[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
In Re : T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad vs Union Of India on 20 November, 2025
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
2025 INSC 1338                                                              REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       INHERENT/ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                            IN RE :   ISSUE RELATING TO DEFINITION OF ARAVALI
                                      HILLS AND RANGES

                                             I.A. NO.105701 OF 2024
                                          (CEC REPORT NO. 03 OF 2024)

                                                          IN

                                       WRIT PETITION (C) NO.202 OF 1995


                            IN RE: T.N. GODAVARMAN THIRUMULPAD
                                                                           …PETITIONER

                                                       VERSUS

                            UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS                   …RESPONDENTS



                                                   JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, CJI


                            IMPORTANCE OF ARAVALIS
1.     In the present matter, we are concerned with the

                            definition of Aravali Hills and Ranges and the need for the

                            proper conservation of the same in the States of Delhi,
Signature Not Verified   Haryana, Gujarat and Rajasthan.
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2025.11.20
2.     The Aravali Range spanning across the aforesaid four
   18:32:32 IST
   Reason:
States is one of the oldest geological features on planet Earth.
1
It is one of the oldest fold mountains in India. It is rich in

wildlife, flora and fauna, and significantly influences the

climate and biodiversity across North India.
3.          The scientific assessments of the Aravali Range

establish the fact that the Aravali ecosystem acts as a “green

barrier” and forms an effective “shield” against desertification

by preventing the eastward spread of the Thar Desert towards

the Indo-Gangetic plains, Haryana and western Uttar Pradesh.

PREVENTION OF DESERTIFICATION AND LAND DEGRADATION
4.          The     United   Nations   Convention   on   Combat

Desertification1 was ratified by India on 17th December 1996.
5.
Article 4
of the said Convention requires the States,

which are parties to it, to inter-alia adopt an integrated

approach to address the physical, biological and socio-

economic aspects of desertification, promote the conservation

of land and water resources as they relate to desertification,

and to determine institutional mechanisms for the same.
6.          As per
Article 5
of the said Convention, India as a

signatory to the UNCCD, is required to strengthen the existing

laws, enact new laws as may be needed, and undertake long-
1
Hereinafter, “UNCCD”.
2
term policy measures and action programmes to combat

desertification.
7.         A perusal of
Articles 10(2)(c)
and
10(4)
of the said

Convention would reveal that national action programmes in

this regard are required to be framed and particular attention

must be given to preventive measures for lands that are not

yet degraded, or which are only slightly degraded.
8.         In order to give effect to its commitments under the

UNCCD, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate

Change2         issued    a    National   Action   Plan   to   Combat

Desertification       and     Land Degradation     through     Forestry

Interventions in 2023. The said Plan highlights the need for a

synergistic and convergent implementation of eco-restoration

initiatives in the country.
9.         In recognition of the ecological importance of the

Aravali Ranges, the MoEF&CC has also launched the “Aravali

Green Wall Project”, an initiative aimed at restoring degraded

land, preventing desertification, enhancing green cover and

improving the ecological health of the Aravali landscape.
2
Hereinafter, “MoEF&CC”.
3
10.        These cumulative obligations in international law

require that a uniform and streamlined approach be taken

towards the preservation and restoration of the Aravali

ecosystem including regulation of exploitation of the Aravali

Hills in a scientific and sustainable manner, guided by the

precautionary principle.
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THIS COURT
11.        This Court is seized of the issues with regard to the

Aravali Hills and Ranges in two sets of proceedings. The first

is in
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India and Others3
and the

second one is in
T.N. Godavarman Thirumalpad v. Union

of India and Others4
.
12.        When T.N. Godavarman Thirumalpad was listed

before this Court on 10th January 2024, an issue arose for

consideration as to whether some of the mining activities were

falling in the Aravali Hills or beyond it.
13.        The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the State of

Rajasthan on that day had raised an issue as to whether the

classification between the Aravali Hills and Aravali Ranges,
3
WP(C) No.4677 of 1985
4
WP(C) No.202 of 1995
4
insofar as the mining activities are concerned, needs to be

finally decided by this Court.
14.         On similar lines, the learned Amicus Curiae had also

raised an issue as to whether continuation of the mining

activities in Aravali Hills and Ranges was in the larger public

interest or not. The learned Amicus had therefore suggested

that it will be appropriate if all the issues with regard to the

Aravali Hills and Ranges be examined by the Central

Empowered Committee5 and directions be issued by this Court

in that regard.
15.         We had, therefore, vide our order dated 10th January

2024 requested the CEC to examine as to whether the

classification of Aravali Hills and Ranges insofar as permitting

mining is concerned, needs to be continued or not. We had

also requested the CEC to take on board the experts in geology

before finalising its report.
16.         Vide the said order, this Court also noticed that the

issues with regard to the mining in Aravali Hills and Ranges

in the State of Haryana were placed before another Bench of

this Court hearing
M.C. Mehta
(supra) and the issues with
5
“Hereinafter, “CEC”.
5
regard to mining in Aravali Hills and Ranges in the State of

Rajasthan was being considered by this Court in the present

proceedings. We had, therefore, directed that both the matters

be placed before the then Hon’ble Chief Justice of India for

placing the same before one and the same Bench so as to avoid

any conflicting order(s).
17.     In pursuance to the order passed by this Court on

10th January 2024, the CEC submitted its report on 7th March

2024 (CEC Report No.3 of 2024).
18.     It will be relevant to refer to the recommendations

made by the CEC in its report i.e., CEC Report No. 3 of 2024,

which read thus:
“I. RECOMMENDATIONS
i) Mapping of the entire Aravalli Hill Range should be
      undertaken and completed within a period of six
      months by the Forest Survey of India, as per the
      norms followed for the State of Rajasthan. The
      National CAMPA may be directed to release funds
      required for the mapping purpose. All the mapped
      areas should be geo-tagged.
ii) Macro-level EIA study of all mining affected
      districts of Rajasthan falling in Aravalli Hill Ranges
      should be done by ICFRE and/or any other
      competent national level central government
      institution as was done in case of Karnataka in
      compliance of the orders of this Hon'ble Court in
      WP(C) 562/2009 dated 05.08.2011. The level of
      mineral extraction should also be analysed along
      with EIA study, on the basis of local requirement of
6
minerals, available infrastructure and environmental
concerns. This study can be completed in six months
period. The funds can be made available by MoEFCC
from the National CAMPA. Till this exercise is
completed no new mining leases or renewals of old
mining leases should be allowed in the Aravalli Hill
Ranges.
iii) Mining should be strictly prohibited in following
areas falling under such mapped Aravalli Hill Range:
a) Protected Areas including Tiger
     Reserves declared under
Wild Life
     Protection Act
1972.
b) where ESZs of protected areas
     mentioned in (i) above have been notified -
within ESZ and up to 1 km from the
     boundary of these ESZ; and within 10 kms
     of boundary of protected areas mentioned
     in (i) where ESZ has not been notified.
c) all identified Tiger Corridors.
d) within 2 km radius/boundary of
     perennial water bodies and wetlands
     identified and notified as Ramsar Sites the
     wetlands notified as per provisions laid
     under Rule 3(b) of the wetlands
     (Conservation and Management) Rules,
     2017.
e) all areas where plantations have been
     raised with funds from any government or
     agency.
f) all those minerals where mining disturbs
     larger volume of minerals and soils but
     yields low revenue such as masonry stone.
g) areas which are falling within the NCR.
h) regions where there are proven or
     potential water aquifers or aquifer
     recharge areas or wherefrom groundwater
     is sourced for irrigation and/or drinking
     purposes.
7
i) Areas which have been identified as
     DARK Zone by the Groundwater Board
     such as Faridabad and Gurgaon.
j) within 10 km aerial distance on either
     side of the inter- state boundary between
     Rajasthan and Haryana States along
     Aravali Hill range.
iv) All mining in forest areas falling in Aravali Hill
Ranges should be suspended and may be allowed
after completion of mapping of area and EIA study,
only in exceptional circumstances, and after due
permission from this Hon'ble Court.
v) The mining in other areas may be permitted only
after all the statutory clearances / approvals
including environmental clearance have been
obtained and renewals should also be done only after
grant of fresh environmental clearance.
vi) The States shall first identify all the abandoned
mining sites of area which exceeds one hectare, both
legal and illegal, within a period of six months.
Thereafter, the States shall prepare a site-specific
reclamation and rehabilitation plans for all these
sites and submit them along with the maps to the
CEC. Once these plans are approved, the States will
execute them in a time bound manner.
vii) Mines which have reached the groundwater level
should be closed to prevent destruction of
underground aquifers, wastage of water and
depleting of groundwater.
viii) The mining leases found to have been operated /
being operated without the requisite statutory
approvals/ permissions and/or found to have
exceeded permissible production limits and/or not
following the mining plan prescriptions should be
immediately closed and shall be liable to be
terminated. Also, no mining lease where any
condition of EC or any other statutory condition has
been violated, renewal should not be allowed in any
circumstances.
8
ix) Online Integrated Lease Management System
(ILMS) for computerized and network-based
management of mineral production and dispatch,
collection of royalty, issue of permit and generation
and submission of online reports involving mining
leases and crusher operations, on the lines being
followed by the State Government of Karnataka
should be implemented immediately.
x) The licenses to stone crushers may be given on the
basis of quantity of raw mineral available in the area
to prevent illegal mining and permit sustainable
mining as has been permitted by this Hon'ble Court
for the wood based industries (saw mills and plywood
factories).
xi) No crusher shall be located within 10 km. aerial
distance from the boundary of Aravalli Hill Range.
Clusters may be located in a cluster similar to an
industrial estate where all inward coming raw
material and outgoing finished/ processed product is
controlled and regulated on real time basis.
xii) Use of explosives in mining should be
discouraged and may be allowed where Indian
Bureau of Mines (IBM) certifies that its use is
essentially required.
xiii) Regular biennial evaluation of the cumulative
impacts of existing and proposed mining activities in
the entire Aravalli region should be ensured to
prevent exceeding the ecosystem's carrying capacity
xiv)Independent and transparent environmental
monitoring mechanisms should be established
preferably under the chairmanship of Chief Secretary
of the state to ensure compliance of all regulations
and also action taken where there are non-
compliances.
xv) In districts involving heavy mining a District Task
Force of Revenue, Forest, Police and Mining
Department should be constituted to control illegal
mining.”
9
19.      In the meantime, in pursuance to the order passed by

this Court dated 10th January 2024, the then Hon’ble Chief

Justice of India constituted a Special Bench comprising of

B.R. Gavai and Abhay S. Oka, JJ. (as they then were).
20.      Upon perusal of the report of the CEC dated 7th March

2024, this Court by an order dated 9th May 2024 passed in
M.C. Mehta
(supra) taken along with the present proceedings,

found that the issue with regard to mining activities in the

Aravali Hills and Ranges needs to be addressed jointly by the

MoEF&CC as well as all the four States i.e., National Capital

Territory of Delhi and States of Rajasthan, Haryana and

Gujarat.
21.      Pertinently, this Court vide the aforesaid order also

noticed that one of the major issues with regard to the illegal

mining was on account of different definitions of “Aravali

Hills/Ranges”,       as       adopted    by   the   different   States.

We, therefore, directed that a committee be constituted for

providing a uniform definition of the Aravali Hills and Ranges.6




6 Hereinafter, “Committee”.
10
22.     It will be relevant to refer to the entire order passed by

this Court on 9th May 2024, which reads thus:
1. Since certain matters from State of Rajasthan with
      regard to mining in Aravalli Ranges and Hills were
      pending before the Bench presided over by one of us
      (B.R. Gavai, J.) and other matters from State of
      Haryana were pending before the Bench presided
      over by one of us (Abhay S. Oka, J.), the matter was
      referred to the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India with
      an observation that it will be appropriate that all the
      matters are heard together so that the issues are
      addressed commonly.
2. Accordingly, a Special Bench consisting of the two
      of us has been constituted under the orders of the
      Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India.
3. There are certain issues with regard to illegal
      mining as well as mining under the permissions
      granted by the States in Aravalli Hills/Ranges.
One of the major issues is with regard to the
      different definitions of “Aravalli Hills/Ranges”, as
      adopted by different States. The learned Amicus
      Curiae states that insofar as the State of Haryana
      is concerned, there is not even a definition of
      Aravalli hills and ranges.
4. The Central Empowered Committee (CEC) has
      submitted its Report No.3/2024, wherein certain
      aspects have been pointed out. The Report also
      points out various illegal mining activities carried
      out throughout the State of Rajastan, district
      wise details have been given with regard to the
      areas under illegal mining.
5. In the report of the CEC, a report prepared by
      the FSI is annexed. As per the Report of the FSI
      the definition of Aravalli hills has been given as
      the hill as well as the uniform 100 meter wide
      buffer surrounding the downside of the hills.
6. We find that the issue with regard to the mining
      activities in the Aravalli Hills and Ranges needs
11
to be addressed jointly by the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change
(MoEFCC) as well as all the four State
Governments i.e. the Government of National
Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) and the States
of Rajasthan, Haryana and Gujarat.
7. We, therefore, direct that a Committee be
constituted     comprising    of   the   following
officers/officials to have a uniform definition of
the Aravalli hills and ranges:-
i. Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest
  and Climate Change, Government of India.
  ii. Secretaries of the Department of Forests,
  Government of National Capital Territory of
  Delhi and the States of Haryana, Rajasthan and
  Gujarat.
iii. A representative of the Forest Survey of
  India.
iv. A representative of the Central Empowered
  Committee.
v. A representative of the Geological Survey of
  India.
vi. Joint Secretary, Ministry of Environment,
  Forest and Climate Change, Government of
  India, shall be the convenor of the Committee.
8. The said Committee shall submit its report within
a period of two months from today.
9. In the meantime, we also issue the following
directions, as suggested by Shri P. Parameshwar,
learned Amicus Curiae, to which Shri Tushar Mehta,
learned Solicitor General of India appearing for the
State of Haryana and Shri K.M. Natraj, learned
Additional Solicitor General of India appearing for the
State of Rajasthan, do not have any objection:-
i. Direct the Union of India through the
     MoEFCC, State of Rajasthan, State of
     Haryana and GNCTD to file affidavits with
     details comments on the CEC Report
12
No.3/2024 and also the issues identified
     hereinabove.
ii. The States of Haryana and Rajasthan
     should specifically indicate what steps for
     compliance        of       15      (fifteen)
     Judgments/Orders of this Court’s have
     been taken by the respective States.
     iii. The States of Haryana and Rajasthan
     should specifically state what action has
     been taken on the CAG/CEC Reports on
     illegal mining and whether prosecution
     under the relevant State Laws and
     Recovery Process has been undertaken.
     iv. The State of Rajasthan to specifically
     state the actions taken pursuant to the
     FSI Report dated 22.02.2018 where illegal
     mining polygons have been identified.
     v. The State of Rajasthan be directed to
     reply to the FSI Report submitted to this
     Court     pursuant   to   Order    dated
     19.02.2010. The FSI Report dated
     25.08.2010 and the CEC Report thereon
     dated 25.10.2010 were shared with the
     State of Rajasthan way back in 2010.
vi. The States of Rajasthan and Haryana
     shall also state the extent and mapping of
     all boundaries of mining areas (mentioned
     in the mining leases) within the area of the
     State.
10. Shri K. Parameshwar, learned Amicus Curiae,
has further submitted that until further orders are
passed by this Court, no fresh mining leases or
renewal of existing mining leases should be permitted
in Aravalli Ranges and Hills in the States of Haryana
and Rajasthan.
11. The said suggestion is opposed by Shri Tushar
Mehta, learned Solicitor General of India and Shri
K.M. Natraj, learned Additional Solicitor General of
India and Shri A.N.S. Nadkarni, learned senior
13
counsel appearing for the Federation of Associations
of Mining in Rajasthan. It is submitted that millions
of labourers are dependent upon the mining activities
carried out in these States. It is submitted that if the
order, as sought by the learned Amicus Curiae is
passed, it would have a cascading effect on the
livelihood of millions of labourers.
12. According to our experience and as has been
pointed out by this Court, in the judgment of this
Court dated 10.11.2021 passed in C.A. No.3661-
3662/2020, a total ban on mining is not conducive
even to the interest of the environment, inasmuch as
it gives scope for illegal mining.
13. In that view of the matter, to balance the
competing interest, we find that the following
direction would subserve the purpose:-
“Until further orders, though all the States
     in which Aravalli Ranges and Hills are
     situated would be at liberty to consider
     and process the applications for grant of
     mining leases and also for renewal thereof
     including obtaining statutory clearances
     from the various authorities, no final
     permission shall be granted for mining in
     the Aravalli Hills/Ranges, as defined in the
     FSI Report dated 25.08.2010, without
     permission from this Court.”
14. Needless to state that this order in no way shall
be construed as prohibiting the legal mining
activities which are being carried out in accordance
with the valid permits/licences.
15. Needless further to state that our orders are
restricted only to the mining in the Aravalli
hills/ranges.”
                                  [Emphasis supplied]
14
23.         It appears that thereafter the matter was adjourned

from time to time so as to enable the Committee constituted

as per the order dated 9th May 2024 to submit its report.
24.         When the matter was, thereafter, listed on 12th August

2025, by way of last chance, this Court had granted two more

months’ time so as to enable the Committee to submit its

report.
25.         Accordingly, the Committee submitted its report via

the MoEF&CC on 3rd October 2025.
26.         We have extensively heard Mr. K. Parameshwar,

learned        Amicus Curiae,   Ms.    Aishwarya   Bhati,   learned

Additional Solicitor General appearing for the MoEF&CC,

Mr. Balbir Singh, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

State of Haryana and Mr. K.M. Natraj, learned ASG appearing

for the State of Rajasthan.
27.         The learned Amicus submitted that the Forest Survey

of India,7 vide its Status Report dated 19th August 2010

in pursuance to the order of this Court dated 19th February

2010 in the present proceedings, has defined the Aravalis as

under:
7
Hereinafter, “FSI”.
15
“(i) slope >3°, (ii) foothill buffer = 100m, (iii) inter hill
      distance or valley width= 500m and (iv) the area
      enclosed by above defined hills from all sides.”
28.     The learned Amicus submitted that the FSI is an expert

body in the field and there should have been no reason for the

Committee to not accept the definition as proposed by the FSI

and substitute it with another definition.
29.     The learned Amicus placed before this Court the report

of the Committee and how the Aravali Hills and Ranges have

been sought to be defined for the purposes of mining.

The same is as under:
“7. Recommendations and Way Forward
      7.1 Definition of Aravali Hills and Ranges in the
      context of mining
      7.1.1 The committee recommends following
      operational definition of Aravali Hills and Ranges in
      the context of mining:
Aravali Hills: Any landform located in the Aravali
      districts, having an elevation of 100 metres or more
      from the local relief, shall be termed as Aravali Hills.
      For this purpose, the local relief shall be determined
      with reference to the lowest contour line encircling
      the landform, as per Para-5.1.1 above. The entire
      landform lying within the area enclosed by such
      lowest contour, whether actual or extended
      notionally, together with the Hill, its supporting
      slopes and associated landforms irrespective of their
      gradient, shall be deemed to constitute part of the
      Aravali Hills.
Aravali Range: Two or more Aravali Hills, as defined
      at Para- 5.1.2 above, located within the proximity of
16
500m from each other, measured from the outermost
      point on the boundary of the lowest contour line on
      either side forms Aravali Range. The area between the
      two Aravali hills is determined by first creating
      buffers with a width equal to the minimum distance
      between the lowest contour lines of both hills. An
      intersection line is then generated between the two
      buffer polygons by joining the intersection of both
      buffer polygons. Finally, two lines, are drawn
      perpendicularly from both endpoints of the
      intersection line and extended till it intersects the
      lowest contour line of both hills. The entire area of
      landforms falling between the lowest contour lines of
      these Hills as explained, along with associated
      features such as Hills, Hillocks, supporting slopes,
      etc., shall also be included as part of Aravali Range.”
30.     The learned Amicus submitted that if the definition as

recommended by the Committee is accepted, all the hills below

the height of 100 metres would be opened up for mining and

as a result the Aravali Hills and Ranges would lose their

continuity and integrity. He, therefore, submitted that if the

definition as suggested by the Committee is accepted, it would

totally endanger the environment and           ecology   of the

mountains.
31.     As against this, Ms. Bhati, learned ASG submitted that

if the definition of Aravali Hills and Ranges as suggested by

the FSI is accepted, it would exclude large areas from the

Aravali Hills and Ranges. She, however, submitted that the
17
definition as suggested by the Committee is adopted, a larger

area would be included as part of the Aravali Hills and Ranges.
32.         Ms. Bhati further submitted that the Committee itself

has recommended that except in case of critical, strategic and

atomic minerals, the mining activities would be prohibited in

the core/inviolate areas. She further submitted that the

Committee has made various recommendations in order to

prevent rampant mining and permit only sustainable mining.
33.         No doubt that the Committee, with the assistance of

the technical committee, has done a commendable work.

However, recently we had an occasion to consider a matter

with regard to Saranda Wildlife Sanctuary as part of the

present proceedings. In the said matter, we had noticed that

the MoEF&CC had got a study done by an expert body namely

Indian       Council        of   Forestry    Research   and    Education8.

On the basis of the said study, the Management Plan for

Sustainable Mining9 in Saranda and Chaibasa, Singhbhum

District, Jharkhand was carried out. In the said matter, we

had        noticed      that      ICFRE’s     geo-referenced     ecological

assessment enabled the identification of areas suitable for
8
Hereinafter, “ICFRE”.
9
Hereinafter, “MPSM”.
18
mining, areas requiring strict ecological protection and zones

where biodiversity values necessitated conservation priority.
34.    Vide the judgment and order dated 13th November

2025 in the present proceedings to which two of us (Gavai, CJI

and K. Vinod Chandran, J.) were a party, this Court has

directed the Wildlife Sanctuary to be established insofar as the

compartments which were identified as conservation areas/no

mining zones. However, this Court explicitly excluded the

compartments wherein the MPSM found that sustainable

mining could be permitted.
35.    It is not in dispute that the Aravali Hills and Ranges

also exhibit similar ecological fragility, and it is also an area

comprising of significant biodiversity. Not only that it acts as

a green barrier thereby preventing desertification in the Indo-

Gangetic plains, Haryana and western Uttar Pradesh.
36.    No doubt that as stated by the learned ASG, the

MoEF&CC had decided to develop a green corridor/green wall.

However, the note submitted by the learned ASG would itself

reveal that the Aravali mountain range faces “escalating

degradation   pressures”.    The    note   further   states   that

deforestation, unsustainable grazing, illegal and excessive
19
mining, and urban encroachment have contributed to

widespread ecosystem damage. It further states that forest

cover has declined significantly in the last two decades, desert

sands are moving eastwards, and aquifers have been depleted

or damaged by mining activities. It further states that these

cumulative impacts undermine not only biodiversity but also

water security and climate resilience. It has further been

stated that all these affect the livelihoods of communities

dependent on the landscape's resources.
37.    Taking all these aspects into consideration, we are of

the considered view that while we propose to accept the report

of the Committee constituted by the MoEF&CC pursuant to

the orders passed by this Court, it would also be in the best

interest of the ecology and environment that a similar study

as was conducted for Saranda and Chaibasa, Singhbhum

District, Jharkhand by ICFRE is also conducted for Aravali

Hills and Ranges. No doubt that the Committee has taken care

by recommending prohibition of mining in core/inviolate areas

except in cases of critical, strategic and atomic minerals.

However, we find that it would be appropriate that such a
20
study be carried out taking into consideration the geological

importance of the Aravali mountain ranges.
38.     It will be relevant to refer to paragraphs 7.3 and 7.4 of

the report of the Committee, which read thus:
“7.3 Regulation of Mining in Aravali Hills and
      Ranges
      7.3.1 The Committee recommends that to ensure
      sustainable mining in the Aravalli Hills and ranges,
      no new mining lease, except in case of critical,
      strategic and atomic minerals (Atomic minerals
      notified in part B and Critical and Strategic minerals
      notified in Part D of the First Schedule of the MMDR
      Act) and minerals listed in the
Seventh Schedule of
      the MMDR Act
1957 may be granted in Aravalli Hills
      and Ranges as marked in the SOI Toposheets as per
      the procedure described above
      7.3.2 Regulation of operation of existing mines in
      Aruvalli Hills and Ranges: The Committee
      recommends that in case of ongoing mining leases
      falling within in the area of Aravalli Hills and Ranges
      as defined above, as well as for the renewal of such
      mining leases, a team of experts comprising officers
      of State Forest Department, Mining and Geology
      Department, Local Administration and State
      Pollution Control Board (SPCB) and such domain
      experts as may be required, shall visit the concerned
      mine to take stock of the compliance of EC/CTO
      conditions and environmental safeguards followed by
      the Mines for conservation of Aravalli Hills/Ranges
      and prescribe necessary environmental safeguards
      as     deemed       appropriate.     The      additional
      environmental safeguard, as proposed by the
      Committee, may be made a part of CTO conditions
      and compliance thereof may be monitored by the
      concerned SPCB.
21
7.4 Prohibition of Mining in Core/Inviolate Areas
7.4.1 Core/Inviolate areas may be designated in the
Aravalli Hills and Ranges for prohibiting mining in
them. For this purpose, following areas may be
designated as core/inviolate areas for the purpose of
mining:
i. Protected Areas, including tiger reserves
     and all identified tiger corridors.
     ii. Area covered under Draft or Final Eco
     Sensitive Zone (ESZ)/Eco Sensitive Area
     (ESA) notified under
Section 3(2)(v)
of the
     Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, and
Section    5(1)
of   the  Environment
     (Protection) Rules, 1986
     iii. For ESZs around Protected Areas, for
     which proposals have been submitted by
     the State Governments but are yet to be
     notified as Draft/Final Notification by the
     MoEFCC and for those, in which the
     proposals are yet to be submitted by the
     State Governments, the default ESZ shall
     be regulated strictly as per the orders of
     Hon'ble Supreme Court issued from time
     to time in the matter of Writ Petition(s)
     (Civil) No(s). 202/1995 Τ.Ν.
Godavarman
     Thirumulpad versus Union of India &
     Ors.
;
iv. No mining to be allowed within 1.0 km
     of the boundary of Protected Area, even if
     the boundary of ESZ is less than 1.0 km
     from the boundary of the Protected Area.
v. Areas where plantations have been
     raised    with   funds    from  CAMPA,
     Government       sources     or  under
     international cooperation
     vi. 500 m from the boundary of Ramsar
     sites and Wetlands under Wetland
     (Conservation & Management) Rules,
     2017.”
22
39.    We also appreciate the recommendations made by the

Committee for preventing illegal mining and permitting only

sustainable mining in the Aravali Hills and Ranges.
40.    However, taking all aspects of the matter into

consideration, especially the fact that the Aravali Hills and

Ranges harbour rich biodiversity, with twenty-two wildlife

sanctuaries, four tiger reserves, the Keoladeo National Park,

along with wetlands like Sultanpur, Sambhar, Siliserh, and

Asola Bhati, and aquifers that recharge river systems

including the ones at Chambal, Sabarmati, Luni, Mahi, and

Banas, it is more than appropriate that before permitting

further sustainable mining activities, the same are preceded

by preparation of an MPSM.
41.    In this regard, Ms. Bhati, learned ASG, expressed an

apprehension that insofar as Saranda was concerned, it dealt

with a much smaller area. She further submitted that carrying

out an MPSM for such a huge area covered by the Aravali Hills

and Ranges, would take a much longer time and would be a

herculean task.
42.    We are of the considered view that it may not be in the

interest of ecology and environment if further mining activities
23
are permitted to be carried out without a body of experts, such

as    ICFRE,   examining    the    issue   of   protection   of   the

conservation areas. The MPSM will provide adequate data on

the basis of geo-referenced ecological assessment and identify

the areas which have wildlife and other high eco-sensitive

areas, which are required to be conserved. The MPSM will also

provide data as to how sustainable mining is to be conducted.
43.     The MPSM, for Saranda, had put up a specific question

as to whether diversion of one of the best natural virgin forest

areas in the country for a lease of 12 to 13 years for mining

activities, is really worthy and justified? It is not in dispute

that the Aravali Hills and Ranges are one of the oldest

geological features of planet Earth. The MPSM for Saranda has

emphasized the need for identification of critical wildlife

habitats, corridors linking critical wildlife habitats, rich forests

and such other important forest areas in Saranda Forest

which need to be protected and conserved for posterity and are

considered as ecologically important and may be considered

as inviolate for iron ore mining. Such areas have been notified

as Conservation Reserve/Corridors or Ecologically Sensitive
24
Areas in accordance with the provisions of the
Wild Life

(Protection) Act, 1972
and the Environment (Protection) 1986.
44.    We are, therefore, of the considered opinion that if such

an MPSM is carried out for the Aravali Hills and Ranges, it can

also identify the areas where sustainable mining activities

could be permitted.
45.    We therefore find that it will be appropriate to prepare

a Management Plan, in the nature of MPSM for Sarandha, for

the Aravali Hills and Ranges.
46.    The MoEF&CC, if necessary, can also consider

preparing MPSM for each of the districts in the Aravali Hills

and Ranges. However, while doing that, it should be ensured

that the continuity and integrity of the Aravali Hills and

Ranges is maintained.
47.    Further, insofar as a ban on mining is concerned,

we do not propose to impose any such ban on the present legal

mining activities that are already being undertaken in the

Aravali Hills and Ranges.
48.    This Court had on an earlier occasion noticed the ill

consequences of imposing a complete ban on mining activities

in the case of
State of Bihar and Others v. Pawan Kumar
25
and Others,10
to which one of us (Gavai, J., as he then was)

was a party. A complete ban on mining could, as was seen in

the said case, lead to illegal mining activities being carried out,

creation of land/mining mafias and criminalisation.
49.       We, however, clarify that mining activities already

being undertaken in the Aravali Hills and Ranges would be

carried out strictly in accordance with paragraph 8 of the

recommendations of the Committee’s Report.
50.       In the result, we pass the following order:
(i)     We accept the recommendations made by the Committee

        with regard to the definition of Aravali Hills and Ranges

        given by MoEF&CC;
(ii)    We further accept the recommendations with regard to

        the prohibition of mining in core/inviolate areas with

        exception as carved out in paragraph 7.3.1 of the

        Committee’s Report;
(iii)   We also accept the recommendations for sustainable

        mining in Aravali Hills and Ranges and the steps to be

        taken for preventing illegal mining in Aravali Hills and

        Ranges;
10 (2022) 2 SCC 348
26
(iv)   We, however, direct the MoEF&CC to prepare a MPSM

       through ICFRE for the entire Aravalis, i.e., understood as

       the continuous geological ridge extending from Gujarat

       to Delhi on the lines of the MPSM for Saranda and the

       MPSM must:
a. Identify permissible areas for mining, ecologically

            sensitive, conservation-critical and restoration-
priority areas within the Aravali landscape where

            mining shall be strictly prohibited or permitted only

            under     exceptional      and   scientifically   justified

            circumstances;
b. Incorporate a thorough analysis of cumulative

            environmental impacts and the ecological carrying

            capacity of the region; and

         c. Include    detailed     post-mining    restoration    and

            rehabilitation measures.
(v)    We further direct that till the MPSM is finalised by the

       MoEF&CC through ICFRE, no new mining leases should

       be granted;
(vi)   We further direct that upon the MPSM being finalised by

       MoEF&CC in consultation with the ICFRE, mining would
27
be permitted as per the MPSM only in those areas

       wherein sustainable mining could be permitted; and
(vii) In the meantime, the mining activities in the mines which

       are already in operation would be continued in strict

       compliance with the recommendations made by the

       Committee in paragraph 8 of its Report.
51.      Since one of us (B.R. Gavai, CJI) is sitting in the

proceedings in W.P.(C) No.202/1995 for the last time, we feel

that it is our duty to place on record our deep appreciation for

Mr. K. Parameshwar, learned Amicus Curiae, who, for the last

three years has laboriously assisted this Court in passing

various judgments and orders for the protection and

conservation of environment, wildlife and ecology. We must

also    place   on   record   our    deep    appreciation    for

Mr. M.V. Mukunda, Ms. Kanti, Ms. Raji Gururaj and

Mr. Shreenivas Patil, learned counsel, whose contribution in

assisting Mr. K. Parameshwar, learned Amicus Curiae is very

valuable. We must also place on record our appreciation for

Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned Additional Solicitor General of

India, who has been representing the MoEF&CC in this matter

for a pro-active role and assisting this Court to find out the
28
solutions for protection and conservation of environment,

wildlife and ecology. We also place on record our appreciation

for Mr. Balbir Singh, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

State of Haryana and Mr. K.M. Nataraj, learned Additional

Solicitor General of India appearing for the State of Rajasthan

in the present matter.
…………….................CJI
                                            (B.R. GAVAI)



                                    …................................J
                                     (K. VINOD CHANDRAN)



                                    …................................J
                                                (N.V. ANJARIA)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 20, 2025.
29