[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Poly Medicure Ltd vs M/S Brillio Technologies Pvt. Ltd on 13 November, 2025
2025 INSC 1314


                                                                                      REPORTABLE


                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6349 OF 2024
                                               Arising out SLP (C) No. 14306 of 2020


                                  M/S POLY MEDICURE LTD.                         …APPELLANT(S)

                                                                    VERSUS

                                  M/S BRILLIO TECHNOLOGIES PVT. LTD

                                                                                …RESPONDENT (S)




                                                              JUDGMENT
MANOJ MISRA, J.
1. This appeal arises from Consumer Complaint No.

                                    515 of 2019 filed by the appellant before the State

                                    Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Delhi1.
Signature Not Verified           The     State      Commission,       vide   its    order   dated
Digitally signed by
KAVITA PAHUJA
Date: 2025.11.13
16:51:06 IST
Reason:
1
State Commission
Civil Appeal No.6349 of 2024                         Page 1 of 27
19.08.2019, held complaint not maintainable as,

               according to the State Commission, the complainant

               (appellant herein) was not a “consumer” as per

               Section 2(1)(d) of the Consumer Protection Act,

               19862.
2. Aggrieved by the State Commission’s order, the

               appellant filed First Appeal No. 1977 of 2019 before

               the     National   Consumer      Disputes    Redressal

               Commission, New Delhi3 which was dismissed, vide

               order dated 15.06.2020, affirming the order of the

               State Commission.
3. The issue which falls for our consideration is

               whether in respect of the goods purchased/services

               availed, the appellant would qualify as a “consumer”

               as defined in Section 2(1)(d) of the 1986 Act.

               Facts
4. The complainant (appellant herein), a company

               incorporated and registered under the Companies
2
1986 Act
3
NCDRC
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                   Page 2 of 27
Act, 1956, filed a consumer complaint before the

           State Commission claiming, inter alia, that, - it is

           engaged in export and import of medical devices and

           equipment; with an intent to install and implement

           an export/ import documentation system at its plant,

           it sought a software; in connection therewith, it

           purchased a product licence of “Brillio Opti Suite”, a

           software, from the respondent; requisite payment for

           the purchase was made, but the software did not

           function         properly.   In   consequence,   claiming

           deficiency in service, the complaint was filed, inter

           alia, for refund of the entire amount paid by the

           complainant to the respondent towards (a) product

           licence cost and (b) additional development cost

           together with interest at the rate of 18%.
5. The respondent contested the complaint claiming,

           inter alia, that the complaint is not maintainable as

           the complainant is not a consumer as defined in

           Section 2 (1) (d) of the 1986 Act.
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                               Page 3 of 27
6. The       State Commission      vide   its order    dated

           19.08.2019 held that since purchase of the software

           license       was    for   a   commercial   purpose,      the

           complainant would not qualify as a “consumer”;

           hence, the complaint is not maintainable.
7. Aggrieved by the order of the State Commission,

           the appellant filed an appeal before NCDRC, which

           came to be dismissed by the impugned order.
8. We have heard learned counsel for the parties.

           Submissions on behalf of the appellant
9. On behalf of the appellant, it was contended that

           software was purchased for self-use; appellant was

           the end user and had no intention to transfer/ sell it

           for profit, therefore, it cannot be said that purchase

           was for commercial purpose; moreover, purchase of

           goods/ services for self-utilization with no intention

           to directly generate profit from it, would qualify the

           purchaser of such goods or services as a “consumer”

           by virtue of Explanation to Section 2(1)(d) of the 1986

           Act, 1986. Decision of this Court in
Lilavati Kirtilal
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                Page 4 of 27
Mehta Medical Trust v. Unique Shanti Developers

               and Ors4
was relied to contend that identity of a

               person making the purchase, or the value of the

               transaction, is not conclusive to determine whether it

               is for a commercial purpose. What is to be seen is the

               dominant purpose for the transaction, that is,

               whether it is to facilitate some kind of profit

               generation for the purchaser / other beneficiary.

               Additionally, it was argued that since the software

               was not directly linked to generation of profit, the

               transaction cannot be considered as one for a

               commercial purpose so as to disqualify the appellant

               from being a “consumer”.
9.1. Reliance was also placed on decision of this

               Court in
Sunil          Kohli    and   Anr.   v.    Purearth

               Infrastructure Ltd.5
to contend that if purchaser of

               a property puts it to commercial use to earn his

               livelihood,      by   way   of   self-employment,    such       a
4
(2020) 2 SCC 265
5
(2020) 12 SCC 235
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                       Page 5 of 27
purchaser would be a consumer. Based on those

           decisions,           learned     counsel      for    the    appellant

           contended that since the appellant had purchased

           the software for installing and implementing an

           export/ import documentation system for self-use as

           an end user thereof, and not for resale or transfer or

           conversion in any manner, the appellant would

           qualify as a consumer and, therefore, the view to the

           contrary taken by the State Commission as well as

           NCDRC is against the law and liable to be set aside.

           Submissions on behalf of respondent
10. Per contra, on behalf of the respondent, it was

           submitted that the software “Brillio Opti Suite” is

           admittedly for carrying out professional activities.

           The software is customized to provide support to the

           appellant        in    managing       its   business       affairs       by

           performing           various      functions     such       as    Export

           Document             Set,      Clubbing/Spitting        SAP         Sales

           Documents, Clubbing of Bill of Exchange, Advance

           Payment/FIRC,               CHA     Charges         Tracking,        Duty
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                              Page 6 of 27
Drawback (All Industrial rate), Letter of Credit

           Management,            Container    Indents   and      Tracking,

           Export Credit Guarantee Corporation (ECGC) Policy

           Management,            Export     Packing   Credit   Handling,

           FOREX Forward Cover Management. Thus, the

           software was used by the appellant to create

           documents necessary for import and export of its

           goods and also to track consignments and benefits

           available under various Government Schemes. The

           use of the software therefore had a direct nexus with

           profit-generating activity of the appellant. Besides

           above, the disputes dealt with under the 1986 Act are

           business to consumer and not business to business.

           Additionally, it was contended, if statutory provisions

           are interpreted in the manner as suggested by the

           appellant, then business to business transactions

           would       also     fall   as   consumer   disputes    thereby

           defeating the very purpose of the 1986 Act, which is

           to provide simple and speedy redressal of consumer

           disputes.
In support of its submissions, the learned
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                      Page 7 of 27
counsel for the respondent placed reliance on

               decisions of this Court in
Lilavati Kirtilal Mehta

               Medical Trust
(supra);
National Insurance Co.

               Ltd. v. Harsolia Motors and Ors6
and
Shrikant G.

               Mantri v. Punjab National Bank7
.
Discussion/ Analysis
11. Before we set out to consider whether the

               appellant is a “consumer” as defined in Section

               2(1)(d) of the 1986 Act, it would be useful to

               reproduce the definition of “consumer” as contained

               in Section 2(1)(d) of the 1986 Act. The same reads as

               under: -
“(d) “consumer” means any person who, —
(i)   buys any goods for a consideration which
                             has been paid or promised or partly paid
                             and partly promised, or under any system
                             of deferred payment and includes any
                             user of such goods other than the person
                             who buys such goods for consideration
                             paid or promised or partly paid or partly
                             promised, or under any system of
                             deferred payment, when such use is
                             made with the approval of such person,
                             but does not include a person who
6
(2023) 8 SCC 362
7
(2022) 5 SCC 42
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                       Page 8 of 27
obtains such goods for resale or for any
                            commercial purpose; or
(ii)    hires or avails of any services for a
                            consideration which has been paid or
                            promised or partly paid and partly
                            promised, or under any system of
                            deferred payment and includes any
                            beneficiary of such services other than
                            the person who hires or avails of the
                            services for consideration paid or
                            promised, or partly paid and partly
                            promised, or under any system of
                            deferred payment, when such services are
                            availed of with the approval of the first
                            mentioned person [but does not include
                            a person who avails of such services
                            for any commercial purpose]

                    Explanation.— For the purposes of this
                    clause, "commercial purpose" does not
                    include use by a person of goods bought and
                    used by him and services availed by him
                    exclusively for the purposes of earning his
                    livelihood by means of self-employment;”
                                              (Emphasis supplied)
12. Sub-clause (i) of Clause (d) of sub-section (1) of

           Section 2 of the 1986 Act in simple terms provides

           that “consumer” means any person who buys any

           goods for a consideration. However, it excludes from

           its purview a person who obtains such goods for

           resale or for any commercial purpose. Sub-clause (ii)

           of Clause (d) of sub-section (1) of Section 2 in simple
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                      Page 9 of 27
terms provides that a person who hires or avails of

              any services for a consideration shall also be a

              consumer provided such services are not for any

              commercial purpose. Explanation to clause (d) of

              sub-section (1) of Section 2 of 1986 Act carves out an

              exception by clarifying that commercial purpose does

              not include use by a person of goods bought and

              used or/ and services availed by him exclusively for

              the purpose of earning his livelihood by means of

              self-employment.
13.
In
Karnataka                  Power             Transmission

              Corporation               and        Anr.        v.    Ashok           Iron       Works

              Private Ltd.8
, this Court had an occasion to consider

              the true import of the term “person” as defined in

              Section 2(1)(m) of the 1986 Act9; as per which,

              “person” includes,—(i) a firm whether registered or

              not; (ii) a Hindu undivided family; (iii) a co-operative

              society; (iv) every other association of persons
8
(2009) 3 SCC 240
9
Section 2(1)(m). “person” includes,—(i) a firm whether registered or not; (ii)a Hindu undivided family;
(iii) a co-operative society; (iv) every other association of persons whether registered under the
Societies
Registration Act, 1860
(21 of 1860) or not.
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                                                  Page 10 of 27
whether registered under the
Societies Registration

             Act, 1860
(21 of 1860) or not. Upon consideration of

             the aforesaid definition in conjunction with the

             definition of “person” as provided in section 3 (42) of

             the General Clauses Act, 189710, this Court held as

             follows:
“20.
Section 3
of the Act, 1986 upon which
                        reliance is placed by learned counsel for KPTC
                        provides that the provisions of the Act are in
                        addition to and not in derogation of any other
                        law for the time being in force. This provision
                        instead of helping the contention of KPTC would
                        rather suggest that the access to the remedy
                        provided to the Act of 1986 is an addition to the
                        provisions of any other law for the time being in
                        force. It does not in any way give any clue to
                        restrict the definition of the `person'.
21.
Section 2(1)(m)
is beyond all questions, an
                        interpretation clause, and must have been
                        intended by the Legislature to be taken into
                        account in construing the expression `person'
                        as it occurs in
Section 2(1)(d)
. While defining
                        `person' in
Section 2(1)(m)
, the Legislature
                        never intended to exclude a juristic person like
                        company. As a matter of fact, the four
                        categories by way of enumeration mentioned
                        therein is indicative, categories (i), (ii) & (iv)
                        being unincorporate and category (iii) corporate,
                        of its intention to include body corporate as well
                        as body un-incorporate. The definition of
                        `person' in
Section 2(1)(m)
is inclusive and not
                        exhaustive. It does not appear to us to admit of
                        any doubt that company is a person within the
10
Section 3(42)
. – “person” shall include any company or association or body of individuals, whether
incorporated or not.
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                                              Page 11 of 27
meaning of
Section 2(1)(d)
read with
Section
                    2(1)(m)
and we hold accordingly.”
14. We respectfully agree with the view taken by this

           Court in
Karnataka Power Transmission Corp.

           and Anr
(supra) that the definition of “person” in
Section 2(1)(m)
is inclusive and not exhaustive.

           Therefore, there can be no doubt that even an

           incorporated company could be a consumer within

           the meaning of
Section 2(1)(d)
read with
Section

           2(1)(m)
of the 1986 Act.
15. As to when an activity or transaction of purchase

           of goods or services availed can be understood as for

           a commercial purpose, this Court, in
Lilavati

           Kirtilal       Mehta         Medical    Trust
(supra),    after

           considering number of decisions, culled out broad

           principles           for   its   determination.   The    relevant

           paragraphs of
the said decision
are extracted below:-
“19. To summarize from the above
                       discussion, though a straight- jacket formula
                       cannot be adopted in every case, the
                       following broad principles can be culled out
                       for determining whether an activity or
                       transaction is “for a commercial purpose”:
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                       Page 12 of 27
19.1 The question of whether a transaction is
                       for a commercial purpose would depend upon
                       the facts and circumstances of each case.
However, ordinarily, “commercial purpose” is
                       understood to include manufacturing/
                       industrial activity or business-to-business
                       transactions between commercial entities.

                       19.2 The purchase of the good or service
                       should have a close and direct nexus with a
                       profit-generating activity.
19.3 The identity of the person making the
                       purchase or the value of the transaction is
                       not conclusive to the question of whether it is
                       for a commercial purpose. It has to be seen
                       whether the dominant intention or dominant
                       purpose for the transaction was to facilitate
                       some kind of profit generation for the
                       purchaser and/or their beneficiary.

                       19.4      If it is found that the dominant
                       purpose behind purchasing the good or
                       service was for the personal use and
                       consumption of the purchaser and/or their
                       beneficiary, or is otherwise not linked to any
                       commercial activity, the question of whether
                       such a purchase was for the purpose of
                       ‘generating livelihood by means of self-
                       employment’ need not be looked into.”
16. What is clear from
the above decision
is that the

           identity of the person making the purchase, or the

           value of the transaction, is not conclusive to

           determine whether the transaction or activity is for a

           commercial purpose. What is to be seen is the
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                       Page 13 of 27
dominant intention or dominant purpose for the

           transaction i.e. whether it is to facilitate some kind of

           profit generation for the purchaser(s) and/or its/

           their beneficiary. If it is found that the dominant

           purpose behind purchasing goods or services is for

           personal use and consumption of the purchaser, or is

           otherwise not linked to any commercial activity, the

           question whether such purchase is for generating a

           livelihood by means of self-employment need not be

           looked into. However, where the transaction is for a

           commercial purpose then it might have to be

           considered whether it is for generating livelihood by

           means of self-employment or not.
17.     The      aforesaid    judgment     underscores       that

           ordinarily commercial purpose is understood to

           include        manufacturing/        industrial   activity      or

           business             to   business    transaction     between

           commercial entities.
18. There is a difference between a self-employed

           individual and a corporation. The goods purchased
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                    Page 14 of 27
by     a    self-employed          individual     for    self-use     for

           generating            livelihood     would       fall    within       the

           explanation even if activity of that person is to

           generate profits for the purpose of its livelihood. But

           where       a        company       purchases      a     software      for

           automating its processes, the object is to maximise

           profits and, therefore, it would not fall within the

           explanation of
Section 2(1)(d)
of the 1986 Act.
19.
In
Sunil Kohli
(supra), a decision relied by the

           appellant,           the   complainants         were     non-resident

           Indians residing abroad. They intended to shift to

           India and therefore, with an intention to earn their

           livelihood, they booked a shop with the opposite

           party. The allegations in the complaint were that the

           complainants had paid instalments to the opposite

           party and despite full payment, the opposite party

           failed       to       deliver      possession.          Consequently,

           complainants sought compensation and delivery of

           possession. The opposite party therein contested the

           proceedings by claiming that the complainants had
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                            Page 15 of 27
booked the shop for commercial purpose therefore

                they cannot be termed “consumer”.
In the light of

                earlier decisions of this Court in
Laxmi Engineering

                Works v. P.S.G. Industrial Institute11
and
Cheema

                Engineering Services v. Rajan Singh12
, this Court

                considered the evidence on record to determine

                whether    the   premises   were   booked    by      the

                complainants with an intention of self-employment /

                self-use. Upon finding that the complainant(s) were

                not employed any more in foreign land and had

                disclosed their desire to come to India to start a

                business, this Court held them to be consumer(s).
20. The decision in
Sunil Kohli
(supra) will not be of

                help to the appellant as that was a case of

                unemployed individual(s) who had booked a shop for

                self-employment; whereas, in the case on hand, the

                appellant is a company engaged in commercial

                activity of import/export, and the goods/services
11
(1995) 3 SCC 583
12
(1997) 1 SCC 131
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                 Page 16 of 27
purchased/availed by the company were to automate

           its business processes with a view to augment its

           efficiency and profits. Thus, whether those goods/

           services purchased/availed are for self-use, in our

           view, would not make a material difference.
21. In Virender Singh v. M/s. Darshana Trading

           Co. through its partner Sanjay Seth (Dead) &

           Anr. (Special Leave to Appeal (C) No.5510 of

           2020, decided on 18.03.2025), the complainant,

           had        purchased      machines      by    which        the

           manufacturing of die could be done at cheaper cost

           and with more precision. As there were defects in the

           machine, a complaint was filed before the State

           Commission,          wherein   the   preliminary   objection

           raised was that since the machine was purchased

           purely for commercial purposes, the complainant is

           not covered under the definition of a consumer. The

           objection was sustained by the State Commission

           and its decision was affirmed by the National

           Commission. The matter travelled to this Court.
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                  Page 17 of 27
Argument raised was that since the machine was

                purchased for self-use/ self-employment, it cannot be

                a commercial purpose.
In support of its submission

                an earlier decision of this Court in
Paramount

                Digital Colour Lab & others v. Agfa India Pvt.

                Ltd. & Ors.13
was cited. Upholding the decision of

                the National Commission, this Court held that

                though it is correct that if goods or services

                purchased or availed are for self-employment, it

                cannot be categorized as commercial purpose, but

                each case has to be seen in light of its own facts.
Thereafter,     while   distinguishing      the    case        of
Paramount Digital
(supra), it was held:
“In this case cited above i.e.,
Paramount
                        Digital
(supra), there were two unemployed
                        graduate persons who had purchased the
                        machine evidently for self-employment. But in
                        the present case, the petitioner/ complainant
                        was already running a business as a
                        commercial venture and admittedly he had
                        purchased the machine to expand his
                        business. It is not a case where the petitioner
                        was himself operating the machine, but he
                        had employed workmen who were doing the
                        job for him. Under these circumstances, no
                        matter how small the venture is, it cannot be
13
(2018) 14 SCC 81
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                        Page 18 of 27
called self-employment for the purpose of the
                      Act and therefore, we find no scope to take a
                      different view than the one taken by the State
                      Commission and the National Commission.”
22. In the case on hand also, the complainant had

           been an established company doing business which

           bought the product license to automate its processes.

           In such circumstances, the object of the purchase

           was not to generate self-employment but to organize

           its operations with a view to maximise profits. In our

           view therefore, the case of the complainant does not

           fall within the Explanation to
Section 2(1)(d)
of the

           1986 Act.
23.
In
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Harsolia

           Motors and Ors
(supra), another decision relied by

           the appellant, the complainant, a commercial entity

           engaged in the business of sale of vehicles, took fire

           insurance policy from the appellant, an insurance

           company, covering its office, showroom, garage,

           machinery lying in the showroom premises, etc. The

           complainant’s case was that damages were sustained
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                     Page 19 of 27
during Godhra riots and, therefore, the complainant

           was entitled to be indemnified under the policy of

           Insurance. Aggrieved by action of the insurance

           company, claiming deficiency in service, a complaint

           was filed. The Insurance Company took an objection

           that the complainant was not a consumer as per
Section 2(1)(d)
of the 1986 Act because its ultimate

           object is to earn profits. The State Commission

           upheld the objection; against which, the complainant

           filed an appeal before the National Commission. The

           National Commission held that the expression used

           “for any commercial purpose” would mean that the

           goods purchased or services hired should be used in

           any activity directly intended to generate profit, but

           in a case where goods purchased or services availed

           are not intended to generate profit, it would not be a

           commercial purpose. Therefore, it was held, when a

           person takes an insurance cover for indemnification

           of actual loss suffered, the intention is not to

           generate       profits.   Consequently,   the   complainant
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                  Page 20 of 27
would be a consumer. Upholding the above view of

           the National Commission, this Court observed:
“39. Applying the aforesaid test, two things are
                   culled out; (i) whether the goods are purchased for
                   resale or for commercial purpose; or (ii) whether
                   the services are availed for any commercial
                   purpose. The two-fold classification is commercial
                   purpose and non-commercial purpose. If the
                   goods are purchased for resale or for commercial
                   purpose, then such consumer would be excluded
                   from the coverage of the Act, 1986. For example, if
                   a manufacturer who is producing product A, for
                   such production he may be required to purchase
                   articles which may be raw material, then
                   purchase of such articles would be for commercial
                   purpose. As against this, if the same
                   manufacturer purchases a refrigerator, television
                   or air-conditioner for his use at his residence or
                   even for his office has no direct or indirect nexus
                   to generate profits, it cannot be held to be for
                   commercial purpose and for afore-stated reason
                   he is qualified to approach the Consumer Forum
                   under the Act, 1986.
40. Similarly, a hospital which hires services of a
                   medical practitioner, it would be a commercial
                   purpose, but if a person avails such services for
                   his ailment, it would be held to be a non-
commercial purpose. Taking a wide meaning of
                   the words “for any commercial purpose”, it would
                   mean that the goods purchased or services hired
                   should be used in any activity directly intended to
                   generate profit. Profit is the main aim of
                   commercial purpose, but in a case where goods
                   purchased or services hired is an activity, which is
                   not directly intended to generate profit, it would
                   not be a commercial purpose.
41. In other words, to make it further clear, let us
                   have certain illustrations, as to whether the
                   transaction falls for commercial purpose or
                   whether the complainant can be held to be a
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                      Page 21 of 27
“consumer” within the scope and ambit of Act,
                   1986.
41.1 A CT scan machine was purchased by a
                   Charitable Trust and that was found to be
                   defective, the question raised whether the
                   machinery was purchased for a commercial
                   purpose and whether the appellant was a
                   consumer. From the narration of facts, this Court
                   in
Kalpavruksha Charitable Trust v. Toshniwal
                   Bros
. (Bombay) (P) Ltd. held that the machine was
                   purchased by the Charitable Trust for commercial
                   purpose as every person who takes a CT scan has
                   to pay for it and the services rendered are not free
                   and thus the Trust was not a consumer.
41.2.
In
Rajeev Metal Works v. Mineral & Metal
                   Trading Corpn. of India Ltd.
, a manufacturer
                   imported raw material through statutory authority
                   that acted as a canalizing agency for manufacture
                   and sale of the finished product. The appellant
                   approached the National Commission alleging that
                   the respondent had not supplied the required
                   quantity demanded by the appellant. This Court
                   held that the purchase was for a commercial
                   purpose and the manufacturer was not a
                   “consumer” for the purpose of the Act, 1986.

                   41.3. The bank which had taken bankers
                   indemnity insurance policy from the insurance
                   company and suffered loss owing to some of
                   transactions in one of its branches, raised an
                   insurance claim stating that it is owing to
                   dishonesty of Branch Manager and the claim was
                   repudiated by the insurance company stating that
                   the alleged loss was because of some dishonesty
                   of the Branch Manager and this being for
                   commercial purpose, may not be a consumer.

                   41.4. The complainant is a private limited
                   company running a diagnostic clinic and alleges
                   that Xray machine purchased by the complainant
                   from the opposite party was defective. If an
                   objection is raised that as machine was purchased
                   for commercial purpose and the complainant
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                      Page 22 of 27
cannot be said to be a consumer as defined under
                   the Act, 1986 as he has been employed for
                   commercial purpose and has been carrying out
                   business for profit indeed the complainant is not a
                   consumer under the Act, 1986.
41.5. A company purchased the EPBX system for
                   the better management of the business of the
                   company for commercial purpose and the
                   complaint filed for alleged supply of defective
                   system may not be covered by the explanatory
                   clause of
Section 2(1)(d)
of the Act, 1986 as the
                   transaction has no nexus to generate profits.
42. Thus, what is finally culled out is that each
                   case has to be examined on its own facts and
                   circumstances and what is to be examined is
                   whether any activity or transaction is for
                   commercial purpose to generate profits and there
                   cannot be a straightjacket formula which can be
                   adopted and every case has to be examined on the
                   broad principles which have been
laid down
                   by
this Court, of which detailed discussion has
                   been made.”
24. Based on paragraphs 39 and 41.5 of the decision

           in
Harsolia Motors
(supra), the learned counsel for

           the appellant submitted that if the goods purchased

           or services availed are for convenience/ comfort or for

           better management of the business of the company,

           and the complaint is filed for compensation on

           account of defective supplies or deficient services, a

           consumer complaint would be maintainable.
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                      Page 23 of 27
25.
In our view, if we read paragraphs 39 and 41.5 in

           conjunction with other paragraphs of the judgment

           in
Harsolia       Motors
(supra),   more   particularly

           paragraph 42, what becomes clear is that if the

           transaction has a nexus with generation of profits, it

           would be treated as one for a commercial purpose.

           The examples of purchase of refrigerator, television or

           air-conditioner cited in paragraph 39 (supra), as one

           not relating to generation of profit, makes the

           position clear. These products/ goods are for comfort

           having no direct nexus to generation of profits. But if

           a transaction has nexus with generation of profits, it

           would be for a commercial purpose. However,

           whether a transaction has nexus with generation of

           profits or not is to be determined on the facts of each

           case by taking into consideration, inter alia, the

           nature of the goods purchased or services availed

           and the purpose for which it is purchased or availed.

           If upon consideration of all relevant factors the

           picture that emerges is one which reflects that the
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                  Page 24 of 27
object of the purchase of goods/ services is to

           generate or augment profit, the same would be

           treated as for a commercial purpose.
26.     Besides       above,   the    question      that    fell    for

           consideration before this Court in
Harsolia Motors
(supra) was whether the insurance services availed

           were for commercial purpose or not. Insurance

           service by its very nature is to secure the insured

           against a prospective loss on account of unforeseen

           circumstances.          Therefore, the dominant object of

           availing that service is not to generate profit but to

           secure oneself against unforeseen losses. In that

           context, this Court took the view that availing of

           insurance services would not be a transaction for a

           commercial purpose even though it may be a

           business         to   business       transaction.     The       other

           illustrations / examples cited in the judgment do not

           constitute the ratio decidendi of that decision.
27. In the instant case, not only the complainant is a

           commercial entity, the purchase of goods/ services
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                          Page 25 of 27
(i.e., software) from the respondent was with a view to

           automate the processes of the company which were

           linked       to      generation   of   profit   inasmuch      as

           automation of business processes is undertaken not

           just for better management of the business but to

           reduce costs and maximise profits. Thus, in our view,

           the transaction of purchase of goods/ services (i.e.,

           software) had a nexus with generation of profits and,

           therefore, qua that transaction the appellant cannot

           be considered a consumer as defined in
Section

           2(1)(d)
of the 1986 Act.
28. For the foregoing reasons, we are of the

           considered view that both the State Commission as

           well as the National Commission were justified in

           holding that the goods /services purchased/ availed

           by the appellant were for a commercial purpose and

           therefore the appellant is not a “consumer” as per
Section 2(1)(d)
of the 1986 Act.
29. The appeal lacks merit and is, accordingly,

           dismissed. There is no order as to costs.
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                   Page 26 of 27
30. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
There is no order as to costs.
.………….......................................J.
                                                  (J. B. PARDIWALA)



                                ……………......................................J.
                                                     (MANOJ MISRA)


           New Delhi;
November 13, 2025.
Civil Appeal No. 6349 of 2024                                       Page 27 of 27