[Cites
48
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Lipi Boilers Ltd. Through Its Chief ... vs The Commissioner Of Central Excise, ... on 10 November, 2025
2025 INSC 1297                                              REPORTABLE


                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                         CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 856-857 OF 2011




          LIPI BOILERS LTD.                              …APPELLANT(S)


                                     VERSUS


          THE COMMISSIONER OF CENTRAL
          EXCISE, AURANGABAD                            …RESPONDENT(S)




                                  JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.11.10
16:31:25 IST
Reason:
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the following parts:
INDEX

A. FACTUAL MATRIX ........................................................................................ 3

B. THE IMPUGNED ORDER ............................................................................. 7

C. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PARTIES ....................................... 9

   (I).     Submissions on behalf of the appellant/assessee ..................................... 9

   (II). Submissions on behalf of the respondent/revenue ................................ 13

D. ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED ................................................................... 15

E. ANALYSIS ...................................................................................................... 16

   (I).     Whether the value of the duty paid bought out items delivered directly
   at the buyer’s site is liable to be included in the value of the boiler cleared by
   the assessee from its factory in completely knocked down (CKD) condition,
   for the assessment of central excise duty? ....................................................... 16
(i). Understanding the nature of Central Excise Duty, in light of the charging
       provision and valuation of quantum provision under the
Central Excise Act,
       1944
:................................................................................................................ 16
(ii). Whether the resultant final product of the contract would fall within the
       ambit of “Excisable Goods”? ......................................................................... 30
(iii). Erroneous reliance on Tariff Classification .................................................. 48
(iv). Inapplicability of the “Utility Test” and the ‘part’ v. ‘accessory’ debate ...... 49
(v). Excess collection of excise duty from buyer is no proof of excisability ....... 49
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                                                             Page 1 of 57
(II). Whether the show cause notice is legal and valid under the extended
  limitation period as provided under the proviso to
Section 11A(1)
of the
  Central Excise Act, 1944? .................................................................................. 52
(i). Was there any wilful suppression of facts with an intention to evade payment
      of duty by the appellant/assessee?.................................................................. 52
F. CONCLUSION ............................................................................................... 57
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                                                 Page 2 of 57
1.   Since the issues raised in both the captioned appeals are the same, the challenge
     in both the appeals are also to the self same order passed by the Customs, Excise
     and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, West Zonal Bench, Mumbai (hereinafter,
     “the CESTAT”) and the parties are also the same, those were taken up for
     hearing analogously and are being disposed of by this common judgment and
     order.
2.   These statutory appeals under
Section 35L(1)(b)
of the Central Excise Act,
     1944 (hereinafter, “the Act, 1944”), are at the instance of an assessee and are
     directed against the common final order dated 23.09.2010 (hereinafter, “the
     impugned order”) passed by the CESTAT in Appeal No. E/1377/07-Mum and
     Cross Objection No. E/CO/13/08, respectively by which the CESTAT reversed
     the concurrent findings of the two lower authorities, allowed the appeal filed
     by the revenue/respondent herein and dismissed the cross objections filed by
     the assessee/appellant herein. The CESTAT in the impugned order held that the
     value of the bought out items received directly at the buyer’s site and used in
     the erection of the boiler are essential parts of the boiler and therefore, the value
     of such bought out items has to be included in the assessable value of the boiler
     for the purpose of assessing the payable central excise duty. Accordingly, the
     demand of duty along with interest was upheld by the CESTAT in the impugned
     order.
A.   FACTUAL MATRIX
3.   The appellant/assessee/Lipi Boilers Ltd. is a holder of Central Excise
     Registration for manufacture of boiler and boiler parts falling under Chapter
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                             Page 3 of 57
Heading nos. 8402.10 and 8402.90 of the
Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
(hereinafter, "the Act, 1985”), respectively.
4.   The assessee entered into an agreement with one Shri Maroli Vibhag Khand
     Udyog Sahakari Mandali Ltd. (hereinafter, “the buyer”), on 29.01.2001, for
     designing, procuring, manufacturing and supplying machinery and equipments
     for one ‘no. 50 TPH MCR Capacity and 45 Kg/cm2(g) working pressure
     bagasse fired boiler’ so that a steam generating plant could be commissioned
     by 31.10.2001 (hereinafter, “ the contract”).
5.   On 28.04.2005, the Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise and Customs,
     Aurangabad, (hereinafter, “ the Assistant Commissioner”) issued a show-
     cause-cum-demand notice (Sr. No. 4/2005/CEX/dated 2005) (hereinafter, “the
     show cause notice”) to the assessee, alleging that the assessee cleared the final
     product boilers in completely knocked down condition (hereinafter, “CKD
     condition”) during the period from 01.04.2000 to 30.06.2000 by paying central
     excise duty without adding or taking into account the cost of ‘essential’ bought
     out ‘parts’ delivered directly at the site of the buyer. According to the show
     cause notice, the non-inclusion of the cost of ‘essential’ bought out ‘parts’ worth
     ₹14,02,344/- (Rupees Fourteen Lakhs Two Thousand Three Hundred and
     Forty-Four only) in the value of the final product boiler resulted in
     undervaluation of the excisable item and a resultant shortfall to the tune of
     ₹2,24,375/-(Rupees Two Lakhs Twenty Four Thousand Three Hundred and
     Seventy-Five only) in the quantum of central excise duty payable by the
     assessee. The show cause notice stated that as per the amended
Section 4(1)
of
     the Act, 1944, (w.e.f. 01.07.2000), the excise duty was payable with reference
     to the transaction value of the goods sold to an unrelated buyer and the price
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                           Page 4 of 57
charged has to be the sole consideration for sale. According to the show cause
     notice, since the transaction value as per the contract included the cost of the
     ‘essential’ bought out ‘parts’ that were delivered directly at the site of the buyer,
     the central excise duty payable by the assessee should take those into account.
6.   The show cause notice invoked the extended period of limitation of 5 years
     provided under the proviso to
Section 11A(1)
of the Act, 1944, on the ground
     that the assessee had not paid central excise duty on the bought out items and
     had wilfully suppressed the facts from the knowledge of the respondent
     department with an intention to evade duty. The show cause notice sought a
     response from the assessee within a period of 30 days from its receipt, failing
     which, the central excise duty amounting to ₹2,24,375/- (Rupees Two Lakhs
     Twenty Four Thousand Three Hundred and Seventy-Five only) was to be
     recovered from it under the erstwhile
Section 11A(1)
of the Act, 1944, read
     with Rule 9(2) of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, along with interest under
Section 11AB
of the Act, 1944 and penalty under
Section 11AC
of the Act,
     1944 read with Rule 173Q and Rule 57(1)(5) of the Central Excise Rules, 1944
     and Rule 13 of CENVAT Credit Rules, 2001, respectively.
7.   On 13.06.2005, the assessee replied to the show cause notice referred to above,
     denying contravention of any applicable provision and stated that the boilers in
     CKD condition were cleared from its factory after duly paying the central
     excise duty leviable thereon, whereas the bought out items were cleared by their
     respective vendors upon payment of applicable central excise duty and
     transported directly to the site of erection. The assessee pointed out that there
     was no evidence on record to establish that the boiler was first assembled at the
     site before it was permanently installed as an ‘immovable property’. Rather, the
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                             Page 5 of 57
assessee, emphatically stated that the mere size and weight of the boiler make
     it impossible to assemble the boiler before erection. The process of erection
     itself involves civil and mechanical engineering, utilising concrete, steel
     reinforcements, and grouting in a manner that ensures the boiler is in a
     functioning condition and in an immovable form upon completion. The
     assessee also stated that such an installed boiler cannot be readily dismantled
     by removing nuts and bolts and reassembled at another site. The same may
     cause extensive damage to the boiler to such an extent that its value may be
     reduced to a mere scrap. Based on such reasoning, the assessee stated that since
     the boiler erected at the site and attached to the earth is not ‘goods’, the same
     would not be excisable. The assessee also stated that it had not availed any
     CENVAT credit on the bought out items and that there was no documentary
     evidence on record to substantiate such allegation.
8.   Upon due consideration of the reply of the assessee, the Assistant
     Commissioner vide Order-in-Original dated 07.12.2005, accepted that the
     demand of central excise duty on the value of the bought out items was not
     sustainable. The Assistant Commissioner dropped the demands made in the
     show cause notice based on the findings which read thus:
“It is well settled law that value of bought out items cleared at site by
          the vendors without bringing the same into the factory premises is
          not liable to be included in the assessable value of the finished
          product. It is also well settled law that the boilers erected at site and
          attached to earth are not ‘goods’ and hence not excisable. I find that
          the ratio of the judgments in the case of
Mittal Engineering Pvt Works
          Vs C.C.E. Meerut
1996 (88) ELT 622(SC);
Tungabhadra Steel
          Products Ltd Vs Union of India
reported in 1998 (98) ELT 334 (HC
          Karnataka); Alpha Laval (I) Ltd Vs C.C.E. Pune reported in 1998
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                           Page 6 of 57
(99) ELT 649 (Tribunal) etc are quite applicable in this case.
Therefore I am inclined to accept the assessee’s contention that the
          demand of duty on the value of bought out items is not sustainable.”
9.   Aggrieved by the Assistant Commissioner’s Order-in-Original dated
     07.12.2005, the revenue preferred an appeal before the Commissioner of
     Central Excise & Customs (Appeals), Aurangabad, [hereinafter, “the
     Commissioner (Appeals)”]. Vide Order-in-Appeal dated 13.07.2007 the
     Commissioner (Appeals), dismissed the appeal preferred by the revenue and
     thereby affirmed the Assistant Commissioner’s order quashing the show cause
     notice.
B.   THE IMPUGNED ORDER
10. Being dissatisfied with the Order-in-Appeal dated 13.07.2007, referred to
     above, the revenue preferred Appeal No. E/1377/07-Mum, whereas the
     assessee filed Cross Objection no. E/CO/13/08 before the CESTAT. Vide the
     common order dated 23.09.2010, the CESTAT reversed the concurrent findings
     of the two lower authorities, allowed the appeal filed by the revenue and
     dismissed the cross objection filed by the assessee, thereby holding that the
     value of the essential bought out items received at the buyer’s site and used in
     the erection of the boiler is to be included in the assessable value of the boiler
     for the purpose of determining the payable central excise duty.
11. The CESTAT based its ruling on two counts:
a.   First, it found no merit in the contention that the boiler had been
          permanently imbedded and is non-excisable, on the ground that such plea
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                          Page 7 of 57
had not been raised before the lower authorities. Further, the CESTAT was
         of the opinion that the immovability argument did not warrant any merit
         because the boiler was manufactured in the factory and it was merely for
         ease of transportation that the same had been cleared in CKD condition.
    b.   Secondly, the CESTAT observed that since the subject bought out items,
         supplied directly to the buyer’s site, were essential parts of the boiler, those
         were therefore to be included in the assessable value of the boiler.
12. The relevant observations made by the CESTAT in the impugned order are
    reproduced as follows:-
“3. We find no merits in the contention of the respondent that the
         boiler has been permanently imbedded and is non-excisable as this
         plea was not taken before the lower authorities. Further the
         respondents are paying duty at the time of clearance of boiler from
         the factory, meaning thereby the boiler is manufactured in the factory
         and only ease of transportation, the same has been cleared in CKD
         condition. In these circumstances, we find no merits in this
         contention.
4. From the facts of the present case the respondent received an order
         for supply of boiler. The respondent manufactured boiler in the
         factory and cleared in CKD condition but certain parts were
         purchased from the market, which were directly supplied at site.
These parts are essential parts of the boiler, which are not in dispute,
         therefore, the decision of the Tribunal in the case of
Thermax
         Babcock & Wilcox Ltd.
, (supra) held that the value of bought out
         items received at site and used in the erection of boiler includable in
         the assessable value of the boiler.
The respondent relies upon the
         decision of the Tribunal in the case of
Silson India Pvt Ltd.
, (supra).
         We find the facts of the case are different from the facts of present
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                            Page 8 of 57
case.
In the case of
Silson India Pvt Ltd.
, (supra) there was no
          evidence on record to show that full boiler has come into existence in
          the factory of manufactured and the manufacturer cleared only parts
          of the boiler. In the present case the respondents are clearing the
          boiler in CKD condition. Therefore, the respondents are
          manufacturing boiler and clearing the same and as boilers bought
          out items are essential parts, therefore, they are includable in the
          assessable value of the boiler. The impugned order is set aside and
          the appeal filed by the revenue is allowed. Cross objection filed by
          the respondent is also disposed of accordingly.”
13. Thus observing, the CESTAT set aside the order of the Commissioner
     (Appeals), allowed the appeal by the revenue and dismissed the cross-objection
     filed by the assessee.
14. Being aggrieved by the impugned order, the assessee is here before us with two
     appeals under
Section 35L(1)(b)
of the Act, 1944.
C.   SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PARTIES


(I). Submissions on behalf of the appellant/assessee
15. Mr. Prakash Shah, the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the
     assessee, submitted that the contract was for designing, procuring,
     manufacturing and supplying of machinery and equipment for a steam
     generating plant and to do other works mentioned therein such as painting, first
     filling of lubricant, transformer oil, packing and forwarding charges, and
     handling and loading charges at the place of supply.
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                         Page 9 of 57
16. The learned Senior Counsel submitted that owing to the huge size of the boiler,
     it had to be cleared from the assessee’s factory in CKD condition to the site of
     the buyer. He submitted that the assessee had no contractual obligation to erect
     or install the goods supplied by it. As per the contract, the erection, installation
     and commissioning of the steam generating plant was to be undertaken by the
     buyer’s engineer.
17. The learned Senior Counsel submitted that the assessee had manufactured some
     of the equipments/machineries of the steam generating plant at its factory and
     cleared those in CKD condition upon payment of appropriate central excise
     duty. He further submitted that the assessee had purchased some items such as
     feed water pumps, fans, safety valves, level gauges, etc., from the open market,
     and supplied those duty-paid bought out items directly to the buyer, without
     bringing those into the assessee’s factory. He submitted that the assessee merely
     supplied those bought out items and did not undertake any processing of those
     either at the site of erection or elsewhere.
18. On the aspect of whether the bought out items were essential parts of the boiler
     or not, the learned Senior Counsel argued that even at the site of erection, the
     bought out items did not form part of the boiler, but were fitted onto other
     machinery/equipments       at   the    site.   He   argued     that   such    other
     machinery/equipment on which the bought out parts are fitted onto, are not
     classifiable under Heading no. 84.02 as boiler but classifiable under Heading
     no. 84.04 as auxiliary plant for use with boilers, under the Act, 1985. Thus,
     according to the learned Senior Counsel, these bought out items are neither
     parts nor accessories of the boiler and hence could not have been included in
     the assessable value of the boilers. He went on to argue that the CESTAT failed
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                           Page 10 of 57
to appreciate that there was no material on record to arrive at the finding that
     the bought out items were essential parts of the boiler, or that their function,
     value and description were provided to justify their essentiality. He submitted
     that the finding of the CESTAT, that the bought out items were essential parts
     of the final product manufactured by the assessee, was not supported by any
     evidence or material on record. He argued that, rather, the CESTAT’s findings
     that the entire boiler was manufactured in the assessee’s factory and cleared in
     CKD condition merely for ease of transportation, is self-contradictory to its
     own finding that the bought out items, delivered directly to the buyer’s site were
     essential parts of the boiler.
19. He also submitted that the assessee had not claimed any CENVAT Credit of the
     central excise duty paid on bought out goods. He placed reliance on Rule 3 of
     the CENVAT Credit Rules, 2004 to submit that CENVAT credit can be taken
     only after inputs are received in the factory of the manufacturers and
     highlighted that the bought out items were never brought into the factory of the
     assessee or worked upon even elsewhere by the assessee.
20. He submitted that the final product i.e. the boiler came into existence at the site
     of the buyer as an immovable property and hence is not ‘goods’ and therefore,
     not excisable.
21. He argued that the revenue is seeking to recover tax on sale of goods in the
     guise of excise duty. He argued that the learned A.S.G.’s contention that
Section
     4
of the Central Excise Act, 1944 permits inclusion of the value of bought out
     goods in the assessable value of the goods manufactured by the Appellant is
     contrary to the law declared by this Court in
Commissioner of Central Excise,
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                         Page 11 of 57
Pondicherry v. Acer India Ltd.
reported in 2004(
8) SCC173 and
    Commissioner of Central Excise, Lucknow, U.P. v. Chhata Sugar Co. Ltd.
reported in 2004(3) SCC 466, whereby this Court had held that
Section 4
of the
    Act, 1944 is a machinery provision and subject to
Section 3
of the Act, 1944
    which is a charging section. He submitted that it is trite law that levy of duty of
    excise is on the manufacture or production and not on sale of goods.
22. The learned Senior Counsel vehemently contended that the CESTAT erred in
    holding that the assessee had not raised the contention regarding the boiler
    being non-excisable on account of its permanent embedding on erection at site,
    before the lower authorities. He submitted that the CESTAT had failed to
    appreciate that the assessee, in its reply dated 13.06.2005 to the show cause
    notice dated 28.04.2005, had specifically raised the contention that the boiler
    on commissioning became immovable property. Further, the said contention
    was accepted by the Assistant Commissioner and the same is reflected in the
    form     of    findings    recorded      in    the    Order-in-Original      dated
    07.12.2005/13.01.2006, wherein the Assistant Commissioner held that the
    boilers erected at site and attached to earth are not goods and hence not
    excisable.
23. The learned Senior Counsel argued that the CESTAT’s reliance on the order of
    the CESTAT in Commissioner of C. Ex. v. Thermax Babcock & Wilcox Ltd.
    reported in 2005 (182) ELT 336 (Tri.- Mumbai) (hereinafter referred to as
    “Thermax CESTAT” ) is erroneous because in case of Thermax CESTAT
    (supra), when the order was challenged before this Court in M/s.
Thermax
    Babcock & Wilcox Ltd. v. Commnr. of Central Excise, Pune
in Civil Appeal
    No(s). 3042-3043/2005 (hereinafter referred to as “Thermax SC”), the learned
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                         Page 12 of 57
counsel for the Commissioner of Central Excise, Pune had pointed out that,
     while computing the demands which were raised in the show cause notice, no
     excise duty was demanded on the bought out items in that matter.
24. Lastly, he contended that the CESTAT committed a serious error in law in not
     remanding the proceedings to the two lower authorities to examine the question
     of whether the show cause notice was time barred. He highlighted that since
     the Assistant Commissioner and the Commissioner (Appeals) had dropped the
     demand on merits, the CESTAT did not find it necessary to address itself on the
     show cause notice being time barred.
(II). Submissions on behalf of the respondent/revenue
25. Mr. Raghavendra P Shankar, the learned A.S.G. appearing on behalf of the
     revenue, on the other hand submitted that in the present case, the taxable event
     of ‘manufacture’ occurred when the parts brought from the appellant’s factory
     in CKD condition and the bought out ‘parts’ were assembled at the buyer’s site
     to form the functional boiler, in discharge of its obligation as per Clause 2.1 of
     the contract. He submitted that even assuming without conceding that the boiler
     ceased to be ‘goods’ once it was affixed to the earth, the dutiable event
     (‘manufacture’ of the boiler) had already occurred at a point in time prior to its
     affixation to the earth and thus excise duty was payable on it.
26. He argued that the taxable event of ‘manufacture’ under
Section 3
of the Act,
     1944, having occurred in the present case at the buyer’s site which is the ‘place
     of removal’, what remains thereafter is only determination of the correct
     valuation of the payable excise duty on the said taxable event.
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                         Page 13 of 57
27. He submitted that as per the amended
Section 4(1)
of the Act, 1944 (w.e.f.
    01.07.2000), the central excise duty is payable with reference to the transaction
    value of the goods sold to a buyer, where price charged is the sole consideration
    for the sale. He submitted that as per the said amended
Section 4(1)
read with
Section 4(3)(d)
of the Act,1944, the “transaction value” means the price
    actually paid or payable for the goods, when sold, which in the present dispute,
    would be the total contract price. He pointed out that as per Clause 3.1(iii) of
    the contract, the total contract price was inclusive, inter alia, of the “cost of all
    other items which are necessary for completing supply of the steam generating
    plant as per scope of supply”. He submitted that the assessee was clearing goods
    as per the contract value agreed with the buyer, which included the cost right
    from drawing and designing of the goods to freight, installation and
    commissioning of the boilers at the site and also cost of its essential bought out
    parts. He therefore argued that since the transaction under the contract was
    completed after successful commissioning of the boiler, the value of the bought
    out items would form part of the transaction value as per
Section 4(1)(a)
of the
    Act,1944.
28. He also argued that the cost of the bought out items was recovered by the
    assessee from the buyer and that the assessee had availed CENVAT Credit of
    duty by including the duty paid on the bought out items under the head
    ‘Reimbursement of duty’ and had recovered the same from the buyer.
29. He further argued that the CESTAT was correct in holding that the bought out
    items are essential parts of the boiler that was manufactured. The learned A.S.G
    placed reliance on the distinction drawn by this Court in M/s.
Quippo Energy
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                           Page 14 of 57
Ltd. v. Commissioner of Central Excise, Ahmedabad-II
reported in 2025
     INSC 1130, between a ‘part’ and an ‘accessory’, and the observation that a part
     is an integral/constituent component which renders the article complete and
     functional, i.e. the article would not be able to fulfill its primary function
     without this component. On the basis of this, he argued that the bought out
     items were ‘parts’ of the boiler and not merely its accessories, and that from a
     functional perspective, the bought out items cannot be said to be external to the
     transaction under the contract for supply of a functional boiler. He argued that
     any artificial vivisection of the transaction (and therefore the transaction value)
     under the contract to exclude the value of the ‘bought out’ parts that were
     nevertheless essential parts of the boiler is alien to the contract and also to the
     Act,1944.
30. In the context of Thermax CESTAT(supra), the learned A.S.G. argued that the
     law laid down by the CESTAT in Thermax CESTAT(supra) had not been
     interfered with by this Court in appeal in Thermax SC(supra), but was
     dismissed based on the observation that there was, “no need to go into the issue
     raised by the appellant in this appeal as the decision of this appeal, either ways
     would not affect the appellant if the duty itself is not demanded thereupon”,
     without raising any doubts regarding the correctness of the CESTAT’s order.
31. In such circumstances referred to above, the learned A.S.G. prayed that there
     being no merit in the appeals, those be dismissed.
D.   ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                          Page 15 of 57
32. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone
        through the materials on record, the following questions fall for our
        consideration:
(I).   Whether the value of the duty paid bought out items delivered directly at
             the buyer’s site is liable to be included in the value of the boiler cleared
             by the assessee from its factory in completely knocked down (CKD)
             condition, for the assessment of central excise duty?
(II).   Whether the show cause notice is legal and valid under the extended
             limitation period as provided under the proviso to
Section 11A(1)
of the
             Central Excise Act, 1944?
E.      ANALYSIS


(I). Whether the value of the duty paid bought out items delivered directly at
        the buyer’s site is liable to be included in the value of the boiler cleared by
        the assessee from its factory in completely knocked down (CKD) condition,
        for the assessment of central excise duty?
(i). Understanding the nature of Central Excise Duty, in light of the charging
        provision and valuation of quantum provision under the
Central Excise Act,
        1944
:
33. The present matter before us strikes at the very root of the concept of exigibility
        of central excise duty. Hence, at the outset, it is necessary to recall certain
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                           Page 16 of 57
foundational principles governing the levy of central excise duty under the Act,
     1944.
34. It is pertinent to note that central excise duty is a duty on manufacture of goods.
A Three-judge Bench of this Court in
Union of India and Others v. Bombay
     Tyre International Ltd. and Others
reported in (1984) 1 SCC 467, while
     discussing the concept of a duty of excise highlighted upon the nature of the
     tax and observed as follows:
“12. We think it is appropriate that at the very beginning we
             should briefly indicate the concept of a duty of excise[…]. The
             observations show that while the nature of an excise is indicated
             by the fact that it is imposed in respect of the manufacture or
             production of an article, the point at which it is collected is not
             determined by the point of time when its manufacture is completed
             but will rest on considerations of administrative convenience, and
             that generally it is collected when the article leaves the factory for
             the first time. In other words, the circumstance that the article
             becomes the object of assessment when it is sold by the
             manufacturer does not detract from its true nature, that it is a levy
             on fact of manufacture. In a subsequent case, Governor-General-
             in-Council v. Province of Madras (AIR 1945 FC 98) the Privy
             Council referred to both Central Provinces and Berar Sales of
             Motor Spirit and Lubricants Taxation Act, 1938 and Province of
             Madras v. Boddu Paidanna and Sons and affirmed that when
             excise was levied on a manufacturer at the point of the first sale
             by him “that may be because the taxation authority imposing a
             duty of excise finds it convenient to impose the duty at the moment
             when the excisable article leaves the factory or workshop for the
             first time on the occasion of its sale. But that method of collecting
             the tax is an accident of administration; it is not of the essence of
             the duty of excise, which is attracted by the manufacture itself […]
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                          Page 17 of 57
13. We think that we have shown sufficiently that while levy is on
             the manufacture or production of goods, the stage of collection
             need not in point of time synchronize with the completion of the
             manufacturing process. While the levy in our country has the
             status of a constitutional concept, the point of collection is
             location where the statute declares it will be […]”

                                                           (Emphasis supplied)
35. Another aspect discussed by this Court in
Bombay Tyre
(supra) which is of
     utmost relevance to the matter before us is understanding the nature of
Section
     3
and
Section 4
of the Act, 1944 respectively.
Hence, before delving into the
     explanation regarding the nature of the two provisions as highlighted by this
     Court in
Bombay Tyre
(supra), it is pertinent to reproduce the provisions as it
     existed at the time of the taxable event in contention, i.e. assembling of the
     boiler parts in CKD condition with the bought out items at the site of erection.
36.
Section 3
of the Act, 1944, that was in force at the time of the taxable event in
     contention, read as follows:
“SECTION 3. Duties specified in
First Schedule and the Second
          Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
to be levied.-
(1) There shall be levied and collected in such manner as may be
          prescribed,-
(a) a duty of excise to be called the Central Value Added Tax
          (CENVAT) on all excisable goods which are produced or
          manufactured in India as, and at the rates, set forth in the
First
          Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
(5 of 1986);
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                        Page 18 of 57
(b) a special duty of excise, in addition to the duty of excise specified
         in clause (a) above, on excisable goods specified in the
Second
         Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
(5 of 1986) which are
         produced or manufactured in India, as, and at the rates, set forth in
         the said Second Schedule.
Provided that the duties of excise which shall be levied and collected
         on any excisable goods which are produced or manufactured,
(i) in a free trade zone or a special economic zone and brought to any
         other place in India; or
(ii) by a hundred per cent export-oriented undertaking and brought
         to any other place in India,
         shall be an amount equal to the aggregate of the duties of customs
         which would be leviable under the
Customs Act, 1962
(52 of 1962)
         or any other law for the time being in force, on like goods produced
         or manufactured outside India if imported into India, and where the
         said duties of customs are chargeable by reference to their value; the
         value of such excisable goods shall, notwithstanding anything
         contained in any other provision of this Act, be determined in
         accordance with the provisions of the
Customs Act, 1962
(52 of 1962)
         and the
Customs Tariff Act, 1975
(51 of 1975).
Explanation 1. - Where in respect of any such like goods, any duty of
         customs leviable for the time being in force is leviable at different
         rates, then, such duty shall, for the purposes of this proviso, be
         deemed to be leviable at the highest of those rates.
Explanation 2. - In this proviso,-
(i) "free trade zone" means the Kandla Free Trade Zone and the
         Santa Cruz Electronics Export Processing Zone and includes any
         other free trade zone which the Central Government may, by
         notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;
(ii) "hundred per cent export-oriented undertaking" means an
         undertaking which has been approved as a hundred per cent export-
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                         Page 19 of 57
oriented undertaking by the Board appointed in this behalf by the
         Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by
section
         14
of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of
         1951), and the rules made under that Act.;
(iii) "special economic zone" means a zone which the Central
         Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in
         this behalf.
(1A) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect of all
         excisable goods other than salt which are produced or manufactured
         in India by, or on behalf of, Government, as they apply in respect of
         goods which are not produced or manufactured by Government.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
         Gazette, fix, for the purpose of levying the said duties, tariff values of
         any articles enumerated, either specifically or under general
         headings, in the First Schedule and the Second Schedule] to the
Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
(5 of 1986) as chargeable with duty
         ad valorem and may alter any tariff values for the time being in force.
(3) Different tariff values may be fixed –
(a) for different classes or descriptions of the same excisable goods;
         or
(b) for excisable goods of the same class or description-
(i) produced or manufactured by different classes of producers or
         manufacturers; or
(ii) sold to different classes of buyers:
Provided that in fixing different tariff values in respect of excisable
         goods falling under sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii), regard shall be
         had to the sale prices charged by the different classes of producers
         or manufacturers or, as the case may be, the normal practice of the
         wholesale trade in such goods.”
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                          Page 20 of 57
37.
Section 4
of the Act, 1944, (as amended w.e.f. 01.07.2000) that was in force at
     the time of the taxable event in contention, read as follows:
“SECTION 4. Valuation of excisable goods for purposes of
          charging of duty of excise.-
(1) Where under this Act, the duty of excise is chargeable on any
          excisable goods with reference to their value, then, on each removal
          of the goods, such value shall -
(a) in a case where the goods are sold by the assessee, for delivery at
          the time and place of the removal, the assessee and the buyer of the
          goods are not related and the price is the sole consideration for the
          sale, be the transaction value;
(b) in any other case, including the case where the goods are not sold,
          be the value determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply in respect of any
          excisable goods for which a tariff value has been fixed under sub-
section (2) of
section 3
.
(3) For the purpose of this section,-
(a) "assessee" means the person who is liable to pay the duty of excise
          under this Act and includes his agent;
(b) persons shall be deemed to be "related" if –
(i) they are inter-connected undertakings;
(ii) they are relatives;
(iii) amongst them the buyer is a relative and a distributor of the
          assessee, or a sub-distributor of such distributor; or
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                         Page 21 of 57
(iv) they are so associated that they have interest, directly or
         indirectly, in the business of each other.
Explanation. - In this clause-
(i) "inter-connected undertakings" shall have the meaning assigned
         to it in clause (g) of
section 2
of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
         Practices Act, 1969 (64 of 1969); and
(ii) "relative" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (41) of
section 2
of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);
(c) "place of removal" means
(i) a factory or any other place or premises of production or
         manufacture of the excisable goods;
(ii) a warehouse or any other place or premises wherein the excisable
         goods have been permitted to be deposited without payment of duty,
                 from where such goods are removed;
(d) "transaction value" means the price actually paid or payable for
         the goods, when sold, and includes in addition to the amount charged
         as price, any amount that the buyer is liable to pay to, or on behalf
         of, the assessee, by reason of, or in connection with the sale, whether
         payable at the time of the sale or at any other time, including, but not
         limited to, any amount charged for, or to make provision for,
         advertising or publicity, marketing and selling organization
         expenses, storage, outward handling, servicing, warranty,
         commission or any other matter; but does not include the amount of
         duty of excise, sales tax and other taxes, if any, actually paid or
         actually payable on such goods.”
38. Since the observations of this Court in
Bombay Tyre
(supra) which are central
    to our discussion are with reference to
Section 4
of the Act, 1944 which was in
    force prior to the amendment of 01.07.2000, and the revenue’s argument
    focuses on the amendment, the erstwhile
Section 4
of the Act, 1944 which
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                        Page 22 of 57
existed at the time of
Bombay Tyre
(supra) is being reproduced here for the
    sake of clarity, and it read as follows:
“SECTION 4. Valuation of excisable goods for purposes of
         charging of duty of excise. –

         (1) Where under this Act, the duty of excise is chargeable on any
         excisable goods with reference to value, such value, shall, subject to
         the other provisions of this section, be deemed to be -
(a) the normal price thereof, that is to say, the price at which such
         goods are ordinarily sold by the assessee to a buyer in the course of
         wholesale trade for delivery at the time and place of removal, where
         the buyer is not a related person and the price is the sole
         consideration for the sale:
Provided that
(i) where, in accordance with the normal practice of the wholesale
         trade in such goods, such goods are sold by the assessee at different
         prices to different classes of buyers (not being related persons) each
         such price shall, subject to the existence of the other circumstances
         specified in clause (a), be deemed to be the normal price of such
         goods in relation to each such class of buyers;
(ia) where the price at which such goods are ordinarily sold by the
         assessee is different for different places of removal, each such price
         shall, subject to the existence of other circumstances specified in
         clause (a), be deemed to be the normal price of such goods in relation
         to each such place of removal;
(ii) where such goods are sold by the assessee in the course of
         wholesale trade for delivery at the time and place of removal at a
         price fixed under any law for the time being in force or at a price,
         being the maximum, fixed under any such law, then, notwithstanding
         anything contained in clause (iii) of this proviso, the price or the
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                       Page 23 of 57
maximum price, as the case may be, so fixed, shall, in relation to the
         goods so sold, be deemed to be the normal price thereof;
(iii) where the assessee so arranges that the goods are generally not
         sold by him in the course of wholesale trade except to or through a
         related person, the normal price of the goods sold by the assessee to
         or through such related person shall be deemed to be the price at
         which they are ordinarily sold by the related person in the course of
         wholesale trade at the time of removal, to dealers (not being related
         persons) or where such goods are not sold to such dealers, to dealers
         (being related persons), who sell such goods in retail;
(b) where the normal price of such goods is not ascertainable for the
         reason, that such goods are not sold or for any other reason, the
         nearest ascertainable equivalent thereof determined in such manner
         as may be prescribed.
(2) Where, in relation to any excisable goods the price thereof for
         delivery at the place of removal is not known and the value thereof is
         determined with reference to the price for delivery at a place other
         than the place of removal, the cost of transportation from the place
         of removal to the place of delivery shall be excluded from such price.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply in respect of any
         excisable goods for which a tariff value has been fixed under sub-
section (2) of
section 3
.
(4) For the purposes of this section,
(a) "assessee" means the person who is liable to pay the duty of excise
         under this Act and includes his agent;
(b) "place of removal" means
(i) a factory or any other place or premises of production or
         manufacture of the excisable goods; [* * *]
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                        Page 24 of 57
(ii) a warehouse or any other place or premises wherein the excisable
         goods have been permitted to be deposited without payment of duty;
(iii) a depot, premises of a consignment agent or any other place or
         premises from where the excisable goods are to be sold after their
         clearance from the factory and,
         from where such goods are removed;
(ba) "time of removal", in respect of goods removed from the place
         of removal referred to in sub-clause (iii) of clause (b), shall be
         deemed to be the time at which such goods are cleared from the
         factory;
(c) "related person" means a person who is so associated with the
         assessee that they have interest, directly or indirectly, in the business
         of each other and includes a holding company, a subsidiary company,
         a relative and a distributor of the assessee, and any sub-distributor
         of such distributor.
Explanation. - In this clause "holding company", "subsidiary
         company" and "relative" have the same meanings as in the
Companies Act, 1956
(1 of 1956);
(d) "value", in relation to any excisable goods, -
(i) where the goods are delivered at the time of removal in a packed
         condition, includes the cost of such packing except the cost of the
         packing which is of a durable nature and is returnable by the buyer
         to the assessee.
Explanation. In this sub-clause, "packing" means the wrapper,
         container, bobbin, pirn, spool, reel or warp beam or any other thing
         in which or on which the excisable goods are wrapped, contained or
         wound;
(ii) does not include the amount of the duty of excise, sales tax and
         other taxes, if any, payable on such goods and, subject to such rules
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                         Page 25 of 57
as may be made, the trade discount (such discount not being
         refundable on any account whatsoever) allowed in accordance with
         the normal practice of the wholesale trade at the time of removal in
         respect of such goods sold or contracted for sale.
Explanation. For the purposes of this sub-clause, the amount of the
         duty of excise payable on any excisable goods shall be the sum total
         of -
(a) the effective duty of excise payable on such goods under this Act;
         and
(b) the aggregate of the effective duties of excise payable under other
         Central Acts, if any, providing for the levy of duties of excise on such
         goods, and the effective duty of excise on such goods under each Act
         referred to in clause ( a) or clause (b) shall be, -
(i) in a case where a notification or order providing for any
         exemption (not being an exemption for giving credit with respect to,
         or reduction of duty of excise under such Act on such goods equal to,
         any duty of excise under such Act, or the additional duty under
section 3
of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975), already paid
         on the raw material or component parts used in the production or
         manufacture of such goods) from the duty of excise under such Act is
         for the time being in force, the duty of excise computed with reference
         to the rate specified in such Act, in respect of such goods as reduced
         so as to give full and complete effect to such exemption, and
(ii) in any other case, the duty of excise computed with reference to
         the rate specified in such Act in respect of such goods.
(e) “whole sale trade” means sales to dealers, industrial consumers,
         Government, local authorities and other buyers, who or which
         purchase their requirements otherwise than in retail.”
39. Having read the erstwhile
Section 3
and
Section 4
of the Act, 1944,
    respectively, we come back to this Court’s observation in
Bombay Tyre
(supra).
This Court in
Bombay Tyre
(supra) observed that while
Section 3
provides for
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                        Page 26 of 57
the levy of the duty of excise,
Section 4
provides the measure by reference to
    which the charge is to be levied. It was categorically emphasised upon, that the
    duty of excise is chargeable with reference to the value of the excisable goods,
    but the measure employed for assessing a tax must not be confused with the
    nature of the tax itself.
The relevant observation of this Court in
Bombay Tyre
(supra), reads as follows:
“14. We move on now to a different dimension, to the conceptual
         consideration of the measure of the tax. Section 3 of the Central
         Excises and Salt Act provides for the levy of the duty of excise. It
         creates the charge, and defines the nature of the charge. That it is a
         levy on excisable goods, produced or manufactured in India, is
         mentioned in terms in the section itself.
Section 4
of the Act provides
         the measure by reference to which the charge is to be levied. The duty
         of excise is chargeable with reference to the value of the excisable
         goods, and the value is defined in express terms by that section. It
         has long been recognised that the measure employed for assessing
         a tax must not be confused with the nature of the tax…In other
         words, the measure adopted could not be identified with the nature
         of the tax.”
                                                           (Emphasis supplied)
40. This Court in
Bombay Tyre
(supra) also referred to this Court’s judgment in
D.G. Gouse and Co. v. State of Kerala
reported in (1980) 2 SCC 410 which in
    turn had referred to a passage from Seervai’s Constitutional Law of India, to
    further explain the distinction between the subject of a tax and a measure of a
    tax.
The relevant observation of this Court in
Bombay Tyre
(supra), reads thus:
“14. […]The point was considered by this Court again in
D.G. Gouse
         and Co. v. State of Kerala
[(1980) 2 SCC 410] where reference was
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                       Page 27 of 57
made to the measure adopted for the purpose of the levy of tax on
         buildings under the
Kerala Building Tax Act
. The Court examined the
         different modes available to the Legislature for measuring the levy
         with the annual value of the building and prescribing a uniform
         formula for determining its capital value and for calculating the tax.
         In the course of its judgment, the Court cited with approval a passage
         from Seervai’s Constitutional Law of India [Second Edn. Vol.2 at p.
         1258]:
“…Another principle for reconciling apparently
              conflicting tax entires follows from the fact that a tax has
              two elements: the person, thing or activity on which the tax
              is imposed, and the amount of the tax. The amount may be
              measured in many ways; but decided cases establish a
              clear distinction between the subject-matter of a tax and
              the standard by which the amount of tax is measured. These
              two elements are described as the subject of a tax and the
              measure of a tax…”

         It is, therefore, clear that the levy of a tax is defined by its nature,
         while the measure of the tax may be assessed by its own standard. It
         is true that the standard adopted as the measure of the levy may
         indicate the nature of the tax but it does not necessarily determine it
         […]”
41. It is clear from the above-quoted observations of this Court in
Bombay Tyre
(supra) that
Section 3
of the Act, 1944 specifies the subject-matter on which
    the excise duty is to be levied, whereas
Section 4
of the Act, 1944 prescribes
    the measure of such excise duty. Unfortunately, in the case on hand, the revenue
    lost sight of this crucial distinction in the nature of these two statutory
    provisions. The revenue erred in its application of the amended
Section 4
of the
    Act, 1944 (w.e.f. 01.07.2000) by conflating the two distinct stages of excise
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                        Page 28 of 57
duty assessment, i.e. (i) levy under
Section 3
and (ii) computation of the
     quantum of levy under
Section 4
of the Act, 1944, into one. Although
Section
     4
was amended (w.e.f. 01.07.2000) to modify the valuation methodology, yet
     such amendment did not alter the essential character of the provision and it
     continues to remain a provision for prescribing the measure of the tax and not
     a charging provision in itself.
42. In other words, the ‘transaction value’ becomes relevant only after the taxable
     event, i.e. manufacture of excisable goods, is first established. The measure of
     tax cannot be invoked to prove that what has been produced is excisable. The
     revenue has, erroneously relied upon the ‘transaction value’ derived from the
     ‘contract price’ to argue that the excise duty on the boiler has to be computed
     on the basis of the contract price. However, for the revenue to contend that the
     contract price would become the basis of the ‘transaction value’ for the purpose
     of determination of the payable excise duty, it has to first establish that the final
     product of the contract itself is excisable.
43. Applying the foundational principles set out hereinabove, it is clear that the
     ‘transaction value’ under
Section 4
of the Act, 1944, merely serves as the basis
     for computing the quantum of excise duty payable, but cannot determine
     excisability. It must necessarily be borne in mind that valuation is a
     consequence of levy, not its determinant. Accordingly, the correct sequence of
     central excise duty assessment under the Act, 1944 is as follows:
i.     First, determining the applicability of the charging provision under
Section 3
, i.e. whether the process results in the manufacture of excisable
           goods; and
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                            Page 29 of 57
ii.    Secondly, (if the first condition is satisfied), computing the quantum of
           excise duty payable under the valuation provisions, such as
Section 4
(or
           Section 4A, although Section 4A is not relevant to this present matter
           before us).
44. Thus, it is necessary to first examine whether the resultant product that emerges
     at the buyer’s site by assembling the parts brought in CKD condition along with
     the bought out items, qualifies as an “excisable good” under the Act, 1944. Only
     if such product which emerges as a result of the contract qualifies as excisable
     goods can the next step of evaluation be undertaken, i.e. to see whether or not
     the contract price can be treated as the ‘transaction value’ under
Section 4
, for
     computing the quantum of payable excise duty. Consequently, if upon such
     examination it is found that the contract price could validly be taken as the
     ‘transaction value’ under
Section 4
, a show cause notice may be issued seeking
     why the value of the bought out items should not be added to the value of the
     boiler. In other words, if upon examination it is found that the resultant product
     of the contract is not excisable goods, then the contract price cannot be
     considered as the ‘transaction value’ for the purpose of determining the payable
     central excise duty on the boiler, which in turn would also mean that the value
     of the bought out goods is not liable to be included in the value of the boiler for
     computing central excise duty.
(ii). Whether the resultant final product of the contract would fall within the
     ambit of “Excisable Goods”?
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                          Page 30 of 57
45. The term “excisable goods” defined under
Section 2(d)
of the Act, 1944, as it
    existed at the time of the taxable event in question read as follows:
“SECTION 2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless there is anything
         repugnant in the subject or context,-
xxx             xxx           xxx
(d) “excisable goods” means goods specified in the
First Schedule
         and the Second Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
(5 of
         1986) as being subject to a duty of excise and includes salt;”
46. The term “goods” has not been defined in the Act, 1944. However, through a
    catena of judgments of this Court, it is now a settled position of law that excise
    duty is leviable only on ‘goods’ and that the test of movability is the decisive
    factor in ascertaining whether an article qualifies as “goods” for the purpose of
    central excise duty. A Coordinate Bench of this Court in a judgment in M/s
Bharti Airtel Ltd. v. The Commissioner of Central Excise, Pune
reported in
    2024 INSC 880, undertook an extensive examination of the expression “goods”
    under the Act, 1944. After a close examination of the meaning of “goods” under
Section 2(7)
of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930,
Section 2(52)
of the Central Goods
    and Services Tax Act, 2017,
Section 2(d)
of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956,
Section 2(22)
of the Customs Act, 1962,
Section 2(i)
of the Competition Act,
    2002,
Section 2(13)
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988,
Section 2(f)
of the Micro,
    Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006,
Section 2(14)
of the
    Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and
Section 2(21)
of the Consumer
    Protection Act, 2019, respectively, this Court concluded that the definition of
    “goods” under the
Sale of Goods Act, 1930
seems to be the basis of the term
    “goods” in other Statutes. Therefore, this Court observed that for the meaning
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                           Page 31 of 57
of the term “goods”, the definition given in the
Sale of Goods Act, 1930
would
     be primarily relied upon.
The relevant observation of this Court in
Bharti Airtel
(supra) is as follows:
“11.2.5 “Goods” has not been defined in the
Central Excise Act,
          1944
. We, therefore, look into other statutes. The term “goods” has
          been defined under various statutes some of which may be mentioned
          as below.
xxx             xxx           xxx

          11.2.6 From the above, it appears that the definition of “goods”
          under the
Sales of Goods Act, 1930
seems to be the basis of the term
          “goods” in other Statutes. Hence, we would primarily rely on the
          definition given in the
Sale of Goods Act
.”
47. This Court in
Bharti Airtel
(supra) went further to observe that since the items
     in consideration before it, were neither actionable claim nor money, nor falling
     within the inclusive clause of the definition, viz., stocks, shares, growing crops,
     grass, and things attached to or forming part of the land which are agreed to be
     severed before sale or under contract of sale, the test of movability would
     determine whether those items would be “goods”. However, this Court
     observed that in order to determine whether an item is movable or immovable,
     the enquiry has to go beyond a simpliciter application of the definitions of the
     terms “movable goods” and “immovable goods” under
Section 3(36)
of the
     General Clauses Act, 1897 and
Section 3(26)
of the General Clauses Act, 1897
     read with
Section 3
of the Transfer of Properties Act, 1882, respectively.
The
     relevant observation of this Court in
Bharti Airtel
(supra) reads as under:
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                          Page 32 of 57
“11.2.7 The items in consideration viz., towers and prefabricated
         buildings are neither actionable claim nor money, nor do they come
         within the inclusive clause of the definition, viz., stocks, shares,
         growing crops, grass, and things attached to forming part of the land
         which are agreed to be severed before sale or under contract of sale.
xxx             xxx          xxx

         11.3 Thus, the focus of our inquiry now will be to ascertain whether
         these items namely, towers, its parts thereof and prefabricated
         buildings are movable or immovable properties.
11.3.1 As to what is a movable property has been defined and can be
         understood from the expansive meaning assigned to it under
Section
         3(36)
of the General Clauses Act, 1897 which states that,“movable
         property shall mean property of every description except immovable
         property”.
11.3.2 The aforesaid definition categorically indicates that movable
         and immovable properties are mutually exclusive. Thus, if it is found
         that these items are not immovable properties, these invariably can
         be treated as movable properties under
Section 3(36)
of the General
         Clause Act and thus will be “goods” within the meaning of
Section
         2(7)
of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 and hence may qualify as “capital
         goods” within the meaning of Rule 2(a)(A) subject to fulfilling other
         conditions mentioned therein.
11.3.3 As to what is immovable property has been explained under
Section 3
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 which specifies that
         “immovable property does not include standing timber, growing
         crops or grass”.
11.3.4 It has been also defined under
Section 3(26)
of the General
         Clauses Act, though not exhaustively, but in an inclusive manner by
         providing that “immovable property” shall include “land, benefits to
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                      Page 33 of 57
arise out of land and things attached to the earth, or permanently
         fastened to anything attached to the earth”.
11.3.5 Therefore, we have to consider whether these items are
         attached to the earth or are permanently fastened to anything
         attached to the earth, for if these are found to be so, these will be
         immovable properties and hence cannot be “goods” and
         consequently, cannot be “capital goods” within the scope of the
         CENVAT Rules.
11.4 As to what amounts to “attached to earth” as mentioned under
Section 3(26)
of the General Clauses Act, has been explained under
Section 3
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 to mean as rooted in
         the earth, as in the case of trees and shrubs; imbedded in the earth,
         as in the case of walls or buildings; or attached to what is so
         imbedded for the permanent beneficial enjoyment of that to which it
         is attached.
11.5 For easy reference, the aforesaid definition clauses of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
and the
General Clauses Act, 1897
as
         may be relevant are reproduced below.
Section 3(36)
of the General Clauses Act.
“movable property” shall mean property of every
             description, except immovable property;
Section 3(26)
of the General Clauses Act.
“immovable property” shall include land, benefits to arise
             out of land, and things attached to the earth, or
             permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth.
Section 3
of the Transfer of Property Act.
“immovable property” does not include standing timber,
             growing crops or grass.
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                      Page 34 of 57
Under Section 3 of the Transfer of Properties Act,
              “attached to the earth” means:
(a) rooted in the earth, as in the case of trees and shrubs;
(b) imbedded in the earth, as in the case of walls or
              buildings; or
(c) attached to what is so imbedded for the permanent
              beneficial
              enjoyment of that to which it is attached.
11.6 From the above, it is now clear that if these items, namely towers
         and parts thereof and prefabricated buildings/shelters are considered
         to be “goods”, these cannot be immovable properties. Conversely, if
         these are not rooted in the earth, nor imbedded in the earth nor
         attached to what is so imbedded for the permanent beneficial
         enjoyment of that to which it is attached, these cannot be
         immovable properties and can qualify to be movable properties and
         hence, “goods”.
11.6.1 Since, towers and parts thereof and prefabricated
         buildings/shelters apparently appear to be fixed on the earth or
         building, these seem to be immovable properties at the first blush.
         However, the first appearance may not be decisive to indicate the real
         character of these items, whether these are immovable or movable
         properties, as demonstrated by the conflicting views of the two High
         Courts on this issue. Hence, we need to delve further to arrive at the
         correct position in law on this issue.
11.7 In order to determine whether any property is movable or
         immovable, this Court, in the light of the statutory provisions has
         applied certain principles. It has also been noted that such
         determination may be done not based on a single test but after
         applying several criteria on the facts of each case.”

                                                          (Emphasis supplied)
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                       Page 35 of 57
48. We should now look into a few landmark judgments to help us understand when
     an article would be considered as movable or immovable for the purpose of
     levying excise duty under the Act, 1944.
49. This Court in
Quality Steel Tubes (P) Ltd. v. Collector of Central Excise, U.P.
reported in (1995) 2 SCC 372 dealt with the question whether the tube mill and
     welding head erected and installed by the assessee for manufacture of tubes and
     pipes out of duty-paid raw materials amounted to “excisable good” assessable
     to duty under the Act, 1944. This Court observed that, the basic test of levying
     duty under the Act, 1944 is two fold: One, that any article must be a good and
     second, that the same should be marketable or capable of being brought to
     market. Goods which are attached to the earth and thus become immovable do
     not satisfy the test of being goods within the meaning of the Act, nor can it be
     said to be capable of being brought to the market for being bought and sold. It
     was held that the subject tube mill or welding head having been erected and
     installed in the premises and embedded to earth, ceased to be goods within the
     meaning of
Section 3
of the Act,1944. This Court categorically observed that
     erection and installation of a plant cannot be held to be excisable goods.
This
     Court’s observation in
Quality Steel
(supra) reads thus:
“4. Levy and collection of duty is provided by
Section 3
of the Act on
          all 'excisable goods other than salt which are produced or
          manufactured'. The power, therefore, to levy and collect the duty
          under the charging Section arises when excisable goods are
          produced or manufactured. What is an 'excisable good' is defined by
          Sub-section (d) of
Section 2
to mean 'goods specified in the
Schedule
          to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
as being subject to a duty of
          excise and includes salt'. The words 'excisable good', therefore, has
          a connotation of its own.
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                        Page 36 of 57
5.
In several decisions rendered by this Court commencing from
Union of India and Anr., v. Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co. Ltd
.
MANU/SC/0245/1962 : to
Indian Cable Co. Ltd. v. Collector of
         Central Excise, Calcutta MANU/SC/0012/1995
: 1994ECR20(SC)
         the twin test of exigibility of an article to duty under
Excise Act
are
         that it must be a good mentioned either in the Schedule or under Item
         68 and must be marketable.
In
Delhi Cloth Mills
(supra) it having
         been held that the word 'good' applies to those goods which can be
         brought to market for being bought and sold it is implied that it
         applies to such goods as are moveable.
The requirement of the goods
         being brought to the market for being brought and sold has become
         known as the test of marketability which has been reiterated by this
         Court in
Collector of Central Excise v. Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises
         MANU/SC/0012/1990
: The Court has held in Union Carbide India
         Ltd. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0306/1986 : that even if a
         good was capable of being brought to market, it would satisfy the test
         of marketability. The basic test, therefore, of levying duty under the
         Act is two fold. One, that any article must be a good and second, that
         it should be marketable or capable of being brought to market. Goods
         which are attached to the earth and thus become Immovable do not
         satisfy the test of being goods within the meaning of the Act nor it can
         be said to be capable of being brought to the market for being
         brought and sold. Therefore, both the tests, as explained by this
         Court, were not satisfied in the case of appellant as the tube mill or
         welding head having been erected and installed in the premises and
         embedded to earth they ceased to be goods within meaning of
Section
         3
of the Act.
6. Learned Counsel for the revenue urged that even if the goods were
         capable of being brought to the market it would attract levy. True,
         but erection and installation of a plant cannot be held to be
         excisable goods. If such wide meaning is assigned it would result in
         bringing in its ambit structures, erections and installations. That
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                        Page 37 of 57
surely would not be in consonance with accepted meaning of
         excisable goods and its exigibility to duty.
(Emphasis supplied)
50. This Court in
Mittal Engineering Works (P) Ltd. v. Collector of Central
    Excise, Meerut
reported in (1997) 1 SCC 203, expressed its agreement with
    the observation in
Quality Steel
(supra) that erection and installation of a plant
    cannot be held to be an excisable good.
This Court in
Mittal Engineering
(supra) observed as follows:
“9. Upon the material placed upon record and
referred to above
, we
         are in no doubt that the mono vertical crystalliser has to be
         assembled, erected and attached to the earth by a foundation at the
         site of the sugar factory. It is not capable of being sold as it is, without
         anything more. As was stated by this Court in the case of Quality
         Steel Tubes (P) Ltd. the erection and installation of a plant is not
         excisable. To so hold would, impermissibly, bring into the net of
         excise duty all manner of plants and installations.
(Emphasis supplied)
51. The issue of movability was once again discussed by this Court in
Sirpur Paper
    Mills Ltd v. Collector of Central Excise, Hyderabad
reported in (1998) 1 SCC
    400, whereby this Court clarified through an analogy that merely attaching of
    an item to the earth would not make it immovable property for the purpose of
    the Act, 1944. This Court considered the movability test from the perspective
    of its marketability in dismantled form and agreed with the Tribunal’s view
in
    that case
that the the subject machine had been attached to the concrete base to
    prevent its wobbling but if somebody wanted to purchase the whole machinery,
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                            Page 38 of 57
it could be dismantled and sold to him in parts.
The relevant observation of this
    Court in
Sirpur Paper Mills
(supra) is as follows:
“3 […] The Tribunal held that the machine was attached to earth for
         operational efficiency. The whole purpose behind attaching the
         machine to a concrete base was to prevent wobbling of the machine
         and to secure maximum operational efficiency and also for safety.
         The Tribunal further held that the paper- making machine was
         saleable and observed "if somebody wants to purchase, the whole
         machinery could be dismantled and sold to him in parts".
4. In view of this finding of fact, it is not possible to hold that the
         machinery assembled and erected by the appellant at its factory site
         was immovable property as something attached to earth like a
         building or a tree. The Tribunal has pointed out that it was for the
         operational efficiency of the machine that it was attached to earth. If
         the appellant wanted to sell the paper-making machine it could
         always remove it from its base and sell it.
5. Apart from this finding of fact made by the Tribunal, the point
         advanced on behalf of the appellant, that whatever is embedded in
         earth must be treated as immovable property is basically not sound.
For example, a factory owner or a householder may purchase a
         water pump and fix it on a cement base for operational efficiency and
         also for security. That will not make the water pump an item of
         immovable property. Some of the components of the water pump may
         even be assembled on site. That too will not make any difference to
         the principle. The test is whether the paper-making machine can be
         sold in the market. The Tribunal has found as a fact that it can be
         sold. In view of that finding, we are unable to uphold the contention
         of the appellant that the machine must be treated as a part of the
         immovable property of the Company. Just because a plant and
         machinery are fixed in the earth for better functioning, it does not
         automatically become an immovable property.
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                       Page 39 of 57
6. A further argument was made that the entire machinery as it is
         cannot be bought and sold because the machinery will have to be
         dismantled before being sold. The Tribunal has pointed out that the
         appellant had himself bought several items and completed the
         machinery. It had purchased a large number of components and
         fabricated a few and manufactured the paper-making machine at site.
         If it is sold it has to be dismantled and reassembled at another site.
         We do not find any fault with the reasoning of the Tribunal on this
         aspect of the matter.”

                                                         (Emphasis supplied)
52. Thus, as per this Court’s observation in
Sirpur Paper Mills
(supra), it can be
    inferred that if an item can be dismantled and reassembled at another site, such
    an item would still be considered as movable ‘goods’ under the Act, 1944.
    However, the test of dismantling was qualified by a subsequent Circular (no.
    58/1/2002-CX) dated 15.01.2002, issued by the Central Board of Excise and
    Custom (hereinafter, “CBEC”), Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance,
    Government of India, in which it was mentioned under Clause (e) that if an
    item that is assembled or erected at site cannot be dismantled without
    substantial damage to its components and thus cannot be reassembled, then
    such items would not be considered as ‘movable’, and will, therefore, not be
    excisable goods. The CBEC Circular dated 15.01.2022 reads as follows:
“(e) If items assembled or erected at site and attached by foundation
         to earth cannot be dismantled without substantial damage to its
         components and thus cannot be reassembled, then the items would
         not be considered as movable and will, therefore, not be excisable
         goods.”
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                       Page 40 of 57
53. Having regard to the case law discussed above, it becomes imperative to
     determine whether the steam generating plant, as erected and commissioned at
     the site retains the character of “goods” as understood under the Act, 1944, in
     terms of being a movable property. For this, we must look into few relevant
     clauses of the contract to discern the object of the contract and the resultant
     item that emerges out of it.
54. Clause 1(b) of the contract reads as follows:
“1. DEFINITIONS:
[…] b) STEAM GENERATING PLANT: It shall mean the plant &
          machinery and equipment for Boiler as specified in Annexure I to VI
          attached herewith and forming part of the agreement.”
55. Clause 2.1 of the contract reads as follows:
“2. Scope of Supply:
2.1 The Seller shall design, procure, manufacture, supply of the
             machinery and equipments for one no. 50 TPH MCR Capacity
             and 45 Kg./cm2(g) working pressure, bagasse fired boiler as
             detailed in Annexure I to V annexed to and forming part of this
             Agreement conformity with the specifications including
             clarifications and elucidations laid down therein and according to
             the progressive delivery schedules to be drawn up by the Seller
             and to be approved by the Purchaser and their authorised
             inspection agency, so that the plant shall be ready for
             commissioning within the time provided in clause 4.1 of the
             Agreement.
(Emphasis supplied)
56. Clause 3.1 of the contract reads as follows:
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                       Page 41 of 57
“3. CONTRACT PRICE:
3.1 The Sellers agree to design, procure, manufacture, supply of
           the machinery and equipment for Steam Generating plant and
           do other work herein mentioned as specified in Annexure I to V
           annexed to and forming part of the Agreement at a Total Price of
           Rs.360.00 lacs (Rupee Three Crores Sixty Lacs only) hereinafter
           referred to as Contract Price subject to terms and conditions as
           hereinafter provided as per the break-up given below:
i) Ex-works: (Ex-Sellers or their sub-contractors workshop or
           place of supply) price of machinery and equipment for Steam
           Generating plant according to specification and details given in
           Annexure I to V is Rs.350.00 lacs (Rupees Three Crores Fifty lacs
           Only)
ii) Price of materials required for following necessary facilities in
           respect of 3.1 (i) above.
a) Paints required for final painting. It shall include primer and
           paints as per colour scheme to be given by Purchaser.
b) First filling of lubricants. It shall include oil and grease.
c) First filling of transformer oil, if any.
d) Packing and Forwarding charges.
e) Freight Charges upto the site.
f) Handling and loading at the place of supply.
g) Total cost of above items (a) to (f) - Rs. 10.00 lacs (Rupees Ten
           lacs only.)
iii) Total Contract Price Rs. 360.00 lacs - (Rupees Three Crores
           Sixty lacs only.)
           It is to be clearly understood that the total Contract Price is
           inclusive of the cost of the following:
a) Cost of all other items which are necessary for completing
           supply of the Steam Generating plant as per scope of supply.
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                       Page 42 of 57
b) All taxes, duties and octroi paid by the Seller or their sub-
contractors on raw materials and other materials for their own
            manufacture of finished equipment or parts of finished equipment.
c) Custom duty on imported raw-materials.”

                                                           (Emphasis supplied)
57. Clause 10(j) of the contract reads as follows:
“Boiler Refractory Work: The Sellers have to provide all
            necessary refractories both ordinary and special inclusive of
            standard and special fire bricks, fire cement, fire clay, asbestos
            ropes, asbestos sheets etc. for wherever they are required
            including hot air duct. The ducting between the boiler and the
            chimney and the entire boiler brick work will also be the Sellers
            responsibilities. Red bricks and port land cement, sand and lime
            shall be provided by the Purchasers.”
                                                         (Emphasis supplied)
58. Clause 13.1.3(b) of the contract reads as follows:
“13. TERMS OF PAYMENT:
13. 1. The Purchasers shall pay the contract price in the following
          manner free of interest.
xxx             xxx          xxx
13. 1.3. 7.5% (Seven & half Percent) of the contract price of
          machinery and equipments (mentioned against 3.1 (i) necessary
          facilities contained in 3.1 (ii) (a) to (f) of the Agreement, i.e. Rs.
27,00,000/- (Rupees Twenty seven Lacs Only.) within 3 (three)
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                        Page 43 of 57
months of signing of the Agreement and on fulfilling all the following
         contractual obligation by the Sellers:
[…] b) Placing order, releasing advances and furnishing the order
         acceptance copies from the concerned vendors for following critical
         bought out items:
• Boiler quality plates for steam and mud-drum
         • High pressure valves and fittings including safety valves.
         • ID, FD and SA fans.
• Drives for above fans including panels.
• Wet Scrubber.
• Instrumentation.
• Furnace grate.
• Feed pumps, transfer pumps and their drives.
         • All Bagasse Carrier Chain and Drives.
• Economizer and Air Pre-heaters.
• Soot Blowers
         AND
         • Supply of Boiler structural material.”


                                                            (Emphasis supplied)
59. A close reading of Clause 2.1, and Clause 3.1 of the contract, respectively,
    indicates that the scope of the contract was design, procurement, manufacture
    and supply of the machinery and equipment for a steam generating plant. The
    poorly drafted definition of “Steam Generating Plant” under Clause 1(b) of the
    contract causes an overlap between the terms ‘boiler’ and ‘steam generating
    plant’. However when the definition of “Steam Generating Plant” to mean “the
    plant & machinery and equipment for Boiler” is read in light of the scheme of
    the contract as a whole, we find that the object of the contract was that the boiler
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                          Page 44 of 57
parts manufactured by the assessee and transported to the site of erection in
    CKD condition would be assembled at the site of delivery along with the bought
    out parts which were directly delivered there, in order to form a steam
    generating plant. The steam generating plant comes into existence as a
    composite system comprising various components- some manufactured by the
    assessee (such as the boiler in CKD condition) and other components such as
    the bought out items. When these are assembled and erected together at the
    buyer’s site, the process results in a steam generating plant that is permanently
    affixed to the earth and hence becomes an immovable property.
60. The revenue seeks to suggest that the mere act of assembling the boiler parts
    cleared in CKD condition from the assessee’s factory, together with the duty-
    paid bought out items delivered directly at the site of erection, simpliciter brings
    into existence excisable goods in the form of a boiler. In other words, the
    revenue’s contention is that the boiler in CKD condition and the bought out
    items first coalesce into a movable boiler before being affixed to the ground,
    and that it is at this intermediate stage that excise duty is to be levied. The
    revenue’s proposition would hold good only if it were established that such a
    movable boiler, distinct from the immovable steam generating plant, does in
    fact come into existence as a result of the assembling of the CKD parts and
    bought out items. However, such a proposition as suggested by the revenue is
    both impractical and improbable when examined in light of the nature, volume
    and magnitude of the boiler in question, as indicated by Clause 2.1 of the
    contract, which provides its specifications as being a ‘50 TPH MCR Capacity
    and 45 Kg./cm2(g) working pressure, bagasse fired boiler’.
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                          Page 45 of 57
61. While referring to Clause 10(j), read with Clause 13.1.3(b) of the contract, we
     find that the assembly involves civil engineering using fire bricks, fire cement,
     portland cement, fire clay, asbestos ropes, asbestos sheets and other materials
     indicating that civil engineering work had to be undertaken in the course of
     assembling the boiler. The erection and assembly of a ‘50 TPH MCR Capacity
     and 45 Kg./cm2(g) working pressure, bagasse fired boiler’ cannot possibly be
     akin to assembling movable equipment or machinery that can exist
     independently as ‘goods’. It is not akin to, for example, affixing a water pump
     on a residential building with cement, which can be removed without damage.
     Rather, the process of assembling would involve the integration of massive
     structures, and piping systems that are aligned, welded, and permanently
     embedded into the foundation at the buyer’s premises. Such process of
     assembly, erection and installation involving construction materials like bricks,
     clay, sand, cement, etc. clearly indicate that the resultant product cannot be
     dismantled into its constituent parts without being substantially damaged.
62. Thus, we find merit in the arguments raised by the assessee that the mere size
     and weight of the boiler make it impossible to assemble the boiler before
     erection, and that the process of erection itself involves civil and mechanical
     engineering with the use of concrete, steel reinforcements, and grouting in such
     a manner that the coming into existence of the boiler in a functioning condition
     is in an immovable form. The assembly and erection of the boiler is essentially
     intertwined in such a manner that we also find merit in the assessee’s argument
     that such an installed boiler cannot be readily dismantled by merely removing
     nuts and bolts and reassembled at another site without causing extensive
     damage to the boiler to an extent so as to reduce its value to mere scrap.
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                        Page 46 of 57
63. The object of the contract therefore is about erection and installation of an
     immovable plant. As noted by this Court in
Quality Steel
(supra) and
     unequivocally affirmed by another Co-ordinate Bench of this Court in
Mittal
     Engineering
(supra), “erection and installation of a plant cannot be held to be
     excisable goods” and therefore, the steam generating plant that emerges as a
     result of the contract cannot be held to be an excisable good. Consequently, the
     base value of the boiler on which excise duty is to be levied, cannot be equated
     with the total contract price which is inclusive of the price of the bought out
     items.
64. Applying the above principles to the facts of the present case, we arrive at the
     finding that the final product that emerges as a result of performing the
     obligations under the contract, does not constitute excisable goods under the
     Act, 1944. Consequently, the base value of the boiler on which excise duty is
     to be levied, cannot be equated with the total contract price. Therefore, the price
     of the bought out parts cannot be included in the value of the boiler for the
     purpose of computing central excise duty under the Act, 1944.
65. Before proceeding further, we find it necessary and crucial to highlight that the
     CESTAT committed a glaring error when it declined to consider the
     immovability plea by the assessee, on the ground that the said plea was not
     taken before the lower authorities. Contrary to the CESTAT’s findings in the
     impugned order, the documents on record clearly indicate that the said plea was
     taken by the assessee right from the earliest stage of its reply to the show cause
     notice itself. We find that the facts on record support the assessee’s contention
     that in its reply dated 13.06.2005 to the show cause notice dated 28.04.2005, it
     had specifically raised the contention that the boiler on commissioning became
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                          Page 47 of 57
immovable property. Materials on record also indicate that the said contention
      regarding immovability was accepted by the Assistant Commissioner and the
      same reflects in the finding recorded in the Order-in-Original dated
      07.12.2005/13.01.2006 that boilers erected at site and attached to earth are not
      goods and hence not excisable. Therefore, for the CESTAT to ignore the most
      central issue, going to the root of the entire dispute, on an erroneous finding of
      fact, is an egregious flaw in the impugned order.
(iii). Erroneous reliance on Tariff Classification
66. At this stage, it is also important to address this issue from one another angle
      and provide a cautionary note in this respect. The revenue appears to have been
      swayed by the fact that ‘boilers’ and ‘boiler parts’ are listed under Chapter 84
      of the
Tariff Act, 1985
, and therefore seem to have proceeded on the erroneous
      assumption that all boilers, irrespective of form or configuration, attract central
      excise duty. However, the revenue should have kept in mind that the mere
      presence of a product in the Tariff Schedule does not determine its excisability.
      The first and primary enquiry must be whether the item satisfies the conditions
      of the charging section under
Section 3
of the Act, 1944, an essential condition
      of which is that the subject matter is a movable good.
67. A significant observation made by a Three-judge Bench of this Court in
Moti
      Laminates (P) Ltd. v. CCE
reported in (1995) 3 SCC 23 that succinctly drives
      home this cautionary note reads as follows:
“11. […] The Tariff Schedule by placing the goods in specific and
           general category does not alter the basic character of leviability. The
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                          Page 48 of 57
duty is attracted not because an article is covered in any of the items
           or it falls in residuary category but it must further have been
           produced or manufactured and it is capable of being bought and
           sold.”
(iv). Inapplicability of the “Utility Test” and the ‘part’ v. ‘accessory’ debate
68. Further, it is relevant to note that both the revenue and the CESTAT have
      erroneously resorted to focusing on whether the bought out parts were essential
      to the functioning of the assembled boiler or not. The determination of the
      question, whether or not the bought out items were ‘parts’ or ‘accessories’, in
      terms of this Court’s observation in
Quippo
(supra), would have been of some
      relevance in the present matter only if the resultant product of the contract
      would fall within excisable goods. In other words, the question of utility would
      have been relevant to the determination of payable excise duty, if a movable
      boiler had resulted from integrating the CKD parts with the bought out items.
69. However, as observed above, in the present case, the final product, i.e. the steam
      generating plant, emerges in the form of an immovable product in the course of
      integrating the CKD parts with the bought out items. Therefore, the resultant
      product of the contract not being excisable goods, it is wholly inconsequential
      whether or not the bought out items are parts or accessories of it.
(v). Excess collection of excise duty from buyer is no proof of excisability
70. It is also necessary to address the contention raised by the revenue that the
      assessee availed CENVAT Credit of duty paid on the bought out items and
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                           Page 49 of 57
recovered the same from the buyer. The revenue has placed reliance on this to
     bolster its argument that the value of the bought out items should be included
     in the dutiable value shown at the time of clearance of the boiler.
71. Irrespective of the fact whether the assessee had denied the allegation in its
     Section 14 statement under the Act, 1944, it is necessary to point out the error
     committed by the revenue in making such an argument.
72. Even if there is any substance in the allegation that excise duty on the value of
     the bought out items was collected by the assessee from the buyer, that by itself
     would not lead to the conclusion that the value of the bought out items must be
     included in the value of the final product for the purpose of computing payable
     excise duty. Rather, if the revenue indeed believed that the assessee had
     collected excise duty from the buyer on the value of the boiler by including the
     price of the bought out items, the correct course of action for the revenue should
     have been to invoke the provisions of
Section 11D
of the Act, 1944, which
     specifically provides a mechanism for recovery of any amount collected by an
     assessee from a buyer, by representing as excise duty in excess of what is
     payable as such.
Section 11D
of the Act, 1944 reads as such:
“SECTION 11D. Duties of excise collected from the buyer to be
          deposited with the Central Government. –

           (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any order
          or direction of the Appellate Tribunal or any Court or in any other
          provision of this Act or the rules made thereunder, every person who
          is liable to pay duty under this Act or the rules made thereunder, and
          has collected any amount in excess of the duty assessed or
          determined and paid on any excisable goods under this Act or the
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                          Page 50 of 57
rules made thereunder from the buyer of such goods in any manner
         as representing duty of excise, shall forthwith pay the amount so
         collected to the credit of the Central Government.
(2) Where any amount is required to be paid to the credit of the
         Central Government under sub-section (1) and which has not been
         so paid, the Central Excise Officer may serve, on the person liable to
         pay such amount, a notice requiring him to show cause why the said
         amount, as specified in the notice, should not be paid by him to the
         credit of the Central Government.
(3) The Central Excise Officer shall, after considering the
         representation, if any, made by the person on whom the notice is
         served under sub-section (2), determine the amount due from such
         person (not being in excess of the amount specified in the notice) and
         thereupon such person shall pay the amount so determined.
(4) The amount paid to the credit of the Central Government under
         sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) shall be adjusted against the duty
         of excise payable by the person on finalisation of assessment or any
         other proceeding for determination of the duty of excise relating to
         the excisable goods referred to in sub-section (1).
(5) Where any surplus is left after the adjustment under sub-section

         (4), the amount of such surplus shall either be credited to the Fund
         or, as the case may be, refunded to the person who has borne the
         incidence of such amount, in accordance with the provisions of
         section 11B and such person may make an application under that
         section in such cases within six months from the date of the public
         notice to be issued by the Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise
         for the refund of such surplus amount.”
                                                         (Emphasis supplied)
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                       Page 51 of 57
73. Upon a bare reading of
Section 11D
of the Act, 1944 it is clear that the failure
      of the revenue to resort to the statutory recourse available under Section 11D,
      and instead to seek to justify inclusion of the value of the bought out items in
      the assessable value of the boiler, reflects an error in application of the law. The
      invocation of Section 11D would be justified in a case where an assessee has
      collected any sum purporting to be the excise duty without the authority of law.
      Consequently, even assuming in arguendo that any excess amount was
      collected from the buyer under the garb of excise duty, such collection cannot
      confer excisability on the final product which emerges as an immovable
      property. The liability of the assessee to pay duty must be determined strictly
      in accordance with the charging provisions under the law and not on the basis
      of any purported recovery from the buyer.
(II). Whether the show cause notice is legal and valid under the extended
      limitation period as provided under the proviso to
Section 11A(1)
of the
      Central Excise Act, 1944?
(i). Was there any wilful suppression of facts with an intention to evade payment
      of duty by the appellant/assessee?
74. In the present case, the extended period of limitation of five years under the
      proviso to
Section 11A(1)
of the Act, 1944 was invoked by the revenue on the
      ground that the assessee had wilfully suppressed the fact that it had not paid
      duty on the bought out items, with the intention to evade Central Excise duty.
      The relevant paragraph from the show cause notice invoking the extended
      limitation period reads thus:
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                           Page 52 of 57
“[…]It further appears that the extended period of limitation as
         provided under proviso to Sect 11A(1) of
Central Excise Act
1944 is
         invokable in the present case because the noticee has not paid duty
         on bought out items and also not paid duty on clearance of the
         bought out items with intention to evade Central Excise duty, the
         noticee appears to have willfully suppressed the facts from the
         knowledge of the Department regarding incorrect valuation of the
         goods and clearance of the bought out items without payment of duty,
         without filing of the declaration required under provisions of Rule 57
         A of erstwhile C. Excise Rules 1944, without declaring the clearance
         of the bought out items in their RT-12 returns […]”

                                                            (Emphasis supplied)
75. The assessee has raised the contention that the conditions for invoking the
    extended period of limitation under the proviso to Section 11A having not been
    met, the show cause notice and the consequent proceedings based on it were
    not maintainable. In order to examine the issue of limitation, let us first refer to
    the provision itself.
Section 11A
of the Act, 1944, which was in force at the
    time of the issuance of the show cause notice reads as follows:
“SECTION 11A. Recovery of duties not levied or not paid or short-
         levied or short-paid or erroneously refunded. - (1) When any duty
         of excise has not been levied or paid or has been short-levied or
         short-paid or erroneously refunded, whether or not such non-levy or
         non-payment, short- levy or short payment or erroneous refund, as
         the case may be, was on the basis of any approval, acceptance or
         assessment relating to the rate of duty on or valuation of excisable
         goods under any other provisions of this Act or the rules made
         thereunder, a Central Excise Officer may, within one year from the
         relevant date, serve notice on the person chargeable with the duty
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                          Page 53 of 57
which has not been levied or paid or which has been short-levied or
         short-paid or to whom the refund has erroneously been made,
         requiring him to show cause why he should not pay the amount
         specified in the notice :
Provided that where any duty of excise has not been levied or paid or
         has been short-levied or short-paid or erroneously refunded by
         reason of fraud, collusion or any wilful mis-statement or
         suppression of facts, or contravention of any of the provisions of
         this Act or of the rules made thereunder with intent to evade
         payment of duty, by such person or his agent, the provisions of this
         sub- section shall have effect, as if, for the words one year, the words
         "five years" were substituted.”
                                                            (Emphasis supplied)
76. A bare reading of Section 11A(1) along with its proviso would indicate that
    ordinarily, notice has to be issued within one year, however the proviso
    stipulates that the notice can be issued within five years from the relevant date
    if , the non-levy, short-levy, or erroneous refund has occurred on account of
    either of the following – fraud, collusion, wilful misstatement or suppression
    of facts, or contravention of any of the provisions of the Act, 1944 or rules
    thereunder, with an intent to evade payment of duty. The proviso employs
    selective choice of words which contemplate a state of mind, whereby the
    noticee has knowingly and deliberately done something or omitted to do
    something which has resulted in non-levy, short-levy or erroneous refund of
    duty. In contrast, for the normal period of one year, there is no requirement of
    any state of mind, and the fact of non-levy, short-levy or erroneous refund of
    duty by itself would be sufficient to invoke the provisions of
Section 11A(1)
of
    the Act, 1944.
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                        Page 54 of 57
77.
In the context of invoking the extended period of limitation under
Section 11A
of the Act, 1944, this Court in
Pahwa Chemicals Private Limited v.
     Commissioner of Central Excise, Delhi
reported in (2009) 4 SCC 658,
     observed that mere failure does not amount to wilful misdeclaration or wilful
     suppression and that there must be some positive act on the part of an assessee
     to bring the case within the mischief of wilful misdeclaration or wilful
     suppression, as the case may be. This Court in
Pahwa Chemicals
(supra)
     observed as follows:
“6. It is settled law that mere failure to declare does not amount to
          wilful misdeclaration or wilful suppression. There must be some
          positive act on the part of the party to establish either wilful
          misdeclaration or wilful suppression. When all facts are before the
          Department and a party in the belief that affixing of a label makes no
          difference does not make a declaration, then there would be no wilful
          misdeclaration or wilful suppression. If the Department felt that the
          party was not entitled to the benefit of the notification, it was for the
          Department to immediately take up the contention that the benefit of
          the notification was lost.”
                                                             (Emphasis supplied)
78. The allegation levelled against the assessee in the present matter before us is of
     wilful suppression with an intention to evade central excise duty. Therefore, the
     following observation of this Court in
Continental Foundation Joint Venture
     Holding v. CCE
reported in (2007) 10 SCC 337 is required to be referred to:
“12. The expression 'suppression' has been used in the proviso to
Section 11-A
of the Act accompanied by very strong words as 'fraud'
          or 'collusion' and, therefore, has to be construed strictly. Mere
          omission to give correct information is not suppression of facts unless
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                          Page 55 of 57
it was deliberate to stop (sic evade) the payment of duty. Suppression
          means failure to disclose full information with the intent to evade
          payment of duty. When the facts are known to both the parties,
          omission by one party to do what he might have done would not
          render it suppression. When the Revenue invokes the extended period
          of limitation under Section 11-A the burden is cast upon it to prove
          suppression of fact. An incorrect statement cannot be equated with a
          wilful misstatement. The latter implies making of an incorrect
          statement with the knowledge that the statement was not correct.”

                                                            (Emphasis supplied)
79. Judged by these principles
laid down by
this Court on the application of the
     proviso to
Section 11A(1)
of the Act, 1944, we find that the assessee is justified
     to contend that the extended period of limitation could not have been invoked
     in the present case since the assessee bona fide believed that the bought out
     items are not to be included in the assessable value of the boiler. A perusal of
     the show cause notice would show that the revenue itself admits that the
     assessee had filed the RT-12 returns with the revenue, which means that the
     revenue had the material particulars on record which it could have acted upon
     within the normal one year period. There is nothing on record to indicate that
     any material information had been suppressed by the assessee with any
     intention to evade payment of central excise duty.
80. Therefore, in the absence of any deliberate act on the part of the assessee with
     an intention to evade being established by the revenue, the essential
     precondition of wilful suppression with intent to evade duty is not satisfied.
     Consequently, the invocation of the extended period of limitation under the
     proviso to Section 11A(1) is held to be not tenable in law.
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                         Page 56 of 57
81. The show cause notice being held to be invalid, the proceedings leading up to
     this present appeal are also liable to be quashed, and accordingly the impugned
     order is set aside.
F.   CONCLUSION
82. We hereby conclude that the value of the duty paid bought out items which
     were delivered directly at the buyer’s site is not liable to be included in the
     value of the boiler cleared by the assessee from its factory in CKD condition,
     for the purpose of assessment of excise duty.
83. We also hold that the show cause notice issued under the proviso to
Section
     11A(1)
of the Act, 1944 is not legal and hence invalid.
84. Therefore, for all the foregoing reasons, the appeals succeed and are hereby
     allowed.
……….…………………..J.
                                                               (J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                                       ……….…………………..J.
                                                               (SANDEEP MEHTA)
New Delhi,
10th November, 2025.
Civil Appeal Nos. 856-857 of 2011                                       Page 57 of 57