[Cites
40
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Rajeswari vs Shanmugam on 19 November, 2025
2025 INSC 1329                                                   REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO.13835 OF 2025
                         (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 3532 of 2018)

             Rajeswari & Ors.                                    …Appellant(s)

                                                Versus

             Shanmugam & Anr.                                  …Respondent(s)

                                             JUDGMENT
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.              Leave granted.
2.              Should a deed assigning a decree for specific

             performance of an agreement of sale of immovable property,

             be registered under the provisions of the
Registration Act,

             1908
, is the question that presents itself for consideration in

             this case.
BRIEF FACTS: -
3.             The appellants are the legal heirs of the judgment-
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHANDRESH
Date: 2025.11.19
13:50:10 IST
Reason:
debtor. Their predecessor suffered an ex-parte decree on
Page 1 of 28
13.09.1993 in O.S. No.100/1989 before the First Additional Sub

Court, Erode, Tamil Nadu.      The first Respondent herein-

Shanmugam claims to be the assignee of the decree dated

13.09.1993. The assignment deed is dated 17.07.1995.
4.   The first Respondent-assignee filed E.P. No.150/2004 in

O.S. No.100/1989 seeking to recognize the assignment and

seeking directions to execute the sale deed and deliver

possession.
5.   On 13.03.2008, the Executing Court ordered the

execution of the sale deed in favour of the first respondent.
6.   When the matter stood thus, on 31.10.2009, the

appellants herein, who were the legal heirs of the deceased-

judgment debtor filed E.A. No.180/2009 under
Section 47
of

the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short ‘
CPC
’) seeking to

set aside the execution of the sale deed dated 13.03.2008 in

favour of the first respondent.    They also prayed for the

dismissal of the Execution Petition primarily on the ground

that the assignment deed in favour of the first respondent was

not registered and, hence, unenforceable in law. By an order
Page 2 of 28
of 08.04.2010, the Executing Court allowed E.A. No.180/2009

and on the aspect of the need for registration of the

assignment, the Court recorded the following finding, after

relying on the judgment of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh

in
K. Bhaskaram and another vs. Mohammad Moulana
(died) and others1:-
“18. …… While perusing
the above decision
, it can be
          noticed that it is not in dispute that there can be oral
          transfer of property without writing in every cases in which
          writing is not exclusively required under law. But if it is an
          immovable property, the value of which is more than
          Rs.100/- such transfer deed will have to be reduced in
          writing and also it requires compulsory registration. After
          analyzing
section 17
of the Indian Registration Act … the
          Hon’ble High Court categorically held that
u/s.17(1)(e)
and
(f) of the
Registration Act
the assignment and transfer of the
          decree relating to immovable property of the value of Rs.
100/- and upwards is compulsorily registrable. Further it
          was held that the transfer of the right in a decree by way of
          assignment in immovable properties require stamp and
          registration and if there is a valid assignment of decree by
          operation of law, then the assignee is entitled to get the
          decree executed in his favour after issuing a notice to the
          transferors and the Judgment-Debtors. Further it was held
          that the non-compliance with provisio regarding notice
          under
Order 21 Rule 16 C.P.C
. renders all subsequent
          proceedings void. The above decision was also rendered
          in a case of specific performance relating to immovable
          property. Therefore, this court finds that the principles and
1
AIR 2005 AP 524
Page 3 of 28
the decision reported above is squarely applicable to the
           facts of the present case also. No other decision or the
           principle
laid down in
any other case has been pointed out
           and produced by the respondents so as to reject or over-
           look the contentions raised by the petitioners herein or the
           decision reported in ‘A.I.R. 2005- Andhra Pradesh- Page
           524’. Therefore, this court has no other go except to accept
           the principles
laid down in
the above decision
.
19. Since this court comes to the conclusion that the
           assignment deed executed by the 2nd respondent in favour
           of the 1st respondent has not been recognised prior to the
           execution of the sale deed and that the assignment deed
           Ex. Bl is bad for want of registration as per
Section 17(1)
of
           the Registration Act, this court finds that the execution
           proceedings initiated by the 1st respondent cannot be
           proceeded further.”
7.         The first respondent herein filed a Revision Petition

before the High Court which was allowed after holding that

what has been assigned by the decree holder was only a right

to derive benefits from the decree passed by the Court and

nothing more and as such the deed of assignment was not

compulsorily registrable.               The High Court relied on the

judgment of High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in
Mumtaz

Ahmad and Another vs. Sri Ram
and others2.
2
(1913) 11 A.L.J.R 815
Page 4 of 28
8.   We have heard Mr. Jayanth Muth Raj, learned senior

counsel for the appellants and Mr. R. Ganesh, learned counsel

for the assignee-respondent No.1. Respondent No.2, though

served, is not appearing.     We have perused the records,

including the original records of the High Court and the Trial

Court, which we called for.
CONTENTIONS OF THE APPELLANTS: -
9.   Mr. Jayanth Muth Raj, learned senior counsel, after

drawing our attention to
Section 17(1)(e)
of the Registration

Act, as amended in 1929, contended that assignment of

decree is compulsorily registrable when the decree purports

or operates to create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish,

whether in present or in future, any right, title or interest,

whether vested or contingent, of the value of one hundred

rupees and upwards, to or in immovable property. According

to the learned senior counsel, the Executing Court rightly

relied upon the judgment of
K. Bhaskaram
(supra) wherein it

was held that the assignment and transfer of the decree
Page 5 of 28
relating to immovable property of the value of one hundred

rupees and upwards is compulsorily registrable and if it was

unregistered and unstamped then there is no assignment of

the decree in the eye of law.
10. Mr. Jayanth Muth Raj, learned senior counsel, contends

that a decree passed in a suit for specific performance of a sale

agreement on immovable property creates an interest in the

immovable property. Learned senior counsel refers to the

Black’s Law Dictionary for the meaning of the word “interest”

as “a legal share in something; all or part of a legal or equitable

claim to or right in property”.
11. Learned senior counsel submits that if the assignment of

the decree of specific performance is not registrable, parties

will get a specific performance decree and instead of

executing a sale deed, they will assign the decree multiple

times for 12 years thereby they can avoid the registration

charges which will defeat the purpose and object of the

provisions of the
Registration Act, 1908
. No other submission

has been canvassed before us.
Page 6 of 28
CONTENTIONS OF THE RESPONDENT NO.1: -
12. Mr. R. Ganesh, learned counsel for the assignee,

submitted that the decree itself does not create or transfer any

right as regards the suit property but only confers a right to

obtain sale through the process of law. Hence, it is submitted

that the contention of the appellants, that the assignment of

decree warrants registration, is incorrect. Learned counsel

relied on the judgment of the High Court of Judicature at

Bombay in
Amol and others vs. Deorao
and others3, wherein

it was held that assignment of a decree for specific

performance does not require registration.
13. Learned counsel contends that upon passing of a decree

for specific performance the contract between the parties is

not extinguished; that the parties to the contract continue to

bear their rights and obligations to complete the contract in

accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract; that

the decree is subject to the further process, upto the stage of
3
2011 SCC OnLine Bom 11
Page 7 of 28
execution of the sale deed and its registration. It is submitted

that the grant of specific performance is an equitable relief

and merely because a decree for specific performance is

passed, it cannot be presumed that a decree-holder is bound

to get the sale deed executed in his favour. It is submitted that

a decree for specific performance does not elevate the status

of a decree-holder to that of an owner since no right, title or

interest in or charge on the immovable property is created in

favour of the decree holder.
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS: -
14. We need to first set out the text of the decree for specific

performance obtained by the second respondent which was

the subject matter of the assignment. The decree dated

13.09.1993 reads as under: -
“1. The defendant is to receive the balance sale
     consideration and execute the sale of suit schedule property
     without any encumbrance in favour of the plaintiff.
2. Failing to do so as aforementioned, the plaintiff can
     execute and obtain a sale deed through the court.
3. The defendant should pay the plaintiff the costs Rs.
4,317.50.
Page 8 of 28
4. The plaintiff is given a time of 1 month to execute the sale
        deed.”
15. We have also gone through the original records obtained

from the High Court and the translated version of the

assignment deed (Ex.B1) executed by the second respondent

in favour of the first respondent herein. The assignment deed

reads as under:-
“Ex.B.1 - Decree Made Over
                            Decree Made over for Rs.20,000/-
The Decree Made over Deed, that is entered into, by me,
        K.T.Natarajan, S/o.Thirumalaisamy Gounder, residing at
        Kanagapuram village, Erode Taluk,

                                    TO AND IN FAVOUR OF

        Shanmugam, S/o. Palanisamy Gounder, residing at
        Murungakaadu Thottam, Poondurai Semur village, Erode
        Taluk, on 07.07.1995* (sic.), recites as hereunder:-
As the plaintiff, I obtained a decree in O.S. No. 100 of 1989 on
        the file of the I Additional Subordinate Court, Erode, against
        the defendant Kuppusamy Gounder, son of Chellappa
        Gounder, residing at Ayyagoundanpalayam, Elumathur
        Village, Erode Taluk, stating that according to the sale
        agreement dated 01.03.1988, the defendant Kuppusamy
        Gounder received a balance sale consideration of
        Rs.15,000/- from me in respect of the suit property and
        agreed to execute a sale deed in favour of me, the plaintiff,
        free from encumbrances, and to deliver possession thereof
        and in default of such execution, it was ordered that I, the
        plaintiff, shall be entitled to have the sale deed executed

* The assignment deed is undisputedly dated 17.07.1995
Page 9 of 28
through court and the defendant was also directed to pay the
     costs of the suit, amounting to Rs.4,817/-. Also, according to
     the aforesaid decree, I had deposited the balance sale
     consideration of Rs.15,000/- before the Hon’ble Court on
     03.09.1991. Since the aforesaid Defendant had not executed
     the sale as per the decree, I was constrained to file an
     Execution Petition.
In this situation, I am having received from you a total sum of
     Rs. 20,000/- (Rupees Twenty Thousand only) in cash, being
     the consideration towards the decree and costs awarded to
     me in the said suit, had executed the made over, the rights
     and interests of aforesaid suit, appeal, and decree, in full and
     absolute manner, into your favour, through this. Henceforth,
     all rights and interests arising out of the said suit, appeal, and
     decree shall belong solely to you. Hence, you shall execute
     the sale deed from the court through the Execution Petition in
     accordance with the aforesaid decree.
Hereafter, neither I nor my heirs shall have any claim or
     succession over the said decree. Thus, it is the Made Over
     Deed executed with my full consent. Henceforth, you shall
     file the Execution Petition and recover the costs along with
     the purchase of the property as per the agreement.”



NATURE AND CHARACTER OF A DECREE FOR SPECIFIC
PERFORMANCE: -
16. As will be seen, what has been the subject matter of the

assignment is a decree for specific performance of an

agreement of sale. It will be trite at this stage to consider what

exactly is the nature and legal character of a decree for

specific performance.
Page 10 of 28
17. In Babu Lal vs. M/s Hazari Lal Kishori Lal and others4,

this Court in the context of examining the question, whether in

a suit for specific performance, the relief of possession could

be claimed at a subsequent stage, discussed the nature of the

decree of specific performance in the following terms: -
“6. It would be appropriate to refer to the state of law as it
            existed prior to the amendment of the
Specific Relief Act
in
            1963. One view was that the decree-holder does not acquire
            title or right to recover possession unless a sale deed is
            executed, in execution of the decree for specific
            performance.
In
Hakim Enayat Ullah v. Khalil Ullah Khan
[AIR
            1938 All 432] a Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court
            dealing with the question observed:
“A decree for specific performance only declares the
               right of the decree-holder to have a transfer executed
               in his favour of the property covered by the decree. The
               decree by itself does not transfer title. That this is so is
               apparent from the fact that in order to get title to the
               property the decree-holder has to proceed in execution
               in accordance with the provisions of Order 21 of the
               Code. So long as the sale deed is not executed in favour
               of the decree-holder, either by the defendant in the suit
               or by the court, the title to the property remains vested
               in the defendant and till the execution of the sale deed
               the decree-holder has no right to the possession of the
               property. It is only the execution of the sale deed that
               transfers title to the property.”
4
(1982) 1 SCC 525
Page 11 of 28
7.In Kartik Chandra Pal v. Dibakar Bhattacharjee [AIR 1952
Cal 362] a Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court,
however, after reviewing a number of reported cases,
viz.,
Ranjit Singh v. Kalidasi Debi [ILR
(1910) 37 Cal
57] Madanmohan Singh v. Gaja Prasad Singh [(
1911) 14 CLJ
159], Deonandan Prasad v. Janki Singh
[(1920) 5 Pat LJ 314]
and Atal Behary Acharya v. Barada Prasad Banerji [AIR 1931
Pat 179], observed:
“...It is incontestable that in a suit for specific
  performance of contract for the sale of land it is open to
  the plaintiff to join in the same suit two prayers, one for
  the execution of the deed of transfer and another for
  recovery of possession of the land in question....
***
  We ought to remember in this connection that no
  special form of decree in a suit for specific performance
  is supplied by the Civil Procedure Code. Chapter II,
  Specific Relief Act, deals with the various circumstances
  under which a contract may be enforced specifically
  and where it cannot be allowed. When a contract is to
  be specifically enforced, it means simply this that when
  the parties do not agree to perform the contract
  mutually the intervention of the Court is required and
  the Court will do all such things as the parties would
  have been bound to do had this been done without the
  intervention of the Court. A sale of a property after
  payment of the consideration and upon due execution
  of the deed of sale presupposes and requires the
  vendor to put the purchaser in possession of the
  property. It cannot be suggested that when a party
  comes to Court for the specific performance of a
  contract he is to be satisfied with simply the execution
  of the document on payment of the consideration
  money. The Court when allowing the prayer for specific
  performance vests the executing court with all the
  powers which are required to give full effect to the
  decree for specific performance. By the decree for
  specific performance, the Court sets out what it finds to
  be the real contract between the parties and declares
  that such a contract exists and it is for the executing
  court to do the rest.
It may be noticed further that a decree in a suit for
Page 12 of 28
specific performance has been considered to be
         somewhat in the nature of preliminary decree which
         cannot set out in the fullest detail all the different steps
         which are required to be taken to implement the main
         portion of the order directing specific performance of
         the contract. The executing court is in such a case
         vested with authority to issue necessary directions.”
                                     ***
21. If once we accept the legal position that neither a
      contract for sale nor a decree passed on that basis for
      specific performance of the contract gives any right or
      title to the decree-holder and the right and the title
      passes to him only on the execution of the deed of sale
      either by the judgment-debtor himself or by the court
      itself in case he fails to execute the sale deed, it is idle to
      contend that a valuable right had accrued to the
      petitioner merely because a decree has been passed for
      the specific performance of the contract. The limitation
      would start against the decree-holders only after they had
      obtained a sale in respect of the disputed property. It is,
      therefore, difficult to accept that a valuable right had
      accrued to the judgment-debtor by lapse of time.
Section 22
has been enacted only for the purpose of avoiding
      multiplicity of proceedings which the law courts always
      abhor.”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
18. It will be seen from the above judgment that neither an

agreement of sale nor a decree passed on the basis of specific

performance of the contract gives any right or title to the

decree holder and the right and title passes to him only on the

execution of the deed of sale either by the judgment debtor

himself or by the Court itself in case the judgment debtor fails

to execute the sale deed.
Page 13 of 28
19. Sir Edward Fry in “A Treatise on the Specific Performance

of Contracts” (Sixth Edition) graphically captures what

specific performance of a contract is, in the following terms: -
“3. The specific performance of a contract is its actual
     execution according to its stipulations and terms; and is
     contrasted with damages or compensation for the non-
     execution of the contract. Such actual execution is enforced
     under the equitable jurisdiction vested in the Courts of this
     country by directing the party in default to do the very thing
     which he contracted to do, and, in the event of his
     disobedience, by treating such disobedience as a contempt
     of Court and visiting it with all the consequences of such
     contempt, including imprisonment; and in some cases by
     doing in one way the thing which the defaulter was directed
     to do in another way, as, e.g., by vesting by an order of the
     Court an estate which ought to have been vested by
     conveyance of the party. To say, as is above said, that the
     Courts enforce actual execution according to the stipulations
     and terms of the contract is not quite exact: for the Court
     rarely, if ever, interferes until the time for performance has
     passed and default been made: consequently the
     performance enforced by the Court is almost always behind
     time as compared with due performance voluntarily
     yielded.”
20. The statutory provisions of the
Transfer of Property Act,

1882
also make the same clear. The definition of sale and

contract for sale which are relevant are set out hereinbelow: -
“54. “Sale” defined.—“Sale” is a transfer of ownership in
      exchange for a price paid or promised or part-paid and
      part-promised.
Sale how made.—Such transfer, in the case of tangible
      immoveable property of the value of one hundred rupees
Page 14 of 28
and upwards, or in the case of a reversion or other
            intangible thing, can be made only by a registered
            instrument.
In the case of tangible immoveable property of a value less
            than one hundred rupees, such transfer may be made either
            by a registered instrument or by delivery of the property.
Delivery of tangible immoveable property takes place when
            the seller places the buyer, or such person as he directs, in
            possession of the property.
Contract for sale.—A contract for the sale of immoveable
            property is a contract that a sale of such property shall take
            place on terms settled between the parties.
It does not, of itself, create any interest in or charge on such
            property.”
21. Lucidly explaining the distinction between sale and a

contract for sale, this Court speaking through (R.V.

Raveendran, J.) in Suraj Lamp & Industries (P) Limited (2)

through
Director vs. State of Haryana and Another5
, held as

under: -
“Scope of an agreement of sale
16.
Section 54
of the TP Act makes it clear that a contract
           of sale, that is, an agreement of sale does not, of itself,
           create any interest in or charge on such property. This
           Court in
Narandas Karsondas v. S.A. Kamtam
[(1977) 3 SCC
           247] observed: (SCC pp. 254-55, paras 32-33 & 37)

               “32. A contract of sale does not of itself create any
               interest in, or charge on, the property. This is
               expressly declared in
Section 54
of the Transfer of
5
(2012) 1 SCC 656
Page 15 of 28
Property Act
.
(See Ram Baran Prasad v. Ram Mohit
   Hazra [AIR 1967 SC 744]). The fiduciary character of
   the personal obligation created by a contract for sale
   is recognised in
Section 3
of the Specific Relief Act,
   1963, and in
Section 91
of the Trusts Act. The personal
   obligation created by a contract of sale is described
   in
Section 40
of the Transfer of Property Act as an
   obligation arising out of contract and annexed to
   the ownership of property, but not amounting to an
   interest or easement therein.
33. In India, the word ‘transfer’ is defined with
   reference to the word ‘convey’. … The word ‘conveys’
   in
Section 5
of the Transfer of Property Act is used in
   the wider sense of conveying ownership.
***
37. … that only on execution of conveyance, ownership
   passes from one party to another….”
17.
In
Rambhau         Namdeo        Gajre v. Narayan      Bapuji
Dhotra
[(2004) 8 SCC 614] this Court held: (SCC p. 619, para
10)
    “10. Protection provided under
Section 53-A
of the Act
    to the proposed transferee is a shield only against the
    transferor. It disentitles the transferor from disturbing
    the possession of the proposed transferee who is put
    in possession in pursuance to such an agreement. It
    has nothing to do with the ownership of the proposed
    transferor who remains full owner of the property till it
    is legally conveyed by executing a registered sale
    deed in favour of the transferee. Such a right to protect
    possession against the proposed vendor cannot be
    pressed into service against a third party.”
18. It is thus clear that a transfer of immovable property
by way of sale can only be by a deed of conveyance (sale
deed). In the absence of a deed of conveyance (duly
stamped and registered as required by law), no right, title
or interest in an immovable property can be transferred.
19. Any contract of sale (agreement to sell) which is not a
registered deed of conveyance (deed of sale) would fall short
of the requirements of
Sections 54
and
55
of the TP Act and
Page 16 of 28
will not confer any title nor transfer any interest in an
     immovable property (except to the limited right granted
     under
Section 53-A
of the TP Act). According to the TP Act,
     an agreement of sale, whether with possession or without
     possession, is not a conveyance.
Section 54
of the TP Act
     enacts that sale of immovable property can be made only
     by a registered instrument and an agreement of sale does
     not create any interest or charge on its subject-matter.”
                                            (Emphasis supplied)


DECREE FOR SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE – DOES NOT
EXTINGUISH THE CONTRACT
22. It will be seen that in case of immovable property of value

of one hundred rupees and upwards, transfer of ownership

will occur only on the execution of a registered instrument.
23. It is also relevant to notice the fundamental principle that

with the passing of a decree of the specific performance, the

contract between the parties is not extinguished.
Section 28
of

the Specific Relief Act, 1963, statutorily recognizes this

principle with regard to contracts for the sale or lease of

immovable property, the specific performance of which has

been decreed.
Section 28
reads as under: -
“28. Rescission in certain circumstances of contracts for
      the sale or lease of immovable property, the specific
      performance of which has been decreed.—
Page 17 of 28
(1) Where in any suit a decree for specific performance of a
contract for the sale or lease of immovable property has
been made and the purchaser or lessee does not, within the
period allowed by the decree or such further period as the
court may allow, pay the purchase money or other sum
which the court has ordered him to pay, the vendor or lessor
may apply in the same suit in which the decree is made, to
have the contract rescinded and on such application the
court may, by order, rescind the contract either so far as
regards the party in default or altogether, as the justice of
the case may require.
(2) Where a contract is rescinded under sub-section (1), the
court—
(a) shall direct the purchaser or the lessee, if he has
        obtained possession of the property under the
        contract, to restore such possession to the vendor or
        lessor, and
(b) may direct payment to the vendor or lessor of all the
        rents and profits which have accrued in respect of the
        property from the date on which possession was so
        obtained by the purchaser or lessee until restoration
        of possession to the vendor or lessor, and if the justice
        of the case so requires, the refund of any sum paid by
        the vendee or the lessee as earnest money or deposit
        in connection with the contract.
(3) If the purchaser or lessee pays the purchase money or
other sum which he is ordered to pay under the decree
within the period referred to in sub-section (1), the court
may, on application made in the same suit, award the
purchaser or lessee such further relief as he may be entitled
to, including in appropriate cases all or any of the following
reliefs, namely:—
(a) the execution of a proper conveyance or lease by the
       vendor or lessor;
(b) the delivery of possession, or partition and separate
       possession, of the property on the execution of such
       conveyance or lease.
(4) No separate suit in respect of any relief which may be
Page 18 of 28
claimed under this section shall lie at the instance of a
            vendor, purchaser, lessor or lessee, as the case may be.
(5) The costs of any proceedings under this section shall be
            in the discretion of the court.”
24.
In
Hungerford Investment Trust Limited (In Voluntary

Liquidation) vs. Haridas Mundhra
and others6, this Court

held as follows: -
“25. …… We have already indicated that the contract
            between the parties was not extinguished by the
            passing of the decree, that it subsisted notwithstanding
            the decree. It was on implied term of the contract and,
            therefore, of the decree passed thereon that the parties
            would perform the contract within a reasonable time. To
            put it in other words, as the contract subsisted despite
            the decree and as the decree did not abrogate or modify
            any of the express or implied terms of the contract, it
            must be presumed that the parties to the decree had the
            obligation to complete the contract within a reasonable
            time.”

SCOPE OF SECTION 17(1)(e) – REGISTRATION ACT
25.
Section 17(1)(e)
of the Registration Act, 1908 reads thus:-
“17. Documents of which registration is compulsory.—(1)
          The following documents shall be registered, if the property
          to which they relate is situate in a district in which, and if they
          have been executed on or after the date on which, Act No.
          XVI of 1864, or the
Indian Registration Act, 1866
, or the
Indian
          Registration Act, 1871
, or the
Indian Registration Act, 1877
, or
          this Act came or comes into force, namely:—
                                        *****
6
(1972) 3 SCC 684
Page 19 of 28
(e) non-testamentary instruments transferring or assigning
     any decree or order of a Court or any award when such
     decree or order or award purports or operates to create,
     declare, assign, limit or extinguish, whether in present or in
     future, any right, title or interest, whether vested or
     contingent, of the value of one hundred rupees and upwards,
     to or in immovable property.”
26. If we analyze
Section 17(1)(e)
of the Registration Act on

which the case of the appellant pivots, it will be clear that what

this section prescribes is that registration is mandatory only

for non-testamentary instruments transferring or assigning

any decree or order of a Court or any award when such

decree or order or award purports or operates to create,

declare, assign, limit or extinguish, whether in present or in

future, any right, title or interest, whether vested or

contingent, of the value of one hundred rupees and upwards,

to or in immovable property. In this case, when the decree

itself which is for specific performance does not create or

purport to create any right, title or interest in any immovable

property, the question of registering an instrument assigning

such a decree cannot arise.
Page 20 of 28
27. In an erudite judgment which repays study, a learned

Single Judge of the Bombay High Court (R.K. Deshpandey J.)

in
Amol
(supra), held as under: -
“27. In the light of the aforesaid judgments of the Apex
     Court, it has to be held that the contract between the parties
     is not extinguished, upon passing of a decree and it subsists
     notwithstanding the decree. Passing of the decree does not
     abrogate or modify any of the express or implied terms of
     the contract. The parties to the contract continue to bear
     their rights and obligations to complete the contract in
     accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract. It
     does not confer an indefeasible right upon the decree-
     holder to get the property straightaway in his own name.
     The decree for specific performance of contract is in the
     nature of a preliminary decree and the Court passing the
     decree continues to retain its control over the entire matter
     and the suit is deemed to be pending, even after such a
     decree. Such decree is subject to the further process, upto
     the stage of execution of the sale-deed and its registration.
     The Court continues to monitor the further process and may
     either direct the execution of the sale-deed by the vendor
     or the execution of the sale-deed through the process of
     Court or even to refuse the execution of the sale-deed, if it
     is found that the decree-holder is not ready and willing to
     abide by his obligations, which are traceable either to the
     contract for sale or to the terms of such decree. In a given
     case, the Court may also order rescission of the agreement,
     to do equity. Thus, the grant of specific performance and its
     execution is an equitable relief and he who seeks equity can
     be put on the terms to ensure that the equity is done to the
     opposite party. Merely because a decree for specific
     performance is passed, it cannot be presumed that a
     decree-holder is bound to get the sale-deed executed in his
     favour.
28. Thus, a decree for specific performance passed on the
     basis of an agreement to sale or a contract for sale, merely
     recognizes a claim for specific performance of contract,
Page 21 of 28
which is capable of being specifically enforced at the
     instance of a decree-holder. It does not elevate the status of
     a decree-holder, subsisting prior to passing of such a
     decree, to that of the owner of the property in question. It
     does not create any right, title, interest in or charge on the
     immovable property in favour of a decree-holder. Even in
     respect of such a decree, the sale would be complete only
     upon the execution of the sale-deed in favour of the decree-
     holder either by the vendor/judgment-debtor or through
     the process of the Court. It is only upon the registration of
     such sale-deed upon payment of stamp duty under Item 20
     of
Schedule I of the Stamp Act
, that any right, title and
     interest in such property shall validly pass on to the decree-
     holder, who is the purchaser of the suit property. Hence,
     mere passing a decree for specific performance of contract
     does not result in the transfer of property.
***
30.
Section 17(1)(e)
deals with an assignment of a decree of
     a Court, when such decree purports or operates to create,
     declare, assign, limit or extinguish, whether in present or in
     future any right, title or interest, whether vested or
     contingent of the value of one hundred rupees and upwards,
     to or in immovable property. What is contemplated by this
     provision is that the decree passed itself, should purport or
     operate to create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish,
     whether in present or in future any right, title or interest,
     whether vested or contingent of the value of one hundred
     rupees and upwards, to or in immovable property. As
     pointed out earlier, the decree for specific performance of
     contract by itself, does not create right, title or interest in or
     charge on the immovable property in favour of a decree-
     holder. Hence, the provision of
Section 17(1)(e)
is not at all
     attracted. Though the Executing Court was right in holding
     that neither the decree nor the Deed at Exhibit 178 required
     registration, it committed an error in holding that the Deed
     at Exhibit 114 was required to be registered.”

We record our concurrence to the holding in the said

paragraphs.
Page 22 of 28
28. What is assigned under Exhibit B1, in the present case,

are the rights and interest arising out of the said decree. There

is no dispute that such decrees could be assigned and in fact

there could not have been any.
Order 21 Rule 16 of the CPC
permits the assignee of a decree to execute it in the same

manner and subject to the same conditions as if the

applications were made by such decree-holder. There has

been no argument before us about any non-compliance with

the proviso to Order 21 Rule 16. Order 21 Rule 16 reads as

under:-
“ORDER XXI
               EXECUTION OF DECREES AND ORDERS
                                  ***
                        Application for Execution
                                  ***
16. Application for execution by transferee of
     decree.— Where a decree or, if a decree has been passed
     jointly in favour of two or more persons, the interest of any
     decree-holder in the decree is transferred by assignment
     in writing or by operation of law, the transferee may apply
     for execution of the decree to the Court which passed it;
and the decree may be executed in the same manner and
     subject to the same conditions as if the application were
     made by such holder:
Provided that, where the decree, or such interest as
     aforesaid, has been transferred by assignment, notice of
Page 23 of 28
such application shall be given to the transferor and the
          judgment-debtor, and the decree shall not be executed
          until the Court has heard their objections (if any) to its
          execution:
Provided also that, where a decree for the payment of
          money against two or more persons has been transferred
          to one of them, it shall not be executed against the others.”
29. We may also notice here that
Section 15
of the Specific

Relief Act also recognizes that representative-in-interest of a

party can obtain specific performance. Relevant portion of
Section 15
of the Specific Relief Act reads as under.
“15. Who may obtain specific performance.—Except as
            otherwise provided by this Chapter, the specific
            performance of a contract may be obtained by—
(a) any party thereto;
(b) the representative-in-interest or the principal, of any
                  party thereto:
Provided that where the learning, skill, solvency or any
            personal quality of such party is a material ingredient in the
            contract, or where the contract provides that his interest
            shall not be assigned, his representative in interest or his
            principal shall not be entitled to specific performance of the
            contract, unless such party has already performed his part
            of the contract, or the performance thereof by his
            representative in interest, or his principal, has been
            accepted by the other party;”
30.        Relying on
Khardah Company Ltd. vs. Raymon & Co.

(India) (P) Ltd.7
, which elucidated how rights under a contract
7
1962 SCC OnLine SC 28
Page 24 of 28
are assignable subject to certain limitations, this Court, in
Kapilaben and others vs. Ashok Kumar Jayantilal Sheth8
,

held as under: -
“24. It is well-settled that the term “representative-in-
           interest” includes the assignee of a contractual interest.
           Though the provisions of the
Contract Act
do not
           particularly deal with the assignability of contracts, this
           Court has opined time and again that a party to a contract
           cannot assign their obligations/liabilities without the
           consent of the other party. A Constitution Bench of this
           Court in
Khardah Co. Ltd. v. Raymon & Co. (India) (P)
           Ltd.
[AIR 1962 SC 1810] has laid out this principle as
           follows : (AIR p. 1819, para 19)].
“19. … An assignment of a contract might result by
               transfer either of the rights or of the obligations
               thereunder. But there is a well-recognised distinction
               between these two classes of assignments. As a
               rule obligations under a contract cannot be assigned
               except with the consent of the promisee, and when such
               consent is given, it is really a novation resulting in
               substitution of liabilities. On the other hand, rights
               under a contract are assignable unless the contract is
               personal in its nature or the rights are incapable of
               assignment either under the law or under an
               agreement between the parties.”
31. We are not able to countenance the submission of Mr.

Jayanth Muth Raj, learned Senior Counsel that a decree

passed in a suit for specific performance of the sale agreement
8
(2020) 20 SCC 648
Page 25 of 28
on immovable property creates an interest in the immovable

property. As held in Suraj Lamp (supra) cited hereinabove,

the personal obligation created by an agreement of sale is

described in
Section 40
of the Transfer of Property Act as an

obligation arising out of a contract and annexed to the

ownership of property, but not amounting to an interest or

easement therein.
32. Reliance by the learned senior counsel for the appellants

on
Satish Kumar and others vs. Surinder Kumar
and others9,

is again misplaced. The paragraph cited from that judgment

dealt with
Section 17(1)(b)
of the Registration Act which again

prescribes for the creation or extinguishment of any right, title

or interest in the immovable property. As held hereinabove,

since no interest is created in the immovable property,
Section 17(1)(b)
also would not be applicable. We are also not

able to accept the submission that if multiple assignments are

permitted registration can be avoided. If a party after
9
(1969) 2 SCR 244
Page 26 of 28
obtaining an assignment deed does not execute the decree,

no right will enure to it in the immovable property. Hence, the

argument that there will be loss of revenue to the State is not

tenable.
33. The holding to the contrary in
K. Bhaskaram
(supra) on

the aspect of the need for registration of an assignment deed

assigning a decree for specific performance of an agreement

for sale, does not lay down the correct law. In that case, it

appears that parties proceeded on an admission that the

registration was required. Further
in that case
, the Court

faulted the assignment for breach of Order 21 Rule 16 also.
34. In any event, in view of what has been held hereinabove,

the assignment deed (Exhibit B1) assigning the decree of

specific performance in this case did not require registration.

The Executing Court which denied execution of the decree

was clearly wrong and the High Court which set aside the

judgment of the Executing Court was clearly right. We uphold

the judgment of the High Court for the reasons set out

hereinabove.
Page 27 of 28
35. For the reasons stated above, the appeal is dismissed.

No order as to costs.
……….........................J.
                                     [J.B. PARDIWALA]


                                   ……….........................J.
                                  [K. V. VISWANATHAN]

  New Delhi;
19th November, 2025
Page 28 of 28