[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
South Delhi Municipal Corporation ... vs Bharat Bhushan Jain (Dead) Thr. Lrs on 6 November, 2025
2025 INSC 1324
                                                                       REPORTABLE
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL         NO. 6077 OF 2018


        SOUTH DELHI MUNICIPAL CORPORATION                                    APPELLANT(S)
        THROUGH ITS COMMISSIONER


                                                              VERSUS


        BHARAT BHUSHAN JAIN (DEAD) THR. LRS.                                 RESPONDENT(S)


                                                              WITH

                                         CIVIL APPEAL         NO. 6078 OF 2018




                                                 O R D E R
J.B.PARDIWALA & K.V.VISWANATHAN,JJ.
1.                  These appeals arise from the judgments and orders passed

        by the High Court of Delhi dated 11.05.2015 in Writ Petition

        (Civil) No. 1497 of 2012 and 01.06.2017 in Review Petition No.

        217/2017 in W.P.(C) No. 1497/2012 respectively by which the

        appeal filed by the appellant herein, namely, the South Delhi
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHANDRESH
Municipal
   Date: 2025.11.17
   16:29:26 IST
   Reason:
Corporation   through       its    Commissioner   came   to   be

        dismissed, thereby affirming the order passed by the learned

        District Judge granting deemed sanction to the plans which were
1
put forward by the respondents herein before the Corporation

for construction of a residential house.
2.   The short facts giving rise to this appeal may be stated

thus:-
(I)      The respondents herein before us have a

         residential house of their ownership bearing No.

         4752 and 4758 respectively situated at 23, Ansari

         Road, Darya Ganj, New Delhi. This house is almost

         85 years old and is in a dilapidated condition.
In such circumstances, the respondents decided to

         dismantle it and put up new construction to be

         utilised    for    their   residence.        The    plans    were

         accordingly prepared and put forward before the

         appellant in the year 2010.
(II) It appears that no decision was taken by the

         authority concerned on the sanctioning of the

         plans put forward by the respondents. In such

         circumstances, the respondents went before the

         Appellate    Authority–MCD,          which   is     a   Tribunal

         constituted under the provisions of
Section 347A
of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (for

         short    “the     Act”).   The       Tribunal      allowed   the

         application and granted deemed sanction of the

         plans.
2
(III) Being dissatisfied with the order passed by

the Tribunal–MCD, the appellant went in appeal

before the Additional District Judge, by way of

Appeal   No.   1/2011.   The   appeal   filed   by   the

appellant herein came to be dismissed by the Court

of the Additional District Judge vide order dated

13.02.2012, thereby affirming the order passed by

the Tribunal.
(IV) Being dissatisfied with the order passed by

the Court of the Additional District Judge, the

appellant went before the High Court by way of a

writ petition. The writ petition also came to be

dismissed.
(V)      We are informed that against the judgment

and order passed by the learned Single Judge of

the High Court, a Letters Patent Appeal was also

filed, however, the same came to be dismissed on

the ground of being not maintainable.
(VI) The Special Leave Petition preferred against

the order passed in the Letters Patent Appeal was

dismissed      as     withdrawn    on     23.12.2016.
Thereafter,     the   appellant   preferred     another

Special Leave Petition against the order of the

Learned Single Judge and obtained liberty to seek
3
review of the order passed in Writ Petition (C)

        No. 1497 of 2012. The said Review Petition came

        to be dismissed on 01.06.2017.
3.     In such circumstances, referred to above, appellant is

here before us with the present appeal.
4. Ms. Vandana Sehgal, the learned counsel appearing for the

appellant, vehemently submitted that the High Court committed

an egregious error in passing the impugned judgment and order.

According to her, it is not permissible for the respondents to

put up new construction in the form of a new house. Although

the    present   residential     house     may   be   in   a   dilapidated

condition, and it may be permissible for the respondents to

continue to reside in such a dilapidated house, yet the law

does    not   permit   the   respondents    to   dismantle     the   present

structure and put up a new house. According to her, the new

bylaws do not permit the respondents to dismantle the house and

put up a new structure. In other words, according to the learned

counsel, the construction has to be strictly in accordance with

the Master Plan and sub-Zonal Plan respectively meant for the

Ansari Road, Darya Ganj. According to the learned counsel, even

if the respondents want to construct a new house, they are

obliged in law to put up a shop on the ground floor which should

be commercial in nature and thereafter, on the first floor or

the second floor, they may make their residence.
4
5. On the other hand, Mr. Paul, the learned Senior counsel

appearing for the respondents, while vehemently opposing this

appeal, would submit that no error, not to speak of any error

of law, could be said to have been committed by the High Court

in passing the impugned judgment and order. According to him,

there are concurrent findings of three authorities. To start

with the Tribunal, the Court of the Additional District Judge

and thereafter the High Court in his favour.    He would submit

that the ancestors of his client started residing in this house

sometime in 1940. He submitted that his clients are not in a

sound monetary condition to shift to any other place in Delhi.

The only option available with the respondents is to dismantle

the present house and put up a new RCC construction and use it

exclusively for residential purpose.
6.   The learned senior counsel took us through the notification

dated 15.09.2006 issued by the Urban Development Department,

Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi. He invited

our attention to clause 15.1 and clause 15.2 respectively.

According to him, this notification permits the occupant of a

property situated in the area in question to use it for mixed

facility, in residential areas. He would submit that his client

does not intend to use the new premises which he would like to

construct for mixed use and he wants to use it only for

residential purpose.
5
7. The principal argument canvassed by the learned senior

counsel is that how can the appellant compel a person to make

use of his property for mixed purposes, i.e., commercial-cum-

residential, and more particularly, when the person wants to

use it only for residential purpose. According to him, the new

provision in the notification is an enabling provision, which

permits the owner of the property, and more particularly, those

who want to use it for mixed purpose.
8. In such circumstances, referred to above, he would submit

that there being no merit in this appeal, the same may be

dismissed.
9. While dismissing the review petition, the Learned Single

Judge of the High Court noted, inter alia, that it was for the

first time the SDMC canvassed an argument in a review petition

that the ground floor would necessarily have to be used for

commercial purpose. The SDMC had earlier set up the case that

the building plans submitted by the respondent were deficient

because the plans had failed to provide for stilt parking on

the ground floor, thus the insistence on the use of the ground

floor as a shopping outlet militates against the case set up

by the SDMC in the writ petition.
10. The learned Single Judge went on to observe:
“Secondly, the Master Plan for Delhi, 2021 makes
     it amply clear that the areas notified for mixed
6
land use are to· be used for commercial purposes
     to a limited extent. Shops are permitted on plots
     abutting notified streets albeit only on the
     ground floor and upto the maximum permissible
     ground floor coverage. This does not imply that
     the owners of residential property on notified
     streets are compelled to develop the property in
     that manner and apply for change of user. It is
     also relevant to mention that the change of user
     for   developing   the  properties   for   partly
     commercial use on notified streets is permissible
     on payment of the conversion charges.”
                                    (Emphasis supplied)
11. A bare perusal of the relevant circular dated 27.05.2009

makes it clear that the learned Single Judge very correctly held

that the owners cannot be compelled to convert the ground floor

of their residential accommodation to a commercial unit, rather,

he may choose to do so. The circular reads thus:
“Circular

     The following guidelines in consultation with the
     Technical Committee of DDA and the Town Planning
     Department of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi
     are issued to all concerned for processing
     applications/ cases for approval of Building Plans
     on notified streets under mixed-use regulations:
1. The Building Plans on notified commercial
     streets/roads can be sanctioned for commercial
     use/partly    commercial/partly/residential/fully
     residential as per the choice of the applicant.
xxx             xxx           xxx
4. Activities permitted on mixed use streets under
     mixed use regulations in MPD-2021 / its amendments
     shall be allowed in the case of plots abutting in
     mixed use streets on -ground floor only and upper
     floors shall be for the residential use.
7
5. One time conversion charges as per notification
     dated 22.06.2007 and as amended from time to time
     shall be charged for the area being sanctioned for
     commercial use on notified commercial streets.”
12. The same understanding may be gained from the observations

made in the case of
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India and ors
in

I.A. Nos. 203615 & 218080 of 2024 and I.A. No. 210981 of 2025

in Writ Petition (C) No. 4677 of 1985 respectively by Justice

B.R. Gavai, CJI, which are as follows:
“20. The learned Senior Counsel for the MCD further
     enlightened us on the different categories of
     markets across Delhi with reference to the Master
     Plans notified for Delhi. The first Master Plan for
     Delhi was MPD-1962, replaced by the 2nd Master
     Plan, MPD-2001 published on 01.08.1990 and then the
     3rd Master Plan, MPD-2021 which came into effect on
     07.02.2007. We have from the documents produced by
     the applicant himself, found that the applicant has
     obtained a sanctioned plan for construction only in
     the year 2005. The Master Plan for 2021 conceived
     the Community Centres (CC) as shopping and business
     centres while the Local Shopping Centre (LSC) and
     the Convenience Shopping Centre (CSC) would cater
     to the day-to-day needs of the local population.
Certain areas developed prior to 1962 like Lajpat
     Nagar, Rajouri Garden, Tilak Nagar, Kamla Nagar and
     others which existed prior to MPD-1962 had
     consolidation of commercial activities.
21. The LSCs were categorised into two categories,
     one meant exclusively for commercial use and the
     other for mixed use where commercial activity was
     allowed to be carried out on the ground floor and
     residential activity permitted on the upper floors.
     MPD-2021   designated   some   of   the   shop-cum-
     residential complexes which were earlier termed as
     ‘shop-cum-residence’ plots/shops as Local Shopping
     Centres and permitted commercial use of floors
     above the ground floor, subject to payment of
     conversion charges. The former category of LSCs
8
wherein exclusively commercial activities were
     carried out, were thus called planned LSCs while
     those in which conversion of the ‘residential’ to
     ‘commercial’ was permitted were called designated
     LSCs. New Rajinder Nagar in which the applicant's
     plot is situated has been notified as a pre-1962
     built up residential and rehabilitation colony. The
     understanding of the applicant was also not
     otherwise since the sanctioned plan produced along
     with the IA, as applied for the applicant, clearly
     indicates the sanction of residential areas on the
     upper floors.”
                                     (Emphasis supplied)
13. We also thought fit to put few questions to Mr. Rahul

Verma, serving as an Assistant Engineer with the appellant. The

officer   present   before   us   is   attached   with   the   Building

Headquarters Department. We enquired with the officer, what is

the idea in imposing such a restriction. According to him,

since the entire Ansari Road, Dariya Ganj, Delhi is now full

of local shopping centres, each and every residential house

should be a shopping complex, if ultimately new construction

is to be put up.      We were taken aback when we came to know

that the residential house of the respondents which is in a

very dilapidated condition is on a 300 square yard plot. This

residential house as noted above was constructed sometime in

1940. The land is said to have been purchased sometime in 1935

and construction of the house was completed sometime in 1940.

We are at our wits' end to understand how does the appellant

expect the respondents to put up construction in a manner by
9
which the ground portion would be for commercial use, and the

upper    floor   would     be   for    residential      purpose,      and   more

particularly, when he has a vested crystalised legal right to

use it for residential purpose for all times to come.
14. The argument canvassed on behalf of the appellant defies

logic that the respondents may continue to reside in the

dilapidated house, but if they want to put up new construction,

then it has to be commercial on the ground floor and upper

floor    as   residence.    Even   the      notification,     which    we   have
referred to above
, does not support the case put forward by the

appellant in any manner.
15. We are at pains to note that this litigation is now almost

15 years old. Had the permission being granted 15 years back,

the     respondents   would     have     been    able    to    complete     the

construction within a particular budget. With 15 years having

passed by, they will have to incur huge expenditure for putting

up new construction.
16. We also looked into the photographs of the subject house

of the respondents. It is in a dilapidated condition and any

time may collapse. In fact, the appellant should have expressed

concern about the safety and lives of the occupants of this

house, rather than objecting to sanctioning of their plans.

This is nothing short of harassment.
17. In such circumstances
,
referred to above
, we see no good
10
ground to interfere with the impugned judgment and order passed

by the High Court.
18. In the result, the appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.
19. We permit the respondents to put forward fresh plans for

approval. The plans shall be for construction of a house. Once

the plans are submitted, the authority concerned shall sanction

the same within a period of four weeks from the date of

presentation   and     grant   necessary        permission    to     put     up

construction meant for residential purpose.
20. In the gross facts and circumstances of this case, and

considering the arbitrary and high-handed manner in which the

appellant   harassed    the    respondents,       we   impose       costs    of

Rs.10,00,000(Rupees     ten    lakh     only)    to    be    paid    to     the

respondents on or before 17.12.2025 without fail. The payment

towards costs shall be reported to us. It shall be open for the

respondents to put forward the very same plans which were

earlier approved by the High Court.
21. With the aforesaid, this appeal stands disposed of.
22. Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of.


CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6078 OF 2018



    In view of the Order passed by us in Civil Appeal No. 6077

of 2018, nothing remains in the connected appeal and the same
11
is also disposed of.
...................J.
                                [J.B.PARDIWALA]



                             ...................J.
                                [K.V. VISWANATHAN]


New Delhi
6th November, 2025.
12