[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Managing Director, M.P. State ... vs Harpal Singh on 28 November, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 1490


                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO._______OF 2025
                               (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) No. 26798 of 2025)




                         MANAGING DIRECTOR, M.P. STATE AGRICULTURAL
                         MARKETING BOARD AND ORS.          ...APPELLANT (S)


                                                   VERSUS

                         HARPAL SINGH AND ORS.                     …RESPONDENT (S)




                                                 ORDER
Leave granted.
2.     The present Civil Appeal has been preferred by the

                         Managing Director, M.P. State Agricultural Marketing Board

                         and Ors. (hereinafter referred to as “the appellants”), being

                         aggrieved by the judgment and order dated 7th April 2025

                         passed by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Gwalior in

                         Writ Appeal No. 894 of 2025.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
POOJA SHARMA
Date: 2025.12.20
3.     By the impugned judgment, the order dated 24th
   14:24:17 IST
   Reason:
January 2025 passed by a Single Bench of the High Court
Page 1 of 13
in Writ Petition No. 36707 of 2024 was upheld whereby the

Single Bench had directed the competent authorities to

sympathetically consider the compassionate appointment of

Harpal Singh, the Respondent no. 1, to a lower post (Class-
IV) subject to his willingness to serve in such post.
4.     A reference to the facts in brief will facilitate

appreciating the issue involved. The issue pertains to the

claim of the Respondent no. 1 for appointment on

compassionate ground. The Respondent no. 1 is the son of

Late Shri Ramjilal Kushwah, who died in harness on 28th

February 2019, while serving as a Peon in the Krishi Upaj

Mandi Samiti, Alampur, District Bhind, Madhya Pradesh.
5.     Thereafter, in accordance with the policy governing

compassionate    appointment,     issued   by   the     General

Administration    Department,     Government     of     Madhya

Pradesh, vide Memorandum No. C-3-12/2013/1/3 dated

29th September 2014, the Respondent no. 1 was sanctioned

appointment on compassionate ground to a Class-III post,

namely Assistant Grade-III, in the Krishi Upaj Mandi Samiti,

Morena, as per sanction order issued by the Additional

Director (Personnel), M.P. State Agricultural Marketing
Page 2 of 13
Board, on 26th August 2020, which was followed by the

appointment order dated 11th September 2020 issued by the

Secretary, Krishi Upaj Mandi Samiti, Morena.
6.     However, it merits emphasis that as per Clause 6.5

of the above-mentioned Government Memorandum dated

29th September 2014, an appointment to the post of

Assistant Grade-III was conditional, as the concerned

candidate    had    to   clear     the    Computer      Proficiency

Certification Test (
CPC
T) within three years of joining

service. The afore-mentioned Clause 6.5 is reproduced

hereunder:
“6.5 For the grant of compassionate appointment to the
       dependant of Government Servant on the post of
       Assistant Grade-3, 3 years time will be given for
       passing Computer Diploma and Computer Typing
       Certificate Exam from the recognized institute. In
       case of not passing the required exams within the
       prescribed period of 3 years, in view of the attempts of
       passing exams by the concerned employee and the
       typing eligibility as acquired by him, period of 1 year
       may be further extended by the Appointing
       Authority. In case of not passing the required exams by
       the concerned employee even after the expiry of this
       period, his services could be terminated.”
7.    In    consonance      with    the    above     Clause,      the

appointment order of the Respondent no. 1, dated 11th

September 2020, expressly stipulated that he is required to

acquire the requisite computer qualifications within a period
Page 3 of 13
of three years. This caveat was incorporated in Conditions

No. 15 and 16 of the appointment order, which lie at the

heart of the present litigation and are reproduced hereunder:
“15. It shall be mandatory to pass
CPC
T Examination
        within a period of 3 years from the institution
        recognized from the Government. The service will be
        terminated in case of not passing mentioned examination
        within the prescribed time period.
16. It shall be mandatory to pass Computer Examination
        within 3 years from an institution among following
        recognized institutions along with passing Computer
        Typing Proficiency Certificate Examination from a
        recognized institution. The service will be terminated in
        case of not passing mentioned examination within the
        prescribed time period.
(i) Diploma from any University recognized by U.G.C.
(ii) Diploma from any Open University recognized by
        U.G.C.
(iii) Diploma Level Examination from D.O.E.A.C.C.
(iv) Modern Office Management Course from Government
        Polytechnic College.
(v) One Year ‘Computer Operator and Programming
        Assistant’ (COPA) Certificate from Government I.T.I.”
8.      The dispute arose when notwithstanding the expiry

of the stipulated three-year period under Condition No. 15,

and in spite of grant of an additional one-year extension from

15th   September     2023     to   14th   September      2024,      the

Respondent no. 1 failed to obtain and submit the requisite
CPC
T scorecard, culminating in the termination of his

services vide order dated 30th September 2024 issued by the

appointing authority.
Page 4 of 13
9.     Aggrieved thereby, the Respondent no. 1 filed a Writ

Petition, being No. 36707 of 2024, before the High Court

seeking quashing and setting aside of his termination order

and restoration of his service in the department. The Single

Bench of the High Court while refraining from setting aside

the termination order and emphasising the underlying

welfare purpose of compassionate appointment, directed the

competent authorities to sympathetically consider the case

of the Respondent no. 1 for appointment to a lower post

(Class-IV) in which
CPC
T qualification is not mandatory,

subject to expressing his willingness to serve in such post.

It is this direction, affirmed by the Division Bench of the

High Court, that forms the subject matter of challenge in the

present appeal.
10.     Before embarking upon the merits of the case, it is

apposite at this juncture to highlight the underlying

principles of compassionate appointments, as this Court

cannot remain oblivious to the human realities that animate

disputes of this nature. It is a harsh reality that the sudden

loss of a breadwinner does not merely extinguish a life; it

often disrupts the economic stability of the entire household.
Page 5 of 13
11.     In families where a deceased stood as the only

source of sustenance, death carries with it not only

emotional devastation but the looming threat of deprivation,

insecurity and social marginalisation. A welfare State,

committed to the Constitutional ideals of justice with the

mandate of reducing inequality, promoting social justice and

ensuring a basic standard of living for all, cannot afford to

allow such bereaved families to slide into destitution by the

mechanical      operation    of       procedural     formalities.

Significantly, a responsibility has been cast upon the State

under the provisions of Part IV of the Constitution of India,

i.e.,
Article 39
of the Directive Principles of State Policy to

serve   such   a   welfare   State.    Thus,   the    policy   of

compassionate appointment is not a concession, largesse or

mercy shown to hapless dependents of a deceased employee,

but a structured response of the State to ensure that the

death of an employee does not mark the beginning of

economic calamity for those left behind. It is from this

vantage point that the competing claims in the present

appeal must be examined.
Page 6 of 13
12.       This Court has in numerous occasions elucidated

    the underlying humanitarian purpose of compassionate

    appointment. The principle was articulated lucidly in
Haryana State Electricity Board v. Hakim Singh1
, wherein

    this Court observed as follows:
“8. The rule of appointments to public service is that they
              should be on merits and through open invitation. It is the
              normal route through which one can get into a public
              employment. However, as every rule can have
              exceptions, there are a few exceptions to the said rule
              also which have been evolved to meet certain
              contingencies. As per one such exception relief is
              provided to the bereaved family of a deceased employee
              by accommodating one of his dependants in a vacancy.
              The object is to give succour to the family which
              has been suddenly plunged into penury due to the
              untimely death of its sole breadwinner. This Court
              has observed time and again that the object of providing
              such ameliorating relief should not be taken as opening
              an alternative mode of recruitment to public
              employment.”
13.       In light of the foregoing discussion, we are of the

    considered opinion that both the Single and Division Bench

    of the High Court rightly directed the competent authority to

    consider the case of Respondent no. 1 for compassionate

    appointment to a lower post (Class IV), which does not

    require
CPC
T qualification. The undertaking furnished by

    Respondent no. 1 to be considered for appointment to a

    lower post (Class-IV), identical to the one held by his


1 (1997) 8 SCC 85.
Page 7 of 13
deceased father, does not entail any relaxation of eligibility

    norms, nor does it confer upon him any undue or

    undeserved advantage.
14.      The appellants, relying upon various judgments

    such as
Sadananda Halo v. Momtaz Ali Sheikh2
,
Vijendra

    Kumar Verma v. Public Service Commission3
, and
Manish

    Kumar Shahi v. State of Bihar4
, among others, contended

    that after taking part in the selection process, knowing fully

    well the procedure, the Respondent no. 1 cannot challenge

    it later. We have perused the judgments relied upon by the

    appellants, but these have no relevance to the instant case,

    as    the    material   facts   in   those   cases   are   clearly

    distinguishable from the facts of the present matter.
The

    afore-mentioned cases do not deal with the issue of

    compassionate appointments, which is an exception to the

    ‘rule of equality’ in the matters of public employment, as was

    held in
General Manager, State Bank of India v. Anju Jain5
and wholly distinct from the usual process of ‘direct

    recruitment’. Had this been a case of ‘direct recruitment’, the



2 (2008) 4 SCC 619
3 (2011) 1 SCC 150
4 (2010) 12 SCC 576
5 (2008) 8 SCC 475
Page 8 of 13
Respondent no. 1 could not, in any circumstances, have

been allowed to be considered for a lower post in lieu of,

failing to satisfy the qualifications of the higher post. This

distinction was also rightly made by the Single Bench of the

High Court, in the order dated 24th January 2025. In

addition, the Single Bench had rightly observed that it was

the   appellants   themselves   who    had   appointed       the

Respondent no. 1 to a higher post, namely, Assistant Grade-

III, despite his not possessing
the CPC
T qualification.
15.    Taking into account the humanitarian objective of

the compassionate appointment scheme along with the

surrounding circumstances, where the Respondent no. 1

fulfils all other essential qualifications and has also

rendered prima facie unblemished service for a continuous

period of four years, directing the competent authority to

consider him for appointment to a Class-IV post cannot be

said to transgress any statutory or policy conditions. No

prejudice is caused to the administration or to any candidate

by such a measure. On the contrary, it aligns with the

institutional responsibility to implement welfare policies in

a manner that preserves the beneficial character.
Page 9 of 13
16.    Additionally, directing the case of the Respondent

no. 1 to be considered against a Class-IV post does not

violate Clause 13.1 of the Government of Madhya Pradesh

Memorandum dated 29th September 2014, which stipulates

that a compassionate appointment once granted shall not be

granted again on any other post. In the present case, the

Respondent no. 1 is not seeking a “second” or fresh

compassionate appointment. Instead, the relief sought is

merely a downward adjustment to a Class IV post, which is

analogous to a reallocation within the same establishment

and framework to preserve the object of the social welfare

scheme. Thus, the appellants’ reliance on Clause 13.1 is

misplaced and reflects an unduly literal interpretation

divorced from context and purpose, especially where

termination would defeat the very purpose for which the

appointment was granted.
17.    It can be safely concluded that a narrow or

mechanical    construction   of   the   rules   governing

compassionate appointment cannot be permitted to override

the welfare-oriented purpose of the scheme. Where a

procedural rigidity ceases to advance the humanitarian
Page 10 of 13
intent of the policy and instead operates as an obstacle to

    its effective implementation, such a procedure must be

    construed liberally to ensure that justice is not sacrificed at

    the altar of technicality.
In this context, it is apposite to

    recall the sagacious observations of V. R. Krishna Iyer, J. in
Sushil Kumar Sen vs. State of Bihar6
:
“Justice is the goal of jurisprudence – processual, as
             much as substantive. While this appeal has to be
             allowed, ………………, I must sound a pessimistic note
             that it is too puritanical for a legal system to sacrifice
             the end product of equity and good conscience at the
             altar of processual punctiliousness and it is not too
             radical to avert a breakdown of obvious justice by
             bending sharply, if need be, the prescriptions of
             procedure. The wages of procedural sin should never be
             the death of rights.”
18.      In this background, it is incumbent upon both the

    concerned government departments and the Courts to adopt

    a humane and purposive approach, ensuring that the spirit

    of the scheme prevails over strict or pedantic readings of its

    procedural stipulations. Procedures and technicalities in

    welfare schemes are meant to provide structure, not to

    become cracks through which the most vulnerable slip.

    When interpretation widens those cracks instead of




6 1975 (1) SCC 774
Page 11 of 13
narrowing them, the wall ceases to protect and begins to

endanger.
19.        It    is   also   necessary    to   emphasise   that    a

compassionate appointment, arising out of the death of an

employee in harness, operates within a distinct framework

carved out to address an exceptional situation. Such

appointments are made against posts earmarked under the

compassionate appointment scheme and do not trench upon

vacancies meant for regular recruitment or for candidates

belonging to other categories. In the absence of any

demonstrable prejudice to similarly situated candidates or

encroachment upon the rights of others, a direction to

consider appointment of the Respondent no. 1 under the

said scheme cannot be said to violate either the mandate of

equality under
Article 14
or the guarantee of equality of

opportunity in matters of public employment under
Article

16
of        the   Constitution   of    India.   Compassionate

appointment, being a narrowly tailored welfare measure,

stands on a distinct footing and does not militate against the

principles governing open competition in public employment

as the appellants have sought to make out.
Page 12 of 13
20.    In view of the aforesaid discussion, we find no merit

in this appeal, and the same is dismissed.
21.    Consequently, we uphold the order dated 7th April,

2025 passed in Writ Appeal No. 894 of 2025 and direct the

appellants to consider the case of the Respondent no. 1 for

compassionate    appointment     to   a       Class-IV     post,

expeditiously and within six weeks.
22.    Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed
of.
.……..……………J.
                                          (SANJAY KAROL)



                    ……..…………..….……………….………J.
                   (NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH)



NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 28, 2025
Page 13 of 13