[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sk Md Anisur Rahaman vs The State Of West Bengal on 26 November, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 1360                                                       REPORTABLE




                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                            MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION DIARY NO.44979/2025

                                                WITH

                             INTERLOCUTORY APPLICATION NOS.197604/2025 &
                                            227763/2025

                                                 IN

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.43/2025



            SK. MD. ANISUR RAHAMAN                      ..APPLICANT/APPELLANT

                                                 VS.

            THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL & ANR.                   …..RESPONDENTS



                                                WITH



                            MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION DIARY NO.55130/2025

                            WITH INTERLOCUTORY APPLICATION NO.244053/2025

                                    IN CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.43/2025



            AFJAL ALI SHA @ ABJAL SHAUKAT SHA                 ……APPLICANT

   Signature Not Verified                        VS.
   Digitally signed by

            THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL & ANR.                   ……RESPONDENTS
   rashmi dhyani pant
   Date: 2025.11.26
   17:36:37 IST
   Reason:




                                                                         Page | 1
                                     JUDGMENT




     DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
FACTS
1.       The basic facts, relevant for disposal of the application for cancellation of

         bail (I.A. No.244053/2025) and the application for modification of one of

         the conditions for bail (I.A. No.197604/2025) along with an application

         for condonation of delay (I.A. No.227763/2025) in presentation of such

         application for modification, which we propose to dispose of by this

         common order, are not in dispute.
2.       SK. Md. Anisur Rahaman1 along with several co-accused is facing trial,

         inter alia, for the offence of murder. By an order of this Court dated 3rd

         January, 2025, Anisur has been granted bail. While Anisur seeks

         modification of the condition that requires him to remain confined to the

         city of Kolkata after his release on bail, Afjal Ali Sha @ Abjal Shaukat

         Sha2 (brother of Kurban Sha3) seeks cancellation of bail granted to Anisur

         on the grounds urged in the application for cancellation.
1
Anisur
2
Afjal
3
the victim

                                                                             Page | 2
3.       Panskura P.S. Case No.496 of 2019 dated 8th October, 2019 was

         registered under
Section 302
/
120B
, Indian Penal Code, 1860 4 read with
section 25
/
27
of the Arms Act, 1959 at the instance of one Jahar Sha 5

         (nephew of the victim). The allegation levelled is that Anisur had entered

         into a conspiracy with the co-accused to eliminate his political rival, viz.

         the victim, and that in furtherance of such conspiracy, on 7th October,

         2019, the victim was shot in the presence of the de-facto complainant

         for taking up vendetta against Anisur. On 16th November, 2019, Anisur

         was arrested.
4.       Upon conclusion of investigation, police report (charge-sheet) under
Section 173(2)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19736 was filed against

         Anisur and the co-accused. Charges having been framed, all the accused

         were committed for trial. The trial7 was assigned to the 3rd Court of

         Additional Sessions Judge, Tamluk, Purba Medinipur, West Bengal. The

         de-facto complainant was examined as PW-1. He narrated the incident

         of murder and in course thereof implicated Anisur as a conspirator in the

         murder.
5.       While the trial was in progress before the court at Tamluk and Anisur

         continued to remain in custody, surprisingly enough, the Legal

         Remembrancer and ex-officio Secretary to the Government of West
4
IPC
5
the de-facto complainant
6
Cr. PC
7
S.T. Case No.01(03)

                                                                            Page | 3
          Bengal, Judicial Department, made an order dated 26th February, 2021

          to the following effect:
“ORDER
             The undersigned is directed to say that the Government has been pleased to
             instruct the concerned Ld. Public Prosecutor for withdrawal of the case being
             Sessions Case No.33 of 2020 arising out of Panskura P.S. Case No.496 of 2019
             dated 08.10.2019
u/s. 302
/
120B
IPC and U/s 25/27 of the
Arms Act
, pending
             before Ld. 3rd Additional District and Sessions Judge, Tamluk, Purba Medinipur
             under the provisions of
Section 321
of Cr.P.C. subject to consent of the ld. Court.”
6.        The order dated 26th February, 2021 came to be challenged by the de-
facto complainant in a writ petition8 before the High Court at Calcutta.
7.        During the pendency of the said writ petition, the court at Tamluk seized

          of the sessions trial mechanically acquitted the accused by an order dated

          2nd March, 2021 as the prosecution had been withdrawn under Section

          321, Cr. PC.
8.        The writ petition of the de-facto complainant was taken up for

          consideration on 2nd March, 2021 itself by a Single Judge of the High

          Court. By an order of even date, the order dated 26th February, 2021 was

          set aside.
9.        Anisur carried the order dated 2nd March, 2021 in an intra-court appeal.
A Division Bench by its order dated 13th April, 2021 set aside the order

          under challenge on the technical ground of violation of principles of

          natural justice. The writ petition was directed to be re-heard on remand.

          However, while so ordering, the Division Bench clarified that the status
8
WPA No. 6315 of 2021
Page | 4
           prevailing when the Single Judge passed the order dated 2nd March, 2021

           shall continue.
10.        Since Anisur was already in custody and the Division Bench had not

           directed his release, the Single Judge observed that he would continue

           in such custody unless order to the contrary is passed by an appropriate

           court.
11.        On 28th April, 2021, the Single Judge hearing the writ petition of the de-
facto complainant was urged by him to allow his prayer for withdrawal of

           the writ petition based on an apprehended threat to his life and liberty.

           The prayer for withdrawal of the writ petition was disallowed for the

           reasons recorded by the Single Judge, which are not required to be noted

           in details here. Suffice it to note that Afjal having scent of the de-facto

           complainant’s desire to withdraw the writ petition had moved an

           application for addition of party9. The Single Judge found that Afjal was

           the brother of the victim and hence had the locus standi to continue with

           such writ petition. Afjal, thus, came to be transposed as the petitioner in

           place of the de-facto complainant.
12.        Crestfallen by such development, whereby the writ petition survived,

           Anisur carried the order dated 28th April, 2021 in an intra-court appeal10.

           By a judgment and order dated 2nd July, 2021, the Division Bench

           dismissed the appeal.
9
CAN 1 of 2021
10
MAT 550 of 2021

                                                                             Page | 5
13.        It was at this stage that Afjal approached this Court with an application11

           under Section 406, Cr. PC seeking transfer of the trial to a different State.

           Stay of proceedings before the trial court was ordered on 5th October,

           2021, resulting in the trial being halted.
14.        Anisur had applied for bail but such application was not being heard in

           view of the order of stay dated 5th October, 2021. As such, this fact was

           brought to the notice of this Court. By a further order dated 2nd May,

           2022, this Court clarified that the order of stay will not stand in the way

           of the trial court to hear any application for bail at the instance of the

           accused.
15.        The trial court then took up for consideration the application for bail filed

           by Anisur. Upon hearing the parties, the trial court dismissed the

           application for bail by an order dated 12th May, 2022.
16.        Aggrieved thereby, Anisur then applied for bail12 under Section 439,

           Cr. PC before the High Court. By a detailed judgment and order dated

           10th June, 2022, a Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the

           application for bail.
17.        The judgment and order dated 10th June, 2022 of the High Court was laid

           to challenge by Anisur before this Court in a special leave petition 13. It

           was dismissed by this Court on 15th December, 2022.
11
T.P. (Crl.) 409 of 2021
12
CRM (DB) 1472 of 2022
13
SLP (Crl.) 9051 of 2022

                                                                               Page | 6
18.   Meanwhile, the Single Judge by a fresh order dated 2nd August, 2022

      allowed the writ petition and set aside the order dated 26 th February,

      2021.
19.   While the trial proceeded, the de-facto complainant in course of his cross-
examination resiled from the statements made in examination-in-chief.

      Surprisingly, the de-facto complainant was not declared hostile. This led

      Afjal to file an application to declare the de-facto complainant hostile and

      to allow Afjal’s lawyer to cross-examine the de-facto complainant. The

      trial court, however, rejected such application.
20.   By an order dated 17th March, 2023, this Court allowed the transfer

      petition of Afjal. The concluding paragraphs of the order are reproduced

      hereunder:
“36. Taking into consideration all the facts and circumstances, we deem it
         appropriate to dispose of this transfer petition in following terms:-
(i)     Criminal Trial bearing ST No. 1 (03) of 2020 arising out of FIR No.
                495/2019 registered at Police Station Panskura, District Purba Medinipur is
                ordered to be transferred from the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, 3rd
                Court, Tamluk, Purba Medinipur, West Bengal to the Court of Chief Judge,
                City Sessions Court at Calcutta.
(ii)    The trial shall be conducted by the Chief Judge, City Sessions Court
                and he shall not entrust the case to any other Additional Sessions Judge.
(iii)   The Chief Judge, City Sessions Court shall endeavour to take up the
                trial on a weekly basis and shall make an effort to conclude the same within
                a period of six months.
(iv)    The State of West Bengal is directed to appoint a Special Public
                Prosecutor on the recommendations of the Chief Judge, City Sessions
                Court, Calcutta with the prior approval of the High Court. This exercise
                shall be completed within two weeks.
(v)     The wife of the Deceased, the Petitioner and other crucial
                prosecution witnesses shall be provided adequate security. The State of
                West Bengal is directed to ensure that no harm is caused to the life and
                liberty of the witnesses and no direct or indirect attempt is made by
                Respondent No. 2 or his co-accused persons or anyone on their behalf to
                influence, frighten or threaten the witnesses.
Page | 7
(vi)   The De-facto Complainant who is also stated to be the eye-witness
                      and has allegedly resiled from his version recorded during the examination-
in-chief, shall be subjected to cross-examination by the Special Public
                      Prosecutor, for which the advocate engaged by the Petitioner may provide
                      assistance to the learned Special Public Prosecutor.
(vii) Respondent No. 2 or any other accused who are in custody shall be
                      transferred forthwith to the Central Jail at Calcutta.
(viii) Respondent No. 2, having regard to his criminal antecedents, as
                      well as other accused who are in custody, shall not be enlarged on bail till
                      the conclusion of trial save and except by the High Court.
(ix)   The Learned Portfolio Judge of the Calcutta High Court is requested
                      to regularly monitor and supervise the trial proceedings in terms of the
                      directions issued hereinabove.
37. This transfer petition is hence, disposed of in above stated terms.”
21.        The trial has since been proceeding before the Court of the Chief Judge,

           City Sessions Court at Calcutta14. We have also been informed that in

           terms of the order dated 17th March, 2023 passed by this Court, a Special

           Public Prosecutor has been appointed to present the case of the

           prosecution at the trial.
22.        Not one to be discouraged by repeated rejection of his prayers, Anisur

           again applied for bail15 before the High Court under Section 439, Cr. PC

           but without success. Vide order dated 29th January, 2024, the Division

           Bench [presided over by the Judge who was the presiding judge of the

           bench which dismissed the earlier application by order dated 10 th June,

           2022] dismissed the application for bail by ordering as follows:
“11. In order to ensure expeditious trial, we direct the trial court as follows:-
(i)    Trial court shall continue to hold the trial on a day-to-day basis;
(ii)   In the event examination-in-chief of a witness has commenced
                                   the trial Judge shall ensure his/her examination is concluded on
14
Sessions Court
15
CRM (DB) No.3916 of 2023
Page | 8
                                   the day itself and if the time of the Court or other circumstances
                                   do not permit, the examination-in-chief shall be concluded by
                                   the next day positively. In similar fashion cross-examination of
                                   the witness shall not exceed 2/3 consecutive dates;
(iii)   Subject to the pendency in the file of the trial Judge, the judge
                                   shall ensure at least two hours are allotted on each day to
                                   conduct trial particularly when witness action is in progress. No
                                   adjournment shall be given to either of the parties on
                                   unnecessary grounds including resolutions of the bar
                                   association not to attend proceedings.
(iv)    We hope and trust that the trial Court and all stake holders shall
                                   make efforts to conclude the examination of all vulnerable
                                   witnesses by 30th April, 2024.”
23.        Close on the heels of such rejection, Anisur once again applied for bail

           before the High Court by filing an application16 under Section 439, Cr. PC.

           It was rejected by an order of another Division Bench dated 8th

           November, 2024. Both the Judges constituting the Division Bench penned

           individual opinions and recorded reasons as to why Anisur did not

           deserve to be released on bail, despite being incarcerated for more than

           five years.
24.        The said order of rejection was carried in appeal17 before this Court.
Fortune smiled on Anisur. His appeal succeeded. By an order dated 3rd

           January, 2025, a co-ordinate Bench of this Court (cor. Abhay S. Oka and

           Augustine George Masih, JJ.) passed the following order:
“Leave granted.
Heard the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant, the learned senior
               counsel appearing for the respondent-State of West Bengal and the learned
               senior counsel appearing for the second respondent (complainant).
The appellant is in the custody for the last 5 years and 2 months. As per order
16
CRM (DB) No.1510 of 2024
17
Criminal Appeal No.43/2025
Page | 9
         dated 17th March, 2023 passed by this Court, the trial was expected to be
         completed within six months. As of today, out of 114 witnesses, 75 have been
         examined.
We have perused the notes of evidence. Considering the facts of the case and the
         role attributed to the appellant, the appellant deserves to be enlarged on bail
         subject to stringent conditions. One of the conditions will be that the appellant
         will remain confined to the city of Kolkata after his release on bail and shall mark
         the attendance every day at appropriate Police Station as may be directed by the
         Trial Court. Another condition will be that if it is found that the trial is being
         delayed at the instance of the appellant due to either his non-cooperation or his
         advocate indulging in unnecessary long cross-examination, the bail will be liable
         to be cancelled.
Apart from the aforesaid conditions, usual conditions shall be imposed which will
         ensure that the appellant does not tamper with the prosecution evidence and
         prosecution witnesses.
The State will have to cooperate with the Trial Court by ensuring the presence of
         all official witnesses. The State will have to render all effective assistance to the
         Special Public Prosecutor appointed under the orders of this Court.
We direct the State to render all possible cooperation to the Special Public
         Prosecutor by ensuring that all official witnesses remain present before the Court.
         We also direct the State to ensure that if any witness needs the protection, he/she
         shall be provided adequate protection.
We direct that the appellant shall be enlarged on bail till the conclusion of the trial
         by producing him before the Trial Court within a maximum period of one week
         from today. The Trial Court shall fix appropriate terms and conditions including
         the conditions incorporated above. The Trial Court shall give hearing to the
         counsel for the State and the second respondent on the terms and conditions of
         bail.
In the event the appellant commits any breach of the terms and conditions, it
         will be always open for the respondents to apply to this Court for cancellation of
         bail.
The appeal is accordingly disposed of.”
25.   Despite being granted bail by the aforesaid order, Anisur felt dissatisfied

      with the condition that restricted his movements. He applied for




                                                                                     Page | 10
           modification of such condition18. By an order dated 5th May, 2025, a

           coordinate Bench (cor. Abhay S. Oka and Ujjal Bhuyan, JJ.) rejected the

           application holding that no case is made out “at this stage”.
26.        Undeterred, Anisur has now renewed his prayer for modification of the

           condition requiring him to remain confined to the city of Kolkata after his

           release on bail. According to Anisur, such a condition is an unreasonable

           restriction on his right to liberty protected by
Article 21
of the

           Constitution of India.
27.        Also, Afjal has prayed for cancellation of bail granted to Anisur contending

           that there can be no fair trial if Anisur is not taken into custody. Be it

           recorded here that such application has been filed by Afjal after he was

           permitted, by an order dated 19th September, 2025, to withdraw the

           previous application for cancellation of bail and file afresh by 27 th

           September, 2025.
ARGUMENTS
28.        We have patiently heard Mr. Vikas Singh, learned senior counsel for

           Anisur, Mr. P.S. Patwalia, learned senior counsel for Afjal, and Mr. Shadan

           Farasat, learned senior counsel for the State of West Bengal.
29.        Mr. Patwalia has contended that Anisur enjoys political patronage, so

           much so that the State of West Bengal has left no stone unturned to

           ensure his acquittal. He has lamented that the developments over the

           months in course of the trial before the Sessions Court would reveal a
18
Misc. Application Diary No. 18397 of 2025

                                                                              Page | 11
      mockery of the criminal justice system. According to him, witnesses were

      turning hostile even when Anisur was in custody; however, emboldened

      by release on bail by this Court, Anisur cast his net of influence wide and

      has been successful in having a good number of other prosecution

      witnesses turn hostile out of fear and intimidation. It is contended that

      only the second investigating officer (PW-88) has stood his ground and

      mustered    courage    to      testify   and   is   presently   being   examined.

      Photographs of Anisur with a prominent political leader of the ruling

      dispensation, which are part of the application for cancellation of bail,

      have been brought to our notice to show the extent of clout that Anisur

      enjoys. Scathing remarks made by the Judges of the High Court as well

      as this Court have been read out to expose how the State of West Bengal

      has shamelessly sought to shield Anisur.
30.   Mr. Patwalia has also brought to our notice that after being released on

      bail, the Superintendent of Police, Purba Medinipur, West Bengal, has

      deputed two police personnel as Anisur’s security staff. According to him,

      Anisur was provided security in 2013 but such security cover has now

      been continued without any assessment of threat perception. He

      contended that such action of the Superintendent of Police speaks

      volume of the special favour that Anisur has been receiving from the

      district police authorities.
31.   To ensure that the trial is not rendered an unfair and ineffective trial, Mr.

      Patwalia claimed that the bail granted to Anisur should be cancelled. He,




                                                                               Page | 12
        accordingly, prayed that upon cancellation of bail, Anisur be taken back

        into custody till completion of the trial.
32.     Per contra, Mr. Vikas Singh contended that a witch-hunt is in progress to

        anyhow nail Anisur despite he having absolutely no nexus with the

        incident of murder of the victim and no material having surfaced that he

        conspired to murder the victim. According to him, because of the

        restrictions imposed on movements of Anisur, he has been deprived of

        leading a meaningful life in his home district which happens to be Purba

        Medinipur, West Bengal. Not only has Anisur been unable to attend to his

        ailing parents (one of whom has since passed away), he could not even

        attend the last rites of his deceased brother-in-law who too passed away

        recently.
33.     Mr. Singh further contended that since the trial is on the verge of

        completion and that the remaining witnesses are all public officials, there

        is no possibility of tampering evidence or influencing witnesses; thus, the

        condition of bail that Anisur should be confined to the city of Kolkata may

        be revoked.
34.     We had enquired from Mr. Farasat as to the existence of any order passed

        by the Superintendent of Police on assessment of threat perception of

        Anisur after his release on bail. The answer was in the negative.


      OUR VIEWS AND CONCLUSIONS
35.     The facts, as outlined, detailing the progression of the sessions trial and

        the series of events and judicial orders so far, are self-explanatory. Lest


                                                                          Page | 13
      any observation made by us influences the Sessions Court, we refrain

      from commenting on the manner in which the trial has been progressing.

      However, while we consider it appropriate to observe that the

      developments [which, inter alia, include the de-facto complainant resiling

      from his stand and almost 10 police witnesses turning hostile apart from

      other witnesses and the State giving direction for withdrawal of

      prosecution (ultimately set aside)] do leave a very bitter taste in the

      mouth, it would be worthwhile to read portions of certain orders passed

      by the High Court as well as the order dated 17th March, 2023 of this

      Court on the transfer petition.
36.   The order dated 10th June, 2022 rejecting the application for bail of

      Anisur, inter alia, reads as follows:
“We have also given anxious thought to the contention of Mr. *** that
         detention of the petitioner at this stage when the prosecution is stayed by the
         Hon’ble Apex Court is in breach of his fundamental right under
Article 21
of the
         Constitution of India. A fair prosecution requires to address not only the rights of
         the accused but also the rights of the victims in particular and the public
         confidence in criminal justice administration in general. Manner in which the
         prosecution is sought to be jettisoned gives rise to grave doubt with regard to the
         bona fides of the State in effectively prosecuting the petitioner and the other
         accused persons. As noted above, while on one hand the State chooses to
         support its stance of withdrawal of prosecution, on other hand it appears to be
         conducting a ‘lip-service’ trial wherein most witnesses have turned hostile.
An aura of fear and apprehension seems to pervade the minds of the
         witnesses and the relations of the victim. In fact, Jahar Sha (informant in the case)
         was constrained to withdraw himself from the writ proceeding challenging the
         withdrawal of prosecution. This calls for a balancing act between rights of victim
         i.e., access to justice and witness protection and the right of the petitioner-
         accused under
Article 21
of the Constitution of India.
In view of the painful state of affairs where the bias of the State is heavily
         loaded in favour of the petitioner-accused, it would be prudent for us to tilt in
         favour of protection of the witnesses and family members of the deceased and
         ensure a fair and just prosecution. Hence, we are not inclined to release the
         petitioner on bail.
Page | 14
37.   The aforesaid order was upheld by a coordinate bench of this Court on

      15th December, 2022 by recording that there was no reason to interfere.
38.   As has been noted above, the Single Judge set aside the order dated

      26th February, 2021 by a judgment and order dated 2nd August, 2022.

      The following observations may be read:
“45. Mere lip-service to the settled legal criteria in the application under
Section
        321
, Cr.PC does not, by itself, lend sanctity to the motive behind non-prosecution.
        Rather, the dubious manner in which the application was shifted back early at the
        behest of the State and allowed by the trial Court on the very same date when the
        present writ petition was fixed and was being taken up for hearing by this court in
        the first round of litigation, even after the trial court being informed and well aware
        of such fixation in this court, evokes suspicion about the motive rather than
        confidence in the application being moved by the PP in good faith.
xxx                   xxx                 xxx
47. The surrounding circumstance and varied developments in the instant case,
        as discussed above, all cast a shadow of doubt on the motive behind the State’s
        fiat to withdraw prosecution against the respondent no. 5 and the other co-
accused persons in the case. No ingredient of public justice and/or interest of
        administration of justice has been made out at all for withdrawing prosecution
        against the accused persons, that too at an advanced stage of trial.
48. Just as political vendetta has been belied as a ground for withdrawal in the
        instant case, the averment in the application under
Section 321
, Cr.PC to the
        effect that the respondent no. 5 has not previously been accused of any serious
        offence is also fraught with untruth, since the respondent is not only a history-
        sheeter during the same political regime which now seeks to withdraw
        prosecution against him, but has been charged with heinous crimes such as
        murder, rape, etc. Such antecedent, without anything else, do not justify the
        argument that the withdrawal was for public interest or in the interest of proper
        administration of justice.
49. The State’s argument, that the withdrawal is in public interest, is betrayed by
        the events as traced out above. Rather, the communication of the State instruction
        to the trial court simultaneously with the PP and the concurrent haste adopted in
        the trial, despite witness after witness turning hostile but not being declared so,
        while in the same breath seeking withdrawal of prosecution, does not augur well
        in favour of the bona fides of the prosecution.
Page | 15
50. The other argument of the respondent no. 5, that the present writ petition is a
         non-starter in the absence of challenge to the order under
Section 321
, Cr.PC,
         though specious, is still-born, since the impugned memo logically culminated in
         the application and the order under the said provision and is a continuum of the
         same cause of action. In fact, in the first round of litigation before remand, the writ
         petition had been allowed by setting aside not only the impugned memo but all
         consequential action.
51. Hence, it would only subserve justice, good conscience and public interest if
         the trial of the respondent no. 5 and other accused persons is conducted properly
         and with the same zeal as the withdrawal of prosecution has been pursued, and
         not vice versa.”
39.   Certain passages from the order of this Court dated 17th March, 2023,

      while disposing of the transfer petition read as under:
“33. Adverting to the facts of the case in hand in light of the principles enunciated
         by this Court from time to time, it is true that the State of West Bengal has taken a
         complete u-turn with a view to help the main accused, namely, Respondent No. 2
         and it went to the extent of resorting to its powers under
Section 321
of CrPC to
         withdraw the prosecution itself. A plain reading of
Section 321
, CrPC leaves no
         room to doubt that it is the Public Prosecutor in-charge of the case who has to
         apply his mind independently and impartially to form a view for withdrawal from
         the prosecution with the consent of the court. The procedure followed in the case
         in hand was completely alien to the scheme of
Section 321
, CrPC as the decision
         to withdraw prosecution was taken at the level of the State Government and the
         Public Prosecutor was merely asked to act upon the said Government notification.
         The Link Judge also showed tearing hurry in accepting the application of the Public
         Prosecutor and permitting withdrawal from prosecution even before the date
         when the case was listed for prosecution evidence.
34. However, none of these patent illegalities were allowed to sustain as a result
         of the pro-active exercise of appellate/revisional/writ jurisdiction by the High
         Court. Not only was the State Government’s notification set aside, the order
         passed by the Link Judge permitting such withdrawal was also annulled by the
         High Court. It is a matter of record that the learned Trial Judge has repeatedly
         declined bail to Respondent No. 2 and even the High Court rejected his prayer for
         enlargement on bail. In this factual scenario, the question arises whether it is
         essential to transfer the trial outside the State of West Bengal or whether the ends
         of justice can be adequately met by issuing alternative appropriate directions?
         D. CONCLUSIONS
35. Having given our thoughtful consideration to this issue, it appears to us that
         there is no legal necessity to transfer the trial outside the State of Best Bengal and
         the apprehensions of the petitioner, some of which are indeed genuine, can be

                                                                                     Page | 16
        effectively redressed by issuing appropriate directions. We say so for the reason
        that more than 90 witnesses, most of whom are Bengali speaking, are yet to be
        examined. The transfer of trial to any other neighbouring state will cause serious
        impediment in the deposition of those witnesses and some of them might be
        reluctant to travel to a far away place and, thus, the case of the Prosecution will
        be severely prejudiced. So long as the High Court and District Judiciary are
        ensuring the fairness in trial proceedings within their jurisdictional framework, we
        are not inclined to accept that the victim’s family will not get fair justice, if the trial
        is held in the State of West Bengal.”
40.   The order dated 29th January, 2024 of the High Court recorded that:
“8. Under such circumstances, we are constrained to hold the trial judge has
        taken all efforts to conduct the trial expeditiously and conclude it within the time
        frame proposed by the Hon’ble Apex Court.
9. We have also examined the evidence of the witnesses who have deposed so far.
PWs. 1, 8, 10, 26 and 30 have deposed against the petitioner and evidence is
        forthcoming with regard to his complicity in the murder. We do not wish to make
        further observations with regard to the evidence on record lest the same
        prejudices either the prosecution or the defence.
10. We have also taken note of the fact one of the prosecution witnesses, PW 29,
        deposed that he had been intimidated by associates of the petitioner. As per the
        special Public Prosecutor 18 vulnerable witnesses are yet to be examined.
        Offences, if proved, would attract mandatory life imprisonment. Gravity of the
        offence and the evidence led against the accused are relevant considerations for
        bail. Similarly, impact of release of the petitioner on bail on the vulnerable
        witnesses also needs to be kept in mind. But the Court cannot turn its eyes away
        from the protracted undertrial detention already suffered by the petitioner i.e.
        more than 4 years. One cannot be unmindful of the systematic and infrastructural
        shortcomings which may inspite of earnest efforts on the part of the trial Court
        and the stakeholders stand in the way of conclusion of trial at an early date. In
        order to balance the right to liberty of an undertrial which is an enshrined right
        under
Article 21
of the Constitution of India on the one hand with the right of the
        State to conduct trial in a free, fair and non-intimidatory atmosphere on the other
        hand, we do not wish to consider the bail prayer of the petitioner favorably at this
        stage till all the vulnerable witnesses are examined.”
41.   Reverting to the applications, we find from the status report of the State

      that presently only a couple of witnesses remain to be examined and

      few are to be examined on recall. It also appears from a petition filed



                                                                                       Page | 17
      before the Sessions Court, handed over to us by Mr. Patwalia that

      recording of evidence of PW-88 is now in progress, which is likely to be

      followed by recording the evidence of two Magistrates (one of whom

      recorded the statement of a witness under Section 164, Cr. PC and the

      other held a T.I. Parade), a doctor and two other witnesses.
42.   The application for cancellation of bail at the instance of Afjal seems to

      be more of a retaliatory response to Anisur’s application for modification

      of bail condition rather than a genuine effort to further project before

      this Court how Anisur has breached the terms and conditions of bail.

      The anxiety and concern of Afjal is understandable. Having lost his

      brother in a homicidal attack, it is quite but natural that regardless of

      the State’s effort to scuttle the trial he would sincerely and earnestly

      wish to have the culprits brought to book. It has, however, not been

      shown how a breach has occasioned. We quite agree with Mr. Patwalia,

      as recorded by this Court in its order dated 17th March, 2023, that the

      State seems to have crossed the line of being an honest and fair

      prosecutor and bordered on becoming a real facilitator for the accused

      in the sessions trial to evade conviction. There is also little doubt that

      witnesses for the prosecution have turned hostile, but that Anisur is

      directly responsible for the damage caused has not been conclusively

      established before us. Be that as it may, having regard to the stage the

      trial has progressed, we do not consider any useful purpose being

      served by cancelling the bail granted in favour of Anisur.
43.   The application for cancellation of bail, thus, stands rejected.
Page | 18
44.     The application for condonation of delay (I.A. No.227763/2025) in

        presentation of the application for modification by Anisur stands

        allowed.
45.     Adverting to the modification application of Anisur, we do not see

        sufficient reason to modify the condition under consideration either.
46.     Anisur’s previous application for modification was rejected by the bench

        presided over by A.S. Oka, J. The present application has been filed on

        8th August, 2025, i.e., a couple of months after His Lordship demitted

        office. In between, there were Partial Working Days from 26th May, 2025

        till 11th July, 2025. The purpose is not far to seek. We perceive this to

        be an attempt to take a chance because of the changed scenario.
47.     Though elementary, it requires restatement that it is fundamental to the

        rule of law to maintain the sanctity and finality of judicial verdicts.

        Judicial orders which determine issues arising between the parties to

        the lis bind them and its conclusive nature ensures resolution of

        disputes so that justice is served. The strength of judicial power lies less

        in the hope of perfection and more in the confidence that decisions,

        once made, are settled. As Justice Robert Jackson19 famously said “We

        are not final because we are infallible, but we are infallible only because

        we are final”. By upholding the finality of verdicts, not only is endless

        litigation prevented but public confidence in the judiciary is also

        maintained.
19
Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court in Brown v. Allen

                                                                           Page | 19
48.   In the recent past, we have rather painfully observed a growing trend

      in this Court (of which we too are an indispensable part) of verdicts

      pronounced by Judges, whether still in office or not and irrespective of

      the time lapse since pronounced, being overturned by succeeding

      benches or specially constituted benches at the behest of some party

      aggrieved by the verdicts prior in point of time. To us, the object of
Article 141
of the Constitution seems to be this: the pronouncement of

      a verdict by a bench on a particular issue of law (arising out of the facts

      involved) should settle the controversy, being final, and has to be

      followed by all courts as law declared by the Supreme Court. However,

      if a verdict is allowed to be reopened because a later different view

      appears to be better, the very purpose of enacting
Article 141
would

      stand defeated. The prospect of opening up a further round of challenge

      before a succeeding bench, hoping that a change in composition will

      yield a different outcome, would undermine this Court’s authority and

      the value of its pronouncements. A matter that is res integra may not

      be reopened or revisited or else consistency in legal interpretation could

      be compromised and the special authority that is invested in decisions

      of this Court, under
Article 141
, lost. The weight and influence of that

      special authority depend on the credibility we, the Judges, give to it. As

      Judges of this Court, we are alive to the position that overturning a prior

      verdict by a later verdict does not necessarily mean that justice is better

      served.
Page | 20
49.     However, with an over looming sense of dissatisfaction and remorse, we

        propose not to walk that path. While it is true that in a case of the

        present nature — where an issue of a citizen’s right to move freely

        throughout the territory of India is involved — the principle of finality

        may not be applied strictly against the party whose right has been so

        restricted, but the antecedent facts in the light whereof the restriction

        is imposed assumes significance and must, of necessity, bear serious

        thought. Any restrictive order of the nature under consideration has to

        be and must be premised on some worthy reason. Such reason need

        not be brushed aside as irrelevant or untenable. Judicial discipline,

        propriety and comity, which are also inseparable parts of a just and

        proper decision-making process, demand that a subsequent bench of

        different combination defers to the view expressed by the earlier bench,

        unless there is something so grossly erroneous on the face of the record

        or palpably wrong that it necessitates a re-look in exercise of inherent

        jurisdiction either by a review petition or through a curative petition as

        explained in
Rupa Ashok Hurra v. Ashok Hurra20
.
50.     The very purpose of the order granting bail, in this case, would stand

        frustrated if the condition requiring Anisur not to leave Kolkata were

        modified. This Court granted bail bearing in mind two factors. First,

        Anisur was in custody for more than 5 years and second, despite this

        Court’s order dated 17th May, 2023 requiring completion of trial within

        6 months, the trial had not concluded. Grant of bail being discretionary
20
(2002) 4 SCC 388

                                                                         Page | 21
      and having regard to the developments over the years, refusal to grant

      bail to Anisur was indeed a distinct option available to the bench.

      However, the bench leaned in favour of granting the concession of bail

      on stringent conditions which this Court found fit to impose considering

      the attendant circumstances and balancing competing interests of need

      for incarceration and right to liberty. If any modification of such

      condition is made now and thereby the stringency relaxed, that would

      not only amount to overstepping the order of this Court granting bail

      but would send a wrong message of this Court being unconcerned with

      the principle of finality of judicial decisions. The stringent condition

      imposed by the bench while granting bail being justified on facts and in

      the   circumstances,   and     there   being   no   significant   change   in

      circumstances warranting a reconsideration, we see no reason to

      interfere.
51.   That apart, this Court being the protector of Fundamental Rights of the

      people of the country cannot also perhaps overlook that Anisur has been

      provided security cover by none other than the Superintendent of the

      police force of the district of which he is a permanent resident. If indeed

      there is any threat perception that endangers Anisur’s life in Purba

      Medinipur, it would be appropriate for him not to leave Kolkata till such

      time the trial is concluded.
52.   We, therefore, reject the application for modification of bail condition

      filed by Anisur.
Page | 22
53.   The Sessions Court is requested to prepare a schedule for recording the

      evidence      of   the    remaining      prosecution   witnesses    on

      successive/alternative days, as far as possible but subject to its

      convenience. The Sessions Court shall be free to proceed with the trial

      in accordance with law.
54.   I.A. No.244053/2025 (application for cancellation of bail) and I.A.

      No.197604/2025 (application for modification of one of the conditions

      for bail) are, accordingly, dismissed.
POSTSCRIPT
55.   After we had reserved judgment on the applications on 18th November,

      2025 and the opinion expressed above was scheduled to be pronounced

      on 25th November, 2025, Mr. Patwalia mentioned the matter on 24 th

      November, 2025 in the presence of Mr. Bedi, learned counsel for Anisur.

      We were shown a copy of an order dated 21st November, 2025 passed

      by the Sessions Court on an application filed by the Special Public

      Prosecutor.
56.   Mr. Patwalia submitted that without any reason or justification, the

      Sessions Court has made scathing comments against the Special Public

      Prosecutor and referred the matter to the Legal Remembrancer, West

      Bengal based on his perception that the Special Public Prosecutor has

      been remiss in conducting the proceedings of the trial and committed a

      serious lapse in filing a belated application and that too, without

      assigning any reason. According to him, the Special Public Prosecutor

      has been prosecuting the case fairly and with a good deal of competence

                                                                    Page | 23
      and Afjal has no dissatisfaction with the manner of conducting of the

      trial. He expresses an apprehension that unless some observations are

      made, the trial would end up meandering into a mere ritual being

      completed with the conclusion written on the wall.
57.   Mr. Bedi, for Anisur, submitted that any interference with the order

      dated 21st November, 2025 in course of these proceedings would not be

      proper. According to him, Anisur is not responsible for the order made

      by the Sessions Court; Anisur is entitled to a fair trial and if any party

      is dissatisfied with partial allowing of the application of the prosecution,

      he/it may move the appropriate forum.
58.   It is noted in such order dated 21st November, 2025 as follows:
“3. The learned Special Public Prosecutor has submitted that the prosecution
        wants to get the indulgence of this Court to –
(a)    Re-examine CSW 83;
(b)    Examine fresh witnesses namely; CSW 84, CSW 37, CSW 41 and the
                      Executive Officials (DM/ADM) to prove the order of sanction
                      (marked Z1 for identification) accorded under
Section 39
Arms Act;
(c)    Examine some forensic experts who submitted their reports;
(d)    Examine PW75 (Dilip Chakraborty), who was though declared as
                      hostile but the matter has been stayed by the Hon’ble High Court;
(e)    Examine one Dipankar Adak who is said to be an ocular witness
                      though not cited in the charge-sheet;
(f)    Examine the seizure witnesses relating to recovery of some articles
                      and re-examine the officials who seized those articles and
(g)    Examine ASI Goutam Roy of Panskura Police Station who made the
                      GD entry no. 281 dated 07.10.2019 (marked Z for identification).
xxx                    xxx                    xxx
7. At the outset, this Court is afraid to make a comment that the prosecution has
         not assigned any reason as why the witnesses sought to be re-examined [CSW
         83 and seizing officials as specified in paragraph 3 (a) & (f)]. Nothing is also found
         explaining the reason for filing such an application is such a belated stage even
         after closure of the evidence of the Investigation officer.”




                                                                                    Page | 24
59.   Despite being critical, the Sessions Court partly allowed the application

      and permitted examination of executive officials (DM/ADM), Dipankar

      Adak and ASI Goutam Roy.
60.   Since the application of the prosecution has been partly allowed and

      partly disallowed by the Sessions Court by the said order dated 21st

      November, 2025, we do not propose to examine the validity thereof in

      course of these proceedings, except to the extent specified hereafter.

      Such order may be challenged in appropriate proceedings by the

      aggrieved party, if so advised.
61.   However, the alleged scathing comments made by the Sessions Court

      against the Special Public Prosecutor (who has been appointed pursuant

      to the order dated 17th March, 2023 on the transfer petition passed by

      this Court), to which our attention was drawn by Mr. Patwalia, read thus:
“30. At the same time, this court firmly observes that the Learned Special Public
        Prosecutor, Mr. ***, cannot exculpate himself from the solemn and onerous duty
        cast upon his office — to lend unalloyed assistance to the court and to lay bare
        the unvarnished truth, thereby enabling the Court to traverse the path of justice
        conviction, and completeness.
31. It is more so, when Mr. ***, is well aware about the directives of the Hon'ble
        Apex Court whereby we all are enjoined to dispose of this case within a stipulated
        period — a circumstance that ought to have impelled greater vigilance and
        circumspection on the part of Mr. Maity.
32. This Court, therefore, deems it imperative ex debito justitiae to express its
        profound disquiet the manner in which Mr. *** has represented the State in the
        present proceeding. His torpid and indifferent approach, contra officii dignitatem,
        stands in glaring discord with the solemn responsibility reposed in a Public
        Prosecutor. In a prosecution touching the very vitals of societal order and moral
        rectitude, such apathy is non toleranda.
33. Accordingly, this Court, suo motu et cum gravi animi sensu, urges the Learned
        Legal Remembrancer, Government of West Bengal, to take due cognizance of this
        lapse and to ensure that cases of such grave import and societal impact are
        hereafter conducted cum summa diligentia et fide publica (with the greatest
        diligence and public faith).
Page | 25
34. A copy of this order be accordingly forwarded to the Learned Legal
        Remembrancer, Government of West Bengal, for information.”
62.   The above observations have been made against the Special Public

      Prosecutor by the presiding officer of the Sessions Court, once he

      approached the Court with the application to grant the prosecution the

      indulgence to examine additional witnesses/re-examine witness already

      examined.
63.   We are pained to record that the comments made by the Sessions Court

      criticising the Special Public Prosecutor are wholly uncalled for,

      thoroughly unwarranted and absolutely unnecessary. In his anxiety to

      conclude the trial early, owing to the directions given by this Court on

      the transfer petition as well as the High Court while dismissing the

      applications for bail of Anisur, the Sessions Court perhaps omitted to

      bear in mind the antecedent facts relatable to progression of the trial.

      If indeed the Special Public Prosecutor by filing an application sought

      the indulgence of the Court to re-examine/examine witnesses, it was

      entirely within the jurisdiction of the Sessions Court to allow or reject

      such prayer. Indeed, the fact that the application of the prosecution has

      been partly allowed does suggest that the Sessions Court did not

      consider the attempt of the prosecution to be part of any dilatory tactics

      to unduly prolong the trial. Having regard thereto, the order is

      contradictory in the sense that on the one hand the application is partly

      allowed and, on the other, the Special Public Prosecutor is criticized for

      lack of vigilance and circumspection.
Page | 26
64.   The Sessions Court, further, ought to have realised that the directions

      for early conclusion of trial were passed owing to long incarceration of

      Anisur. This Court was anxious that an under-trial’s liberty should not

      be curtailed without sufficient reason. However, with the passing of the

      order dated 3rd January, 2025 by this Court releasing Anisur on bail

      (albeit with restrictions on his movement), the extreme urgency to

      conclude the trial as early as possible by fixing successive/alternative

      dates did recede a bit and the endeavour of the Sessions Court ought

      not to have been to discourage the prosecution from placing its case by

      all means, as permitted by law. If indeed the prosecution, for ensuring

      a fair trial for the victim as well as the accused, felt that it was essential

      to apply for permission to have witnesses re-examined/examined,

      obviously such an application was not one which necessitated scathing

      remarks to be made against the Special Public Prosecutor. To

      characterise the approach of the Special Public Prosecutor as torpid and

      indifferent amounts to unjustly criticising him for lack of initiative. The

      Sessions Court ought to have been alive to the situation that the

      predecessor in office of the Special Public Prosecutor was tardy,

      lethargic, indolent and unenthusiastic for which the current initiative of

      the Special Public Prosecutor was necessary for a fair, effective and

      meaningful trial. The Sessions Court ought not to forget the status of a

      prosecutor, who has been appointed pursuant to an order of this Court.

      Reference to legal maxims could be insightful, if the context so requires,

      but overusing them might distract from the main issue, coming across

                                                                          Page | 27
      as ostentatious rather than substantive. We conclude by observing that

      the Special Public Prosecutor has been unfairly criticised by the Sessions

      Court in its hurried attempt to conclude the trial without, however,

      realising the seriousness and magnitude of the situation. However, while

      viewing this as a one–off aberration on the part of the presiding officer

      of the Sessions Court, we hope that it is not repeated.
65.   Having limited our examination to that part of the order dated 21st

      November, 2025 whereby reference has been made to the Legal

      Remembrancer, we interfere and set aside such reference.
66.   The Special Public Prosecutor is encouraged to continue conducting the

      trial on behalf of the prosecution with fairness, integrity and diligence.
67.   The Sessions Court is directed to deal with all applications that might

      be filed by the parties on its own merits.
68.   This order may not be construed as restricting Anisur from raising

      legitimate objections during the trial, which the Sessions Court will

      decide as per law.
69.   The Sessions Court may conclude the trial, in accordance with law,

      without being overly concerned about the previous timelines set by this

      Court.
………………….……………………J.
                                                  (DIPANKAR DATTA)


                                             …….…………………………………J.
                                             (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)

  New Delhi;
November 26, 2025.
Page | 28