[Cites
29
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Poonam vs Dule Singh on 6 November, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 1284                                                                   REPORTABLE


                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 12000 OF 2025

                            POONAM                                             PETITIONER
                                                         VERSUS
                            DULE SINGH & ORS.                                  RESPONDENTS




                                                  JUDGMENT
ATUL S. CHANDURKAR, J.
1.    The petitioner suffered a conviction under
Section 138
of the

                            Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. She, however, failed to disclose

                            her conviction in the nomination form for the election to the post of

                            Councillor. Her election was challenged by the first respondent, and

                            the trial Court unseated her from the post of Councillor holding her

                            to be disqualified under the provisions of
The Madhya Pradesh

                            Municipalities Act, 1961
. The revision application preferred by the

                            petitioner having been dismissed, she has preferred the present
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
KAPIL TANDON
Special Leave Petition.
Date: 2025.11.06
   16:22:56 IST
   Reason:
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                                 Page 1 of 32
2.      In the elections held for the post of Councillor at Nagar

       Parishad, Bhikangaon, the petitioner came to be elected from Ward

       No.5 securing the highest number of votes. Notification to that effect

       dated 04.10.2022 came to be issued. The first respondent filed an

       election petition under
Section 20
of the Madhya Pradesh

       Municipalities Act, 1961 (hereinafter, “the Act of 1961”) read with The

       Madhya Pradesh Nagar Palika Nirvachan Niyam, 1994 (hereinafter

       “the Rules of 1994”) and sought a declaration that the petitioner be

       held disqualified for holding the post of Councillor and that her seat

       be declared as vacant. In the election petition, it was pleaded by the

       first respondent that on 07.08.2018, the petitioner had been

       convicted in proceedings filed under
Section 138
of the Negotiable

       Instruments Act, 1881 (hereinafter, “the Act of 1881”). She had been

       sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of one year

       and also ordered to pay compensation. The fact of her conviction,

       however, had not been disclosed by the petitioner in the affidavit

       filed along with the nomination form as required by Rule 24-A of the

       Rules of 1994. Though other grounds of challenge were also raised,

       same are not relevant for the present purpose. It was thus prayed

       that the petitioner be declared disqualified from holding the post of

       Councillor.
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                           Page 2 of 32
3.      The petitioner filed her reply and opposed the election petition

       by raising a plea that the order of conviction dated 07.08.2018 was

       no longer in existence as the same had set aside in appeal. She

       stated that the election petition was liable to be dismissed as she

       had not incurred any disqualification as mentioned in
Section 35
of

       the Act of 1961.
4.      The parties led evidence before the trial Court and after

       considering the same, the learned Judge of the trial Court held that

       the petitioner had been convicted under
Section 138
of the Act of

       1881 which fact had not been disclosed in the affidavit filed along

       with the nomination form. It was further held that since it was

       mandatory on the part of a candidate to disclose if he/she had

       suffered any conviction, the voters had a right to obtain correct

       information. As the conviction of the petitioner was not mentioned in

       her affidavit, it was clear that this had affected the voters from Ward

       No.5. The election of the petitioner was held to be materially

       affected. It was thus concluded that since the petitioner failed to

       disclose the fact of her conviction in her affidavit, she was

       disqualified from continuing as a Councillor. By the judgment dated

       17.02.2025, the election of the petitioner was set aside holding her

       to be disqualified for holding the post of Councillor from Ward No.5.

       Her election was declared null and void.
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                            Page 3 of 32
5.      The petitioner being aggrieved by her disqualification

       challenged the same by filing a revision application before the High

       Court under
Section 26 (2)
of the Act of 1961. One of the contentions

       raised on behalf of the petitioner was that the order of conviction

       had been set aside on 30.12.2022 and hence the same could not

       be the basis for unseating her. It was also urged that the first

       respondent had failed to prove that the election of the petitioner had

       been materially affected on account of non-compliance of the

       provisions of Rule 24-A of the Rules of 1994. The learned Judge of

       the High Court held that the petitioner had failed to disclose the fact

       of her conviction in her affidavit filed along with the nomination form.

       This resulted in breach of Rules 24-A of the Rules of 1994.

       Consequently, the provisions of
Section 22(1) (d) (iii)
of the Act of

       1961 were attracted and the same was the ground for declaring the

       election of the petitioner to be void. While arriving at this finding, it

       was observed that the petitioner did not enter into the witness box

       to establish that by failing to disclose her conviction, her election

       was not materially affected nor did it influence the election. The

       judgment of the trial Court was thus upheld by recording a finding

       that by failing to disclose her conviction in the affidavit filed along

       with nomination form, there was a breach of Rule 24-A of the Rules

       of 1994 and the petitioner’s election was rightly set aside. The
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                             Page 4 of 32
revision application was thus dismissed. Being aggrieved, the

          petitioner has approached this Court under
Article 136
of the

          Constitution of India
6.     Mr. Vivek Tankha, learned Senior Advocate for the petitioner

          made the following submissions:
a. The election of the petitioner was wrongly declared as null

                     and void. Assuming that there was a failure on the part of

                     the petitioner to disclose her conviction under
Section 138
of the Act of 1881, it could not be said that such non-
disclosure was of a substantial nature that would affect the

                     outcome of the election for it to be set aside. The conviction

                     was for an offence not involving moral turpitude and

                     therefore such non-disclosure was not of a material nature.
The offence being compoundable in nature and the

                     conviction of the petitioner having been subsequently set

                     aside, no material difference could be stated to have been

                     made on account of non-disclosure of such conviction in

                     the affidavit. To substantiate this contention the learned

                     Senior Advocate placed reliance on the decisions in
Ravi

                     Namboothiri vs. K.A. Baiju
& others1 and
Karikho Kri
1
2022 INSC 1187
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                                Page 5 of 32
vs. Nuney Tayang
and another2. It was thus urged that

                       the election of the petitioner having been wrongly set aside,

                       she was liable to be restored to her elected post.
b. The first respondent (election petitioner) had failed to prove

                       that the election of the petitioner as a returned candidate

                       had been materially affected on account of non-disclosure

                       of her conviction in the affidavit filed along with the

                       nomination form. Hence, her election could not have been

                       set aside under
Section 22 (1) (d) (i)
or (iii) of the Act of

                       1961. There were no pleadings in the election petition that

                       by the improper acceptance of the petitioner’s nomination

                       form or on account of non-compliance of the provisions of

                       Rule 24-A of the Rules of 1994, the election of the petitioner

                       had been materially affected. This material aspect was not

                       taken into consideration while unseating the petitioner.
7.        On the other hand, Mr. Sarvam Ritam Khare, learned

          Advocate appearing for the first respondent opposed the appeal by

          urging as under:
a. The fact that the petitioner had been convicted for the

                       offence punishable under
Section 138
of the Act of 1881
2
2024 INSC 289
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                                  Page 6 of 32
not having been disclosed in the affidavit required to be

                      filed under Rule 24-A of the Rules of 1994, it was clear that

                      the nomination form of the petitioner was wrongly accepted

                      in breach of
Section 22 (1) (d) (i)
of the Act of 1961. There

                      had also been non-compliance with the requirements of

                      the Act of 1961 and the Rules of 1994 thereby affecting the

                      petitioner’s nomination. On this count, the election of the

                      petitioner had been rightly set aside.
In support of this

                      submission the learned Advocate placed reliance on the

                      decisions in
Resurgence India Vs. Election Commission

                      of India
and another3 and Krishnamoorthy Vs.

                      Shivakumar and others.4

                    b. Since the petitioner was convicted on 07.08.2018 and the

                      said conviction continued to operate when the nomination

                      form was filed, the subsequent acquittal of the petitioner on

                      30.12.2022 after the elections were held was of no

                      consequence. The eligibility of a candidate was required to

                      be determined as on the date of submission of the

                      nomination form. Both the Courts had rightly found that the
3
2013 INSC 617
4
2015 INSC 960
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                                Page 7 of 32
conviction of the petitioner was operating when she had

                    submitted the nomination form.
c. After the election of the petitioner was set aside, fresh

                    elections were held to fill in the vacancy as caused. The

                    petitioner had again contested the said election but was

                    unsuccessful. Since the petitioner had lost the subsequent

                    election, the challenge raised by her to the order passed

                    by the trial Court had now been rendered infructuous.
On these grounds, it was urged that there was no

                 case made out to interfere with the impugned adjudication.
8.      We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length

       and with their assistance we have also perused the documentary

       material on record. Before considering the challenge raised by the

       petitioner, it would be necessary to first deal with the submission of

       the first respondent that by virtue of the subsequent election to fill in

       the vacancy caused by the disqualification of the petitioner, her

       challenge as raised had been rendered infructuous. In this regard,

       it is necessary to note that after the present proceedings were filed,

       a bye election was notified and the polling was scheduled on

       07.07.2025. This Court on 25.06.2025 directed that though the bye
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                             Page 8 of 32
election could be held, the result thereof would be subject to

       outcome of the present proceedings.
It is thus clear from the aforesaid that the holding of the

       subsequent election for filling in the vacancy caused by the

       unseating of the petitioner was made subject to outcome of these

       proceedings. It therefore cannot be gainsaid that with the conduct

       of the bye elections, the challenge raised by the petitioner to the

       order passed by the trial Court had become infructuous.

       Notwithstanding the conduct of the bye elections, the present

       challenge would be required to be adjudicated on merits since the

       rights of the petitioner stand protected by virtue of the interim order

       dated 25.06.2025. The said contention raised by the first respondent

       therefore cannot be accepted.
9.      Coming to the challenge raised by the petitioner, it is to be

       noted from the pleadings of the first respondent in the election

       petition that the petitioner had failed to disclose the fact that on

       07.08.2018 she had been convicted under
Section 138
of the Act of

       1881. This material fact was required to disclosed by her in the

       affidavit mandated to be filed under Rule 24-A of the Rules of 1994

       along with her nomination form. To appreciate this contention, it

       would be first necessary to refer to the relevant statutory provisions.
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                           Page 9 of 32
Section 22 (1) (d)
of the Act of 1961, insofar as it is material fact for

       the present purpose reads as under:
“22. Grounds for declaring election or nomination to be
              void- (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), if the
              Judge is of the opinion - …………
(d) that the result of the election, or nomination in so far as
              it concerns a returned candidate has been materially
              affected –
(i)     by the improper acceptance of any
                            nomination; or
(ii)    by the improper acceptance or refusal of
                            any vote or reception of any vote which is
                            void; or
(iii)   by the non-compliance with the provisions
                            of this Act or of any rules or orders-made
                            there under save the rules framed under
Section 14
in so far as they relate to
                            preparation and revision of list of voters;
he shall declare the election or nomination
                            of the returned candidate to be void.”

               The aforesaid statutory provisions indicate that the election of

       returned candidate can be declared to be void on account of

       improper acceptance of his/her nomination form or on account of

       non-compliance with the provisions of the Act of 1961 or the Rules

       of 1994 or orders made thereunder.
10.     Rule 24-A of the Rules of 1994 requires each candidate to

       furnish information         with regard to     declaration   of    criminal

       antecedents, assets, liabilities and educational qualifications. The
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                             Page 10 of 32
said provision insofar as it is relevant for the present purpose reads

       as under:
“24-A. (1) Each candidate shall furnish the information
              relating to -Declaration of criminal antecedent, assets,
              liabilities and educational qualification-
(i) any pending criminal case in which he is
                         charged and any disposed criminal case in
                         which he has been convicted;”

       Rule 24-A (2), (4) and (5) of the Rules of 1994 being relevant are

       reproduced hereunder:
“(2) The nomination paper shall be rejected, if the affidavit
                   is not enclosed.”

              “(4) The Returning Officer shall, as soon as may be after
                   furnishing of the information to him under sub-rule
                   (1), display the aforesaid information by affixing a
                   copy of the affidavit, at a conspicuous place at his
                   office for the information of electors of the concerned
                   ward for which the nomination paper is filed and, shall
                   on demand from any other candidate/elector of the
                   ward, make available the information received of the
                   candidate and, shall also publicize the information
                   received through the media.”

              “(5) If any candidate or elector files an affidavit against the
                   information contained in the affidavit filed by a
                   candidate under sub-rule (1), it shall also be
                   displayed in the manner prescribed in sub-rule (4).”
11.     As required by Rule 24-A(5) of the Rules of 1994, the petitioner

       filed her affidavit in the prescribed format. The relevant portion of the

       said affidavit dated 09.09.2022 reads as under:
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                             Page 11 of 32
AFFIDAVIT

              As per Rule 24-A(1)(5)(Amended)             of    the   M.P.
              Nagarpalika Nirvachan Niyam, 1994

              For election to Parshad Ward No.5 from Nagar Parishad,
              Bhikangaon
              (6) I have been/have not been convicted of an offence(s)
              [other than any offence(s) referred to in sub-section (1)
              or sub-section (2), or cover in sub-section(3), of
section
              8
of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of
              1951)] and sentenced to imprisonment for one year or
              more.
If the deponent is convicted and punished as aforesaid,
              he shall furnish the following information: In the following
              cases, I have been convicted and sentenced to
              imprisonment by a court of law:
A The details of cases, Section (s) of the         Nirank
                 concerned Act(s) and description of the
                 offence(s) for
                 Name of the Court(s), Case No. and               Nirank
               B
                 date(s) of order(s):
Punishment imposed                               Nirank
               C
                 Whether any appeal was/has been filed            Nirank
               D
against the conviction order. If so, details
                 and the present status of the appeal:
VERIFICATION
              I, the deponent, above named, do hereby verify and
              declare that the contents of this affidavit are true and
              correct to the best of my knowledge and belief and no part
              of it is false and nothing material has been concealed there
              from. I further declare that:
(a)    There is no case of conviction or pending case
                     against me other than those mentioned in items 5 and
                     6 of part A and B above;
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                              Page 12 of 32
(b)     I, my spouse, or my dependents do not have any
                      asset or liability, other than those mentioned in items
                      7 and 8 of Part A and items 8, 9 and 10 of Part B
                      above.
Verified at this day of 09/09/2022
                                                               DEPONENT
                                                 (emphasis supplied by us)
12.     Undisputably, the petitioner was convicted on 07.08.2018

       under
Section 138
of the Act of 1881. The conviction was in force

       when the petitioner submitted her nomination form on 09.09.2022.

       In the affidavit filed under Rule 24-A of the Rules of 1994, the

       petitioner failed to disclose her conviction as stated above. To that

       extent, the plea raised by the first respondent and accepted by both

       Courts that there was a failure on the part of the petitioner in not

       disclosing her conviction in the affidavit filed under Rule 24-A of the

       Rules of 1994 which in turn resulted in non-compliance with the

       provisions of the Act of 1961 or the Rules of 1994 is correct.
13.     On consideration of the statutory provisions as well as the

       documentary material on record it becomes clear that under Rule

       24-A (1) of the Rules of 1994, every candidate contesting elections

       is required to furnish information which includes declaration of

       criminal antecedents, etc. The information required to be furnished

       is with regard to any pending criminal case in which the candidate

       is charged or any criminal case that has been disposed of and has
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                             Page 13 of 32
resulted in his conviction. Failure to furnish such affidavit can result

         in rejection of the nomination paper. The Returning Officer is

         required to display the nomination furnished by each candidate by

         affixing a copy of the affidavit at a conspicuous place at his office so

         as to provide information to the electors from the concerned ward.

         He is also required to publicise the information received through the

         media. Similarly, contents of the affidavit required to be filed under

         Rule 24-A (1) are also required to be displayed in the aforesaid

         manner. The object behind disclosing such information is to enable

         the voters to get knowledge about the criminal antecedents, assets,

         liabilities and educational qualifications of the candidates contesting

         the elections. That such information is required to be furnished in

         furtherance of the right to information available to the electorate

         under
Article 19 (1) (a)
of the Constitution of India is now well-

         settled.
14.
In this context, it would be necessary to refer to the three

         Judge Bench decision in
Union of India vs. Association
for

         Democratic Reforms.5 While considering the question whether a

         voter had a right to get relevant information including that with

         regard to involvement in an offence, this Court while recognising
5
2002 INSC 253
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                             Page 14 of 32
such right to get information in the context of
Article 19(1)(a)
of the

       Constitution of India held as under:
"In our view, democracy cannot survive without free and fair
              election, without free and fairly informed voters. Votes cast
              by uninformed voters in favour of X or Y candidate would
              be meaningless. As stated in the aforesaid passage, one-
              sided information, disinformation, misinformation and non-
              information all equally create an uninformed citizenry which
              makes democracy a farce. Therefore, casting of a vote by
              misinformed and non-informed voter or a voter having one-
              sided information only is bound to affect the democracy
              seriously. Freedom of speech and expression includes right
              to impart and receive information which includes freedom
              to hold opinions. Entertainment is implied in freedom of
              ‘speech and expression’ and there is no reason to hold that
              freedom of speech and expression would not cover right to
              get material information with regard to a candidate who is
              contesting election for a post which is of utmost importance
              in the democracy."
It thereafter concluded as under:
"Under our Constitution,
Article 19(1)(a)
provides for
               freedom of speech and expression. Voters' speech or
               expression in case of election would include casting of
               votes, that is to say, voter speaks out or expresses by
               casting vote. For this purpose, information about the
               candidate to be selected is must. Voter's (little man
               citizen's) right to know antecedents including criminal past
               of his candidate contesting election for MP or MLA is
               much more fundamental and basic for survival of
               democracy. The little man may think over before making
               his choice of electing law breakers as law makers."
15.     It is an admitted position that, the petitioner failed to disclose

       her conviction for the offence punishable under
Section 138
of the

       Act of 1881 and that she had been sentenced to imprisonment for a

       period of one year. It is also not disputed that on 09.09.2022 when
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                             Page 15 of 32
the petitioner submitted her affidavit as required by Rule 24-A (1) of

       the Rules of 1994, her conviction was in force. The petitioner was

       therefore obligated to furnish information about her conviction and

       consequently being sentenced to imprisonment for a period of one

       year. She however failed to do so. Pertinently, Rule 24-A (1) requires

       a declaration to be made of an order or conviction, irrespective of

       the quantum of sentence imposed. In other words, the material

       information to be furnished is the fact of any conviction suffered by

       a candidate. It is therefore clear that by failing to disclose her

       previous conviction, the petitioner furnished false and incorrect

       information as regards her criminal antecedents. As a result the

       verification of her affidavit was false and incorrect despite the fact

       that the petitioner had full knowledge of her conviction which she

       had subjected to further challenge. As a consequence, the ground

       under
Section 22 (1) (d) (iii)
of the Act of 1961 became available for

       declaring her election to be void. Further, as a result of such false

       information being furnished by the petitioner in her affidavit filed

       under Rule 24-A (1) of the Rules of 1994, her nomination paper was

       improperly accepted.
These factual aspects have been considered by the trial Court

       and thereafter affirmed by the High Court in exercise of its revisional
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                          Page 16 of 32
jurisdiction. This factual position was not contested by the learned

       Senior Advocate for the petitioner. It is thus clear that by failing to

       disclose her conviction and consequent sentence of imprisonment

       for a period of one year, a ground for declaring her election as

       Councillor became available to the first respondent.
16.     The learned Senior Advocate for the petitioner tried to

       extricate the case of the petitioner from such position by urging that

       the conviction of the petitioner was not for an offence involving moral

       turpitude. It was a conviction under
Section 138
of the Act of 1881

       and thus it could not be said that there was any serious or heinous

       crime committed by the petitioner. For her conviction in such an

       offence, the petitioner was not liable to be visited by an order of

       disqualification under the Act of 1961. To substantiate this

       contention he sought to derive support from the decisions of this

       Court in
Ravi Namboothiri and Karikho Kri
(supra).
Having considered both these decisions, we find that the same

       are clearly distinguishable in view of the statutory provisions

       involved therein as well as the relevant factual aspects.
In
Ravi

       Namboothiri
(supra), the appellant therein was finally convicted for

       the offence punishable under
Section 38
read with
Section 52
of the

       Kerala Police Act, 1961 and was sentenced to a fine of Rs. 200/-.
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                          Page 17 of 32
The said appellant however while filing his nomination for the

       elections to the Panchayat failed to disclose the fact of his conviction

       under
Section 38
read with
Section 52
of the Kerala Police Act,

       1961. On this count his election to the Panchayat was set aside as

       he had suppressed information with regard to his past conviction.

       The appellant challenged his disqualification before this Court. It

       was found that what was required to be disclosed under
Section

       52(1A)
of the Kerala Panchayat Raj Act, 1994 were the details with

       regard to criminal cases in which the candidate was involved at the

       time of submission of his nomination. Reference was made to the

       previous of
Section 102 (1)(ca)
of the Kerala Panchayat Raj Act,

       1994 which made furnishing of details by an elected candidate

       under
Section 52 (1A)
a ground for declaring an election to be void

       if such details furnished were fake. It was held by this Court that the

       word “involvement’’ in a criminal case at the time of filing of the

       nomination in
Section 52 (1A)
would only mean cases where a

       criminal complaint was pending investigation/trial, cases where the

       conviction and/or sentence was current at the time of filing of the

       nomination and cases where the conviction was the subject matter

       of any appeal or revision pending at the time of nomination. It was

       found that besides Rule 6, Form No. 2-A required details even of

       cases where the candidate was convicted earlier. Since the said
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                           Page 18 of 32
appellant had failed to disclose details of his earlier conviction in

       Form No.2-A, his election was liable to be declared as void under
Section 102 (1)(ca)
. This Court however found that under provisions

       of
Section 38
and
52
of the Kerala Police Act, 1961, the conviction

       of the said appellant was for disobedience of the directions issued

       by a police officer. By observing that such offence could not be

       treated to be a substantive offence, it was observed that protest was

       a tool in hands of the society and therefore failure on the part of said

       petitioner to disclose his conviction for the offence consequent upon

       holding a ‘dharna’ in front of the Panchayat Office could not be taken

       as a ground for declaring an election to be void. It further observed

       that the
Kerala Police Act, 1961
was a successor legislation of

       certain police enactments of the colonial era, whose object was to

       scuttle the democratic aspirations of the indigenous population.

       Accordingly, this Court held that the High Court was not correct in

       declaring the election of the said petitioner to be void on the ground

       that he had failed to disclose to in Form No.2-A of his conviction

       which amounted to undue influence on the free exercise of the

       electoral right.
17.     We may note that in the aforesaid decision, the requirement

       was to furnish information with regard to involvement in a criminal
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                           Page 19 of 32
case as required by
Section 52(1A)
of the Kerala Panchayat Raj Act,

       1994. Further the said appellant on his conviction was merely

       sentenced to fine of Rs.200/- for the offence under
Section 38
read

       with
Section 52
of the Kerala Police Act, 1961. There was no

       sentence of imprisonment.
In the present case, the petitioner after her conviction was

       sentenced to an imprisonment for a period of one year. The affidavit

       required to be filed under Rule 24-A (1) of the Rules of 1994

       specifically requires furnishing of details as regards any sentence of

       imprisonment for a period of one year or more. The statutory

       requirement in the present case is thus distinct from the

       requirements in
Ravi Namboothiri
(supra) which makes
the said

       decision
distinguishable.
18.
In
Karikho Kri
(supra), the successful candidate in the

       assembly elections was found to have not disclosed in his affidavit

       details with regard to ownership of vehicles, failure to submit no

       dues certificate with regard to electricity charges and municipal

       dues. His election was declared to be void under
Section 100

       (1)(d)(i)
of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. While

       considering the challenge to the judgment of the High Court, this

       Court found that the vehicles in question had either been gifted or
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                         Page 20 of 32
sold by the appellant prior to filing of his nomination and hence the

       said vehicles could not be considered to be owned by his family

       members. It was further found that the said appellant had disclosed

       the value of his assets which included the value of the vehicles in

       question. It was then found that what was not disclosed by the

       appellant was not of a substantial nature so as to impact his

       candidature or the result of the election. In fact, a finding was

       recorded that there were no actual outstanding dues payable by the

       appellant and hence there was no defect whatsoever so as to render

       the acceptance of his nomination form to be improper. Additionally,

       it was found that though the election of the appellant had been

       invalidated under
Section 100(1)(d)(iv)
of the Representation of the

       People Act, 1951, it had not been shown as to how the result of the

       election had been materially affected by the acceptance of his

       nomination form. On these counts, the judgment of the High Court

       was set aside and the election of the said appellant was found to be

       valid.
The aforesaid facts are sufficient to distinguish
the said

       decision
in the wake of the undisputed facts of the present case. The

       petitioner herein having been convicted and sentenced to

       imprisonment for a period of one year which fact was not disclosed
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                        Page 21 of 32
in the affidavit filed along with the nomination form is sufficient to

       hold that the ratio of the aforesaid decision cannot be applied to the

       present case.
19.     It is now necessary to deal with the contention raised on behalf

       of the petitioner that notwithstanding her conviction, the same was

       not for committing a serious offence or one touching upon moral

       turpitude. The conviction being under
Section 138
of the Act of 1881,

       the petitioner was not liable to be unseated for her conviction for a

       minor offence.
We are unable to accept this contention which seeks to dilute

       the fact of non-disclosure of the petitioner’s conviction in the

       nomination form. Rule 24A-(1) requires a candidate to disclose any

       order of conviction suffered by him by filing an affidavit along with

       the relevant information before the Returning Officer. The format of

       the affidavit prescribed under the Rules of 1994 requires a

       disclosure as regards conviction and sentence of imprisonment for

       a duration of one year and more. The validity of Rule 24-A(1) of the

       Rules of 1994 has not been subjected to any challenge. It would

       therefore have to be treated as valid. Its compliance has been made

       mandatory as failure to furnish such information along with an

       affidavit as prescribed visits a candidate with the consequence of
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                           Page 22 of 32
non-compliance of the provisions of the Rules of 1994. This in turn

       is a ground to challenge the election of the returned candidate. In

       absence of any provision in the Rules of 1994 that would enable the

       Court to condone such non-compliance or exempt its compliance on

       the ground that the conviction was for a non-serious offence or one

       not involving moral turpitude, adopting such course as urged would

       do violence to the Act of 1961 and the Rules of 1994.
20.     At this stage, we may refer to the decision of this Court in

       Krishnamoorthy (supra) wherein this Court considered the effect

       of non-disclosure of criminal cases in respect of serious offences

       including those involving moral turpitude. After noting that the right

       to contest an election was neither a fundamental right nor a common

       law right, it was observed as under:
“The controversy which has emanated in this case is
              whether non-furnishing of the information while filing an
              affidavit pertaining to criminal cases, especially cases
              involving heinous or serious crimes or relating to corruption
              or moral turpitude would tantamount to corrupt practice,
              regard being had to the concept of undue influence”.
       It was thereafter concluded in paragraph 86 as under:
“In view of the above, we would like to sum up our
              conclusions:
(a) Disclosure of criminal antecedents of a
                  candidate, especially, pertaining to heinous or
                  serious offence or offences relating to corruption
                  or moral turpitude at the time of filing of nomination
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                             Page 23 of 32
paper as mandated by law is a categorical
                   imperative.
(b) When there is non-disclosure of the offences
                  pertaining to the areas mentioned in the preceding
                  clause, it creates an impediment in the free
                  exercise of electoral right.
(c) Concealment or suppression of this nature
                  deprives the voters to make an informed and
                  advised choice as a consequence of which it
                  would come within the compartment of direct or
                  indirect interference or attempt to interfere with the
                  free exercise of the right to vote by the electorate,
                  on the part of the candidate.
(d) As the candidate has the special knowledge of the
                  pending cases where cognizance has been taken
                  or charges have been framed and there is a non-
disclosure on his part, it would amount to undue
                  influence and, therefore, the election is to be
                  declared null and void by the Election Tribunal
                  under Section 100(1)(b) of the 1951 Act.
(e) The question whether it materially affects the
                  election or not will not arise in a case of this
                  nature.”

               This Court was concerned with the suppression of various

       cases of embezzlement by the concerned candidate in his

       nomination form. The reference to heinous or serious offences or

       offences relating to corruption or moral turpitude would have to be

       seen in that factual backdrop. This Court was not dealing with an

       offence that was not heinous or not involving moral turpitude. It is

       therefore not the ratio of Krishnamoorthy (supra) that disclosure

       only of serious and heinous offences is mandated and that failure to
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                             Page 24 of 32
disclose conviction for a minor or non-serious offence could be

       condoned, as a principle.
We may however clarify that ultimately it is a matter of

       exercise of judicial discretion in the given facts of the case, as was

       exercised in
Ravi Namboothiri
(supra), as to whether such non-

       disclosure is fatal or not.
Hence, the decision in Krishnamoorthy

       (supra) cannot be the basis to hold that non-disclosure of conviction

       in case of a minor offence was always intended to be condoned and

       not viewed seriously.
21.     The plea raised by the petitioner that her election could not be

       set aside in the absence of it being proved that the result of the

       election had been materially affected on account of the improper

       acceptance of her nomination form need not detain us. Once it is

       found that there has been non-disclosure of a previous conviction

       by a candidate, it creates an impediment in the free exercise of

       electoral right by a voter. A voter is thus deprived of making an

       informed        and   advised   choice.   It   would   be   a     case    of

       suppression/non-disclosure by such candidate, which renders the

       election void.
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                               Page 25 of 32
22.
In this regard, we may refer to the decision in
Kisan Shankar

         Kathore vs. Arun Dattatray Sawant & Others6
. Therein the

         election of the returned candidate to the Legislative Assembly was

         challenged by a voter from the constituency on the ground that the

         nomination form of the returned candidate had been improperly

         accepted by the Returning Officer and that the election was void due

         to non-compliance of the provisions of the
Representation of the

         People Act, 1951
. There were in all five candidates in the fray. In the

         election petition, the High Court held that the returned candidate

         failed to make material disclosures in the affidavit filed along with

         the nomination form and hence the nomination form was improperly

         accepted by the Returning Officer. It further held that the result of

         the election was materially affected due to non-disclosure of

         relevant information. Accordingly, the election of the returned

         candidate was set aside. While considering the challenge to
the said

         judgment
, this Court noted that the aspect of non-disclosure of

         material information was an admitted fact.
Referring to the decisions

         in Association for Democratic Reforms (supra) and People’s

         Union for
Civil Liberties (PUCL) Vs. Union of India
and another7,

         it was held that if the required information as per the guidelines of
6
2014 INSC 384
7
2023 INSC 176
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                            Page 26 of 32
the Election Commission was not given, the same would amount to

       suppression/non-disclosure of relevant information. On the aspect

       of the result of the election being materially affected due to non-

       disclosure of such information, it was observed in paragraph 28 as

       under:-
“Issue No. 8 pertains to the question as to whether the
              election result was materially affected because of non-
              disclosure of the aforesaid information. The High Court
              took note of provisions of Section 100 (1)(d)(i) and (iv) and
              discussed the same. Thereafter, some judgments cited by
              the appellant were distinguished and deciding this issue
              against the appellant, the High Court concluded as under:
“137. In my opinion, it is not necessary to
                    elaborate on this matter beyond a point, except to
                    observe that when it is a case of improper
                    acceptance of nomination on account of invalid
                    affidavit or no affidavit filed therewith, which
                    affidavit is necessarily an integral part of the
                    nomination form; and when that challenge
                    concerns the returned candidate and if upheld, it
                    is not necessary for the Petitioner to further plead
                    or prove that the result of the returned candidate
                    has been materially affected by such improper
                    acceptance.
138. The avowed purpose of filing the affidavit is
                    to make truthful disclosure of all the relevant
                    matters regarding assets (movable and
                    immovable) and liabilities as well as criminal
                    actions (registered, pending or in respect of which
                    cognizance has been taken by the Court of
                    competent jurisdiction or in relation to conviction
                    in respect of specified offences). Those are
                    matters which are fundamental to the
                    accomplishment of free and fair election. It is the
                    fundamental right of the voters to be informed
                    about all matters in relation to such details for
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                             Page 27 of 32
electing candidate of their choice. Filing of
                     complete information and to make truthful
                     disclosure in respect of such matters is the duty
                     of the candidate who offers himself or who is
                     nominated for election to represent the voters
                     from that Constituency. As the candidate has to
                     disclose this information on affidavit, the
                     solemnity of affidavit cannot be allowed to be
                     ridiculed by the candidates by offering incomplete
                     information or suppressing material information,
                     resulting in disinformation and misinformation to
                     the voters. The sanctity of disclosure to be made
                     by the candidate flows from the constitutional
                     obligation.”
         Affirming the said finding, it was held in paragraph 38 as under:-
“…Once it is found that it was a case of improper
               acceptance, as there was misinformation or suppression of
               material information, one can state that question of
               rejection in such a case was only deferred to a later date.
               When the Court gives such a finding, which would have
               resulted in rejection, the effect would be same, namely,
               such a candidate was not entitled to contest and the
               election is void…”
23.
In
Sri Mairembam Prithviraj @ Prithviraj Singh Vs. Shri

         Pukhrem Sharatchandra Singh8
, two candidates were in the

         election fray. The returned candidate failed to submit any documents

         as regards his educational qualification alongwith the nomination

         form. The acceptance of his nomination form was accordingly

         challenged. The High Court held that the declaration made by the

         returned candidate as regards his educational qualification was

         false. The said finding was upheld by this Court.
On the question as
8
2016 INSC 1000
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                            Page 28 of 32
to whether the election of the returned candidate was materially

       affected due to such improper acceptance of the nomination form,

       reference was made to the decision in
Kisan Shankar Kathore
(supra). It was thereafter held in paragraph 23 as under:-
“23. Mere finding that there has been an improper
              acceptance of the nomination is not sufficient for a
              declaration that the election is void under Section 100 (1)
(d). There has to be further pleading and proof that the
              result of the election of the returned candidate was
              materially affected. But, there would be no necessity of any
              proof in the event of the nomination of a returned candidate
              being declared as having been improperly accepted,
              especially in a case where there are only two candidates in
              the fray. If the returned candidate’s nomination is declared
              to have been improperly accepted it would mean that he
              could not have contested the election and that the result of
              the election of the returned candidate was materially
              affected need not be proved further. We do not find
              substance in the submission of Mr. Giri that the judgment
              in Durai Muthuswami (supra) is not applicable to the facts
              of this case.”
               Though in the aforesaid case there were only two candidates

       who contested the elections, the principle that failure to disclose

       relevant information in the affidavit filed along with the nomination

       form amounted to non-disclosure of material information was

       accepted. That such wrongful acceptance of the nomination form of

       the returned candidate would result in the election being materially

       affected rendering it void was recognised as a consequence.
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                          Page 29 of 32
24.     Even     otherwise,   it   is   clear   from   the   decision   in

          Krishnamoorthy (supra) that non-furnishing information pertaining

          to criminal antecedents has the effect of causing undue influence

          which creates an impediment in the free exercise of electoral right

          by a voter. When there is such non-disclosure of criminal

          antecedents, this Court held in paragraph 86(e) that the question

          whether the election is materially affected or not would not arise in

          such a case.
It is thus clear that by failing to disclose her conviction under
Section 138
of the Act of 1881, the petitioner suppressed material

          information and thus failed to comply with the mandatory

          requirements of Rule 24-A(1) of the Rules of 1994. The acceptance

          of her nomination form has therefore been rightly held to be

          improper. She being the returned candidate, her election was

          rendered void. It is thus obvious that on account of such wrongful

          acceptance of her nomination form, the election was materially

          affected. This contention of the petitioner also fails.
25.     We may now indicate why discretion under
Article 136
of the

          Constitution of India does not deserve to be exercised in the present

          case. The Constitution Bench in
Pritam Singh vs. State9
while
9
1950 INSC 9
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                                Page 30 of 32
explaining the scope and powers of the Court under
Article 136
has

       held that:
“Generally speaking, this Court will not grant special leave,
             unless it is shown that exceptional and special
             circumstances exist, that substantial and grave injustice
             has been done and that the case in question presents
             features of sufficient gravity to warrant a review of the
             decision appealed against.”

             Having considered the entire matter, we are not persuaded to

       hold that the petitioner has made out an exceptional case for this

       Court to hold that notwithstanding the failure on the part of the

       petitioner to disclose her conviction leading to the sentence of

       imprisonment of one year, such lapse should be condoned. The

       information furnished in her affidavit filed under Rule 24-A(1) of the

       Rules of 1994 has been found to be incorrect and false. The

       petitioner rests on her subsequent acquittal in appeal, which event

       occurred after her election. She did not step into the witness box to

       explain her inadvertence, which is now sought to be put forward.
The plain reading of Rule 24-A(1) and its requirement does not

       admit of any doubt whatsoever. Moreover, both the Courts have

       concurrently found that the petitioner failed to disclose her

       conviction without any justifiable reason. In these facts therefore, no

       special or exceptional case has been made out by the petitioner for

       this Court to exercise jurisdiction under
Article 136
of the
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                          Page 31 of 32
Constitution of India. In the passing, we may observe that the

       petitioner had contested the bye election that had occasioned by her

       removal and she lost the same.
26.     For all the above reasons, the Special Leave Petition stands

       dismissed.
…………………………………………..J.
                                    [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]




                                                …..………………………..J.
                                                [ATUL S. CHANDURKAR]


       NEW DELHI,
       NOVEMBER 06, 2025.
SLP (C) No.12000 of 2025                                        Page 32 of 32