[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Rikhab Chand Jain vs Union Of India on 12 November, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Aravind Kumar
,
Dipankar Datta
REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 1337
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6719 OF 2012

        RIKHAB CHAND JAIN                                                       APPELLANT


                                                         VERSUS


        UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                                   RESPONDENTS


                                                     JUDGMENT
1.              This civil appeal, by special leave granted on 17th September, 2012,

                            impugns the judgment and order dated 14th March, 20111 of the High

                            Court of Judicature for Rajasthan, Bench at Jaipur2, whereby the

                            appellant’s writ petition3 came to be dismissed on the ground of omission

                            of the appellant to pursue the alternative remedy of appeal provided by

                            the Customs Act, 19624 as well as on merits.
2.              The facts leading to presentation of the writ petition before the High

                            Court are not in dispute. On 27th September, 1992, alleged smuggled

                            silver weighing 252.177 kgs came to be seized. By an order dated 7 th

                            May, 1996, the respondent no. 35 ordered confiscation of the seized silver

                            and levied penalty of Rs.50,000/- on the appellant. The said order was
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
JATINDER KAUR
Date: 2025.11.20
16:03:10 IST
Reason:
1
impugned order
2
High Court
3
D.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 6203 of 2009
4
1962 Act
5
Commissioner, Customs and Central Excise
2
carried in appeal6 by the appellant before the CEGAT7 under Section

         129A(1) of the 1962 Act. The CEGAT effectively dismissed the appeal by

         an order dated 23rd June, 2000. While it did not interfere with the order of

         confiscation, the amount of penalty was reduced to Rs.30,000/-.
3.   Despite availability of a further appeal to the High Court under
Section

         130
of the Customs Act, the order dated 23rd June, 2000 of dismissal of

         the appeal by the CEGAT was not challenged by the appellant within the

         prescribed period of limitation, i.e., 180 days. Instead, the appellant

         approached the High Court in its writ jurisdiction as late as on 18th March,

         2003. Therein, he laid a challenge to the order dated 7th May, 1996 of the

         respondent no.3 and the order dated 23rd June, 2000 of the CEGAT.
4.   Perusal of the impugned order reveals that the High Court did not

         examine the order of confiscation on its merits forming a view that such

         an order had not been challenged by the appellant before the CEGAT. The

         High Court held that since the appellant did not challenge the confiscation

         order before the CEGAT (but only challenged the order of penalty), the

         order of the CEGAT had attained finality. Therefore, the only remedy

         available to the appellant was to file an appeal under
Section 130A
of the

         Act, which he did not pursue. Thus, the High Court declined to invoke its

         writ jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution. One other reason

         was assigned by the High Court for holding that the appellant did not

         deserve relief. The High Court noted that the order dated 14th May, 2003

         of the criminal revisional court (the court of the Additional Sessions
6
Appeal No. C/225/96 NB
7
Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal
3
Judge), which set aside the Special Magistrate’s direction contained in an

     order dated 12th February, 2002 to return the seized silver, was never

     challenged by the appellant. In effect, when there was no order directing

     return of silver, the appellant could not have asked for the relief in a writ

     petition.
5.   We have heard Ms. Chitrangda Rastravara, learned counsel for the

     appellant and Mr. Raghavendra P. Shankar, learned Additional Solicitor

     General for the respondents at some length.
6.   Since the appellant has been told off at the gates by the High Court on

     the ground that he did not pursue the alternative remedy of appeal before

     the High Court under
Section 130
of the 1962 Act, what is central to our

     consideration is whether the High Court was justified in refusing to

     entertain the writ petition of the appellant seeking a writ of certiorari.
7.   Decisions of this Court are legion from which guidance can aptly be drawn

     as to when a writ petition ought to be entertained despite the party

     approaching the high court not exhausting the alternative statutory

     remedy available to him/her/it. Insistence by the courts – both this Court

     and the high courts – of exhaustion of a statutory remedy provided by an

     enactment before invoking the writ jurisdiction of a high court under
Article 226
of the Constitution can be traced to one of several self-

     imposed restrictions, laid down by judicial precedents of this Court.

     Unless, of course, any of the exceptions [challenge to an act/order

     grounded on (i) breach of a Fundamental Right; (ii) violation of natural

     justice principles; (iii) lack of jurisdiction; and (iv) unconstitutionality of a

     statute] is satisfied, that a writ court may refuse to entertain a writ
4
petition does not admit of any doubt.
This Court relying on a host of

         decisions including
State of Uttar Pradesh v. Md. Nooh8
and
Titaghur

         Paper Mills v. State of Orissa9
has, in
Godrej Sarah Lee v. Excise

         and Taxation Officer-cum-Assessing Authority10
, reiterated that

         availability of an alternative statutory remedy does not oust the

         jurisdiction of a writ court. It was also explained how “entertainability of a

         writ petition” is a concept distinct from the concept of “maintainability of

         a writ petition”.
8.   However, this particular appeal unfolds a fact situation which requires

         consideration of the issue from a different perspective. We wish to justify

         our conclusions by referring to two old-era Constitution Bench decisions

         of high authority, which have seemingly faded into obscurity but the

         significance and impact whereof have continued relevance even in

         present times.
9.   While deciding whether to entertain a petition under
Article 226
bearing

         in mind the precedents in the field, a writ court ought to additionally

         notice the forum designated by the statute for the litigant to approach.

         This is necessary because the alternative forum that is provided by the

         statute has to be one which can dispense speedy and efficacious relief.

         However, as in the present case, if the statutorily designated alternative

         forum happens to be the high court itself whose jurisdiction under
Article

         226
is invoked and not any ordinary statutory functionary/tribunal,

         refusal to entertain the petition should be the rule and entertaining it an
8
AIR 1958 SC 86
9
(1983) 2 SCC 433
10
2023 SCC OnLine SC 95
5
exception.
10.      We may profitably refer, in this context, to the Constitution Bench

         decision in
Thansingh Nathmal v. A. Mazid, Superintendent of

         Taxes11
.
In
Thansingh Nathmal
(supra), this Court had the occasion to

         lay down a principle of law which is salutary and not to be found in any

         other previous decision rendered by it. The principle, plainly, is that, if a

         remedy is available to a party before the high court in another

         jurisdiction, the writ jurisdiction should not normally be exercised on a

         petition under
Article 226
, for, that would allow the machinery set up by

         the concerned statute to be bye-passed. The relevant passage from the

         decision reads as follows:
"The jurisdiction of the High Court under
article 226
of the Constitution is
               couched in wide terms and the exercise thereof is not subject to any
               restrictions except the territorial restrictions which are expressly provided
               in the article. But the exercise of the jurisdiction is discretionary; it is not
               exercised merely because it is lawful to do so. The very amplitude of the
               jurisdiction demands that it will ordinarily be exercised subject to certain
               self-imposed limitations. Resort to that jurisdiction is not intended as an
               alternative remedy for relief which may be obtained in a suit or other
               mode prescribed by statute. Ordinarily the court will not entertain a
               petition for a writ under
article 226
, where the petitioner has an
               alternative remedy, which, without being unduly onerous, provides an
               equally efficacious remedy. Again the High Court does not generally enter
               upon a determination of questions which demand an elaborate
               examination of evidence to establish the right to enforce which the writ is
               claimed. The High Court does not therefore act as a court of appeal
               against the decision of a court or tribunal, to correct errors of fact, and
               does not by assuming jurisdiction under
article 226
trench upon an
               alternative remedy provided by statute for obtaining relief. Where it is
               open to the aggrieved petitioner to move another tribunal, or even itself in
               another jurisdiction for obtaining redress in the manner provided by a
               statute, the High Court normally will not permit, by entertaining a petition
               under
article 226
of the Constitution, the machinery created under the
               statute to be by-passed, and will leave the party applying to it to seek
               resort to the machinery so set up."
(emphasis ours)
11
AIR 1964 SC 1419
6
11.      Since the appellant had a remedy by way of a reference before the High

         Court against the order dated 23rd June, 2000 of the CEGAT, we do not

         consider refusal to exercise discretion in favour of the appellant to be so

         fundamentally incorrect that interference is warranted.
12.      That apart, the majority view in a previous Constitution Bench in
A. V

         Venkateswaran, Collector of Customs, Bombay v. Ramchand

         Sobhraj Wadhwani12
reads thus:
“14. ..., we must express our dissent from the reasoning by which the
               learned Judges of the High Court held that the writ petitioner was
               absolved from the normal obligation to exhaust his statutory remedies
               before invoking the jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article 226
of the
               Constitution. If a petitioner has disabled himself from availing himself of
               the statutory remedy by his own fault in not doing so within the
               prescribed time, he cannot certainly be permitted to urge that as a ground
               for the Court dealing with his petition under
Article 226
to exercise its
               discretion in his favour.
Indeed, the second passage extracted from the
               judgment of the learned C.J. in
Mohammed Nooh
case with its reference
               to the right to appeal being lost ‘through no fault of his own’ emphasizes
               this aspect of the Rule.”
                                                                           (emphasis ours)

         In essence, this Court was of the opinion that once a petitioner has due to

         his own fault disabled himself from availing a statutory remedy, the

         discretionary remedy under
Article 226
may not be available.
13.      Although there is no period of limitation for invoking the writ jurisdiction

         of a High Court under
Article 226
, all that the courts insist is invocation of

         its jurisdiction with utmost expedition and, at any rate, within a

         “reasonable period”. What would constitute “reasonable period” cannot be

         put in a straight-jacket, and it must invariably depend on the facts and

         circumstances of each particular case. Nonetheless, the period of

         limitation prescribed by an enactment for availing the alternative remedy
12
AIR 1961 SC 1506
7
provided thereunder in certain cases does provide indication as to what

         should be the “reasonable period” within which the writ jurisdiction has to

         be invoked.
14.      In the present case, the order of the CEGAT was subjected to challenge

         by the appellant well after the prescribed period of limitation for seeking a

         reference by making an application under
Section 130A
of the 1962 Act

         (as it then existed). Although, an explanation was sought to be given by

         the appellant why the writ jurisdiction could not be invoked earlier, we

         are not impressed. The belated invocation of the writ jurisdiction of the

         High Court could not have been justified by the appellant by taking the

         plea of pursuing remedy elsewhere. Even otherwise, such an explanation

         could well have been offered in an application seeking condonation of

         delay in presentation of the application under
Section 130A
of the 1962

         Act before the High Court. We have not found any provision in the 1962

         Act which either expressly or by necessary implication excluded the

         provisions of Sections 4 to 24 of the Limitation Act, 196313. As such, in

         terms of
Section 29(2)
of the 1963 Act, the High Court in its reference

         jurisdiction could have well been approached with a request to condone

         the delay in presentation of the application under
Section 130A
of the

         1962 Act.
15.      In our considered opinion, the appellant having had a remedy before the

         High Court in a separate jurisdiction which was equally efficacious, he

         indulged in the (mis)adventure of invoking its writ jurisdiction which was

         rightly not entertained.
13
1963 Act
8
16.   We have also noticed that the High Court dismissed the writ petition as

      one being devoid of merits. It was noted by the High Court that the

      CEGAT reduced the quantum of penalty, while observing that the

      confiscation was not under challenge before it. Ms. Rastravara invites our

      attention to the memo of appeal that came to be filed before the CEGAT

      against the order of confiscation dated 7th May, 1996 to buttress her

      contention that the order of confiscation was also under challenge. She is

      right; the confiscation order indeed was under challenge in the appeal

      before the CEGAT. However, we do not find appropriate pleadings in the

      writ petition to the effect that the point of invalidity in confiscating the

      seized silver was duly raised before the CEGAT but had not been

      considered by it. Merely urging a ground, under the heading ‘GROUNDS’,

      which is in the nature of a submission before the High Court without

      anyone (having full knowledge of the proceedings before the CEGAT and

      knowing precisely the points raised) taking responsibility of making a

      statement on oath by verifying it as true to his knowledge that a point

      was raised but not dealt with, would not be sufficient to persuade us to

      entertain any grievance on this score. Drawing from our judicial

      experience, we may observe that not all points raised or grounds urged in

      a petition are advanced in course of hearing. In order to have the court

      examine the objection of non-consideration raised as well as to succeed,

      there has to be a direct challenge that the authority whose order is being

      questioned did not deal with the point/ground much to the detriment of

      the party raising it. The writ petition lacked the basic pleadings and

      hence, the High Court did not fall in error in dismissing it even on merits.
9
17.   We, therefore, uphold the impugned order of the High Court and dismiss

      the appeal.
……….............................J.
                                                   [DIPANKAR DATTA]




                                                ……….............................J.
                                                     [ARAVIND KUMAR]
New Delhi;
November 12, 2025.