[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Livein Aqua Solutions Private Limited vs Hdfc Bank Limited on 24 November, 2025
Reportable
2025 INSC 1349
                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11766 OF 2025


             Livein Aqua Solutions Private Limited                                    … Appellant


                                                           versus


             HDFC Bank Limited                                                       … Respondent


                                                       JUDGMENT
SANJAY KUMAR, J
1.             The short issue that arises for consideration in this appeal is whether

             an application under Section 7 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,

             2016 1, verified on 26.07.2023 but supported by an affidavit deposed to on

             17.07.2023 would be liable to be rejected at the threshold on that ground.
2.             The National Company Law Tribunal, Ahmedabad Bench 2, opined

             so and non-suited the respondent-bank, vide order dated 18.06.2024

             passed in C.P.(IB)/97(AHM)2024, its petition filed under Section 7 of the

             IBC            against      the     appellant-company3.   Disgruntled   therewith,   the

             respondent-bank filed an appeal in Comp. App. (AT) (Ins) No. 1534 of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
babita pandey
Date: 2025.11.24
15:02:00 IST
Reason:
1              For short, ‘the IBC
             2              For short, ‘the NCLT’
             3              For short, ‘the company’
1
2024 before the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal, Principal

Bench, New Delhi4. By order dated 27.08.2025, the NCLAT allowed the

appeal and restored C.P.(IB)/97(AHM)2024 to its original number. The

matter was remanded to be decided on merits and in accordance with law.

Aggrieved thereby, the company is in appeal under Section 62 of the IBC.
3.    As only the ambit and effect of the aforestated procedural aspect

needs to be addressed and we are not concerned with the merits of the

matter, we need not advert to the facts in extenso. Suffice it to state that

the company availed a loan facility from the respondent-bank to the tune

of ₹5.5 crores and the same came to be classified as a non-performing

asset on 04.08.2019. Ultimately, the respondent-bank filed an application

under Section 7 of the IBC. This application was filed in Form 1 appended

to the Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Application to Adjudicating Authority)

Rules, 2016, in consonance with Rule 4(1) therein, titled ‘Application by

financial creditor’. Rule 4(1) requires a financial creditor, either by itself or

jointly, to make the application for initiating the corporate insolvency

resolution process against a corporate debtor under Section 7 of the IBC

in Form 1, accompanied with documents and records required therein and

as specified in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Insolvency

Resolution Process for Corporate Persons) Regulations, 2016.



4     For short, ‘the NCLAT’
2
4.    Significantly, neither Rule 4(1) nor Form 1 requires the said

application to be supported by an affidavit. It is Rule 34(4) of the National

Company Law Tribunal Rules, 2016 5, that prescribes that every petition

or application made before the National Company Law Tribunal shall be

verified by an affidavit in Form No. NCLT.6. It would be apposite, at this

stage, to note the scheme of the NCLT Rules to the extent relevant for our

purposes. Part-III of the NCLT Rules is titled ‘Institution of proceedings,

petition, appeals etc.’ Rule 20 to Rule 27 therein set out the procedural

norms to be followed in every appeal or petition or application, amongst

others, to be filed before the National Company Law Tribunal.
5.    Rule 28 therein pertains to the scrutiny of the petition or appeal or

document. Rule 28(1) states to the effect that the person in charge of the

filing counter shall assign a diary number upon receipt of the petition or

appeal or application; enter the particulars of what has been filed in the

Register and, thereafter, cause it to be sent for scrutiny. Rule 28(2)

provides that, if the appeal or petition or application is found to be

defective on such scrutiny, the same shall, after notice to the party, be

returned for compliance and if there is a failure to comply within seven

days from the date of return, the same shall be placed before the Registrar

who may pass appropriate orders. Rule 28(3) states that the Registrar



5     For short, ‘the NCLT Rules’
3
may, for sufficient cause, return the said document for rectification to the

party filing the same and, for this purpose, he may allow such party such

reasonable time as he may consider necessary or extend the time for

compliance. Rule 28(4) states that if the party fails to take steps for the

removal of the defect within the time fixed for the same, the Registrar may,

for reasons to be recorded in writing, decline to register the pleading or

document. Part-IV of the NCLT Rules is titled ‘General procedure’ and

comprises Rules 34 to 59. Rule 34(4) reads as follows:
‘34. General Procedure. –
         (1) to (3)……
         (4) Every petition or application including interlocutory application shall
             be verified by an affidavit in Form No. NCLT.6. …….’
6.    Notably, Section 7(5)(b) of the IBC also provides that if an

application for initiation of corporate insolvency resolution process by a

financial creditor made under Section 7(2) thereof is found to be

incomplete, the National Company Law Tribunal may, by order, reject such

application. However, the proviso thereto states that the National

Company Law Tribunal shall, before rejecting the application under

Section 7(5)(b), give a notice to the applicant to rectify the defect in his

application within seven days of the receipt of such notice.
7.    In the case on hand, the scrutiny section of the NCLT conveyed the

defects/objections in the filing of petitions/applications, including the

application of the respondent-bank, but as the same were not
4
removed/rectified, the Joint Registrar issued Notice dated 10.10.2023 in

respect of 26 petitions/applications, including the application of the

respondent-bank, calling upon all concerned to remove the defects within

seven days failing which suitable orders would be passed under Rule

28(3) of the NCLT Rules. However, the respondent-bank failed to refile the

application after removing the defects, leading to the Joint Registrar of the

NCLT refusing to register the application, vide order dated 18.10.2023.
8.    Aggrieved by the said order, the respondent-bank filed Appeal No.

4 of 2024 under Rule 63 of the NCLT Rules. Rule 63 provides that any

person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar in the context of the

scrutiny of the petition/application, as provided in Part-III and elsewhere

in the Rules, may file an appeal against such order to the President of the

Principal Bench and at other places, to a Member of the Bench designated

by the President and the decision on the said appeal shall be final. The

respondent-bank’s appeal was allowed by the NCLT on 08.02.2024.

Thereby, the order dated 18.10.2023, passed by the Registrar of the NCLT

was set aside and another opportunity was given to the respondent-bank

to remove the defects within seven days, subject to payment of costs.
9.    Aggrieved by this order, the company preferred CA (AT) (Ins) Nos.

770-771 of 2024 before the NCLAT. These appeals were, however,

dismissed as infructuous on 15.07.2024. This was obviously due to the

fact that the application filed by the respondent-bank under Section 7 of
5
the IBC came to be rejected on 18.06.2024 as the defects therein

remained unattended to, despite the order dated 08.02.2024.
10.   Aggrieved by the rejection of its application under the order dated

18.06.2024, the respondent-bank filed an appeal before the NCLAT.

Therein, while conceding that its application was defective, the

respondent-bank contended that the defect was curable by filing of a

better affidavit in support of the application. Countering this argument, the

company contended that the very filing of the application by the

respondent-bank was non est as it was not in keeping with Rule 10(1) of

the NCLT Rules. Rule 10(1) states to the effect that, till such time the rules

of procedure for conduct of proceedings under the IBC were notified, an

application under Section 7 of the IBC should be filed in accordance with

Rules 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 and 26 in Part-III of the NCLT Rules.
11.   The NCLAT noted that the proviso to Section 7(5)(b) of the IBC was

not adhered to by the NCLT and held that, in the light of the law laid down

by this Court in
Dena Bank (now Bank of Baroda) vs. C. Shivakumar

Reddy and another
6, the rejection of the application filed by the

respondent-bank could not be sustained. In that regard, the NCLAT held

that when an application is filed with a defective affidavit it would not be

non est on that ground as the defect can be cured. However, having said



6     (2021) 10 SCC 330
6
so, the NCLAT chose to restore the company petition straightaway and

remanded the matter to the NCLT for decision on merits, without requiring

the defective affidavit to be cured.
12.     Aggrieved thereby, the company is in appeal before us. By order

dated     15.09.2025,    this   Court       stayed   further   proceedings   in

C.P.(IB)/97(AHM)2024 on the file of the NCLT.
13.     Admittedly, no notice was given to the respondent-bank under the

proviso to Section 7(5)(b) of the IBC. The notice dated 10.10.2023 was a

consolidated notice issued by the Joint Registrar of the NCLT in relation

to 26 petitions/applications, calling upon all concerned to take notice and

to remove the defects therein within a period of seven days, failing which

all such cases would be dealt with under Rule 28(3) of the NCLT Rules.

This notice was put up on the NCLT’s website as well as the notice

board/cause list of the NCLT. The respondents-bank’s application under

Section 7 of the IBC found mention at Serial No. 6 of the tabulated

statement giving the details of 26 defective petitions/applications.
14.     Similarly, the order dated 18.10.2023 passed by the Joint Registrar

of the NCLT was in relation to 42 defective petitions/applications. Stating

that sufficient time had been granted to all concerned to rectify/remove

the defects, the Joint Registrar exercised power under Rule 28(4) of the

NCLT Rules and declined to register the petitions/applications set out in

Annexure A, excepting those matters in which compliance by way of
7
removal of defects had been made. The respondent-bank’s application

found mention at Serial No. 6 in Annexure A. This order was also put up

on the NCLT’s website and the notice board/cause list of the NCLT.
15.   There was no mention either in the notice dated 10.09.2023 or the

order dated 18.10.2023 of the proviso to Section 7(5)(b) of the IBC.

Pertinently, the proviso to Section 7(5)(b) of the IBC requires the notice

thereunder to be given to the applicant itself to rectify the defect in the

application within seven days of the receipt of such notice. In this regard,

Rule 38 of the NCLT Rules, titled ‘Service of notices and processes’

assumes significance as Rule 38(5) therein provides that notice or

process may also be served on an authorised representative of the

applicant or the respondent, as the case may be, in any proceeding or on

any person authorised to accept a notice or a process, and such service

on the authorised representative shall be deemed to be proper service.

Rule 38(5), thus, permits service of notice on the authorized

representative of the applicant or the respondent, as the case may be.
16.
In
Dena Bank
(supra), this Court had observed as under:
‘91. Furthermore, the proviso to Section 7(5)(b) IBC obliges the
         adjudicating authority to give notice to an applicant, to rectify the defect
         in its application within seven days of receipt of such notice from the
         adjudicating authority, before rejecting its application under clause (b)
         of sub-section (5) of Section 7 IBC. When the adjudicating authority
         calls upon the applicant to cure some defects that defect has to be
         rectified within seven days. There is no penalty prescribed for inability
8
to cure the defects in an application within seven days from the date of
         receipt of notice, and in an appropriate case, the adjudicating authority
         may accept the cured application, even after expiry of seven days, for
         the ends of justice.’


      Therefore, issuance of a notice to an authorized representative of

the respondent-bank was not enough to satisfy the mandate of the proviso

to Section 7(5)(b) of the IBC. The IBC, being the substantive legislation

relating to the application filed by the respondent-bank under Section 7

thereof, the notice to cure the defects therein necessarily had to be given

under the said provision and compliance with the Rules, independently

framed for the National Company Law Tribunal, was not sufficient.
17.   Further, we are not persuaded to accept the argument of the learned

senior counsel for the company that the defective affidavit filed in support

of the respondent-bank’s application under Section 7 of the IBC was

sufficient to hold the application itself liable to be rejected on the ground

of being non est. Perusal of the objection raised by the company itself, in

para 4 of its additional affidavit dated 02.04.2024 filed before the NCLT,

indicates that it had stated that the petition deserved to be dismissed as

‘defective’ and not on the ground that it was ‘non est’. This argument was,

however, advanced before the NCLAT and, once again, before us. Mere

filing of a ‘defective’ affidavit in support of an application would, however,

not render the very application non est and liable to be rejected on that

ground as it is neither an incurable nor a fundamental defect.
9
18.   As pointed out by this Court in
Vidyawati Gupta and others vs.

Bhakti Hari Nayak
and others7, rules of procedure are made to further

the cause of justice and not to prove a hindrance thereto.
Again, in
Uday

Shankar Triyar vs. Ram Kalewar Prasad Singh and another
8, this

Court pointed out that non-compliance with any procedural requirement

relating to an application for relief should not entail automatic dismissal or

rejection, unless the relevant statute or rule so mandates, and procedural

defects and irregularities which are curable should not be allowed to

defeat substantive rights or to cause injustice. It was further pointed out

that procedure, a handmaiden to justice, should never be made a tool to

deny justice or perpetuate injustice, by any oppressive or punitive use.
19.   On the above analysis, we are of the opinion that, even though the

Registry of the NCLT issued process under Rule 28 of the NCLT Rules,

the same was insufficient as there was no communication of a notice

under the proviso to Section 7(5)(b) of the IBC at any time. We, therefore,

find no error having been committed by the NCLAT in holding to this effect.

However, the NCLAT ought to have asked the respondent-bank to cure

the defective affidavit at least at that stage instead of ignoring the same

and directing the NCLT to proceed to hear the company petition on merits

and in accordance with law. To that extent, the NCLAT was in error.



7     (2006) 2 SCC 777
8     (2006) 1 SCC 75
10
20.   The appeal is accordingly disposed of directing the respondent-

bank to cure the defects in C.P.(IB)/97(AHM)2024, including the defective

affidavit, within seven days from today, and the National Company Law

Tribunal, Ahmedabad Bench, shall thereupon take up the matter for

hearing in accordance with law and due procedure.
Parties shall bear their respective costs.
……………………...J
                                                    [SANJAY KUMAR]




                                                   .……………………...J
                                                     [ALOK ARADHE]


New Delhi;
November 24, 2025.
11