[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
M/S. Boorugu Nagaiah Rajanna Rep. By Its ... vs Joint Family Of Masetty Venkanna And ... on 31 October, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 9
Author:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
Bench:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           

Second Appeal No.1192 of 1999  

31-10-2017 

M/s. Boorugu Nagaiah Rajanna Rep. by its Partner Boorugu Surya Prakash Rao.... Appellant 

Joint family of Masetty Venkanna and sons Rep. by its Karta and Manager Masetty Venkateswara Rao and others.Respondents     

Counsel for Appellant   : Sri V. Hari Haran

Counsel for Respondent Nos.3 and 4: Sri G.S.Krishna Prabhu 
 Counsel for Respondent Nos.1 and 2:        

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
(1)      1962 ALT Pg.210 
(2)      2006(3) ALD 62 
(3)      1972 (2) ALT 149
(4)      1958 (1) An.W.R 415 = LAWS (APH) 1958 (1) Pg.16   


HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO             

SECOND APPEAL No.1192 of 1999      

JUDGMENT:
This Second Appeal is preferred by the appellant/plaintiff
aggrieved by the judgment and decree dated 19.03.1999 in A.S.No.39 of
1994 passed by the I Additional Chief Judge, City Civil Court,
Secunderabad confirming the judgment and decree dated 31.12.1993 in  
O.S.No.1656 of 1983 passed by the III Additional Judge, City Civil
Court, Secunderabad.
2)      The facts in nutshell are thus:
a)      The case of the plaintifffirm is that theirs is a partnership firm
registered under the
Indian Partnership Act
; defendants for the purpose
of their business borrowing money from it from time to time and
making payments by opening Katha (account) in the name of 
defendants firm; the further case of the plaintiff is that after giving
credit to all the payments made by the defendants from time to time still
a sum of Rs.25,826.15 ps. was due and payable upto 04.11.1983. 
Hence, the suit.
b)      Defendants filed written statement denying the plaint allegations.
They contended that plaintifffirm is not a registered partnership firm;
originally Masetti Venkanna started metal business about 70 or 80
years ago as joint family business; subsequently the same was
converted into Masetty Venkanna and sons; Venkanna died in 1939;  
after his death Masetti Hanumaiah Gupta took charge and he also died
in 1960; thereafter, D1 became the head of the joint family business and
joint family ceased to exist and partnership firm of M/s.Swastic Metal
Products was formed on 16.11.1978 with D2 and his two sons as  
partners; originally plaintifffirm was a joint family under the name
and style B.N.Rajanna and it is not known when the said joint family
business became partnership firm and how it came into existence and
they were not informed about the said change; the plea of defendants is
that plaintifffirm has not complied with the provisions of
Money
Lenders Act
; the interest claimed by plaintiff is highly exorbitant. They
thus prayed to dismiss the suit.
c)      Plaintifffirm filed rejoinder stating that in view of close
relationship between the parties, it has advanced money to the
defendants for their business purpose; the accounts were prepared from
time to time and defendants used to acknowledge the same in their
books of accounts; as the suit transactions are between the close
relatives and traders, the provisions of Hyderabad Money Lenders Act
are not applicable; they denied the fact that interest charged by them
was arbitrary. Thus, they prayed to decree the suit.
d)      Basing on the above pleadings, the trial Court framed the
following issues:
1.      Whether the plaintiff is a registered firm?
2.      Whether the joint family of Masetti Venkanna and Son existed at
all at the time of the suit transaction commenced?
3.      To what amount is the plaintiff entitled from the defendant?
4.      Whether the plaintiff is entitled to claim any interest and if so at
what rate?
5.      Whether the suit is barred by limitation?
The following additional issue was framed.
Whether the plaintiff has complied with the provisions of
Money
Lenders Act
and if not what is the effect?
e)      During trial, PW1 was examined and Exs.A1 to A59 were  
marked on behalf of the plaintiff. On the other hand, DW1 was
examined but no documents were marked on behalf of defendants.
f)      On appreciation of facts and evidence, the trial Court dismissed
the suit on the observation that the plaintiff is a registered partnership
firm doing money lending business and it has not placed any cogent
evidence showing that suit transactions arose only between two traders
and therefore, the provisions of the
Money Lenders Act
were not
applicable and accordingly dismissed the suit.
g)      Aggrieved, the plaintiff filed A.S.No.39 of 1994 before the
Additional Chief Judge, City Civil Court, Secunderabad challenging the
Judgment of the trial Court. After hearing both sides, the First
Appellate Court dismissed the appeal confirming the judgment and
decree passed by the Trial Court.
Hence, the instant Second Appeal by plaintiff.
3)      While admitting the instant appeal, this Court framed the
following substantial questions of law:
1)      Whether the provisions of A.P. (Telangana Area) Money 
Lenders Act, 1349 Fasli are attracted to the suit loan
transaction particularly when both the plaintiffs and the
defendants are the traders?
2)      Whether said Act has retrospective operation?
3)      Whether the suit Khata to the extent to the entries of
which have been acknowledged by the defendants can be  
reopened?
4)      The parties in this second appeal are referred as they were
arrayed before the Trial Court.
5)      Heard arguments of Sri V.Hari Haran, learned counsel for
appellant and none appeared for respondents.
6 a)    Severely imputing the concurrent judgments of both the Courts
below holding that plaintiffs suit was hit by A.P. (Telangana Area)
Money Lenders Act, 1349 Fasli (for short the
Money Lenders Act
)
inasmuch as the plaintiff is a money lender within the purview of said
Act and he did not produce his money lending license issued under the
said Act for the period prior to 1960, though he was lending money to
defendant even prior to 1960, learned counsel for appellant would
argue that both the Courts below grossly erred in holding that Act
would apply to the suit transaction. He vehemently argued that it is for
the defendant to take a specific plea that plaintiff is a professional
money lender within the purview of the
Money Lenders Act
and that he
has not complied with the mandatory provisions of the said Act and
therefore, the suit transaction is hit by
Money Lenders Act
. Thus the
burden is on the defendant to establish his plea.  However, the
defendant has miserably failed to discharge his burden.  Regarding the
burden of proof he placed reliance on the following judgments:
1) Komravelli Vara Laxmi vs. Syed Kasim Hussain
2) B.Srikanth vs. Erukala Laxmi Suvarnamukhi
b)      He further argued that as per
Section 2(4)(g)
of the Money
Lenders Act, if the loan is advanced by one trader to another trader in
the ordinary course of business, the said loan transaction will not come
under the definition of loan and thereby the
Money Lenders Act
would have no application. Above all, a stray transaction of advancing
loan that too by one trader to another trader will not attract this Act.
On this proposition of law, he cited the decision reported in
Somanath
Baraman and others vs. Raja S.V.Jagannatha Rao
. He would argue,  
unfortunately the Courts below did not consider this aspect and
wrongly held as if the provisions of the
Money Lenders Act
would
apply to the suit transaction and dismissed the suit.
c)      Nextly, he argued that suit is filed within the period of limitation
and therefore, the said question does not arise. He thus prayed to allow
the appeal by setting aside the judgments of the Courts below and
decree the suit.
7)      Question No.2: A perusal of the
Money Lenders Act
does not 
show that it has any retrospective operation. This aspect has been dealt
with in a decision of this Court reported in
L.Rama Goud vs. Raja
Lakshmi Bai
, wherein it was held thus:
The Hyderabad Money-lenders Act came into operation on  
Shahrewar 15, 1349-F (July 21, 1940).  Obviously the provisions of
such a subsequent enactment cannot cover a litigation based on an
earlier transaction and also instituted earlier to the operation of the
Act.  We have examined the provisions of the aforesaid Act and we
find nothing in it to give its provisions such retrospective effect.
This point is answered accordingly.
8)      Question Nos.1 and 3: The main plank of the argument of
learned counsel for appellant/plaintiff as stated supra is that the
provisions of the
Money Lenders Act
have no application to the suit
transaction since the monies advanced by the plaintiff to defendant
from time to time were in the nature of an accommodation made by one 
trader to another trader but not a loan within the meaning of
Section
2(4)
of the said Act. Such an accommodative transactions are exempted 
from the purview of the loan under
Section 2(4)(g)
of the Money
Lenders Act. Further, the parties are relations and on that count also it
can be safely held that the monies adjusted by the plaintiff from time to
time were only accommodative in nature.  It is also argued that the
plaintiff is a merchant of gold and silver, whereas the defendant is doing
the bran business as per the admission of DW.1.  Therefore, the main
business of the plaintiff is not the money lending business and at best it
is only an additional business.  Therefore, the plaintiff would not come
under the definition of money lender as explained in
Section 2(7)
of
Money Lenders Act.  In that view of the matter, the observation of the
Courts below that the plaintiff is a money lender and the suit
transaction is a loan which has been in vogue even prior to 1960 and
that plaintiff had not filed his money lending license for the period prior
to 1960 and therefore, the suit is hit by
Money Lenders Act
is
erroneous.
9)      Though not specifically argued, in the Grounds of Appeal it was
mentioned that even assuming that plaintiff was a money lender and the
advances given by him were the loan within the purview of the
Money
Lenders Act
, still, it cannot be said, the suit transaction is hit by
Money
Lenders Act
.  It is because, DW1 in his evidence admitted that the loan
transaction between plaintiff and defendant had been in vogue for more
than 80 years i.e, the transaction commenced around 1913 AD.
Whereas the A.P. (Telangana Area) Money Lenders Act, 1349 Fasli  
came into force on 21.07.1940 and this Act has no retrospective
operation.  Therefore, the loan transaction which has been in vogue
long prior to the
Money Lenders Act
came into force will not come
within the mischief of the provisions of the
Money Lenders Act
.
10)     To appreciate the above arguments, it is apposite to note the
relevant provisions of the
Money Lenders Act
.  The Andhra Pradesh
(Telangana Area) Money Lenders Act, 1349 Fasli  passed by the 
erstwhile Hyderabad Government, came into operation on 15th 
Shahrewar, 1349 (21st July, 1940).
This Act
has no retrospective
operation as held in question No.2.
11)     The preamble of the
Money Lenders Act
says:
Whereas it is expedient to regulate the transactions of money
lending and to make better provision for its control.
Section 2(4)
defines loan, which reads thus:
loan means a loan secured or unsecured, advanced on interest in
cash or in kind, and shall include every transaction which is in
substance a loan, but shall not include the following:
(a) xx xx
(b) xx xx
(c) xx xx
(d) xx xx
(e) xx xx
(f) xx xx
(g) a loan advanced by one trader to another trader in the ordinary
course of business, in accordance with practice in trade;
Section 2(7)
defines money lender as follows:
Money-lender means a person including a pawnbroker, who, within 
the meaning of this Act, only advances loan in the ordinary course of
his business or does so along with other business, and shall also
include the legal representative of such person and the person
claiming to be his representative on the group of succession or
assignment or otherwise;
Section 3
provides for registration of money lenders.
Section 3(5)
reads:
(a)    No money-lender shall carry on in any district the business
of money-lending without obtaining a licence provided for in sub-
section(2).
(b)     If any person contravenes the provisions of Clause (a), he be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
six months or with fine or with both. The fine imposed shall, in case
of default be recoverable as arrears of land revenue.  The Collector
shall have power to award punishment under this clause.  An appeal
against his order shall lie to the Sessions Judge.
(c)     An offence under this sub-section shall be cognizable and
bailable.
Section 9 provides for procedure of Courts in suit for recovery of loan:
Section 9(2) reads thus:
(2)    if it is proved that the plaintiff is a money-lender as defined
in sub-section (7) of
Section 2
, but does not hold a licence granted
under
Section 3
, the Court shall dismiss his suit;
(2-A)   if it is proved that the money-lender has not complied with
the provisions of Clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
Section 5
, or of
sub-section (1) of
Section 6
, or of Section 8 and the plaintiffs claim
is established in whole or in part, the Court may, in the
circumstances of the case, disallow the whole or any portion of the
interest due and may disallow the cost wholly or in part.
12)     The above are some of the important provisions. Be that it may,
in Komravelli Vara Laxmi (1 supra) and
B. Srikanth
(2 supra), it was
held that the burden is on the defendant to establish that the plaintiff is
the professional money lender and he contravened the provisions of
Money Lenders Act
.  Now, it has to be seen whether the defendant
established the same and whether the suit transaction is hit by
Money
Lenders Act
.
a)      It is to be noted that the defendant by way of amendment of the
pleadings took the plea that the plaintiff is a money lender and he has
not complied with the provisions of the
Money Lenders Act
and
therefore, the suit is liable to be dismissed.  Plaintiff, it appears, filed
rejoinder stating that in view of the close relationship between the
parties and as they are traders, the plaintiff was advancing monies to
defendants firm for their business purpose. Coming to the proof,
plaintiff himself produced Exs.A.33 to A.54 money lending licences for
the years 1960 to 1981 and he was admittedly doing money lending 
business.  When he himself admitted as money lender and produced  
money lending licences, the defendant need not specifically prove this
fact.  Then, Exs.A.1 to A.28 would show the monies advanced by the 
plaintiff to defendant and repayments made by the defendant.
b)      In the light of Exs.A.1 to A.28 and Exs.A.33 to A.54, it has to be
seen whether plaintiff is a money lender and monies advanced by him
are loan within the purview of
Money Lenders Act
or not.  Basing on
the admission of defendant to the effect that the plaintiff was doing
business in gold and silver and the defendant firm was doing business
in bran, it is argued on behalf of the appellant that the plaintiff is not a
money lender within the meaning of
Section 2(7)
of the Money Lenders
Act.  However, this argument cannot be accepted. Going by the
definition of money lender, a person, who only advances loan in the
ordinary course of his business or doing so along with other business
can be called as a money lender.  Here, the plaintiff apart from doing
gold and silver business, is also doing money lending business as is
evident from Exs.A.33 to A.54money lending licences. Therefore, he 
squarely falls within the definition of money lender.  Then monies
advanced by him to defendant are concerned, no doubt
Section 2(4)(g)
of the Money Lenders Act says that loan advanced by one trader to
another trader in the ordinary course of his business shall not fall
within the ambit of definition of loan.  However, that exemption will
apply to the cases where one trader accommodates another trader by 
adjusting money out of business relations and to develop goodwill and
not out of doing money lending business. It is common knowledge that
in business circles, the merchants will mutually help each other by
adjusting amounts for their mutual necessities and the borrowers will
repay, generally without any interest or with a nominal interest.  This is
only an act of good gesture among themselves to maintain cordial
relation.  Such transactions are exempted from the purview of loan
within the meaning of the
Money Lenders Act
. That is not the situation
in the instant case.  The plaintiff has been lending monies over decades.
It is not a stray act either.  Though the defendant is stated to be his
relation, plaintiff has been collecting interest by maintaining records.
Thus, such transactions would fall within the definition of loan but do
not fall within the exception.
In view of this fact situation,
Somanath
Baramans
case (3 supra) has no application. Therefore, the Courts
below have rightly held that
Money Lenders Act
would apply to the
suit transactions. Admittedly, the loan transaction was going on
between them even prior to 1960. However, plaintiff produced his
money lending licences for the years 1960 to 1981 only.  Therefore, this
suit is hit by
Section 9(2)
of the Money Lenders Act since he had no
licence for the period prior to 1960.  Hence the suit is liable to be
dismissed.
c)      At this juncture, one more argument of the appellant has to be
mentioned.  Basing on the admission of DW.1 to the effect that the
money lending transaction was going on between them since more than  
80 years, it is contended in the grounds of appeal that as per the said
admission, the money lending business was continued from 1913 or so 
and A.P. (Telangana Area) Money Lenders Act, 1349 Fasli came into  
force w.e.f. 21.07.1940 and the said Act has no retrospective operation
and therefore, the suit transaction is not hit by the
Money Lenders Act
.
Even if the said admission of DW.1 is taken into consideration, still the
argument of the appellant cannot be accepted. By virtue of such
admission of DW.1, at best, the money lending transactions between 
the plaintiff and defendant for the period prior to 21.07.1940 will not
be hit by
Money Lenders Act
because the said Act was not in force by
then.  However, the transactions which took place from 21.07.1940
onwards till the filing of the suit will certainly come within the purview
of the
Money Lenders Act
.  Since plaintiff could not produce the money
lending licences for the period prior to 1960, as noted supra, the suit is
liable to be dismissed in terms of
Section 9(2)
of the Money Lenders
Act.
13)     Before parting, it should be mentioned that learned counsel for
appellant argued that suit was filed within time and hence the same was
not barred.  Both the Courts below held that the suit was filed within
the period of limitation. As such, the question of limitation does not
arise.
14)     In view of the above findings, there are no merits in this appeal
and the same is accordingly dismissed. No costs.
As a sequel, miscellaneous applications pending, if any, shall
stand closed.
_________________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 31.10.2017