[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Bendapudi Parvathamma And Others vs Ketaraju Nagabhushana Rao And Others on 10 July, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 83
Author:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
Bench:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           

A.S.No.2575 of 2000 

10-07-2017 

Bendapudi Parvathamma and others.. Appellants  

Ketaraju Nagabhushana Rao and others Respondents     

Counsel for Appellants  : Sri E.V.V.S.Ravi Kumar

Counsel for Respondent No.1 : Sri P.Vidya Sagar 

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
  AIR 1954 Supreme Court 526(1) 
2 AIR 1973 Andhra Pradesh 149 (V 60 C 43)  
3 2002(1) ALT 466 (D.B.)
4 (2014) 2 Supreme Court Cases 269  
5 (2006) 9 Supreme Court Cases 235  
6 2004 (4) ALT 286
7 (2014) 2 Supreme Court Cases 269  
8 (2006) 9 Supreme Court Cases 235  
9  2004 (4) ALT 286
10 (1970) 1 SCC 33 

HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO             

Appeal Suit No.2575 of 2000 

JUDGMENT:
Aggrieved by the dismissal of plaintiffs suit in O.S.No.81 of
1992 by the Senior Civil Judge, Bapatla in his judgment dated
29.04.2000, the instant appeal is preferred.
2)      The parties in the appeal are referred as they stood before the
trial Court.
3)      The factual matrix of the case is thus:
a)      The suitO.S.No.81 of 1992 was filed by plaintiff for
declaration of title and consequential possession of plaint A schedule
properties and other reliefs. Her case is that item No.1 of the plaint A
schedule property i.e, wet land admeasuring Ac.1-61 cents covered
by Sy.No.428/2 of Kondamudi village and item No.2 of the plaint A
schedule property i.e, house bearing Door Nos.417 to 420
(corresponding to earlier Door No.362 in Railpet), 5th block of
Ponnur Municipality admeasuring Ac.0-17 cents originally belonged
to her maternal grandfather i.e, Anumarlapudi Nagabhushana Rao. 
The plaintiffs grandfather had only one issue by name
Seetharavamma, who is the mother of plaintiff and 1st defendant. The
said Nagabhushana Rao executed a will dated 11.08.1919, during his 
lifetime in a sound and disposing state of mind bequeathing the
plaint A schedule property in favour of his only daughter i.e,
plaintiffs mother towards her pasupu kunkuma and thereafter he
died.  The plaintiffs mother came into possession of the plaint
schedule property and enjoyed it till her death in 1938 as Stridhana
property by which time the plaintiff was 3 years old and D.1 was 1
year old.
b)      The further case of plaintiff is that as per the Hindu Law of
Succession prevailing during 1938, the plaintiff alone succeeded to
the plaint A schedule property which is the Stridhana property of
her mother as her only her. They were brought up under the care and
guardianship of their father Ketharaju Narasimha Rao and their
father re-married again and they were all living in Item No.2 of plaint
A schedule house and their father was managing that property on
behalf of plaintiff by collecting rents and paying taxes and was
utilizing the rent amounts, for which plaintiff did not mind.
c)      The plaintiff got married to one Bendapudi Satyanarayana
Rao, who was resident of Upputur village and sometime thereafter
the plaintiffs father gave the copy of will dated 11.08.1919. Later,
plaintiff shifted from Upputur to Bapatla and D.1 also lived with
her. Plaintiff and D.1 used to visit their father who was at Nidubrolu
and some time thereafter D.1 started collecting rents etc., on behalf of
his father and pay taxes. Plaintiff contends that D.1 had no right or
title over plaint A schedule property and he was never in possession
of it. D.1 got married and started living separately by doing his own
business and he never cared his ailing father.
d)      The plaintiff further submits that on 05.12.1989, her father
executed a hand letter on a stamp paper admitting and confirming
her rights on plaint schedule property and few days thereafter i.e, on
07.12.1989, he executed a will reiterating the plaintiffs title and
possession to plaint A schedule properties apprehending the earlier
letter dt.05.12.1989 may not be sufficient to protect the rights of
plaintiff. On coming to know about the execution of the above two
documents, D.1 took his father on 08.12.1989 from Nidubrolu to
Bapatla on the pretext of his fathers medical checkup and brought
back him on 11.12.1989. Later their father died on 14.12.1989 and
sometime thereafter, D.1 clandestinely took away all the papers
including the will dt.11.08.1919. Plaintiff contended that all of a
sudden she received a registered notice dt.08.01.1990 from D.1 with
false averments as if the plaint A schedule property belongs to him
and he was in possession and enjoyment of the same; the D.2 was  
managing the item No.1 of the plaint schedule property; their father
Narasimha Rao executed an agreement on 10.12.1989 in his favour. 
The plaintiff issued a reply notice to D.1. The plaintiff further
contended that D.1 with the assistance of his supporters forcibly
took away the crop from item No.1 of plaint A schedule property,
which is a fertile land yielding two crops and the income was about
Rs.5000/- p.a and that the item No.2 of A schedule properties fetches
rents of Rs.3000/- p.a.
     Hence the suit.
e)      Defendants 3 to 9 remained ex parte.
f)      D.1 filed written statement and adopted by D2. While denying
plaint averments, it is pleaded that the suit schedule property is not
the Stridhana property of Seetharavamma and her father
Anamarlapudi Nagabhushana Rao never executed the alleged will  
dated 11.08.1919.  It is contended that the plaintiff was never in
possession and enjoyment of suit property and it was managed by 
their father for D.1 and after D.1 attaining majority, he took
possession of the property and enjoying the same.  The documents 
said to have been executed by their father on 05.12.1989 and
07.12.1989 were fabricated and they were not binding on D.1.  D.1
further contended that he being the only male descendant of entire
family, he acquired right and title to the plaint A schedule property
and that he was in exclusive possession of both the items of plaint A
schedule properties. He thus prayed to dismiss the suit.
g)      Basing on the above pleadings, the following issues were
framed for trial:
1)      Whether the suit A schedule properties are the Stridhana
properties of Late K.Sitharavamma, the mother of plaintiff and
1st defendant?
2)      Whether late Anamarlapudi Nagabhushana Rao, father of late 
K.Seetharavamma executed a will dated 11.08.1919 if so is it
binding on the 1st defendant?
3)      Whether late Ketharaju Narasimha Rao, father of plaintiff and
1st defendant executed a letter on a stamped paper on
05.12.1989 admitting the title and possession of the plaintiff in
the suit A schedule properties?
4)      Whether late Ketharaju Narasimha Rao has executed will 
dt.07.12.1989 confirming the title and possession of plaintiff in
the plaint A schedule properties? If so is it binding on the 1st
defendant?
5)      Whether late Ketharaju Narasimha Rao, executed a document   
dated 11.12.1989 accepting the title and possession in plaint A
schedule properties in the 1st defendant? If so is it binding on
the plaintiff?
6)      Whether the plaintiff is entitled for the declaration of her title
in the plaint A schedule properties and for possession?
7)      Whether the plaintiff is entitled for the past profits of Rs.5,000/-
for 1989-90 on item No.1 of plaint A schedule property from
D.1?
8)      Whether the plaintiff is entitled to past rents of Rs.1250/- from
D.3 to D.9 on plaint A schedule Item 2?
9)      Whether the plaintiff is entitled to future profits on plaint A
schedule properties? If so what amount?
10)     To what amount?  
h)      During trial, PWs.1 to 6 were examined and Exs.A.1 to A.22
were marked on behalf of plaintiff.  DWs.1 to 4 were examined and
Exs.B.1 to B.84 were marked on behalf of defendants.
i)      The trial Court dismissed the plaintiffs suit on the observation
that the plaintiff failed to prove that her maternal grandfather
executed a will dated 11.08.1919 and that the plaint A schedule
properties are the Stridhana properties of her mother late
Seetharavamma. The trial Court further observed the defendant too
failed to prove the execution of Ex.B80 by his father and therefore,
Ex.B.80 is not binding on the plaintiff and Exs.A.5 and A.6 are not
binding on D.1.
Hence the appeal by plaintiff/appellant.
4)      Pending appeal, the sole plaintiff and 1st respondent died.
Appellants 2 and 3 were brought on record as LRs of the deceased
sole appellant as per orders of this Court dated 01.07.2013 in
A.S.M.P.No.1356 of 2013 and respondents 10 to 14 were brought  
on record as LRs of 1st respondent as per orders of this Court  dated
07.03.2014 in A.S.M.P. No.121 of 2014.
5)      Heard arguments of Sri E.V.V.S.Ravi Kumar, learned counsel 
for appellants and Sri P.V.Vidya Sagar, learned counsel for
respondents.
6)      Impugning the judgment, learned counsel for appellant/plaintiff
would firstly argue that the trial Court wholly misunderstood the
facts and implication of the oral and documentary evidence placed in
support of the pleadings of the plaintiff and dismissed the suit on the
misconception that Exs.A.5 and A.6 were fabricated by plaintiff
though in fact they were only secondary documents, inasmuch as, 
they were produced only to show that they contain a reference about
the will dated 11.08.1919 executed by plaintiffs maternal
grandfather in favour of her mother-Seetharavamma.  He vehemently
argued that irrespective of the controversy as to whether Exs.A.5
and A.6 are genuine or fabricated, still the plaintiff could by other
cogent oral and documentary evidence establish that the suit schedule
property was the Stridhana property of her late mother and she
inherited the same.
In expatiation of his argument, he would submit, the suit
schedule property originally belonged to the maternal grandfather of
plaintiff namely A.Nagabhushana Rao and plaintiffs mother
Seetharavamma was his sole issue and he bequeathed the suit  
properties in her favour by way of a will dated 11.08.1919.  Learned
counsel emphasized, even in the absence of the will dated
11.08.1919, Seetharavamma being the sole heir of Nagabhushana  
Rao, would have succeeded the suit properties.  She was married to
Narasimha Rao and he was managing the suit properties on her 
behalf by leasing out the same to third parties which is evident from
Ex.A.3. While-so, she died in the year 1938 leaving behind the
plaintiff and D.1, who were infants by then. Plaintiffs father
continued to manage the suit properties. In Item No.2 himself,
plaintiff and D.1 were residing.  After the death of her mother in
1938, plaintiff being the daughter succeeded to the suit properties in
exclusion of her brother i.e, D.1 as per the law of succession in vogue
by then.  Therefore, the plaintiff is the absolute owner of the suit
properties.  The original will dated 11.08.1919 executed by
Nagabhushana Rao was with the plaintiffs father and he gave only a
copy of the said will to her.  The original will was snatched away by
D.1. Plaintiff could not produce the original will or its copy into the
Court.  However, he argued, non-production of the will dated
11.08.1919 would not adversely effect plaintiffs case because as
stated earlier, Seetharavamma was the sole issue of Nagabhushana 
Rao and thereby she succeeded her fathers property and from her,
the plaintiff succeeded. He thus vehemently argued, the non-fling of
the will dated 11.08.1919 and doubt about the veracity of Exs.A.5
and A.6 are inconsequential to decide plaintiffs right. The other
documents like Exs.A.1 to A.4, A.9, A.12 to A.22 will prove her
case, he argued. Unfortunately, the trial Court gave much emphasis
on the non-filing of the will and the controversy surrounding Exs.A.5
and A.6 and dismissed the suit.  He further submitted that the
defendant except claiming title, could not explain how he got the suit
property. The trial Court ought to have considered that aspect also
and held the property belonged to plaintiffs mother.  He thus prayed
to set aside the judgment of the trial Court and allow the appeal.
7)      Nextly, he would alternatively argue that if for any reason, this
Court come to conclusion that the plaintiff failed to establish that the
suit property was the Stridhana property of her mother, still by
virtue of the fact that suit property is the joint family property, a
partition decree may be granted in her favour for half share in the
suit property.  He would submit that when compared to the
declaratory relief for entire property, relief of partition for half share
is a lesser relief and therefore, the Court having regard to the facts
and circumstances of the case and in the interest of justice, can afford
such an alternative relief to plaintiff without the necessity of driving
her LRs (as she died pending appeal) to institute a separate suit for
partition at this length of time.  He placed reliance on the following
decisions to buttress his argument that the Court can grant partition
relief in the present suit under appeal:
i) Singaravel vs. Murugesa Udayar
(died) & others
ii) Pendyala Narasimham vs. Pendyala Venkata Narasimha Rao
iii) Hasmath Bee and another vs. Mrs. Khatija and others
.
8)      Per contra, while supporting the judgment learned counsel for
respondents Sri P.V.Vidya Sagar, would argue that the plaintiff
utterly failed to establish the suit property to be the Stridhana
property of her mother as she did not produce the original or copy of
the alleged will dated 11.08.1919 to show that her maternal
grandfather bequeathed the suit properties to her mother.  That
would indicate there was no such will in existence. She made a vain
attempt by fabricating Exs.A.5 and A.6 and made a reference therein
about the non-existing will. Evidently she played a lead role in
procuring Exs.A.5 and A.6 and therefore, while answering Issues 3
and 4, the trial Court categorically held that the plaintiff failed to
prove the execution of Exs.A.5 and A.6 and therefore, those
documents were not binding on D.1. Even for arguments sake, it is
admitted that the suit property is the Stridhana property of the
mother, both plaintiff and D.1 being her children would equally
entitle but plaintiff cannot claim preference over D.1. Hence,
plaintiffs suit for declaration and possession for the entire suit
property is legally untenable as the frame of the suit itself is
defective.
a)      He would further argue that it is the case of D.1 that he is the
owner of the suit properties and during his minority, his father
managed them on his behalf and after attaining majority, the
defendant himself managing and enjoying. To prove this aspect he
adduced cogent oral and documentary evidence. Assuming that there  
was defect in his title, still plaintiff cannot get decree on that count.
The plaintiff being the suitor seeking declaratory and possessory
reliefs, it is trite law that she has to establish her legal title without
depending on the weakness if any in defendants case. On this point
he relied on the following decisions:
1)      Moran Mar Basselios Chatholicos and another vs. Most Rev. 
Mar Poulose Athanasius and others
2)      Chakicherla Audilakshmamma vs. Atmakuru Ramarao and     
others
3)      Sajana Granites, Madras and another vs. Manduva Srinivasa 
Rao and others
4)      Union of India and others vs. Vasavi Cooperative Housing
Society Limited and others
.
9)      Nextly, commenting on the alternative relied sought by the
plaintiff, learned counsel would vehemently argue that the said relief
is quite different and distinct from the original relief of declaration.
Same cannot be granted as it altogether changes the nature of the
suit.  Further, the plaintiff has not taken any steps till now to amend
the plaint to include such an inconsistent alternative relief.  Hence,
such a prayer cannot be acceded to by the Court.  He relied on the
following decisions on the aspect that a party is bound by its
pleadings and cannot put-forth a new case contrary to his pleadings:
1)      Venkatappa alias Moode (dead) by LRs. Vs. M.Abdul Jabbar  
and others
2)      Prakash vs. Pushpa Vani
.
He thus prayed to dismiss the appeal.
10)     In the light of above rival arguments, the points for
determination are:
i)      Whether the suit properties are the Stridhana properties of
the mother of plaintiff and D.1 and if so whether plaintiff
succeeds them in preference to D.1?
ii)     If the point No.1 is held in negative, whether the plaintiff can
be granted an alternative relief of partition for half share in
suit properties treating them as the joint family properties?
iii)    To what relief?
11)     POINT No.1: The concept Stridhana is interesting and
intriguing too for, we have to mostly depend on Smrithis and
Commentaries of Sages of yore reproduced in authoritative texts of
noted writers like Mulla, Raghavachariar, Maynes Hindu Law etc.
a)      The concept of Stridhana is explained by Mulla (Mullas
Hindu Law 20th edition Volume-I in Para-112 at Page No.226). It is
noted the word Stridhana is derived from Stri i.e. women and
Dhana i.e. property which means literally womens property.
In Para-113 at Page No.226, it is observed thus:
113. STRIDHANA ACCORDING TO THE SMRITIS THE           
SACRED WRITINGS OF RISHIS OR SAGES OF          
ANTIQUITY  
        Manu enumerates six kinds of Stridhana.
(1)     gifts made before the nuptial fire, explained by
Katyayanna to mean gifts made at the time of marriage before
the fire, which is the witness of the nuptial (adhyagni)
(2)      gifts made at the bridal procession, that is, says
Katyana, while the bride is being led from the residence of her
parents to that of her husband (adhyabahanika)
(3)      gifts made in token of love, that is, says Katyayanna,
those made through affection by her father-in-law and
mother-in-law (pritidata), and those made at the time of her
making obeisance at the feet of the elders (padavandaika);
(4)     gifts made by the father;
(5)     gifts made by the mother; and
(6)     Gifts made by the brother (Manu,IX, 194)
All the commentators have agreed that the above list is not an
exhaustive enumeration of Stridhana.
To the above list, Vishnu adds:
(1)     gifts made by a husband to his wife on supersession, that
is, on the occasion of his taking another wife (adhivedanika);
(2)     gifts, subsequent, that is, says Katyayanna, those made
after marriage by her husbands relations or her parents
relations (anwadheyaka);
(3)     sulka, or marriage-fee, a term which is used in different
senses in different schools (see  147, 150, 152-54);
(4)     gifts from sons and relations.
Thus, the above is relation to the concept of Stridhana.
12)     Succession of a womans estate subsequent to the advent of
Hindu Succession Act, 1956
w.e.f 17.06.1956 does not pose any  
problem as the said aspect is covered by
Sec.15
and
16
of the
aforesaid Act.   However, succession to a Stridhana or womans
estate prior to
Hindu Succession Act
wholly depended again on
Smrithis and Commentaries.  It should be noted that in the instant
case, as per Ex.A.1, Seetharavamma died on 13.07.1938. So we have   
to refer the old texts.
13)     Regarding succession, Mulla observed in Para 147 at Page 251 
as follows:
147. SUCCESSION TO STRIDHANA ACCORDING TO           
MITAKSHARA    
        For the purpose of succession, Mitakshara divides
Stridhana (Para 115) into two classes, namely:
(1)     shulka, which is defined as gratuity for which a girl is
given in marriage; and
(2)     other kinds of stridhana.
(1)     Shulka 
Shulka devolves in the order mentioned in para 146, sub-para
(1)
(2)     Other kinds of Stridhana
 Stridhana other than shulka, passes in the following order:
(i)     unmarried daughter; she takes before a married
daughter.  The rule applies to Jains in the absence of a
special custom.
(ii)    married daughter who is unprovided for;
(iii)   married daughter who is provided for;
(iv)    daughters daughter;
(v)     daughters son;
(vi)    son;
(vii)   sons son.
If there be none of these, in other words, if the woman dies
without leaving any issue, her Stridhana, if she was married in
an approved form, goes to her husband, and, after him, to the
husbands heirs in order of their succession to him; on failure
of the husbands heirs, it goes to her blood relations in
preference to the government. However, if she was married in
an unapproved form, it goes to her mother, then to her father,
and then to the fathers heirs, and then to the husbands heirs in
preference to the government.
So, in the above order of succession, the heirs in one entry will
precede over and exclude the heirs in the other entries.
a)      It is to be noted that the Apex Court in
Shamlal vs.
Amarnath
has approved the above 7 classes of successors and held 
thus:
Para-7 These passages have received interpretation at the
hands of the Judicial Committee as well as the High Courts in
India and the law is now settled as to the mode of succession to
Stridhana under Mitakshara until we reach son's son. The
controversy now is as to who should succeed to such an estate
if none of the heirs mentioned in item Nos.1 to 7 in paragraph
147 of Mullas Hindu Law is in existence at the time of the
death of the woman concerned.
14)     The above being the law on Stridhana and its succession,
Seetharavamma admittedly being the sole issue to her parents would
inherit the properties of her parents, whether or not her father
Anamarlapudi Nagabhushana Rao executed the Will dated   
11.08.1919. Hence, the aforesaid Will has no relevancy in this case.
Then, succession to the property of Seetharavamma is concerned, 
admittedly, Seetharavamma died in the year 1938 and plaintiff and
1st defendant are her children. However, the plaintiff being the
daughter and placed in the earlier entries in the order of succession,
she would take precedence and exclude 1st defendant in the matter of
succession.
Now, the crucial aspect is whether suit properties are
Stridhana properties of late Seetharavamma.
15)     Needless to emphasise that the burden rests on the plaintiff to
establish this fact.  As rightly contended by the 1st defendant and as
held in catena of decisions placed on record by his counsel, the
plaintiff by cogent evidence has to establish that the suit properties
are Stridhana properties of her mother. In this regard, she cannot
take advantage of the weakness in D1s case.
16)     To establish her case, the plaintiff relied upon
1)      The will dated 11.08.1919 said to be executed by her maternal
grandfather late Nagabhushana Rao in favour of her mother
and  copy of the said will said to be given to her by her father.
2)      Ex.A.5letter dated 05.12.1989 and Ex.A.6unregistered   
will dated 07.12.1989 executed by her father confirming her
right in respect of plaint schedule properties and also making a
mention about the will dated 11.08.1919 in Ex.A.6.
3)      Besides, the plaintiff also relied upon Exs.A.2 and A.3
resettlement adangal register and register of holdings and other
documents.
a)      Will dated 11.08.1919 is concerned, though plaintiff stated that
her father kept the original with him and gave a copy to her,
however, she failed to produce either the original or its copy for
whatever be the reason. Exs.A5 and A6 are concerned, the trial
Court on an elaborate discussion in issues 3 and 4, has held that
those two documents were doubtful as some suspicious  
circumstances were surrounding those documents. Like, plaintiff
took a lead role in execution of the alleged documents, she herself
secured the attesters and scribe and further, her father was in an ill-
health condition. The trial Court in para-29 of the judgment observed
plaintiff failed to prove that Exs.A5 and A6 were executed by her
father. The findings on issues 3 and 4 are concerned, this Court finds
no reason to differ with the trial Court.
b)      Thus, in essence, the plaintiff failed to produce the Will dated
11.08.1919 and the Exs.A5 and A6 are held to be suspicious.
However, in the considered view of this Court, these defects will not
adversely affect her case. As already observed supra,
Seetharavamma would succeed her fathers properties despite the
absence of the Will and therefore, non-production of the will dated
11.08.1919 is of no consequence. Even assuming Exs.A5 and A6 are   
genuine documents, they have no much legal significance.  Ex.A.5 
letter said to be written by plaintiffs father is only a reiteration that
the suit properties are the Stridhana properties of plaintiffs mother
and except her, D.1 has no right. Similarly, Ex.A.6 is purportedly a
will said to be executed by plaintiffs father wherein he referred the
will dated 11.08.1919 executed by Anamarlapudi Nagabhushana   
Rao in favour of plaintiffs mother.  Under Ex.A.6, plaintiffs father
reiterated that the suit properties belonged to plaintiff and none of
his other children have any right. Thus in essence, the plaintiff
through these documents sought to establish that her grandfather
conferred suit properties on her mother by way of will dated
11.08.1919 and plaintiff alone succeeded them after the death of her
mother. Since plaintiff failed to produce original or copy of the will
dated 11.08.1919 and Exs.A.5 and A.6 were held to be not genuine,
it can be said plaintiff failed to establish the existence of will dated
11.08.1919. However, as already observed, if she can otherwise
establish that the suit properties belonged to her maternal
grandfather and her mother being the sole issue succeeded them,
Exs.A.5 and A.6 pale into insignificance. If the suit properties are the
Stridhana of her mother, her father would have no right to execute
Ex.A.6will and would have no necessity to reiterate that fact
through Ex.A.5letter. Hence, irrespective of the doubt shrouded
around Exs.A.5 and A.6, they have no legal significance. Hence,
what is left for consideration is, whether plaintiff could establish by
other evidence that the suit properties are the Stridhana of her
mother.
17)     Ex.A.2 is the copy of resettlement adangal of the village
Nidabrolu filed by plaintiff which shows that the plaintiffs maternal
grandfather Anamarlapudi Nagabhushana Rao was the inamdar of   
the land bearing Inam Patta No.826.  His name was struck-off and in
his place, the name of Anamarlapudi Seetharavamma, minor  
represented by her grandfather Bendapudi Sudarshanam is  
mentioned. The plaint A schedule land is covered by Sy.No.428/2
in an extent of Ac.1-61 cents and it is not known whether Ex.A.2
relates to this land or not.  The trial Court too did not place reliance
on Ex.A.2.
a)      Coming to Ex.A.3, it is an extract of Register of Holdings of
Kondamudi village.  This document shows the particulars of
ownership and encumbrances if any in respect of the plaint schedule
land covered by Sy.No.428/2 in an extent of Ac.1-61 cents.  In
column no.1, the ownership of the land is mentioned as
Anamarlapudi Seetharavamma, minor represented by Guardian   
Bendapudi Sudarshan. In encumbrance column, it is mentioned that 
under two registered lease deeds, encumbrances were created over 
Sy.No.428/2 in an extent of Ac.1-61 cents.  The first encumbrance
was created in the year 1944 by plaintiffs father Kethiraj Narasimha
Rao by leasing out the land to one Yelavarthy Nagaiah for a period
of 10 years on certain terms of lease. Again Narasimha Rao executed
another registered lease deed in the year 1952 in favour of Garikapati
Venkata Swamy for 5 years. The aforesaid two registered leases were
clearly mentioned under the encumbrance column. Since  
Seetharavamma died by then, naturally her husband Narasimha Rao   
was mentioned as lessor of the land. However, the original
ownership is mentioned in the name of Seetharavamma. This  
document was issued by the Sub-Registrar of Ponnur on 11.04.1990  
when applied for an extract. Though the document was obtained on
the eve of filing the suit, still since the encumbrances were created
under registered lease deeds long prior to the filing of suit, the
authenticity of Ex.A.3 can be believed.  It shows, the plaintiffs
mother was the owner of the suit land and after her death, her
husband managed the same on behalf of the plaintiff by leasing.
Unfortunately, the trial Court did not appreciate this crucial
document in right perspective. It entertained a doubt as to when
Seetharavamma was married to Narasimha Rao, still why she was   
referred as minor represented by her Guardian Bendapudi Sudarshan 
Rao. This doubt, it must be said, is logically incorrect. By the time
the original ownership vested in Seetharavamma, she was a minor
and hence basing on the records, she was referred as minor
represented by her Guardian. Merely such reference is there, that will
not debilitate the authenticity of Ex.A.3. This document clearly
shows suit property is Stridhana of plaintiffs mother.
b)      Then Ex.A.4 is concerned, it is a 10(1) account relating to inam
patta no.826 standing in the name of plaintiff.  As already noted
earlier, it is not known whether the aforesaid inam patta land and
suit land are one and the same or not. Hence Ex.A.4 cannot be said
relied upon.
c)      Then Ex.A.9 is the non-agricultural tax receipt dated
17.01.1990 issued in favour of the plaintiff much prior to the suit.
Exs.A.12 and A.13 are the two agricultural tax receipts dated
24.02.1990 obtained by the plaintiff for the suit land and these two
receipts were prior to the filing of the suit. Whereas Exs.A.14 to
A.18 are also the agricultural tax receipts for the suit land obtained
by plaintiff subsequent to the filing of the suit. It must be noted that
by virtue of Ex.A.3 when it is accepted that the suit land is the
Stridhana of her mother and succeeded by the plaintiff, the tax
receipts obtained by plaintiff in her name can also be believed.
Exs.A.19 and A.20 are the house tax receipts issued in the name of
plaintiffs father.  Ex.A.21 is the electricity passbook.
18)     Then coming to the documents of defendant, no doubt he 
produced Ex.B.1pattedar passbook, Ex.B.210(1) account,    
Ex.B.3adangal for fasli 1398-99, Exs.B.4 to B.21cist receipts,
Ex.B.22 to B.61house tax receipts, Exs.B.62title deed,  
Ex.B.63pattedar pass book; Exs.B.64 to B.68L.R receipts,   
Exs.B.69 to B.78house tax receipts and Exs.B.81 to B.84   
adangal extracts, besides Ex.B.80agreement said to have been  
executed by his father. Therefore, he produced aforesaid documents
to show that he is the owner of suit properties. This Court gave
anxious consideration to these documents.    It must be said that they
do not have evidentiary value for the reason that it is the categorical
admission of DW.1 that his paternal grandfather and his father have
no properties and he does not know how the suit property stood in
his name. This shows that suit properties were not acquired by the
paternal grand father and father of D.1 and D.1 himself.  This
admission would further show that D.1 got managed the authorities
and obtained above documents in his name.  Hence those documents   
will not confer any title in him. Further, the above admission
strengthens Ex.A.3 to hold that the suit properties are the Stridhana
of their mother Seetharavamma. The other oral evidence placed by
defendant will not advance his cause.
19)     So, on a conspectus of the facts and evidence, it is held that the
suit properties are the Stridhana properties of mother of plaintiff and
D.1 and since she died prior to
Hindu Succession Act, 1956
came 
into force, the plaintiff being her daughter, succeeded her properties
in exclusion of D.1. This point is answered in favour of plaintiff.
20)     POINT No.2: Since point no.1 is held in affirmative, the
discussion on point no.2 is not necessary.
21)     POINT No.3: In the result, this appeal is allowed by setting
aside the judgment and decree dated 29.04.2000 in O.S.No.81 of 
1992 passed by the Senior Civil Judge, Bapatla and the said suit is
decreed in favour of appellants herein by:
a)      declaring the title of the appellants in plaint A schedule
property;
b)      directing the respondents to deliver vacant possession of
plaint A schedule property to the appellants within
one(1) month from the date of this decree;
c)      mesne profits shall be determined by the trial Court on
filing of a separate application by the appellants
d)      No costs in the appeal
e)      The office shall prepare decree only after the appellants
depositing the requisite Court fee on plaint and appeal
within 20 days from the date of this judgment.
As a sequel, pending miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall
stand closed.
_________________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 10.07.2017