[Cites
12
, Cited by
8
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Deep Industries Ltd., vs Oil And Natural Gas Corporation Ltd., ... on 19 September, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 HYDERABAD 45, (2018) 2 CIVLJ 607, (2019) 1 BANKCAS 136, (2017) 6 ANDHLD 499
Author:
Challa Kodanda Ram
Bench:
Challa Kodanda Ram
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE CHALLA KODANDA RAM           
WRIT PETITION No.28527 OF 2017    

19-09-2017 

Deep Industries Ltd.,  Petitioner..

Oil and natural Gas Corporation Ltd., and another  Respondents 

Counsel for the Petitioner: Senior Counsel Sri Vedula Venkata Ramana

Counsel for the respondents: Senior Counsel Sri D.Prakash Reddy 

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:

1.(1987) 2 Supreme Court Cases 160  
2.(2011) 5 Supreme Court Cases 697  
3.(2003) 2 Supreme Court Cases 107  
4.(2006) 10 Supreme Court Cases 236  
5.(2010) 11 Supreme Court Cases 186  
6.(2004) 3 Supreme Court Cases 553  
7.(1996) 6 Supreme Court Cases 22  
8.2004(4) ALD 682 (DB) 
9.(2015) 9 Supreme Court Cases 433  


THE HONBE SRI JUSTICE CHALLA KODANDA RAM           
WRIT PETITION No.28527 OF 2017    
ORDER:
The brief facts, for the purpose of disposal of the Writ
Petition, are stated as under:-
2)      Pursuant to a notification issued by the 1st respondent 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (hereinafter referred
to as Oil Company) for the execution of work under the title
Hiring of Gas Dehydration System for Five production
installations at Rajahmundry Assets (hereinafter referred to as
Gas Dehydration Work), the petitioner has participated in the
tender process and become the successful bidder. A contract
agreement dated 24.06.2015 was also executed in favour of the
petitioner.  The term of the contract is for 3 years and the
petitioner is required to mobilize and install the necessary
equipment within 120 days and accordingly, it has commenced  
the work within the stipulated period.  A show cause notice
dated 28.04.2017 was issued against the petitioner alleging
that it had claimed the experience of                 M/s Craft
production systems inc. Texas, (CPS), which, in fact, did not
have the relevant experience and as the contract dated
24.06.2015 was awarded based on a misrepresentation, it is
liable to be terminated.  The petitioner claims that necessary
replies were submitted. After considering the said explanations
submitted by the petitioner and after exchange of
correspondence, finally, the contract agreement came to be
terminated by the order dated 31.07.2017.  However, the
petitioner was directed to carry on the operations for a further
period of 300 days.  Simultaneously, by letter dated
03.08.2017, he was also prohibited from participating in future
tenders.  Challenging the said proceedings, the petitioner filed
Writ Petition No.26400 of 2017, wherein an interim order was
passed by this Court on 08.08.2017, which, on Appeal (Writ
Appeal No. 1149 of 2017), came to be modified by the Division
Bench of this Court on 21.08.2017 restricting the scope of
blacklisting.
3)      While things stood thus, vide impugned proceedings
dated 17.08.2017, the petitioner was directed to remit a sum of
Rs.66.95 crores, on account of alleged excess payments 
received up to 31.05.2017 and further, the respondents
proposed to pay a lower rate based on the rates quoted by the
petitioner in subsequent tenders.  Aggrieved by the said
decision of the respondent corporation dated 17.08.2017,
challenging the same as illegal and contrary to the contract
agreement, the petitioner filed the present Writ Petition.
4)      Learned Senior Counsel Sri Vedula Venkata Ramana   
appearing for the petitioner contends that the action of the
respondents in unilaterally determining that they had made
excess payments, is totally impermissible, as the same is like -
a party to the contract unilaterally determining the damages,
which are payable, though there is a specific mechanism for
determination of the damages.  Placing reliance on the
judgments of the Supreme Court in
State of Karnataka v.
Shree Rameshwara Rice Mills
,
Union of India v. Tantia
Construction Private Limited
,
Harbanslal Sahnia v.
Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd.
and
Noble Resources Ltd. V. State
of Orissa
, the learned Senior Counsel submits that such
unilateral determination is illegal and impermissible.
By
placing reliance on
Zonal Manager, Central Bank of India
v. Devi Ispat Limited
,
ABL International Ltd. V. Export
Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Ltd.
the
respondent Corporation being a State, within
Article 12
of the
Constitution of India, cannot act arbitrarily in total derogation
of the contractual terms and in those circumstances learned
senior counsel for the petitioner prays for Writ of mandamus
declaring the action of the respondents in issuing the
impugned communication dated 17.08.2017 as illegal, 
arbitrary and unconstitutional.
5)      Sri D. Prakash Reddy, learned Senior Advocate 
instructed by Sri K. Venkata Rao for respondent company 
opposes the very entertainment of the Writ Petition. The learned
Senior Counsel submits that the very writ affidavit itself
discloses that, in essence, the petitioner is seeking to enforce
the contractual terms under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
India, which is impermissible.  As, admittedly, there is a
specific dispute resolution mechanism provided in the contract
agreement, dated 24.06.2015 the Writ Petition is not
maintainable and the same is liable to be dismissed in limini.
According to the learned Senior Counsel, the action taken
against the petitioner is justified to protect the revenues of the
State organisation.  But for the experience and expertise of the
collaborator, which the petitioner had claimed, it would not
have been eligible to participate in the tender process and
quote the rates at which the contract came to be awarded.  As it
is found that the petitioner had misrepresented and thereby
breached Clause 34  Integrity Pact, the action of the
respondents is justified and at any rate, the Writ Petition is not
maintainable and hence, prays for dismissal of the Writ
Petition.  To support his contention, the learned Senior
Counsel places reliance on
State of U.P. v. Bridge & Roof
Company (India) Ltd.
,
U.P.S.R.T.C. v. K.L. Hi-Tech Secure
Print Ltd.
,
Hyd  and State of Kerala v. M.K. Jose
.
The
learned Senior Counsel submits that in two Division Bench
judgments of this Court, after taking into consideration the
judgment of the Supreme Court in
ABL International
Case
(cited supra), categorically held that in cases where there is
arbitration clause, the Writ Petition is not maintainable and the
High Court should refuse to entertain the Writ Petition.
6)      After hearing the submissions made by the learned
Senior Counsel on either side and after going through the writ
affidavit and the other relevant material documents placed
before the Court, including the Contract agreement dated
24.06.2015, the question that falls for consideration is :
whether the impugned letter dated 17.08.2017 proposing to pay
the petitioner at a lower rate than what has been agreed to in the
contract and further demanding Rs.66.95 crores, is arbitrary,
illegal and liable to be interfered with in exercise of the
jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India.
7)      After going through the various
judgments rendered by
the Supreme Court
, cited supra by both the learned Senior
Counsel, no manner of doubt is left in the mind of this Court
that a Writ Petition is maintainable albeit in certain
circumstances.   It is not necessary for this Court to extract
portions of the judgments referred to supra, as it would be
burdening the record and creating more confusion.   The sum
and substance and the ratio of the judgments cited by both the
learned Senior Counsel can be summed up as under:
1)      Normally a Writ Court shall not interfere in cases
involving contracts, particularly where there are
disputed questions of fact, and interpret the
contractual terms.
2)      Further, even in cases where there is a specific dispute
resolution mechanism by way of arbitration, as a rule,
there is no bar, but the Writ Court would be slow in
entertaining a Writ Petition.
3)      On appreciation of the material placed before it, if the
Writ Court comes to a conclusion that the State has
acted in an arbitrary and unreasonable manner,
infringing or likely to infringe the Fundamental Rights
of a petitioner before it, a Writ is maintainable.  The
Writ Court, while exercising the writ jurisdiction, is
required to examine the facts of each case and then
decide to proceed or not.
8)      Keeping the above guiding principles in mind, the
undisputed facts of the present case are required to be
examined, for which purpose, a reference to certain clauses in
the contract may be examined.
6.2 Entire Agreement:
The CONTRACT constitutes the entire agreement   
between the ONGC and the CONTRACTOR with      
respect to the subject matter of the CONTRACT and 
supersedes all communication, negotiations and 
agreement (whether written or oral) of the parties
with respect thereto made prior to the date of this
agreement.
7.0 REMUNERATION AND TERMS OF PAYMENT:
7.1 CORPORATION shall pay to CONTRACTOR for       
the services, to be provided by the CONTRACTOR as  
per the Scope of Work (Annexure-III), as per the price
Schedule at Annexure-A.  The rates payable, shall
be firm during the entire CONTRACT period,
including extension period, if any.
7.5.  In the event of any dispute in a portion or
whole of any invoice, the CORPORATION shall make   
payment of undisputed portion and shall promptly
notify the CONTRACTORs representative in writing
for the remaining portion in CONTRACT to mutually
resolve the dispute and if resolved in part or full,
payment shall be made to the CONTRACTOR within    
30 days of such settlement.
7.6.  ONGCs right to question the amounts claimed:
Payment of any invoice shall not prejudice the
right of the Corporation to question the allowability
under this Agreement of any amounts claimed 
therein, provided ONGC, within one year beyond the
expiry of each CONTRACT year, delivers to 
CONTRACTOR, written notice identifying any item or 
items which it questions and specifying the reasons
therefor.  Should ONGC so notify CONTRACTOR,    
such adjustment shall be made as the parties shall
agree.  These provisions shall be reciprocal for
similar rights to the CONTRACTOR.
The CONTRACTOR shall provide on demand a     
complete and correct set of records pertaining to all
costs for which it claims reimbursement from ONGC 
and as to any payment provided for hereunder,
which is to be made no the basis of CONTRACTORs   
costs.
27.  ARBITRATION
28.  CONTINUANCE OF THE CONTRACT:
Notwithstanding the fact that settlement of
dispute(s) (if any) under arbitration may be pending,
the parties hereto shall continue to be governed by
and perform the work in accordance with the
provisions under this CONTRACT.
9)      By the impugned proceedings, the 1st respondent decided 
to deprive the petitioners of the contractually-agreed price for
the work to be done.  Clause 7.1
referred to above
does not
permit any unilateral right for variation of the prices.  In the
event of dispute, there is also no unilateral deduction
permissible, as is evident from Clause 7.6.  This is clear from
the methodology provided in Clause 7.6 with respect to the
claims of the respondent company, assuming the nature of the
claims that are being made by the respondent fall within the
said clause of the Contract.   Clauses 7.5 and 7.6 provide for
settlement through mutual negotiations.  Though Clause 27
provides for arbitration, the clause, as read in whole, can be
resorted to only after exhausting settlement through mutual
discussions.  Further, Clause 28 mandates respective parties
to adhere to the contractual terms.  In the light of the above,
the proposed action of the respondent Corporation cannot be
said, in any way, fair and justifiable and the consequences of
the arbitrary and unilateral action of the said respondent
would have deleterious effect on the finances of the petitioner
depriving them of cash flows which would also affect its
operations.  It may also be noted that as of date, the
respondents themselves have to depend on the petitioner and
they desired the petitioner to continue to carryout the work for
a further period of 300 days even after the termination of the
contract.  This would indicate the indispensable nature of the
services of the petitioner at least for a period of 300 days.
Viewed from that angle also, the action of the respondents
cannot be termed to be in public interest.  Even with respect
to the demands on the petitioner, the principle that a party to
the contract cannot be a judge of his own case determining the
amounts payable / damages, would squarely apply in the 
present facts of the case.  Prima facie, the demands, which are
made by the respondents, at best would qualify as
unascertained claims, but not the claims determined in an
adjudication proceedings.  The judgment cited by the learned
Senior counsel appearing for the petitioner squarely applies to
the same.
10)     The observations made above are only for the limited
purposes of this Court coming to a prima facie conclusion
whether the action of the respondents is arbitrary and also the
same is condonable keeping in view of the public interest and
shall not be construed as interpreting any of the clauses of the
agreement expressing a firm opinion.  However, as the Court is
obliged to appreciate and judge in a given case whether the
allegation of arbitrariness is made out, a prima facie opinion
has been expressed.
11)     In those circumstances, the Writ Petition is allowed
setting aside the impugned communication dated 17.08.2017, 
declaring the same as arbitrary, illegal and violative of the
rights of the petitioner under
Article 14
of the Constitution of
India.  There shall be no order as to costs.
12)     Miscellaneous Petitions, if any, pending in the Writ
Petition, shall stand closed.
____________________________     
CHALLA KODANDA RAM, J       
Date:19.09.2017.