[Cites
31
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Smt. Vatumalli Laxmi Prasanna, W/O. ... vs The State Of Telangana, Rep.By Its ... on 21 September, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 HYDERABAD 32, (2017) 6 ANDHLD 517 2018 (184) AIC (SOC) 2 (HYD), 2018 (184) AIC (SOC) 2 (HYD), 2018 (184) AIC (SOC) 2 (HYD) (2017) 6 ANDHLD 517, (2017) 6 ANDHLD 517
Author:
P.Naveen Rao
Bench:
P.Naveen Rao
THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE P.NAVEEN RAO            

W.P.Nos.30891 OF 2017   

21-09-2017 

Smt. Vatumalli Laxmi Prasanna, w/o. Kumar Bapuji, Aged about 42 years, R/o S-5-B-680, NGO Colony, Vanasthalipuram, Hyderabad     

The State of Telangana, rep.by its Secretary, Revenue (Registration and Stamps) Department, Secretariat, Hyderabad  and othe

Counsel for the petitioner :  Sri Y V Ravi Prasad, Senior counsel

Counsel  for the Respondents:  Spl G P for Revenue (TG)


<Gist :

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
(2010) 15 SCC  207 
2017 SCC Online Hyd 272  
2006 SCC Online AP 909   
(2016) 10 SCC 767 

HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE P.NAVEEN RAO           

WRIT PETITION NOs.30891, 31036 & 31037 OF 2017      

Date: 21.09.2017 

WP No.30891 of 2017:  

The Court made the following:


HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE P.NAVEEN RAO           

WRIT PETITION NOs.30891, 31036 & 31037 OF 2017      

COMMON ORDER:
In these three writ petitions, petitioners challenge the
registration of deed of cancellation dated 16.08.2017 by the Joint
Sub-Registrar-I, Sangareddy, canceling the sale deeds registered in
the year 2007.   As the issue raised in all the three writ petitions is
common, these writ petitions are considered and decided by this
common order.
2.      According to petitioners, their vendors are the original
inamdars of inam land.  It is further case of the petitioners that on
introduction of the
Andhra Pradesh Land Reforms (Ceiling On
Agricultural Holdings) Act, 1973
(Act, 1973), petitioners vendors
filed declarations under
Section 9
of the Act, 1973. Thereon
detailed enquiry was conducted and the primary authority held
that the declarants are entitled to retainable standard holdings of
11.0674 and they are liable to surrender 7.0674 standard holding.
According to the petitioners, the vendors of the petitioners were
entitled to four standard holdings. On appeal preferred by the
vendors, the appeal was rejected by order dated 23.08.1993,
confirming the primary authority decision. On challenge before
this Court, matter was remitted to the primary authority.  On such
remittance, till date no further decision is made.  In substance, it is
the case of the petitioners that the vendors of the petitioners were
holding valid title and interest in the property and on purchase of
the subject property made by the petitioners, title had validly
passed on to them from their vendors in the year 2007 and they
have been in possession and enjoyment of the property purchased 
by them. It is further case of the petitioners that though initially
land was un-surveyed, but subsequently surveyed and denoted as 
Sy.Nos.1050, 1051 and 1052.  Petitioners were issued pattadar
pass books and title deeds.  When petitioners approached the Sub-
Registrar in the first week of September, 2017 to know the basic
register value and the stamp duty payable, petitioners came to
know that the documents are not being entertained for registration
on the ground that deed of cancellation of sale made in the year
2007 was presented by the Tahsildar, Kandi Mandal, and the same 
was registered on 16.08.2017.  The registration of which document
is under challenge in these writ petitions.
3.      Extensive submissions were made by the learned counsel for 
petitioners, lead by senior counsel Sri Y.V.Ravi Prasad appearing
for counsel for petitioners in W.P.No.31036 of 2017.  The first and
foremost submission raised by the learned counsel is that in view
of decision of the Supreme Court in Thota Ganga Laxmi and 
another v. Government of Andhra Pradesh and others  and in
view of the provision contained in Rule 26 (i)(k) of A.P.Registration
Rules, 1960 (Rules, 1960), it is not permissible for the Registrar to
register unilateral cancellation deed of the earlier deed of sale, more
so by a third party to the transaction.  It is further contended that
at any rate registration of such unilateral cancellation deed after
ten years is not permissible in law. It is further case of learned
counsel that petitioners have purchased in a valid sale transaction
and title was validly vested in the vendors and passed on to
petitioners and third party to the deed of conveyance registered
before the registering authority cannot cancel the said deed of sale
and thus, the decision of the registering authority to accept and
cancel such deed of cancellation is ex facie illegal and amounts to
arbitrary exercise of power.
4.      Learned counsel also made extensive submissions on merits  
of the issue.
5.      However, learned Government Pleader raised preliminary
objection on maintainability of writ petitions. According to the
learned Government Pleader, an effective and efficacious remedy is
available to the aggrieved parties under
Section 31
of the Specific
Relief Act and when such effective and efficacious civil law remedy
is available, writ petitions are not maintainable and on that
ground, writ petitions are liable to be dismissed. Learned
Government Pleader further contended that the decision rendered
by the Supreme Court in Thota Ganga Laxmi (supra) has no  
application to the facts of these cases in view of the specific
provision contained in the form of proviso appended to Rule
26(i)(k)(i) of the Rules, 1960 and, therefore, question of prior notice
and opportunity to the parties to the earlier deed of sale does not
arise.  It is not open to the petitioners to assail the decision of the
registering authority to register the document presented by the
Tahsildar on the ground that unilateral cancellation is not
permissible, in the writ petitions filed under
Article 226
of the
Constitution of India.
In support of the said contention, learned
Government Pleader placed reliance on recent  decision of the
learned single Judge of this Court in
P.Veda Kumari and others v.
The Sub-Registrar, Banjara Hills, Hyderabad and others
.
6.      Learned Government Pleader also contended that even on  
merits, there was no valid title vested in the vendors of the
petitioners and the concerned properties vest in the State and third
parties to the land have no manner of right or title to undertake
sale and, therefore, the sale transaction between the petitioners
and their vendors was sham transaction and has no legal validity.
7.      Learned senior counsel and learned counsel for petitioners
would submit that it is not competent for Tahsildar to register deed
of cancellation on behalf of State.  Further, as such cancellation
was effected without prior notice and opportunity and in an
arbitrary exercise of power and authority, it is liable to be set aside
on these grounds and, therefore, writ petitions are maintainable.
Civil law remedy is available only if a contest is made on merits.
8.      The registering authority exercises power of registration of
documents presented before him in accordance with the provisions
contained in
Indian Registration Act, 1908
and the Rules, 1960.
Rule 26 prescribes guidelines for registering authority to process
documents presented before him.  For the purpose of these cases it
is suffice to note few of the instances mentioned therein. They read
as under:
Rule 26. (i) Every document shall, before acceptance
for registration, be examined by the Registering Officer
to ensure that all the requirements prescribed in the
Act and in these rules have been complied with, for
instance:
(a)     that it has been presented in the proper office
(
Sections 28
,
29
, and
30
);
(b)     that the person is entitled to present it (Sections 32
and 40);
xxxxx
(k) (i) The registering officer shall ensure at the time of
presentation for registration of cancellation deeds of
previously registered deed of conveyances on sale
before him, that such cancellation deeds are executed
by all the executant and claimant parties to the
previously registered conveyance on sale and that such
cancellation deed is accompanied by a declaration
showing mutual consent or orders of a competent Civil
or High Court or State or Central Government
annulling the transaction contained in the previously
registered deed of conveyance on sale;
Provided that the registering officer shall dispense with
the execution of cancellation deeds by executant and
claimant parties to the previously registered deeds of
conveyance on sale before him if the cancellation deed
is executed by a Civil Judge or a Government Officer
competent to execute Government orders declaring the 
properties contained in the previously registered
conveyance on sale to be Government or Assigned or 
Endowment lands or properties not registerable by any
provision of law.
9.      Rule 26 (i)(k) was introduced by way of amendment made in 
the year 2006, after the Full Bench judgment in
Yanala
Malleshwari v. Ananthula Sayamma
.  Sub-Rule (k)(i) mandates 
that the registering officer should ensure at the time of
presentation for registration of the cancellation deeds of previously
registered deeds of conveyance,  that such  cancellation deed
should be executed by all the executants and claimant parties to
the previously registered conveyance on sale and should be
accompanied by declaration of mutual consent or orders of the
competent Court.  In several decisions, this Court held that in view
of amendment to Rule 26 and introduction of Rule 26(i)(k)
registration of unilateral cancellation of earlier deed of conveyance
is not permissible in law.
This issue was considered by Supreme
Court in Thota Ganga Laxmi (supra).  Supreme Court held as 
under:
4. In our opinion, there was no need for the
appellants to approach the civil court as the said
cancellation deed dated 4-8-2005 as well as
registration of the same was wholly void and non est
and can be ignored altogether. For illustration, if A
transfers a piece of land to B by a registered sale deed,
then, if it is not disputed that A had the title to the
land, that title passes to B on the registration of the
sale deed (retrospectively from the date of the execution
of the same) and B then becomes the owner of the 
land. If A wants to subsequently get that sale deed
cancelled, he has to file a civil suit for cancellation or
else he can request B to sell the land back to A but by
no stretch of imagination, can a cancellation deed be
executed or registered. This is unheard of in law.
5. In this connection, we may also refer to Rule 26(k)(i)
relating to Andhra Pradesh under
Section 69
of the
Registration Act, 1908, which states:
(i) The registering officer shall ensure at the
time of preparation for registration of
cancellation deeds of previously registered deed
of conveyances on sale before him that such
cancellation deeds are executed by all the
executant and claimant parties to the
previously registered conveyance on sale and
that such cancellation deed is accompanied by
a declaration showing natural consent or orders
of a competent Civil or High Court or State or
Central Government annulling the transaction
contained in the previously registered deed of
conveyance on sale:
Provided that the registering officer shall
dispense with the execution of cancellation
deeds by executant and claimant parties to the
previously registered deeds of conveyances on
sale before him if the cancellation deed is
executed by a Civil Judge or a government
officer competent to execute government orders
declaring the properties contained in the
previously registered conveyance on sale to be
government or assigned or endowment lands or 
properties not registerable by any provision of
law.
A reading of the above Rule also supports the
observations we have made above. It is only when a
sale deed is cancelled by a competent court that the
cancellation deed can be registered and that too after
notice to the parties concerned. In this case, neither is
there any declaration by a competent court nor was
there any notice to the parties. Hence, this Rule also
makes it clear that both the cancellation deed as well
as registration thereof were wholly void and
non est and meaningless transactions.
10.     Doubting the view taken in Thota Ganga Laxmi, matter was 
referred to bench of three judges. Bench of three judges of Supreme
Court in
Satya Pal Anand Vs.  State of Madhya Pradesh and  
others
extensively considered the issue including the view taken
in Thota Ganga Laxmi.
From the discussion and the conclusions 
arrived at by the Honble Supreme Court in Satya Pal Anand, it is
clear that in the absence of provision similar to one  in Rule 26 (i)
(k)(i) of the Rules, 1960, registration of unilateral cancellation of
deed of conveyance earlier registered is permissible.   Supreme
Court also held that decision made by the registering authorities
under the
Registration Act
cannot be classified as made in exercise
of quasi-judicial function and are to be treated as administrative
decisions.  It is held that an aggrieved party has to work out his
remedies as available in law, more particularly with reference to
provision in
Section 31
of the Specific Relief Act.
11.     Supreme Court held as under:
34. The role of the Sub-Registrar (Registration)
stands discharged, once the document is 
registered (see Raja Mohammad Amir Ahmad Khan     
[State of U.P. v. Raja Mohammad Amir Ahmad Khan,   
AIR 1961 SC 787] ).
Section 17
of the 1908 Act deals
with documents which require compulsory 
registration. Extinguishment deed is one such
document referred to in
Section 17(1)(b)
.
Section 18
of
the same Act deals with documents, registration
whereof is optional.
Section 20
of the Act deals with
documents containing interlineations, blanks,
erasures or alterations.
Section 21
provides for
description of property and maps or plans and
Section 22
deals with the description of houses and
land by reference to government maps and surveys.
There is no express provision in the 1908 Act
which empowers the Registrar to recall such
registration. The fact whether the document was
properly presented for registration cannot be
reopened by the Registrar after its registration.
The power to cancel the registration is a
substantive matter. In absence of any express
provision in that behalf, it is not open to assume
that the Sub-Registrar (Registration) would be
competent to cancel the registration of the
documents in question. Similarly, the power of the
Inspector General is limited to do superintendence of
Registration Offices and make rules in that behalf.
Even the Inspector General has no power to cancel
the registration of any document which has already
been registered.
36. If the document is required to be compulsorily
registered, but while doing so some irregularity
creeps in, that, by itself, cannot result in a
fraudulent action of the State Authority. Non-
presence of the other party to the extinguishment
deed presented by the Society before the
Registering Officer by no standard can be said to
be a fraudulent action per se. The fact whether
that was done deceitfully to cause loss and harm
to the other party to the deed, is a question of
fact which must be pleaded and proved by the
party making such allegation. That fact cannot be
presumed. Suffice it to observe that since the
provisions in the 1908 Act enables the Registering
Officer to register the documents presented for
registration by one party and execution thereof to be
admitted or denied by the other party thereafter, it is
unfathomable as to how the registration of the
document by following procedure specified in the
1908 Act can be said to be fraudulent. As
aforementioned, some irregularity in the procedure
committed during the registration process would not
lead to a fraudulent execution and registration of the
document, but a case of mere irregularity. In either
case, the party aggrieved by such registration of
document is free to challenge its validity before the
civil court.
40. The Andhra Pradesh High Court, in
Yanala 
Malleshwari [Yanala Malleshwari v. Ananthula
Sayamma
, AIR 2007 AP 57 : 2006 SCC OnLine AP      
909] was called upon to consider whether a person
can nullify the sale by executing and registering a
cancellation deed and whether the Registering Officer
like District Registrar and/or Sub-Registrar
appointed by the State Government is bound to refuse
registration when a cancellation deed is presented.
The fact remains that if the stipulation contained in
Sections 17
and
18
of the 1908 Act are fulfilled, the
Registering Officer is bound to register the document.
The Registering Officer can refuse to register a
document only in situations mentioned in sections
such as
Sections 19
to
22
,
32
and
35
. At the same
time, once the document is registered, it is not open
to the Registering Officer to cancel that registration
even if his attention is invited to some irregularity
committed during the registration of the document.
The aggrieved party can challenge the registration
and validity of the document before the civil court.
The majority view of the Full Bench was that if a
person is aggrieved by the extinguishment deed
or its registration, his remedy is to seek
appropriate relief in the civil court and a writ
petition is not the proper remedy.
41.
Section 35
of the Act does not confer a quasi-
judicial power on the Registering Authority. The
Registering Officer is expected to reassure that the
document to be registered is accompanied by 
supporting documents. He is not expected to evaluate
the title or irregularity in the document as such. The
examination to be done by him is incidental, to
ascertain that there is no violation of provisions of the
1908 Act.
In
Park View Enterprises [Park View
Enterprises v. State of T.N.
, AIR 1990 Mad 251 : 1989
SCC OnLine Mad 273] it has been observed that the 
function of the Registering Officer is purely
administrative and not quasi-judicial. He cannot
decide as to whether a document presented for
registration is executed by person having title, as
mentioned in the instrument. We agree with that
exposition.
43. No provision in the State of Madhya Pradesh
enactment or the Rules framed under
Section 69
of
the 1908 Act has been brought to our notice which is
similar to the provision in Rule 26(k)(i) of the Andhra
Pradesh Registration Rules framed in exercise of
power under
Section 69
of the 1908 Act. That being
a procedural matter must be expressly provided
in the Act or the Rules applicable to the State
concerned. In absence of such an express 
provision, the registration of extinguishment
deed in question cannot be labelled as fraudulent
or nullity in law. As aforesaid, there is nothing in
Section 34
of the 1908 Act which obligates
appearance of the other party at the time of
presentation of extinguishment deed for
registration, so as to declare that such
registration of document to be null and void. The
error of the Registering Officer, if any, must be
regarded as error of procedure.
Section 87
of the
1908 Act postulates that nothing done in good faith
by the Registering Officer pursuant to the Act, shall
be deemed invalid merely by reason of any defect in
the procedure. In the present case, the subject
extinguishment deed was presented by the person  
duly authorised by the Society and was registered by
the Registering Officer. Once the document is
registered, it is not open to any Authority, under
the 1908 Act to cancel the registration. The
remedy of appeal provided under the 1908 Act, in Part
XII, in particular
Section 72
, is limited to the inaction
or refusal by the Registering Officer to register a
document. The power conferred on the Registrar by
virtue of
Section 68
cannot be invoked to cancel the
registration of documents already registered.
46. In our considered view, the decision in Thota
Ganga Laxmi [Thota Ganga Laxmi v. State of A.P., 
(2010) 15 SCC 207 : (2013) 1 SCC (Civ) 1063] was 
dealing with an express provision, as applicable to the
State of Andhra Pradesh and in particular with regard
to the registration of an extinguishment deed. In
absence of such an express provision, in other State
legislations, the Registering Officer would be governed
by the provisions in the 1908 Act. Going by the said
provisions, there is nothing to indicate that the
Registering Officer is required to undertake a
quasi-judicial enquiry regarding the veracity of
the factual position stated in the document
presented for registration or its legality, if the
tenor of the document suggests that it requires to
be registered. The validity of such registered
document can, indeed, be put in issue before a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(emphasis
supplied)
12.     At this stage it is appropriate to note the observations of
Justice V.V.S. Rao, as he then was in
Yanala Malleshwari
(supra),
which reads as under:
67. Therefore, when the provisions of the
Registration
Act
and Registration Rules elaborately deal with the
circumstances and situations when the registering
officer has to accept and register the documents,
and/or as to when registering officers has to reject the
documents for registration, it is not possible to hold as
a general rule that whenever a cancellation deed is
submitted, the registering officer is bound to reject the
acceptance and registration of the same. Such
interpretation would render
Section 126
of TP Act
(which enables the donor of a gift to cancel/revoke the
same) ineffective. Secondly, there could be
unimaginable number of circumstances when the  
executant himself on his own volition comes before the
registering officer and desires to cancel the earlier
document. As already pointed out supra, under
Section 23-A
of the Registration Act, the registering
officer can re-register a document totally ignoring the
earlier registration. Furthermore, under Schedule 1-
A
to the Indian Stamp Act
as amended by the Stamp  
(A.P. Amendment) Act, 1922, cancellation deed is one 
of the legal documents recognized in law and a
transaction for transfer of immovable property, is no
exception.
78. The person, who has ex facie right whether such
right is registered or not can always approach the
registering authority, with a request to cancel a sale
deed, which was registered earlier by such registering
authority by showing that subsequent registration was
obtained by fraud by a person who is not entitled to
transfer the property or that such transfer was
registered by playing fraud on the owner or on the
stranger. In the present statutory dispensation, namely
Transfer of Property Act, Contract Act, Specific Relief
Act and Registration Act, the Court does not see any
prohibition operating on the exercise of inherent
power by the registering authority to cancel the
sale deed earlier registered, which is likely to
cause prejudice to the true owner as well as to the
entire public at large.
87. Apart from the limitations pointed out by the
Supreme Court, the power of judicial review is not
available when there is an effective alternative
remedy to the aggrieved person. When granting 
redressal involves adjudication of disputed
questions of facts, which require adducing of
evidence by the parties, then also ordinarily an
application for a judicial review is not accepted.
See
Whirlpool Corporation v. Registrar of Trade Marks
,
AIR 1999 SC 22. There is justification for the principle.
Clive Lewis in Judicial Remedies in Public Law (first
edition 1992, Sweet & Maxwell, pp. 229 and 230,
explained the rationale for the principle as under.
The rationale for the exhaustion of remedies
principle is relevant to the scope of that
principle. A twofold justification has been put
forward. First, that where Parliament has
provided for a statutory appeals procedure, it is
not for the Courts to usurp the functions of the
appellate body. The principle applies equally to
bodies not created by statute which have their
own appellate system. Secondly, the public
interest dictates that judicial review should be
exercised speedily, and to that end it is
necessary to limit the number of case in which
Judicial review is used. To these reasons can be
added the additional expertise that the appellate
bodies possess. In tax cases, for example, the
appellate body, the General or Special
Commissioners, have wide experience of the 
complex and detailed tax legislation. In
employment cases, for example, the system of 
Industrial and Employment Appeal Tribunals
may be better equipped to deal with industrial
issues than the High Court.
(emphasis supplied)
13.     In view of this judgment, Rule 26 was amended and sub-rule
(i) (k) was introduced vide notification dated 29.11.2006.  By this
amendment an exception was also carved out in the form of
proviso. After formation of State of Telangana, Rule 26 (i)(k)(i)
underwent further amendment.  However, proviso is retained as it
stood earlier.  The amended provision as it stands now reads as
under:
(k) That the cancellation deed of the previously
registered deed of conveyance on sale of immovable
property is executed by both the executing and the
claiming parties thereof unless such Cancellation
Deed is executed under the orders of a competent
Court or under Rule 243.
14.     Proviso appended to Rule 26(i)(k)(i) of the Rules, 1960 carves
out exception to the requirements in main provision.  According to
this proviso prior consent and presence of all parties to previously
registered document made need not be present and an authorized 
officer on behalf of State can unilaterally present deed of
cancellation.  It is thus clear that after the judgment of
Yanala
Malleshwari
(supra) though Rule 26 is amended by introducing
Rule 26(i)(k), its scope is limited to parties to the document other
than State and has no application to presentation of document of
unilateral cancellation of earlier sale deed by State.  At this stage, it
is appropriate to note that the deed of cancellation registered by the
Sub-Registrar, impugned in these writ petitions, is made in
invoking proviso appended to Rule 26 (i) (k)(i) of the Rules.
15.     In the cases on hand, it is also appropriate to note that what
is assailed in the writ petitions is the registration of the document -
Deed of Cancellation of Sale Deed bearing document Nos.17067 of
2017, 17073 of 2017 and 17069 of 2017, respectively, presented by
the Tahsildar canceling the earlier sale deed bearing document
nos.11955 of 2007, 11886 of 2007 and 14065 of 2007, 
respectively.  There is no challenge to the proviso appended to Rule
26 (i)(k)(i) of  the Rules, 1960.  As held by Supreme Court in Satya
Pal Anand in the absence of express provision unilateral
registration of extinguishment deed cannot be faulted.  In fact,
proviso restricts the application of main provision.  Thus, Rule 26
(i) (k) (i) read with proviso would make it clear that no prior notice
is required nor presence of all parties to earlier deed of conveyance
is required to accept deed of cancellation presented on behalf of
State. The legislative intendment is also very clear by incorporating
the proviso.  The States power to unilaterally cancel the previously
registered sale deed is preserved and in such situations the view
expressed by majority of the Full Bench in Yanala Malleswari
holds. The issue in these writ petitions is not similar to the issue
considered by Supreme Court in Thota Ganga Laxmi.
16.     The decision of Registering Authority impugned herein can
neither be termed as without jurisdiction and competence nor can
be called as amounting to fraudulent exercise of power.  Once a
decision is made it is irreversible.
17.     It is also appropriate to note that the executant declares that
he is authorized to cancel the documents registered at Registration
Office, Sangareddy. Proviso appended to Rule 26 (i)(k)(i) only
requires presentation of document by competent Government  
Officer. He is the primary authority in the revenue hierarchy
entrusted with the responsibility of protecting Government
property.  It cannot also be said that responsible officer would
make a false declaration.  Even otherwise, it is between him and
the Government and no third party can have a say on Tahsildars
competence to represent.  Further, he is only protecting the interest
of Government by canceling deeds of conveyance made by private 
parties on public properties.  It is not the case of petitioners that
action of Tahsildar is actuated by mala fides or personal bias. The
Tahsildar sought to justify his action by referring to a decision
taken by Joint Collector dated 25.07.2017 setting aside patta
granted by Revenue Divisional Officer, Sangareddy, dated
16.06.1978.  Justification shown therein and the reasons assigned
therein can be agitated by petitioners in appropriate proceedings.
Be it noted that his action cannot be termed as amounting to
patently illegal exercise of power, even assuming that such a
window of opportunity is available to petitioners to maintain the
writ petition, while asserting the decision of registering authority
in registering the unilateral cancellation of earlier sale deed.
18.     Unilateral cancellation of gift settlement deed/sale deed
earlier registered by a party to such deed has come up for
consideration before this Court in batch of writ petitions (P.Veda
Kumari).  In support of prayer to set aside such unilateral
cancellation deed heavy reliance was placed on Thota Ganga 
Laxmi. Learned single Judge has extensively considered the
similar contentions as urged in these writ petitions.  This
unilateral cancellation was directly against the provision in Rule
26(i)(k)(i) of the Rules, 1960. Following the judgment of the
Supreme Court in
Satya Pal Anand
(supra), learned single judge
held that writ petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
India is not maintainable and aggrieved party has to work out his
civil law remedies.
19.     On the scope of alternative remedy and status of registering
authority under the
Registration Act
, learned single Judge of this
Court in
P.Veda Kumari
(supra) held as under:
29. The facts in these cases are not adverted to as the
writ petitions are considered and disposed on the
point of law only. Even it is assumed that the action
of the registering authority was accentuated by fraud,
it has to be proved by specific averments and no such
averment is made in these writ petitions and fraud
cannot be assumed from a mere registration of a
document by the registering authority as observed by
the Supreme Court.
30. At the cost of repetition, it is held that the act
of the Registering Authority is only an
administrative act and it has no option except to
register a document, which was validly
presented. The document may be valid at the time of
presentation but is required to comply with the Rules
at the time of registration and if he violated Rule 26(k)
of the Rules, it can be definitely said that he
committed procedural irregularity. It is well
established rule of administrative law that an
authority, which is vested with power, may
exercise it rightly or wrongly, but this Court
while exercising the power of judicial review,
subject to its limitations, would interfere with
such actions and one of such limitations for
exercising judicial review is availability of
alternative remedy and the discharge of public
law duty. Merely because the respondent is a
State under
Article 12
, this Court cannot
interfere as held by the Supreme Court in
Joshi
Technologies International INC v. Union of India
.
Thus, in order to exercise jurisdiction by this
Court, the action of the statutory authorities
must be without any alternative authority and in
discharge of public law duty. Both of these are
absent in the case of execution of deeds of
cancellation as no public law duty is involved
and
Section 31
of the Specific Relief Act gives the
relief. Merely because Thota Ganga Laxmis case 
(supra) reverses the order of this Court
dismissing the writ petition relating to
cancellation of registration of cancellation of
sale deed, it does not follow that the writ petition
is maintainable in view of the observations made
by three-Judge Bench of Supreme Court in
Satya 
Pal Anands
case (supra).                (Emphasis
supplied)
20.     In the cases on hand, as noted above, proviso appended to
Rule 26(i)(k)(i) of the Rules, 1960, clearly vests power in the
competent authority to present deed of cancellation of earlier deed
of conveyance on behalf of State and proviso does not envisage
prior notice. Once the deed is presented for registration and
complies all requirements, registering authority has no competence
to refuse registration of such document. In the cases on hand once
power to register unilateral deed of cancellation of earlier registered
sale deed is held valid the aggrieved parties have to avail the civil
law remedies as available to them.   Further, the narration of facts
would disclose that there appears to be a dispute between State
and vendor of the petitioners/petitioners and such disputes require
adducing of evidence which cannot be undertaken in exercise of
power of judicial review.  That being so, following the view
expressed by the learned single Judge of this Court in P.Veda
Kumari and in the peculiar facts of these cases also, writ petitions
are not maintainable and are liable to be dismissed in limini,
leaving it open to the petitioners to work out their remedies as
available in law.       Be it noted that in the majority view expressed in
Yanala Malleshwari it is held that judicial review is not available
when there is effective alternative remedy and this view was noted
by the Supreme Court in Satya Pal Anand.
21.     Writ petitions are accordingly dismissed.  There shall be no
order as to costs.  Miscellaneous petitions, if any, pending in these
writ petitions shall stand closed.
___________________________     
JUSTICE P.NAVEEN RAO      
Date: 21.09.2017