[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
1. Mohd. Nayeem vs 1.Sri Sale Sayeed R/O H.No.6-3-580/17, ... on 4 August, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 4
Author:
M. Satyanarayana Murthy
Bench:
M. Satyanarayana Murthy
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M. SATYANARAYANA MURTHY             

CIVIL REVISION PETITION NOs.1754 OF 2017 and batch      

04-08-2017 

1. Mohd. Nayeem  
 2.Mohd. Nadeem Both R/o H.No.14-1-287  Mangalhat, Hyderabad Petitioners           

1.Sri Sale Sayeed R/o H.No.6-3-580/17, Anandnagar Colony,Khairatabad, Hyderabad and 8 others.Respondents     


Counsel for petitioner:Sri Ch.Siddartha Sarma

Counsel for Respondent:Sri Shiv Kumar 

<Gist:

>Head Note  

?Cases Referred 

  1985 AIR 28
  (1963) ILLJ 661 SC
  AIR 1966 SC 81 
  (1991) 2 Gau LR 231
  1989 Cri LJ 715 (Bom)

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.SATYANARAYANA MURTHY              

CIVIL REVISION PETITION NOs. 1754 AND 1772 OF 2017       

COMMON ORDER:
These two revisions petitions are filed under
Article 227
of the
Constitution of India, aggrieved by the order passed by the III
Additional Chief Judge, City Civil Court, Hyderabad in I.A.No.1582 of
2016 in I.A.No.781 of 2016 and I.A.No.1583 of 2016 in I.A.No.780 of
2016 in O.S.No.306 of 2016 dated 06.01.2017, dismissing the
applications filed under
Order VI Rule 17 CPC
r/w
Section 151
C.P.C
seeking leave of the court to amend the affidavit by incorporating
paragraph no.23 in the affidavit.
The question involved in both the cases is one and the same
and hence, I find that it is expedient to decide both the petitions by
common order.
The petitioners filed O.S.No.306 of 2016 for various reliefs.
Along with the suit, the petitioners filed I.A.Nos.781 & 780 of 2016
for grant of interim injunction during pendency of the suit, for grant
of interim injunction restraining the respondents from alienating the
suit schedule property and also retraining them from making further
constructions in the suit schedule property. The petitioners filed a
memo before the II Additional Chief Judge, City Civil Court,
Hyderabad seeking withdrawal of O.S.No.501 of 2015 before filing
O.S.No.306 of 2016.  The petitioners filed their affidavit raising
several contentions. But the respondents raised a contention that the
petitioner did not disclose the earlier suit O.S.No.501 of 2015 against
the respondents and other interlocutory applications filed therein,
including C.M.As and consequently I.A.Nos.781 & 780 of 2016 were 
heard. Thereupon, the petitioners filed I.A.No.1582 of 2016 in
I.A.No.781 of 2016 and I.A.No.1583 of 2016 in I.A.No.780 of 2016 in
O.S.No.306 of 2016 for amendment of two affidavits, on the ground
that the petitioners filed a memo on the file of II Additional Chief
judge, City Civil Court, Hyderabad for withdrawal of O.S.No.501 of
2015.  It is submitted that the memo is still pending and no order has
been passed on the memo, granting permission to withdraw the suit
and no suit is pending as such.  Further, the petitioners did not seek
any permission from the Court for filing fresh on from the same cause
of action. Therefore, the memo itself would constitute withdrawal of
the suit and no further order is required. When the petitions came up
for hearing, the Trial Court posted both the interlocutory applications
for orders, in view of the directions issued by this Court in
C.M.A.No.845 of 2016.  Since the petitioners filed memo to withdraw
O.S.No.501 of 2015, the petitioner is not required to disclose the
proceedings in earlier suit O.S.No.501 of 2015 and incidental
proceedings therein. But, in view of the objections, the petitioner
sought for amendment of the affidavit, seeking leave of the Court to
add paragraph 23 in the affidavit in I.A.No.1582 of 2016 in
I.A.No.781 of 2016 and I.A.No.1583 of 2016 in I.A.No.780 of 2016 in
O.S.No.306 of 2016. The respondents did not file any counter but
advanced arguments during hearing.
Upon hearing argument of both the counsel, the Trial Court
dismissed I.A.No.1582 of 2016 in I.A.No.781 of 2016 and I.A.No.1583
of 2016 in I.A.No.780 of 2016 in O.S.No.306 of 2016.
Aggrieved the said orders passed by the Trial Court in
06.01.2017, these two revisions are filed, raising identical
contentions in both the revisions and challenging the order, mainly
on the ground that the reason assigned by the Trial Court is
fallacious and the Court failed to see that no prejudice would be
caused in the event of allowing the applications for amendment, since
it would not change the nature of the petitions. It is also contended
that, the Trial Court did not consider the plea of the petitioner in
proper perspective and committed a serious error.
During hearing, Sri E. Venugopal learned senior counsel
appearing for Sri Ch. Siddhartha Sarma mainly contended that,
when the petitioners filed memo in the Court in O.S.No.501 of 2015,
the petitioners need not disclose the details of the proceedings in
earlier suit and incidental proceedings therein and those facts are not
material aspects even to decide the real controversy. However, the
petitioner intended to bring those facts on record by amending
affidavit, since the suit is at pre-trial stage. Therefore, amendment can
be permitted but the Trial Court did not appreciate this contention in
proper perspective and committed a serious error in dismissing the
petitions.
Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents argued totally
in support of the order passed by the Trial Court, without raising any
specific contention.
Considering rival contentions and perusing the material
available on record, the sole point that arises for consideration is:
Whether the petitioners in I.A.No.1582 of 2016 in I.A.No.781 of
2016 and I.A.No.1583 of 2016 in I.A.No.780 of 2016 in
O.S.No.306 of 2016 be permitted to amend the affidavit by adding
paragraph 23.
P O I N T:
These two strange applications are filed by the petitioners
seeking leave of the Court to amend the affidavit by exercising power
under Order VI Rule 17 r/w
Section 151
C.P.C.  According to
Order
VI Rule 17 C.P.C
the Court may at any stage of the proceedings allow
either party to alter or amend his pleadings in such manner and on
such terms as may be just, and all such amendments shall be made  
as may be necessary for the purpose of determining the real questions
in controversy between the parties. The term pleading is defined as
plaint or written statement under
Order VI Rule 1 C.P.C
.  If, such
restricted meaning is accepted, it is difficult for the Courts to exercise
its power under
Order VI Rule 17 C.P.C
, granting leave to amend the
original petitions and other incidental proceedings therefore, a wider
meaning has to be given to the word pleading as defined under
Order VI Rule 1 C.P.C
.  But, affidavit is not a part of pleadings and it
is not defined anywhere in
the Code of Civil Procedure
. However,
According to
Section 3(3)
of The General Clauses Act, 1897, the term
affidavit means:
affidavit shall include affirmation and declaration in
the case of persons by law allowed to affirm or declare
instead of swearing

        Similarly, according to Rule 34 (new) of The Andhra Pradesh
Civil Rules of Practice and Circular Orders, 1980, the word affidavit
is interpreted as follows:
The word affidavit in this Chapter shall include any
document required to be sworn; and the words swear
and sworn shall include affirm and affirmed.
Rules 35 to 52 deals with various aspects like Form of an
affidavit, description, title of affidavits and before whom the affidavit
may be sworn. But, those Rules are not necessary for deciding the
present controversy.
Order XIX C.P.C
deals with what the affidavit should contain.
Therefore, in the absence of any definition in the Civil Procedure
Code, the definition in
The General Clauses Act
and interpretation in
Civil Rules of Practice and Circular Orders is to be taken into
consideration and applied for deciding the real controversy in this
revision petition.
In
M. Veerabhadra Rao vs Tek Chand
the Supreme Court  
held that, Affidavit is sworn statement in writing made especially
under oath or on affirmation before an authorized magistrate or
officer. According to
Section 3(3)
of the General Clauses Act, affidavit
shall include affirmation and declaration in the case of persons by
law allowed to affirm or declare instead of swearing. The expression
'affidavit' has been commonly understood to mean a sworn statement
in writing made especially under oath or on affirmation before an
authorised Magistrate or officer. Affidavit has been defined in sub-
clause (3) of
Sec. 3
of the General Clauses Act, 1897 to include
'affirmation and declaration in the case of person by law allowed to
affirm or declare instead of swearing.' The essential ingredients of an
affidavit are that the statements or declarations are made by the
deponent relevant to the subject matter and in order to add sanctity
to it, he swears or affirms the truth of the statements made in the
presence of a person who in law is authorised either to administer
oath or to accept the affirmation.
The responsibility for making
precise and accurate statements in affidavit were emphasized by the
Apex Court in
Krishan Chander Nayar v. The Chairman, Central 
Tractor Organisation and Ors
. The part or the role assigned to the
person entitled to administer oath is no less sacrosanct.
Section 3
of
the Oaths Act, 1969 specifies persons on whom the power to 
administer oath or record affirmation is conferred. It inter alia
includes 'any Court, Judge, Magistrate or person who may
administer oaths and affirmations for the purpose of affidavits, if
empowered in this behalf-(a) by the High Court, in respect of
affidavits for the purpose of judicial proceedings; or (b) by the State
Government, in respect of other affidavits.'
The Schedule to the Act
prescribes forms of oaths or affirmation that is required to be
administered to the party seeking to make his own affidavit. Rule 40
of the Civil Rules of Practice framed by the Andhra Pradesh High
Court provides that 'the officer before whom an affidavit is taken shall
state the date on which, and the place where, the same is taken, and
sign his name and description at the end, as in Form No. 14,
otherwise the same shall not be filed or read in any matter without
the leave of the Court.' 'Form No. 14' prescribes the form of affidavit
on solemn affirmation. It requires a solemn affirmation or oath before
the person authorised to administer the same and then at the foot of
which the signature of the deponent must appear and below that the
officer entitled to administer oath must put his signature in token of
both that he administered the oath and that deponent signed in his
presence and by his attestation he has subscribed to both the
aspects. Rule 34 of the aforementioned rules sets out officers
authorised to administer oath for the purpose of affidavits and an
Advocate or Pleader other than the Advocate or Pleader who has been
engaged in such a proceeding have been included in the list of officers
authorised to administer oath.
According to
Order XXXIX Rule 1 C.P.C
, where in any suit it is
proved by affidavit or otherwise_
(a) that any property in dispute in a suit is in danger of being
wasted, damaged or alienated by any party to the suit, or
wrongfully sold in execution of a decree, or
(b) that the defendant threatens, or intends, to remove or dispose of
his property with a view to defrauding his creditors,
(c) that the defendant threatens to disposes the plaintiff or
otherwise cause injury to the plaintiff in relation to any property in
dispute in the suit,
        the Court may by order grant a temporary injunction to restrain
such act, or make such other order for the purpose of staying and
preventing the wasting, damaging, alienation, sale, removal or
disposition of the property [or dispossession of the plaintiff, or
otherwise causing injury to the plaintiff in relation to any property
in dispute in the suit] as the Court thinks fit until the disposal of
the suit or until further orders.
It is clear from the definition and form of affidavit and persons
authorised to administer oath etc, as discussed in the judgment, the
affidavit is only a statement and affirmation or a declaration by the
parties, as to the facts of a particular case filed before the Trial Court.
But, such statement sought to be on affirmation or oath is sought to
be amended by the petitioners in I.A.No.1582 of 2016 in I.A.No.781 of
2016 and I.A.No.1583 of 2016 in I.A.No.780 of 2016 in O.S.No.306 of
2016 before the Trial Court.
Thus, by virtue of
Order XXXIX Rule 1 C.P.C
, which permits
the Court to dispose of interlocutory applications by an affidavit or
otherwise, the petitioners filed affidavit along with petitions in
compliance of
Order XXXIX Rule 1 C.P.C
.  That apart, Rule 60 of Civil
Rules of Practice (new) deals with proof of facts by affidavit, and fact
required to be proved upon an interlocutory proceeding shall unless
otherwise provided by these rules, or ordered by the Court, be
provided by affidavit but the Judge may, in any case, direct evidence
to be given orally, and thereupon the evidence shall be recorded, and
exhibits marked, in the same manner as in a suit and lists of the
witnesses and exhibits shall be prepared and annexed to the
judgment.
Thus,
Order XXXIX Rule 1 C.P.C
permits filing of an affidavit in
proof of certain facts in an interlocutory application, the Courts
allowing the parties to file affidavits along with application for interim
reliefs by virtue of power conferred on Court.
Section 94(3)
C.P.C deals with supplemental proceedings and 
in order to prevent the ends of justice from being defeated the Court
may, if it is so prescribed, grant a temporary injunction and in case of
disobedience commit the person guilty thereof to the civil prison and
order that his property be attached and sold.
On a cogent reading of
Section 94
C.P.C and
Order XXXIX Rule
1 C.P.C
, coupled with Rule 60 of Civil Rules of Practice and Circular
Orders, an application under
Order XXXIX Rule 1 C.P.C
can be
decided basing on an affidavit filed by the party who is seeking an
interlocutory order.
Thus, viewed from any angle, the affidavit is only a solemn
affirmation or a declaration made before a person who is competent to
administer oath, which is only a substitute to the oral statement.
Such statement on affirmation would not fall within the definition of
pleadings under
Order VI Rule 1 C.P.C
It is an elementary principle that leave can be granted to
amend the pleadings under
Order VI Rule 17 C.P.C
and the Court 
may at any stage of the proceedings allow either party to alter or
amend his pleadings in such manner and on such terms as may be   
just, and all such amendments shall be made as may be necessary for 
the purpose of determining the real questions in controversy between
the parties. The heading of the rule and the word used his pleadings
in such manner must be read in conjunction with    Rule 1 of
Order
VI C.P.C
.  In such case,
Order VI Rule 17 C.P.C
shall be confined to
the pleadings.
In the present facts of the case, pleading is only a petition,
but not an affidavit, since the affidavit is a solemn statement affirmed
before the competent officer or a declaration. Leave cannot be granted
to amend solemn affirmation made before a competent officer, who is
authorised to administer the oath, as discussed above.
An affidavit is statement of facts in writing made voluntarily
before an officer authorised to administer oaths. An affidavit is
different from a plaint. As already stated, in the writ petition, evidence
in support of facts in the petition is accepted in the form of affidavit.
But the allegations in the plaint are to be proved by producing
evidence, unless they are admitted by the defendant. An affidavit
which is not properly verified cannot be treated as an affidavit in the
eyes of the law. When there is no original affidavit in the eyes of the
law, the question of amending it does not arise because amendment 
is referable to an existing one.
In
Dwaraka Nath v. Income Tax
Officer
, the Supreme Court held that, if an affidavit is defective in
any manner, instead of rejecting it a reasonable opportunity is to be
given to the party concerned to file better affidavit complying with the
requirements of law. The above decisions indicates that, if an affidavit
is defective for lack of proper verification, an opportunity must be
given to the party concerned to file a properly verified affidavit. This
shows impliedly that amendment of verification of affidavit cannot be
allowed but the party concerned must be given an opportunity to file
a properly verified affidavit. For these reasons, the verification of
affidavit cannot be amended.
In the facts and circumstances of the
case and keeping in view the decision in
Dwaraka Nath3
case, the
Supreme Court afforded an opportunity to the respondents to file
properly verified affidavits complying with the relevant provisions of
the rules without changing the contents of the original affidavits
except the relevant paragraphs relating to verification.
In
Pannalal Ganguly v. State of Tripura
, the Gauhati High
Court held that amendment means, to alter by addition,
substitution, or omission. If re-verification in the manner sought is
allowed, and it alters the original affidavits, either by addition or by
substitution, it would amount to amendment of the original affidavit,
so far as it concerns the verification. An affidavit which is not
property verified, cannot be treated as an affidavit in the eyes of the
law. When there is no original affidavit in the eyes of the law, the
question of amending it does not arise, because amendment is
referable, only to an existing one.
In
Nandakumar Shabnkar Mhatre v. Dayanand Mahadev    
Mhatre
, the Bombay High Court held that, the affidavit once made
cannot be allowed to be changed by amending the same. The  
affidavits without verification and the affidavits with defective
verification cannot be admitted in evidence. In paragraph 6 of the
same judgment, the Court observed as follows:
6. The learned Counsel for the petitioner orally
applies for amendment of the petition and thereby
wants to correct the verification of the petition. I am
unable to see how a party can be allowed to amend the
affidavit which has been already made by him. The
affidavit once made cannot be allowed to be changed
by amending the same. Consequently, the prayer of 
the learned Counsel for the petitioner for permission
to amend the petition cannot be granted.
Thus, the consistent views taken by the Gauhati and Bombay 
High Courts is that an affidavit cannot be permitted to be amended,
since it is a statement of fact, made on affirmation before an officer
authorised to administer oath. Even, ignoring the judgments of
Gauhati and Bombay High Courts, it is clear from the definition of
affidavit under
Section 3(3)
of General Clauses Act and Rule 34 of
Civil Rules of Practice and the judgment of the Apex Court in
M. Veerabhadra Rao1
case, that the affidavit is only a statement by
affirmation or a sworn statement before an officer competent to
administer oath, it is not a pleading within the definition of
Order VI
Rule 1 C.P.C
, even if wider meaning is given to such pleading.
Therefore, the power under
Order VI Rule 17 C.P.C
. cannot be
exercised to grant leave to the petitioners to amend the affidavit,
which is a statement on solemn affirmation and at best, the
petitioners are entitled to file an appropriate affidavit or additional
affidavit after obtaining leave of the Court. It is also clear that the
proceedings in a civil court are governed by Civil Procedure Code and
A.P. Civil Rules of Practice and Circular Orders, 1980. The Writ Rules
in the High Court and Appellate Side Rules, have no application to
proceedings in Civil Court. Consequently, the question of exercising
power under
Order VI Rule 17 C.P.C
to grant leave to the petitioners
to amend the affidavit does not arise.
The other contentions raised by the learned Senior Counsel
Sri E. Venugopal are not relevant for deciding the present issue, in
view of my foregoing discussion. Hence, I find no ground to allow the
civil revision petitions and set-aside the order passed by the Trial
Court, though on different grounds. Consequently, the civil revision
petitions are devoid of merits.
In the result, both the civil revision petitions are dismissed.
        Consequently, miscellaneous applications pending if any, shall
stand dismissed. No costs.
_________________________________________       
JUSTICE M. SATYANARAYANA MURTHY          
Dated:04.08.2017