[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Katineni Sreenivasulu vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh Rep. By Its ... on 14 March, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 48
Bench:
Suresh Kumar Kait
,
U. Durga Prasad Rao
HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT & HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO                   

CRIMINAL APPEAL No. 1607 of 2010    

14-03-2017 

Katineni Sreenivasulu..Appellant

The State of Andhra Pradesh Rep. by its Public Prosecutor.. Respondent


Counsel for the Appellant: Sri S. Ram Sharma

Counsel for Respondent: Public Prosecutor 

<Gist :

>Head Note: 

?Cases referred:

1954 AIR (SC) 51 

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT         
& 
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO          

Crl.A. No. 1607 of 2010

JUDGMENT:
- (ORAL)    
       (Per Honble Sri Justice Suresh Kumar Kait)

     This Criminal Appeal is preferred against the judgment
dated 29.09.2010 delivered in S.C.No. 111 of 2009 by
V Additional District and Sessions Judge, Rayachoty, whereby
the appellant - accused was found guilty of the offence
punishable under
Section 302
IPC,
Section 25(1B)(a)
and
Section 27(1)
of Arms Act, 1959.  Accordingly, the appellant
was convicted and sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life
and to pay a fine of Rs.500/-, in default, to undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months for the offence
punishable under
Section 302
IPC; convicted and sentenced to
undergo imprisonment for a period of one year and to pay a
fine of Rs.500/-, in default, to undergo simple imprisonment
for a period of three months for the offence punishable under
Section 25(1B)(a)
of Arms Act, 1959 and further convicted and
sentenced to undergo imprisonment for a period of five years
and to pay a fine of Rs.500/-, in default, to undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months for the offence
punishable under
Section 27(1)
of Arms Act, 1959
2) In brief, case of the prosecution is that the
deceased  K.Hari Prasad and the appellant are real brothers
being the sons of one K.Kadiraiah @ Kadirappa through his
third wife  Lakshmamma.  There were verbal altercations
between Atchamma, who is the first wife of Kadirappa and
the third wife of Kadirappa.  Due to which, Lakshmamma, the
mother of the appellant and the deceased, went to her
parents house at Narayanavaripalli, H/o. Gandlapenta Mandal,
Anantapur District and was residing there.  About five years
prior to 12.04.2008, the deceased married Radhamma, the 
daughter of one Y.C. Reddamma at Katinenivandlapalli
village.  Since the marriage, the deceased  Hariprasad was
insisting on his father to bequeath the property which was
acquired by his father through his first wife  Atchamma.  But
the appellant bluntly refused to give share to the deceased
since he was in possession and enjoyment of the land.  In that
connection, panchayat was held by the village elders, wherein
the matter was settled to the effect that 1/3rd share of the
property must be given to the deceased, but since two years,
both the deceased and the appellant were quarrelling in
connection with the share of their properties.  Therefore,
they were inimical to each other.  About six months prior to
the commission of the alleged offence, the appellant put
bricks kiln in the disputed land to which the deceased and his
wife did not raise any objection.  While so, on 11.04.2008, the
deceased and his wife - Radhamma cut the firewood in the
disputed land, thereupon, the appellant bore grudge against
the deceased.  As per his previous plan, the appellant, with
mala fide intention to do away with the life of his brother 
Hari Prasad, loaded S.B.M.L. gun, concealed it in the nearby
bushes, went to his brothers house and picked up quarrel
with him on the ground that his brother cut firewood in the
disputed land.  Verbal altercations followed between them.
In order to fulfil his mala fide intention, the appellant made
the deceased come to the village elders and took him towards
the scne of offence and picked up the loaded S.B.M.L. gun
and opened fire on the deceased on his left neck at upper
portion of left color bone, as a result, his brother fell down
sustaining pellet injuries and died instantaneously.
3) Meanwhile, Krishnaiah, who is the maternal uncle
of the wife of the deceased and one of the witnesses to the
occurrence, rushed to the house of the complainant to inform
about the occurrence, at which time, the wife and the
mother-in-law of the deceased came across him on hearing 
the sound of opening of fire arms, and then, Krishnaiah
informed them about the incident.  Immediately, all of them
rushed towards the spot where the deceased died in a pool of
blood with pellet injuries.  By that time the appellant left the
place with the gun challenging that none would object him
now and absconded.  On the complaint lodged by PW1, the   
wife of the deceased, a case in Cr.No. 84 of 2008 for the
offences punishable under
Section 302
IPC and
Sections 25
and
27
of Arms Act, was registered by the Inspector of Police,
Rayachoty Police Station.  After completion of investigation,
the police filed charge sheet.
4) Sri S. Ram Sharma, learned counsel for the
appellant, submits that it is not in dispute that the appellant
and the deceased are real brothers.  PW2, who is the father of
PW1, had bad eye on the appellants land and falsely
implicated him in the case just to grab his land.  He further
submits that based on Ex.P1  report of PW1, F.I.R. was
registered, however, copy of the same was not sent to the
Magistrate, as such, it creates doubt on the prosecution story.
He further submits that as stated by PW1 in the cross-
examination, Ex.P1 was signed by her on 03.03.2010, whereas,  
F.I.R. was registered on 12.04.2008.
5) The learned counsel for the appellant further
submits that the weapon of offence marked as M.O.1 could 
not be identified whether it was a lisenced weapon or
company made or country made weapon.  PW9, scientific   
officer, deposed that it was a company made gun (U.K.
company), whereas, PW10  Investigation Officer, deposed 
that it was country made.  However, he voluntarily says that
since he is not a ballistic expert he has no knowledge whether
M.O.1 is a country made or company made gun.
6) The learned counsel for the appellant has further
argued that the deceased was a police informer and living in
naxalite area, therefore, he might have been killed by
someone else.  He further submits that the mother of the
deceased, who is a material witness, and in whose presence 
naxalites took away the deceased, was deliberately not
examined.  Had the prosecution examined her, truth would
have come out.
7) To strengthen his argument on the issue of
non-examination of material witness, he relied upon a
judgment rendered by the Supreme Court of India in the case
of
Habeeb Mohammad v. State of Hyderabad
wherein it is 
held that as per
Section 252
Cr.P.C. and
Section 114
of Indian
Evidence Act, 1872, if the material witness is not examined, it
casts a serious reflection on the fairness of the trial.  Thus, he
argued, the Court may draw an adverse inference and extend
benefit of doubt to the appellant.  He further submits that
ballistic expert has not been examined, and thereby, it is not
established whether the appellant fired with the fire arm i.e.
M.O.1 - country S.B.M.L. gun or not.  It is also not clear that
the weapon of the offence was triggered by the appellant.
Thus, the appellant is innocent and falsely implicated, as
such, the appeal may be allowed.
8) On the other hand, Sri Posani Venkateswarlu,
learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the respondent 
State, submits that as per the evidence of PW9  Scientific
Officer, he has opined in Ex.P5 - F.S.L. report dated
27.06.2008 as under:
Item 1 is a company made SBML gun    
Item 1 was fired previously.  However, the exact date when it was
last fired cannot be ascertained.
Item 1 is in working order.
The hole on the skin piece item 2 could have been caused by the
entry of any firearm projectiles, such as item 3.
Item 3, the stone/glass piece could have been discharged on firing
from item 1
Item 1 comes under the purview of
Arms Act
.
9)     He further submits that as per Item 3 above, the
stone / glass piece, could have been discharged on firing from
item 1 i.e. weapon of the offence.  He submits that even it is
established from Ex.P3  post-mortem certificate that the
appellant used the weapon.  He submits that PWs.2 and 3 are 
eye-witnesses and PW4 is a circumstantial witness who heard 
fire noise, and thus, all the witnesses supported the
prosecution case and consequently the appellant was found 
guilty of the charged offences and accordingly convicted and
sentenced as stated supra.
10)     We have heard the learned counsel for both the
parties as above.
11)     The point for determination is whether the
conviction and sentence passed by the trial Court are factually
and legally sustainable?
12)     As per the prosecution case, there was land
dispute between the appellant and the deceased.  On
11.04.2008, when the deceased cut some firewood in the 
disputed land, dispute arose between them.  Consequently,
the appellant bore grudge against the deceased and planned
to kill him.  In the process, he acquired one loaded S.B.M.L.
gun, concealed it in the nearby bushes, went to the house of
the deceased and picked up quarrel with him.  On 12.04.2008,
at about 07:00 a.m., at the request of the appellant, when
the deceased came out to attend before elders for panchayat,
the appellant picked up the loaded gun and opened fire on
him on his left side of the neck, upper portion of left color
bone, as a result of, the deceased fell down sustaining pellet
injuries and died instantaneously.  On seeing the same, K.
Sivaiah rushed towards the house of the wife of the deceased.
Meanwhile, the wife of the deceased and mother-in-law of the
deceased came across him.  Then, K. Sivaiah informed them  
about the appellant opening fire arm against the deceased.
Immediately, the wife and mother-in-law of the deceased
rushed to the spot, by which time, the appellant left the
scene challenging that none would object him now and 
absconded.
a) During the course of the investigation, inquest and
autopsy were conducted over the dead body of the deceased. 
Subsequently, the appellant was arrested on 14.04.2008 in the
presence of panchayatdars at 04:00 p.m. at Diguvagottiveedu
cross-roads.  The appellant confessed the offence in the
presence of panchayatdars which was reduced into writing
under a panchanama.  The appellant led the police and the
panchayatdars to Koraigutta and picked up a country made 
gun from the concealed place and produced it before the
police.  The S.B.M.L. gun was seized under cover of
mahazarname at 05:30 p.m. on 14.04.2008 duly attested by  
the panchayatdars.
13)        The case of the prosecution rests on the direct
evidence of PWs.2 and 3.  They deposed that they have 
witnessed the appellant opening fire on the deceased with
S.B.M.L. gun from a short range and caused the death of the
deceased.  They stated that when they were in their
respective fields for watering their lands situated between
Venkatapuram and Katinenivandlapalli villages on the date of
the offence around 07:00 a.m., the deceased and the
appellant were altercating each other forcibly on the road
near their fields.  Then, PWs.2 and 3 and one Balagangadhar
questioned as to why they were quarrelling and suggested
them to settle their disputes amicably by approaching the
elders.  Meanwhile, the appellant picked up a loaded S.B.M.L.
gun from the nearby bushes and shot dead Hariprasad.  The 
gun shot hit below the throat on the left side near collar bone
of the deceased, due to which, the deceased fell down on the
road side and died on the spot.  PW3 stated in his evidence
that when the deceased fell down in the wayside canal, he
rushed to Katinenivandlapalli and informed the villagers about
the incident.  Then, PW2 rushed to the village where the
house of the mother-in-law of the deceased is located.  He
stated in his deposition that on witnessing the incident, he
rushed out of fear to Kondakindapalli village where PW1 was
residing in the house of her mother.  When he informed PW1
about the incident, PW1 and her mother rushed to the scene
of offence.  The appellant warned PW1 that nobody should
come in his way and left towards Venkatapuram village.  The
evidence of PW2 is thus corroborating with the evidence of
PWs.1 and 4 who are the wife and mother-in-law of the
deceased.  PW1 in her evidence has clearly stated that the
appellant came to her mothers house on that day at about
07:00 A.M. and questioned the deceased as to why he cut the 
trees in the disputed land.  When her husband informed the
appellant that he (appellant) himself first cut the trees, the
appellant threatened her husband and asked him to come to 
the elders for mediation.  Thereafter, her husband followed
the appellant to the village noted above to attend before the
mediators.  Five minutes thereafter, she heard some gun-shot
sound and immediately she and her mother - PW4 came out   
from the house.  By that time, PW2 came and informed her 
that the appellant shot dead her husband with a gun.  When
they were running to the scene of offence, the appellant
came opposite to them by holding a gun and proclaimed that
he shot dead her husband and would kill who comes in his
way.
14)        PW4  mother of PW1, deposed that five minutes
after the appellant took the deceased along with him, they
heard a gun-shot sound.  When she and PW1 came out from    
the house, PW2 came opposite to them by running and  
informed them that the appellant shot dead the deceased.
When she and PW1 rushed to the place, the appellant came  
opposite to them by holding a gun in his hand and stated that
he shot dead the deceased and who are there to come in his
way and ran away.
15)        As discussed hereinabove, based on the evidence
of PWs.1 to 4, the prosecution has established the guilt of the
appellant beyond all reasonable doubt for the offence
punishable under
Section 302
IPC.  Based on the evidence of
PWs.1 to 4, PW7  panchayatdar and PW10  investigating   
officer, it is established that the appellant was in possession
of fire arm which was used for murdering the deceased 
victim.  Their evidence could not be shattered in the cross-
examination.
16)        As per
Section 3(1)
of Arms Act, no person shall
acquire, have in his possession, or carry any fire-arm or
ammunition unless he holds in this behalf a licence issued in
accordance with the provisions of
Arms Act, 1959
and the
Rules made thereunder.   As per
Section 25(1B)(a)
of Arms
Act, whoever acquires, or has in his possession or carries any
fire arm or ammunition in contravention of
Section 3
of Arms
Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than one year, but which may extend to 3
years and shall also liable to fine.
17)        In view of the evidence of PWs.1 to 4, 8 and 9, it is
established that the appellant has committed the offence
punishable under
Section 25
(1-B)(a) of
Arms Act, 1959
.  Since
he was in possession of M.O.1, which is fire arm, at the time
of commission of the offence, he produced the same to PW10  
in the presence of PW7 and one other panchayatdar under 
Ex.P7  seizure mahazarnama dated 14.04.2008.
18)        As per the evidence of PW9  scientific officer
(ballistic expert), M.O.1 is company made S.B.M.L. gun which
was fired previously and it is in working order.  The hole on
the piece of the skin sent to him could have been caused by
the entry of any fire arm projectiles.  PW9 also deposed that
stone/glass pieces sent to him could have been discharged on
firing from M.O.1.  He also deposed that M.O.1 comes under
the purview of
Arms Act
.  However, PW9 has not stated that
M.O.1 is within the purview of prohibited arms covered under
Section 7
of Arms Act.
19)        As per
Section 2(1)(i)
, if pressure is applied on the
trigger of the fire arm, missile continues to be discharged
until pressure removed from the trigger so designed.  The fire
arm comes under the purview of prohibited arms.  But, in the
present case, M.O.1 was designed in such a manner that 
pressure has to be applied on the trigger of M.O.1 over and
over again for release of loaded gun powder for each fire.
Thereafter, M.O.1 in this case cannot be said to be falling
within the definition of prohibited arms.  Since M.O.1 is not
satisfied, the definition of prohibited arms as per
Section
2(1)(i)
of Arms Act will not fall under the purview of
Section 7
of Arms Act.
20)        It is pertinent to mention here that to prosecute
any person for any offence punishable under
Sections 25
and
27
of Arms Act, there must be sanction from the Central
Government.  In this case, PW8  Junior Assistant,
Collectorate Office, Kadapa deposed that on 28.08.2008, at
the request of the Superintendent of Police, Kadapa, the
District Collector-cum-District Magistrate, Kadapa, after
perusing the record and considering the opinion of the
Additional Public Prosecutor, accorded sanction to prosecute
the appellant.  Consequently, sanction order dated 05.10.2008
was issued by the then District Collector.  So, there is official
sanction from the Central Government to prosecute the case.
21)        The issue raised by the learned counsel for the
appellant is that ballistic expert is not examined on the
specific lines.  Moreover, the mother of the deceased is not
examined, if examined, she would have disclosed the truth.
In the present case, PWs.2 and 3 are the
eye-witnesses and PW4 is a witness who heard the fire arm.
These witnesses have not only seen the appellant, but the
appellant also threatened them that nobody should come in
his way and he was found to be in possession of the fire arm in
his hand at the time of commission of offence.  In such a
situation, these two witnesses are sufficient apart from PW9,
who established that the weapon was recovered at the
instance of the appellant.  The appellant, it appears, has not
taken steps to examine the mother of the deceased to
establish his defence plea.  Hence, he cannot raise that
argument.
22)        The learned counsel for the appellant has
contended that as per the prosecution, the F.I.R. was
registered on the report given by PW1, however PW1, in
cross-examination stated that one week before she adduced 
her evidence, she signed on Ex.P1  report of PW1.
23)     It is true that the report of PW1 given to the police
under Ex.P1 was not received by the Magistrate along with the
original F.I.R. under Ex.P11 and Ex.P1 was received by the
trial Court only after commencement of trial on 17.03.2010,
whereas, PW10 - investigation officer, deposed that Ex.P1 was
forwarded to the Court along with the original F.I.R.  He
further deposed that he was under the impression that Ex.P1
was also sent along with F.I.R. under Ex.P11 as usual.  But,
Ex.P1 was not sent to the committal Court along with the
F.I.R.
24)        We note that when PW1 was adducing her
evidence in chief examination, on 03.03.2010, the trial Court
found that the report submitted to the police by PW1 was not
on record, as such, the trial Court deferred her examination
to some other day.  Subsequently, the trial Court received the
original report/statement of PW1 dated 12.04.2008 from the
Inspector of Police, Rayachoty Police Station on 17.03.2010
along with photocopy of printed F.I.R. with covering letter
stating that after verification, they found the original report
of PW1 in the case bundle at the office of the Superintendent
of Police.  The original F.I.R. was marked as Ex.P11.  The
contents of Ex.P1 were incorporated in the F.I.R. under
Ex.P11.  Ex.P1 was in fact registered as F.I.R. under Ex.P11.
The contents of Ex.P1  report are tallying with the contents
of the report as noted in the F.I.R. under Ex.P11.  The
signature of PW1 was also found on Ex.P11  the original F.I.R.
If at all no report was lodged by PW1 as on the date of Ex.P1,
the contents of F.I.R under Ex.P11 pertaining to the report
lodged by PW1 would not have been tallied with the contents
of Ex.P1.
25)    In view of the clinching evidence of PWs.2 and 3
and other material witnesses, who have corroborated the
documentary evidence, we are of the view that the
prosecution has successfully brought home the guilt of the
appellant.  Hence, we find no illegality or perversity in the
findings recorded by the trial Court, and the judgment under
appeal is perfectly justified and does not warrant any
interference by this Court.
26)     Hence, the Criminal Appeal is devoid of merit and
the same is accordingly dismissed.
27)        As a sequel, Miscellaneous Petitions, if any
pending, shall stand disposed of as infructuous.
28)        Before parting, we hereby place on record our
appreciation to the learned Legal Aid counsel,
Sri S. Ram Sharma who ably rendered assistance in the present 
case.
____________________   
SURESH KUMAR KAIT, J     
14.03.2017 
____________________   
U.DURGA PRASAD RAO, J