[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Tata Seshaiah vs 1. Maruboyina Sankaramma And Two Others on 22 February, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 21
Author:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
Bench:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           

S.A.No.11 of 2007 

22-02-2017 

Tata Seshaiah ... Appellant

1. Maruboyina Sankaramma and two others. . Respondents     

Counsel for Appellant : Smt. M.Bhaskara Lakshmi 

Counsel for Respondent No.1 : Smt. K.Sesharajyam  
                               for Smt. Deepika Gadde
Counsel for Respondent No.3  :   G.P. for Arbitration (AP)
Counsel for Respondent No.2:    Not necessary vide C.T.

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1.  (2005) 10 SCC 38
2   (2007) 14 SCC 138 
3   (2010) 12 SCC 740 
4   AIR 1975 Allahabad 341
5   1988 (2) Law Summary 223  
6    AIR 1969 AP 136 
7   2011 SCC Online AP 778 = 2012 (2) ALD 692  

HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO             
SECOND APPEAL No.11 of 2007      
JUDGMENT:
This Second Appeal is preferred by the appellant/1st defendant in
O.S.No.204 of 1991 aggrieved by the Judgment and Decree dated  
15.07.2005 in A.S.No.2 of 1999 passed by the IV Additional District
Judge, Nellore, whereby and whereunder the learned Judge allowed the
appeal filed by the plaintiff and set aside the Judgment and Decree dated
03.11.1998 in O.S.No.204 of 1991 passed by the III Additional Junior
Civil Judge, Nellore, filed for permanent and mandatory injunction.
2)      The parties in this Second Appeal are referred as they were arrayed
before the Trail Court.
3)      The factual matrix of the case is thus:
a)      The plaintiffs case is that she owns Ac.0-48 cents of wet land in
Sy.No.571-1A of Brahmadevi village, Muthukur Mandal having 
purchased under Ex.A.1sale deed. There was a road running from East  
to West towards Southern side of the land purchased by her. 1st defendant
and his son i.e, 2nd defendant, who are residing jointly adjacent to the land
of plaintiff, constructed a house in the road margin illegally. The
defendants dug trenches adjacent to the road berm and also encroached 
into 2 Ankanams of plaintiffs land. When the husband of the plaintiff
objected, defendants closed the drainage channel which was in existence
since long time. The rain water from the land of plaintiff passes through
that drainage channel and if it is closed, the rain water gets stored in the
land of plaintiff and submerge the crop raised in the land and cause severe
loss. The plaintiff and her husband approached the village Sarpanch
Kaliki Ramana Reddy complaining the illegal acts of the defendants and
when the village Sarpanch along with some other elders visited the spot on
01.06.1981, the defendants temporarily stopped the construction.
However, the defendants were making hectic efforts to proceed with the
construction.
Hence the suit.
b)      As per the orders in I.A.No.206 of 1998, plaint was amended
seeking the relief of mandatory injunction directing the defendants to
remove the constructions made in the suit schedule site pending orders
passed in I.A.No.374 of 1991.
c)      Defendant No.1 filed written statement admitting that there was a
road margin of 15 feet width and the drainage channel in the road margin
used for passing water from the village to the fields. He denied that the
defendants entered the road margin and closed the drainage channel and
made preparations to construct a stone walled house. He also denied that
defendants dug trenches and encroached into the land of plaintiff and
closed the drainage channel, thereby giving scope for submergence of
plaintiffs land and crops. It is contended that there was no such
diminution of value of land of plaintiff with the alleged construction made
by defendants, as the houses of defendants and others were in existence
since past 20 years. It is submitted that defendants along with 59 others
occupied the road margin adjoining the plaintiffs land and they raised
their houses and that they were in uninterrupted possession and enjoyment
of the properties. Due to heavy rains in 1984, the houses were damaged
and all the persons dug trenches and raised stone walls and laid cement
sheeted roofing to the houses. In the year 1989 and also in 1991, there was
cyclone resulting in damage of the houses of the defendants and others.
It is contended that the husband of the plaintiff intends to knock away 20
Ankanams house site of defendants and threatened 1st defendant to vacate 
the house to form layout for his land and sell the same as house plots by
offering Rs.1,000/- to the 1st defendant. As the 1st defendant disagreed, the
husband of plaintiff lodged a complaint with the police against the 1st
defendant and on enquiry they found 1st defendant was in possession of
the property since 20 years and hence taken no action. It is also contended
that plaintiff encroached into 2 Ankanams house site of 1st defendant
and making false claim against him.  There was a way of 40 feet x 20 feet
to facilitate the movements of the vehicles from road to the land of
plaintiff and hence there was no obstruction caused to the plaintiff.
d)      After amendment of the plaint claiming relief of mandatory
injunction, the 1st defendant filed additional written statement reiterating
his earlier written statement and denied that defendants raised construction
after filing of the suit.
e)      Basing on the above pleadings, the Trail Court framed the following
issues on 10.10.1991:
i)      Whether the Plaintiff is entitled for permanent injunction?
ii)     To what relief?
f)      On 14.10.1998, the following additional issues were framed:
i)      Whether the Plaintiffs are entitled to the Mandatory Injunction
for removal of the defendants house?
ii)     To what relief?
g)      During trial, PWs.1 to 5 were examined and Exs.A.1 to A.10 were
marked on behalf of plaintiff.  DWs.1 and 2 were examined and Exs.B.1
to B.14 were marked on behalf of defendants. Exs.X1 to X7 were marked 
in the evidence of PW.4.
h)      After hearing both sides and basing on the oral and documentary
evidence, the Trial Court dismissed the suit.
i)      Aggrieved, the plaintiff filed A.S.No.2 of 1999 before the IV
Additional District Judge, Nellore and the said appeal was allowed
decreeing the suit for perpetual and mandatory injunction for removal of
the constructions made in the suit schedule site.
Hence the instant Second Appeal by defendant No.1.
4)      While admitting the appeal, this Court framed the following
substantial questions of law:
1)      Is the court below right in granting relief of permanent
injunction to the plaintiff when there is no evidence on
record to show that the Appellant herein has encroached
into the land of plaintiff and the evidence is that the
plaintiff herself has encroached?
2)      Is the Appellate Court right in giving a finding contrary
to the pleadings and evidence?
3)      Is the Appellate Court right in giving a finding that the
constructions made by the Defendants are obstructing the
ingress and aggress of the plaintiff to public pathway only
basing on the pleadings when there is no evidence to
establish the same?
4)      Is the Appellate Court right in misconstruing the evidence
on record both oral as well as documentary?
5)      Is the Appellate Court right in ignoring the legal aspect
that even assuming that the Defendants have raised
unauthorized construction, the remedy for the plaintiff is
under separate proceedings in appropriate forum and the
civil court has no jurisdiction?
5)      Heard arguments of Smt. M.Bhaskara Lakshmi, learned Senior   
Counsel for appellant; Smt. K.Sesharajyam, learned Senior Counsel for
Smt. Deepika Gadde, learned counsel for respondent No.1 and learned 
Government Pleader of Arbitration (Andhra Pradesh) for respondent No.3.
Respondent No.2 is not necessary party in this appeal vide cause title.
6a)     Fulminating the judgment of the first appellate Court, learned senior
counsel Smt. M.Bhaskara Lakshmi would firstly argue that the judgment 
of the first appellate Court is perverse in the sense that it has not taken into
consideration the evidence on record against the plaintiff. In expatiation,
she would submit that the oral evidence of PW4 and Exs.X1 to X7 would
clearly depict that apart from the defendants and others, the plaintiff
herself has, encroached a portion of the road margin and constructed
thatched house. When plaintiff herself is a trespasser, she has no moral or
legal right to harp that defendants have trespassed and caused obstruction
to her right of way to her land. In fact, the trial Court has given clear
finding to the effect that plaintiff is a trespasser and therefore she does not
deserve the equitable relief of injunction. However, the first appellate
Court without considering the evidence on record as well as the finding of
the trial Court, but only considering that defendants have constructed
house on the berm of the road, granted injunction on erroneous
appreciation of facts and evidence. Learned counsel cited the following
decisions to canvass that the erroneous appreciation of facts and evidence
by the appellate Court would amount to perversity which can be set right
in the Second Appeal.
1.
Manicka Poosali v. Anjalai Ammal
2.
Abdul Raheem v. Karnataka Electricity Board
3.      Dinesh Kumar v. Yusuf Ali
b)      Secondly, with regard to obstruction allegedly caused by the house
of defendants to approach to the land of the plaintiff, learned senior
counsel would argue that since plaintiff herself is a trespasser as submitted
earlier, she cannot harp against defendants about obstruction. Even
assuming that there is some obstruction, still there is no total blockade, in
view of the fact that there is a passage by the side of house of defendants
to approach to the land of the plaintiff. The argument that public have
right on every inch of public property will not come to the aid of plaintiff
because she herself is a trespasser of road margin to some extent. She thus
prayed to allow the appeal and set aside the judgment of the appellate
Court.
7a)     Per contra, while supporting the appellate Court judgment, learned
senior counsel Smt. K.Sesharajyam would firstly argue that the admission
of defendants coupled with the concurrent finding of both the Courts
below is that the defendants constructed house on the road margin
blocking the passage to the plaintiffs land from the road. The said
concurrent finding of fact is suffice to grant mandatory injunction in
favour of plaintiff as she is entitled to use every inch of public property. In
that view, the Second Appeal is liable to be dismissed in limini as it does
not involve any substantial question of law.
b)      Secondly, she argued that it is preposterous to contend that plaintiff
had encroached upon road margin. The evidence of PW4 in this regard is
only a passing remark without any proof. On the other hand, his evidence
would show that there is drainage between the land of plaintiff and house
of defendants. That being so, the question of plaintiff crossing the
drainage and encroaching the road margin does not arise. Further, in
Ex.X3, the sentence to the effect plaintiffSankaramma herself occupied
road margin was pen-written but not a typed one. The said sentence was
only an interpolation without initials of the Deputy Executive Engineer.
Hence, the authenticity of the said sentence is highly doubtful one.
Therefore, the plea of encroachment by the plaintiff is not believable. She
would further argue that when alleged encroachment made by the plaintiff
is discarded, what will remain for consideration is whether the defendants
constructed house on the road margin blocking the passage to the
plaintiffs land or not. On this point, apart from the cogent evidence
adduced by the plaintiff, the own admission of defendants is writ large.
Defendants indeed constructed house in the road margin blocking passage 
to the land of the plaintiff. Merely because some passage is available
abutting their house to approach to the plaintiffs land, that cannot be a
ground to deny injunction to plaintiff. The public will have every right to
use every inch of public property and that right is a natural right but not
prescribed by easement. To buttress her argument, she relied upon the
following judgments.
1. Mst.
Bhagwanti v. Mst
. Jiuti
2. S Someswar Rao v. S.Tirupatamma
3.
Movva Butchamma v. Movva Venkateswararao
c)      She alternatively argued that even assuming that the plaintiff too
encroached upon the road margin and made some constructions that will 
not disentitle her to get injunction. The authorities may take action against
her for removal of encroachment made by the plaintiff in a separate
proceedings. Thus, the learned senior counsel prayed to dismiss the
Second Appeal.
8)      Learned Government Pleader for Arbitration (AP) who appeared for
third respondent argued that both the plaintiff as well as defendants
encroached berm of the road passing between Brahmadevi and  
Pottempadu and made constructions and the same is evident from  
Ex.X7survey report of Assistant Engineer and also the evidence of
PW4. In that view, one trespasser cannot maintain injunction against
another trespasser. She submitted that Government was contemplating to 
take suitable action and thus prayed to pass suitable orders in the appeal.
9)  Substantial Questions 1 to 4:  These questions can be taken up
together as they relate to correctness of appreciation of facts and evidence
made by first appellate Court. It is the argument of learned senior counsel
for appellant that the Trial Court basing on the evidence on record, held,
plaintiff has encroached road margin and made constructions. However,
defendants did not encroach into plaintiffs property, but they too made
constructions on the road margin and therefore, the plaintiff who is an
encroacher, does not deserve mandatory injunction. However, the
appellate Court on a wrong appreciation of facts and evidence held that
since the defendants constructed the house blocking the passage from
plaintiffs land to the main road, plaintiff deserved mandatory injunction.
In the process, the lower appellate Court failed to consider the evidence on
record showing that plaintiff also encroached upon the road margin to
some extent and constructed a thatched house by the side of defendants
house. When plaintiff herself is an encroacher, she cannot claim the
equitable relief of injunction against the defendants. It is also her
argument that when the finding of the lower appellate Court is vitiated due
to non-consideration of crucial evidence on record, it can be said as
perverse finding and the High Court in the Second Appeal can set at
naught its judgment.
10)     I have given my anxious consideration.
a)      In Manicka Poosalis case (1 supra) the Apex Court referred its
earlier judgment in
Govindaraju v. Mariamman
[(2005) 2 SCC 500]
wherein it is held that the High Court while exercising its powers under
Section 100
C.P.C. on re-appreciation of the evidence cannot set aside the
findings of fact recorded by the first appellate Court unless the High Court
comes to the conclusion that the findings recorded by the first appellate
Court were perverse i.e. based on misreading of evidence or based on no
evidence.
b)      In
Abdul Raheems
case (2 supra) it was observed that
consideration of irrelevant fact and non-consideration of relevant fact
would give rise to substantial question of law. It was further observed that
reversal of a finding of fact arrived at by the first appellate Court ignoring
vital documents may also lead to a substantial question of law.
c)      In Dinesh Kumars case (3 supra) the Apex Court observed that
Second Appeal is maintainable basically on a substantial question of law
and not on facts.  However, if the High Court comes to the conclusion that
the findings of fact recorded by the courts below are perverse being based
on no evidence or based on irrelevant material, the appeal can be
entertained and it is permissible for the Court to re-appreciate the
evidence.
Thus, the substance of the above precedential jurisprudence is that
if the verdict of the first appellate Court is vitiated by perverse finding due
to non-consideration or misconsideration of the material evidence on
record, the High Court in the Second Appeal can interfere with. It has now
to be seen whether the judgment of the lower appellate Court is vitiated by
perversity.
11)     I have gone through both the judgments. The trial Court dismissed
the plaintiffs suit on the prime finding that defendants did not encroach
upon plaintiffs property but both the plaintiff and defendants encroached
the road margin and made construction and therefore, plaintiff cannot seek
for mandatory injunction. Whereas, the lower appellate Court held that
since the defendants constructed house on the road margin blocking the
passage to the plaintiffs land from the road, plaintiff deserve mandatory
injunction. In view of this dichotomy, it is pertinent to know:
i)      Whether defendants have encroached upon plaintiffs property and
also road margin causing obstruction to the plaintiff?
ii)     Whether plaintiff has encroached upon the road margin and made 
construction?
12)     In para-4 of the plaint it is pleaded that the defendants were
intending to construct a house on the road margin and they have no right
to make such unauthorized construction. They dug trenches on the 
Northern side encroaching 2 Ankanams of the land of the plaintiff.
In para-4(a) it is pleaded that the defendants constructed asbestos sheet
roofed house in the trenches dug before filing of the suit even after serving
of the orders passed by the trial Court in I.A.No.374 of 1991. Thus, the
plaintiff took a specific plea that defendants encroached upon the road
berm and also her site in an extent of 2  Ankanams and made illegal
construction of house towards South of her land. However, in the evidence
of PW1, he did not depose about defendants encroaching into property of
plaintiff. He only stated about their constructing house on the road margin.
The plaintiff did not adduce any oral or documentary evidence to establish
that the defendants encroached into 2 Ankanams of her land. Therefore,
the trial Court rightly observed that the defendants have not encroached
into the land of the plaintiff.  Sofaras defendants constructing house on the
road margin is concerned, the defendants themselves admitted in their
pleadings and evidence that themselves and some others have occupied 
the road margin and raised thatched houses about 30 years back and when  
those huts were damaged, they constructed stone walls with asbestos roof.
13)     Plaintiffs encroachment is concerned, though she vehemently
denied, the evidence of PW4 and Exs.X3 and X7 would clearly show that 
plaintiff too encroached a portion of the road margin and raised thatched
hut by the side of house of defendants. PW4 is the Executive Engineer,
Panchayat Raj, Nellore. He produced Exs.X1 to X7 during his evidence
and stated that the entire road margin was occupied by encroachers
including the plaintiff. In the cross-examination he stated that there is a
drainage lane between the land of plaintiff and house of defendants.
Basing on the same, it was argued that when the drainage lane intervenes
the land of plaintiff and road margin on which defendants constructed the
house, the question of plaintiff encroaching the road margin by crossing
the drainage lane does not arise.  This argument is only partly correct. To
the immediate North of road there is a road margin on which the
defendants constructed the house. To the further North there exists the
drainage and to the North of the drainage the land of plaintiff is situated.
Therefore, in the Northern direction, there is no scope for encroachment
by the plaintiff as contended. However, the encroachment was made by 
the plaintiff on the Eastern side of the defendants house. In Ex.X7 letter
addressed by Assistant Engineer, Mothkur to Deputy Executive Engineer 
he mentioned that by the side of defendants house plaintiff occupied road
margin by constructing a thatched house including the site 10 meters x 5.3
meters. The Deputy Executive Engineer also inspected the road and 
submitted a letter to the Executive Engineer under Ex.X3 wherein he too
mentioned that plaintiff herself occupied some portion of the road margin.
Of course, he mentioned this fact in pen-written form. In view of similar
report given by Assistant Engineer under Ex.X7, the authenticity of Ex.X3
can be accepted. Therefore, it is clear that plaintiff has also encroached a
portion of the road margin and raised a hut. In fact the hut is visible in the
photos filed by the plaintiff. Thus, both plaintiff and defendants are the
encroachers of road margin.
14)     The law relating to the right of the public on public roads and other
public properties and also law relating to the status of encroachers of the
roads is no more res integra. It is trite law that once it is a public road,
passage or rasta, whole, every part of it and every inch of it retains its
character as such. Then, the public will have right to pass through on
every inch of public road, passage or rasta. Any person who has a house
abutting to public road is entitled to access to the road and if any
obstruction is made by any person, special damage can be presumed to be  
caused to such person and he will deserve injunction. An obstructionist
cannot advance obdurate argument that even after his encroachment, some 
space is left for public to pass through. He cannot judge the method and
manner as to how a public right shall be exercised (vide
Mst.Bhagwantis
case(4 supra); S.Someswar Raos case(
5 supra) and Movva Butchammas
case(6 supra)).
15)     However, an encroacher of a public property stands on a different
footing. Having encroached upon a portion of the public rasta, an
encroacher cannot harp against another person that he encroached another
part of public rasta and caused obstruction to him. It would amount to pot
calling the kettle black. An encroacher also cannot maintain a suit for
injunction against another encroacher for, the sine qua non for affording
equitable relief of injunction is that the plaintiff must approach the Court
with clean hands.
16)     This Court in Talari Nageswar Rao v. Nakkal Pushpavathi
reiterated the above legal point thus:
Para-9The substantial question of law which is involved in the
instant case arises for consideration is that admittedly the houses
of the plaintiffs are situated in road margin which they are not
supposed to occupy and construct the houses, can they seek the 
relief of mandatory injunction against the defendants 1 and 2, the
appellants herein for removal of their houses which are also said
to be situate in road margin. The learned first appellate Court
expressed the view that if the houses of the plaintiffs are situate in
road margin, any villager can approach the Gram Panchayat or
the Court for removal of the said houses but the defendants cannot
resist the suit filed by the plaintiffs since their houses are
constructed encroaching the road margin.
Para-10   The said finding recorded by the learned first appellate
Court, in my considered view, is totally erroneous and contrary to
law. The plaintiffs who are guilty of constructing houses in road
margin cannot maintain the suit against the defendants for the
relief of mandatory injunction on the ground that the defendants'
houses were built encroaching upon the road margin.
17)     In the instant case, the plaintiff like defendants, occupied a portion
of the road margin and raised a hut. In that view, she cannot make a
complaint against them and seek for mandatory injunction. Unfortunately,
the lower appellate Court did not consider the evidence on record touching
the aspect of plaintiffs encroachment. Therefore, I am constrained to hold
that its judgment is vitiated by perversity and hence liable to be set aside.
These questions are answered accordingly.
18)  Substantial Question No.5:  Learned counsel for appellant submitted
that it is not her argument that Civil Court has no jurisdiction but her point
is that when equally efficacious relief is available, the Court shall desist
from granting injunction under Section 41(h) of Special Relief Act. In
view of her submission, substantial question No.5 has become redundant.
Sofaras the point of argument raised by her is concerned, learned counsel
has not vivified as to the availability of the so-called equally efficacious
relief to the plaintiff other than seeking for injunction in the suit. It is
altogether a different aspect that plaintiff does not deserve injunction as
she being an encroacher of the road margin. However, that has nothing to
do with
Section 41(h)
of Specific Relief Act. So, the said argument cannot
be accepted.
19)     In the result, this Second Appeal is allowed by setting aside the
judgment and decree passed by the lower appellate Court in A.S.No.2 of
1999. Consequently O.S.No.204 of 1991 on the file of III Additional
Junior Civil Judge, Nellore, is dismissed.  No costs.
20)     Before parting it must be made clear that this judgment will not
restrain the Government authorities to initiate appropriate proceedings to
evict the concerned encroachers by following due process of law.
As a sequel, miscellaneous petitions pending, if any, shall stand
closed.
__________________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 22.12.2017