[Cites
55
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Karem Sivajee vs J.Prasad Babu & Ors on 6 January, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 HYDERABAD 46, (2017) 3 ANDHLD 331
Bench:
Ramesh Ranganathan
,
A. Shankar Narayana
HONBLE THE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN AND THE HONBLE SRI  JUSTICE A. SHANKAR NARAYANA                    

WRIT APPEAL Nos.1220 OF 2016 and batch      

06-01-2017 

Karem Sivajee .Appellant 

J.Prasad Babu & Ors.. Respondents   

Counsel for appellant : Sri Vedula Venkataramana, Learned
                         Senior Counsel for Sri K.
                         Sarvabhouma Rao, Learned Counsel.

Counsel for respondents: Learned Advocate-General (AP), 
                          Learned Government Pleader for
                          Social Welfare (AP), Sri V.V.
                          Narayana Rao, Learned Counsel
                          for Sri V.Y. Prabhuvu, Learned
                          Counsel.

<GIST:  

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Citations:

1.      AIR 1953 SC 148 : 1953 SCR 533   
2.      AIR 1961 SC 674  
3.      AIR 1966 SC 1678  
4.      (2011) 9 SCC 354 : (2011) 4 SCC (Civ) 673
5.      (1957) 1 AER 49 
6.      (1977) 4 SCC 193 
7.      MANU/UP/1300/2015    
8.      (2007) 6 SCC 276 
9.      (1985) 3 SCC 398 
10.     (1975) 2 SCC 649 
11.     (2013) 5 SCC 1 
12.     (2005) 7 SCC 627 
13.     (2008)1 SCC 728  
14.     (1990)4 SCC 356  
15.     (2007)2 SCC 181  
16.     AIR 1967 S.C. 295 
17.     (1981) 1 SCC 664 
18.     AIR 1969 SC 707  
19.     (1976) 1 SCC 77 
20.     AIR 1964 SC 1742  
21.     (1899)2 QB 158 
22.     (2003) 2 SCC 455 
23.     (1973) 1 SCC 216 
24.     (1876) 7 AC 743 
25.     (1955) AC 696 (HL) 
26.     (1976) 3 ALL ER 611 
27.     (1976) 2 All ER 721
28.     (1834) 1 Ad & EI 136
29.     (1836) 2 M&W 195  
30.     (1973) 2 ALL ER 204 
31.     (1974) 2 ALL ER 73 
32.     (2002) 3 SCC 722 
33.     (2006) 11 SCC 731 = AIR 2006 SC 3106   
34.     (1891) A.C. 531 (G)
35.     (1846) 4 MIA 179 = 6 Moo P.C 1 (PC) 
36.     AIR 1933 PC 63 (1) 
37.     (2002) 3 SCC 533 
38.     (2005) 4 SCC 530 



HONBLE THE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN               
       AND
       HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A. SHANKAR NARAYANA        

                        WRIT APPEAL Nos.1220 AND 1225 OF 2016       
COMMON JUDGMENT:
(Per the Honble The Acting Chief Justice Ramesh Ranganathan)        
        
        Both W.A. Nos.1220 and 1225 of 2016 are preferred by the 
4th respondent and respondent Nos.1 and 2, in W.P. No.14299 of 
2016, respectively aggrieved by the order of the Learned Single
Judge dated 04.11.2016 setting aside the appointment of the 4th
respondent as the Chairman of the Andhra Pradesh State 
Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, vide  
G.O.Ms. No.45 dated 13.04.2016, on grounds of illegality and
procedural impropriety.  The parties in these appeals shall,
hereinafter, be referred to as they are arrayed in W.P No.14299 of
2016.
The petitioners, five in number, filed W.P. No.14299 of 2016
to declare the action of the 1st respondent in issuing G.O.Ms.
No.45 dated 13.04.2016 appointing the 4th respondent as the
Chairman of the Andhra Pradesh State Commission for Scheduled   
Castes and Scheduled Tribes (hereinafter called the Commission)
as illegal, arbitrary and violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution of
India, and to direct the 1st respondent to empanel candidates for
being considered for appointment as the Chairman of the
Commission.
G.O.Ms. No.44 dated 13.04.2016 was issued by the  
Government of Andhra Pradesh, in the exercise of its powers under
Section 3 of the A.P. State Commission for Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes Act, 2003 (hereinafter called the 2003 Act)
reconstituting the Commission. On the very same day, G.O.Ms.  
No.45 dated 13.04.2016 was issued nominating the 4th respondent 
as the Chairman of the reconstituted Commission.  The term of the
Chairman was to be for a period of three years from the date he
assumed office or until he attained the age of sixty five years,
whichever was earlier.  G.O.Ms. No.45 dated 13.04.2016, whereby 
the 4th respondent was appointed as the Chairman of the
Commission, was subjected to challenge in W.P. No.12499 of 2016,  
resulting in the order under appeal being passed.
In W.P. No.14299 of 2016 the Learned Single Judge framed 
the following five points for consideration:
(1) Whether the appointment of the Chairman, under Section
5(1)(a) of the 2003 Act, could be based on the pleasure doctrine or
whether prescription of a fixed term in Section 6 made the said
principle inapplicable?
(2) Whether absence of Rules under Section 18 of the Act gave the
1st respondent the power to make appointment to the post of
Chairman as per its free will and choice?
(3) Whether the selection of an eminent person in clause 5(1)(a)
should be based on objective criteria, and whether the person
should at least satisfy the minimum criteria mentioned in clause
5(1)(b) for appointing ordinary Members of the Commission?
(4) Whether the petitioners have locus standi to file the Writ
Petition?
(5) Whether appointment of the 4th respondent, as the Chairman
of the Commission, required reconsideration in the light of the
provisions of the Act?
On point No.1 the Learned Single Judge, on an analysis of
the provisions of the Act, held that there was nothing in any of the
provisions of the Act, or any Rule, for simple termination of a
person nominated as the Chairman; no Rule could be made for 
simple termination without notice, as Section 6 of the Act only
prescribed the grounds of disqualification to be enumerated in the
Rules; the 2003 Act was a piece of social legislation to safeguard
the interests of the Schedule Castes and the Schedule Tribes; the
2003 Act sought to implement the provisions of
Article 17
of the
Constitution relating to untouchability; it was made in furtherance
of
Article 38
of the Constitution to secure a social order for the
promotion of welfare of all the people, and for achieving equal
justice under
Article 39-A;
it was also meant to promote the
education and economic interests of the Schedule Castes and the 
Schedule Tribes under
Article 46;
and, therefore, appointment of
members and the Chairman of the Commission did not attract the 
pleasure doctrine.  The Learned Single Judge further held that the
2003 Act required an eminent person to be appointed as the
Chairman on the basis of objective criteria/material in view of the
language of Section 5 of the Act; and the pleasure doctrine could
not be applied when the 2003 Act prescribed a fixed term, but did
not provide for disqualification or for summary termination.
On point No.2, the Learned Single Judge held that, even in
the absence of Rules having been made under the Act, the 1st
respondent could not appoint any person at its will and choice to
the important post of Chairman of the Commission; the High Court
could exercise its powers, under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
India, to ensure that the State Government exercised its discretion
properly; even in the absence of prescription of parameters by the
Statute, some parameters could be implemented in the process of 
selecting persons such as the Chairman of the Commission; the 
question as to eminence and integrity of the person to be
appointed as the Chairman, and his record of service to the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, were important factors 
which were needed to be considered before a person is appointed
to the post of Chairman of the Commission; the mere fact that the
body in question only made recommendations to the Government   
did not mean that its functions were not important, and persons
could be appointed as per the whims and fancies of the
Government; absence of a challenge to Section 5(1)(a) of the 2003
Act did not enable the 1st respondent to make appointment to the
post of Chairman as per the sweet will and pleasure of the political
executive; in the context of the responsibilities conferred, under
Section 12 of the 2003 Act, on the Chairman and members of the 
Commission, parameters such as integrity of the candidate, and
his record of service to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes, were implied in the very nature of duties entrusted to the
Commission; necessary guidance must be provided by Rules to  
make Section 5(1)(a) workable and meaningful; and absence of 
Rules framed under the 2003 Act, in respect of qualifications for
appointment of a Chairman, did not permit the 1st respondent to
appoint a person to the post of Chairman of the Commission as per
its free will and choice.
On point No.3, the Learned Single Judge held that the words
eminent person in Section 5(1)(a) required the person to be far
above ordinary, i.e., far above those who could be appointed as
members of the Commission who were men of integrity; they 
should stand head and shoulders above persons who are eligible to
be appointed as members of the Commission; selection of a person 
as an eminent person should be based on objective criteria, and
was not to be a subjective decision; the minimum  requirement of
ability, integrity and having outstanding record of selfless service
to the cause of justice for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes were applicable to the post of Chairman; the State
Government was not entitled to fill up the posts of members and
Chairman of the Commission without any norms, at its pleasure,
wherein persons favoured by the party in power were chosen
without any reference to qualities such as their ability, integrity,
track record of providing services to members of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, educational qualifications etc;
the contention that appointment of the 4th respondent as
Chairman of the Commission was not justiciable, since it was a
part of the spoils system, was liable to be rejected; the term
eminent persons in Section 5(1)(a) should be determined on the
basis of objective criteria, and should atleast satisfy the minimum
criteria mentioned in Section 5(1)(b) for appointing ordinary
members of the Commission; it was possible to read into Section
5(1)(a) the said minimum criteria, and the requirement that the
person must possess ability, very high integrity and a record of
service to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes; and
there ought to be a transparent process of selection of person to
the post of the Chairman of the Commission.
On point No.4, the Learned Single Judge held that all the
petitioners belonged to the Scheduled Caste community, and the 
1st petitioner claimed to have credentials to be considered for
appointment to the said post vis--vis the credentials of the 4th
respondent; along with the counter-affidavit of respondents 1 and
2, a copy of the application submitted by the 1st petitioner to the
Chief Secretary on 14.07.2015, for consideration of his
candidature for the said post had been filed; and the petitioners
could, therefore, not be non-suited on the ground of locus.
On point No.5, the Learned Single Judge held that
appointment of the 4th respondent could not have been made on 
the spoils system or the pleasure doctrine; interference is
permissible if the appointment is not legally valid; appointment to
the post of Chairman of the Commission could be tested on the
touchstone of
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution, as the
Commission fell within the definition of State under
Article 12;
on
application of the Wednesbury rule, the order of appointment of
the 4th respondent was liable to be set aside on grounds of
illegality, non-application of relevant principles, and procedural
irregularities; the 1st respondent had committed an illegality in
presuming that the appointment of the 4th respondent to the post
of Chairman was an appointment under the spoils system; it had
erred in its belief that the word eminent was subjective, it did not
require any objective criteria, and even the relevant minimal
qualifications prescribed for members need not be applied; there
was no evidence that the 1st respondent had checked the 
antecedents of the 4th respondent through a process of police
verification to check whether he was a person of integrity; this was
because appointment of 4th respondent was made on the same day   
the Commission was constituted; no evidence was placed before 
the Court regarding scrutiny of the credentials of the 4th
respondent with regards the services rendered by him for the
upliftment of member of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes; no evidence was placed before the Court to show if any
persons candidature had been considered, or that applications of
other persons were invited, and any search committee was 
appointed to identify such persons and make a comparative
assessment of their credentials; it was not the case of the
respondents that persons from the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes, such as High Court and Supreme Court judges,  
bureaucrats, high ranking police officers, persons involved in
social service particularly to the cause of upliftment of Schedule
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, were unavailable for a detailed
consideration of several names for appointment to the office of
Chairman of the Commission; the respondent had assumed  that  
the post could be filled under the political spoils system, which it
was not; and as appointment of the 4th respondent, as the
Chairman of the Commission, had been made without reference to  
the requirements of the statute, without following any objective
criteria for deciding the eminence of a person suitable to be
appointed to the post, and without following any transparent
method to identify that the 4th respondent was the person to be
appointed to the post, appointment of the 4th respondent was
vitiated both on grounds of illegality as well as procedural
impropriety. The Learned Single Judge held that the appointment
of the 4th respondent, as the Chairman of the Commission, was
liable to be set aside.  In conclusion the Learned Single Judge held
that:-
(i)     the appointment of the 4th respondent, as the Chairman
of the Commission, was liable to be set aside both on the
grounds of illegality and procedural impropriety.
(ii)    Appointment of the Chairman, under Section 5(1)(a) of
the Act, cannot be based upon the general principle of
spoils system in view of Section 6(1) which provides for a
period of 3 years as the tenure of the Chairman of the
Commission unless otherwise disqualified from
continuing as such under the Rules; and as, admittedly,
no such disqualification Rules have been framed, and
there is no scope for disqualification, the present case of
appointment of the 4th respondent cannot be brought
within the spoils system/pleasure doctrine.
(iii)   The members and Chairman of the Commission perform    
a variety of highly important functions and exercise
important powers to safeguard the interests of the
Schedule Castes and the Schedule Tribes.
(iv)    Even in the absence of Rules being framed under the Act,
the 1st respondent could not appoint any person as per its
will and choice to the post of Chairman of the
Commission. Parameters such as ability, integrity of the
candidate and his record of service to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes are implied by the very
nature of duties entrusted to the Commission.
(v)     Eminent persons are not ordinary persons. They are far
above those who can be the members of the Commission,   
who should be men of integrity.  They ought to, at least,
stand head and shoulders above persons who are eligible
to be appointed as members of the Commission.
(vi)    Formation of opinion by the 1st respondent, that a person
is eminent, must be on objective material and cannot not
rest upon a subjective view unsubstantiated by
demonstrable credentials.
(vii)
Article 14
of the Constitution of India requires the
procedure under law to be fair, just and reasonable; and
such powers, to make appointment to public offices,
should be exercised in a manner consistent with public
interest.  The process, leading upto the appointment,
must be fair and reasonable, and must provide for
consideration of all persons eligible and qualified in this
regard.
(viii)  The first respondent failed to follow a transparent and
objective process by giving due publicity to the fact that
the State Government is in the process of filling up
vacancies in the Commission, since it is conceived in
public interest and discharges public functions.  Its
membership/Chairmanship cannot be regarded as an   
instrument of conferring largesse on a chosen few.
While setting aside the appointment of the 4th respondent as
the Chairman of the Commission, the Learned Single Judge 
directed the 1st respondent to follow a transparent method such as
inviting applications from interested persons through
advertisement and/or constituting a search committee, to suggest
suitable candidates, keeping in mind the parameters of integrity
and track record of the applicants/candidates, and also whether
they can be treated as eminent persons; and to then make
appointment of a suitable person to the said post in accordance
with law. The 1st respondent was directed to consider persons from
all walks of life including individuals who have retired as judges of
the Supreme Court or the High Court or civil servants, and whose
contribution to the upliftment of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes is well documented, so that the Commission 
inspires the confidence of the public at large.
Learned Advocate General for the State of Andhra Pradesh,
appearing on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, would submit that the
2003 Act does not prescribe any procedure for inviting
applications, nor is knowledge of the laws stipulated as a condition
for appointment as the Chairman; the Learned Single Judge erred
in holding that the post of Chairman of the Commission required
knowledge in law; the mere fact that Rules were not made, did not
disable the Government from appointing a person as the Chairman 
of the Commission under Section 5(1)(a) of the Act; in the absence
of any stipulation in the Act, and in the absence of Rules being
made in this regard, the Learned Single Judge erred in holding
that a notification should be issued for inviting applications for
appointment to the office of Chairman; such a direction amounts
to judicial legislation which is impermissible; the  State
Government has the discretion to appoint an eminent person as
the Chairman of the Commission; and it is not obligated to invite
applications, or constitute a search committee, in order to make
appointment to the office of Chairman of the Commission.
Sri Vedula Venkataramana, Learned Senior Counsel  
appearing on behalf of the  4th respondent, would submit that
appointment to the post of Chairman of the Commission is not
justiciable; the Constitution of India provides for appointment to
several constitutional posts without stipulating guidelines or
prescribing the eligibility criteria for such appointments; a few of
such posts are as referred to in
Articles 76
, 148
and
155
of the
Constitution of India; a process of inviting applications from the
general public, in selecting candidates for appointment to such
constitutional posts, cannot be resorted to; confidence and trust is
reposed by the Legislature in the designated appointing authority
to exercise power in a legitimate manner; appointment to a
statutory office is based on the subjective decision of the State; the
analogy of State largesse is not attracted; the power to appoint a
person as the Chairman of the Commission is referable to Section
5(1)(a) of the Act; the conditions stipulated, for appointment as
members of the Commission under Section 5(1)(b) of the Act,
cannot be read into Section 5(1)(a) thereof; the wisdom of the
legislature in prescribing different criteria, for appointment to the
office of Chairman and for appointment as members of the
Commission, cannot be scrutinised by Courts; the Statute has to
be read as it is, and, if the wisdom of the law maker cannot be
discerned, the Courts cannot read into the provisions, the lack of
wisdom of the law maker, to make the provision more meaningful
or purposeful; the literal rule of construction of statutes should be
applied; the word eminent is incapable of precise meaning; non-
consideration of all eminent persons, belonging to the Scheduled
Castes, cannot be the subject matter of judicial review; the
Chairman of the  Commission is a member only for the purpose of
a quorum, and nothing more; there is no justification in reading
clauses (a) and (b) of Section 5(1) together; no obligation is cast by
the Act on the State to make a comparative evaluation of the
degree of eminence of persons who may be available in
abundance for appointment to the post of Chairman; and the
Learned Single Judge erred in interfering with the appointment of
the 4th respondent as the Chairman of the Commission.   He would 
rely on
Nalinakhya Bysack v. Shyam Sunder Haldar
;
Shri Ram  
v. State of Maharashtra
; and
Shyam Kishsori Devi v. The
Patna Municipal Corporation
.
On the other hand Sri V.V. Narayana Rao, Learned Counsel  
appearing on behalf of the petitioners, would submit that Section
11 of the 2003 Act confers powers, akin to a Civil Court, on the
Commission; the Learned Single Judge was, therefore, justified in
reading the requirement of knowledge in laws for appointment to
the office of Chairman under Section 5(1)(a) of the Act; the very fact
that the 4th respondent was appointed as the Chairman of the
Commission on the very same day on which it was reconstituted 
(13.04.2016) shows that the 4th respondent was appointed at the
whim and fancy of respondents 1 and 2, and not on the basis of
any objective criteria; and the order of the Learned Single Judge
does not necessitate interference in an intra-court appeal under
clause 15 of the Letters Patent.
The contention that Clause (a) of Section 5(1) of the 2003 Act
relates to appointment of a Chairman, and the conditions
stipulated therein are different from the conditions stipulated in
Clause (b) which relates to appointment of members,  does not
merit acceptance as the legislative intent, in prescribing the
criteria for appointment as the Chairman and as members of the
Commission, must be gathered on reading of the provisions of the
Act as a whole, and not on a reading of a clause in a particular
Section in isolation.  The key to the opening of every law is the
reason and spirit of the lawit is the animus imponentis, the
intention of the lawmaker, expressed in the law itself, taken as a
whole.  To arrive at the true meaning of any particular phrase in a
Statute, that particular phrase is not to be viewed detached from
its context. (
Delhi Airtech Services (P) Ltd. v. State of U.P.
, ;
Attorney General v. HRH Prince Ernest Augustus of Hanover ).
The words in a Statute cannot be read in isolation, their colour and
content are derived from their context and every word in a statute
is to be examined in its context.
(Delhi Airtech Services (P) Ltd.4;
Union of India v. Sankalchand Himatlal Sheth
).  Bearing these
principles in mind, let us take note of the relevant provisions of the
A.P. State Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes   
Act, 2003 (the 2003 Act for short).
As is evident from the statement of objects and reasons for
the 2003 Act, the State Government appointed Justice Dr. K.
Punnayya, retired judge of the Andhra Pradesh High Court, as the
Single Member Commission of enquiry to enquire into the practice
of untouchability against the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes, and the incidence of atrocities against them; and to suggest
measures for eradication of untouchability and prevention of such
atrocities against the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
The Commission, after examining numerous petitions presented by 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, made certain 
suggestions, and for measures to be taken for eradication of
untouchability, and for prevention of atrocities against the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.  In order to achieve
this goal, the Commission recommended constitution of an 
independent Commission, on the lines of the Andhra Pradesh State 
Minorities Commission, to perform the duties of the Commission
as prescribed under
Article 338(5)
of the Constitution of India, by
giving it a statutory status under a specific Legislation.  The State
Government, after examining the recommendations of the Single 
Member Commission of enquiry, decided to enact a law for 
constitution of the Andhra Pradesh State Commission for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.  This resulted in the
2003 Act being made.
Section 2(a) of the 2003 Act defines Chairman to mean the
Chairman, of the Andhra Pradesh State Commission for Scheduled  
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, appointed under Section 5.  Section
2(b) defines Commission to mean the Andhra Pradesh State 
Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes   
constituted under Section 3.  Section 2(c) defines Civil Rights to
mean any right accruing to a person, by reason of the abolition of
untouchability, by
Article 17
of the Constitution.  Section 2(d)
defines disabilities to mean those provided in
Article 15(2)
of the
Constitution, and Section 2(h) defines Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes to have the meanings assigned to them 
respectively under clauses (24) and (25) of
Article 366
of the
Constitution.  Section 2(g) defines prescribed to mean prescribed
by rules made, by the Government, under the Act.
Chapter II of the 2003 Act relates to the Andhra Pradesh
State Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.  
Section 3(1), thereunder, enables the Government, by notification,
to constitute a body to be known as the Andhra Pradesh State
Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to  
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions
assigned to, it under the Act.   Section 3(2)  stipulates that the
Commission shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession 
and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of the Act
and the rules made thereunder, to acquire, hold and dispose of
property and to enter into contracts and, in the said name, to sue
and be sued.  Section 4 relates to the meetings of the Commission,
and sub-section (1) thereof stipulates that the Commission shall
hold ordinary meetings at such places, and at such intervals, as
may be prescribed, and that the meetings may be convened by the 
Chairman at any time for the transaction of any urgent business.
Section 4(2) stipulates that the number of members necessary to
constitute a quorum of the meeting, and the procedure to be
followed therein, shall be such as may be prescribed.  Section 5
relates to composition of the Commission and, since the dispute in
these Writ proceedings revolves around its scope, Section 5 is
extracted hereunder:
Composition of Commission:- (1) The Commission shall
consist of the following members:-
(a). a Chairman shall be an eminent person belonging to
Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe to be appointed by the
Government; and
(b). not more than five members to be appointed by the
Government from amongst persons of ability, integrity and
having outstanding record of selfless service to the cause of
justice for the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes belonging
to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes out of which one 
woman member shall be appointed by the Government.
The Secretary shall convene the meetings of the Commission from 
time to time.
Section 6 relates to the term of Office and conditions of
service of the Chairman and Members and, under sub-section (1)
thereof, the Chairman or the members shall, unless otherwise
disqualified from continuing as such under the Rules, hold office
for a term of three years from the date he assumes office or until
he attains the age of sixty five years, whichever is earlier, and shall
be eligible for re-appointment for a second term only.  Section 6(2)
stipulates that the Chairman or a Member may, by writing under
his hand addressed to the Government, resign from office, but he
shall continue in office till his resignation is accepted by the
Government, or his successor is appointed. Section 6(3) stipulates
that the successor, so appointed under sub-section (2), shall hold
office for the remainder of the term of his predecessor or until he
attains the age of sixty five years, whichever is earlier.  Section 6(4)
enables the Government to remove a person from the office of a
member, if that person (a) becomes an undischarged insolvent; (b)
is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which,
in the opinion of the Government, involves moral turpitude; (c)
becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent   
court; (d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; (e) without
obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, absents himself
from three consecutive meetings of the Commission; (f) has, in the
opinion of the Government, so abused the position of the member
as to render that persons continuance in office detrimental to the
interest of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the
State, or the public interest.  Under the proviso thereto, no person
shall be removed under this clause until that person has been
given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
Section 10(1) stipulates that the Commission shall meet as
and when necessary, at such time and place, as the Chairman may  
think fit.  Section 10(2) empowers the Commission to regulate its
own procedure.  Section 11 relates to the power of the Commission
and, sub-section (1) thereof, stipulates that the Commission shall,
while performing its functions under Section 12, have the power of
the Civil Court trying a suit and, in particular, in respect of the
matters mentioned therein.  Section 11(2) stipulates that any
proceeding before the Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of
Sections 192
and
228
of the
Indian Penal Code, and the Commission shall be deemed to be a  
Court for the purpose of
Section 195
of the Code of Criminal
Procedure.
Section 11(3)
confers power on the Commission to 
requisition such information, document and such assistance as
may be required from any department of the Government for the
effective implementation of the provisions of the Act.
Section 12
stipulates the functions the Commission is required to perform
and, among them, are (a) inquire into complaints of (i) violation of
any rights provided under the
Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955
,
and the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act, 1989
; (ii) negligence, in the prevention of such
violation, by a public servant; (iii) inquire and recommend to the
concerned disciplinary authority to initiate disciplinary action in
case the Commission is of the view that any public servant has
been grossly negligent or grossly indifferent in regard to the
discharge of his duties in relation to the protection of the interests
of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes; (b) investigate
and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes under the Constitution, or
under any other law for the time being in force, or under any order
of the Government, and to evaluate the working of such
safeguards; (c) evaluate the working of various safeguards and civil
rights accruing to a person as stipulated in the
Protection of Civil
Rights Act, 1955
and the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled  
Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
for the protection of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and in the laws,
regulations and any other orders passed by the Union and State
Governments; investigate and monitor all matters relating to the
safeguards provided for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes under the Constitution or under any other laws and
Government orders, and to evaluate the making of such
safeguards; (d) make recommendations with a view to ensure 
effective implementation and enforcement of all safeguards under
the
Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955
and the
Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
; (e)
undertake a review of the implementation of the policies pursued
by the Union and the State Governments with respect to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes; (f) look into specific
complaints regarding deprivation of rights and safeguards in the
interest of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes; (g)
enquire into any unfair practice, take a decision thereon, and
recommend to the Government the action to be taken in that
matter; (h) to spread literacy among various sections of society
regarding the
Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955
and the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of 
Atrocities) Act, 1989
, and to promote awareness of the safeguards
available for the protection of these rights; (i) conduct studies,
research and analysis on the question of avoidance of
discrimination against the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes; (j) suggest appropriate legal and welfare measures in
respect of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes to be
undertaken by the Government; (k) inquire into any unfair
practice; (l) receive written complaints regarding Schedule Castes
and Scheduled Tribes, and to cause investigation or inquires to be
made by the Commissioner of Social Welfare to monitor working of
the laws concerning the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled  
Tribes women, to invite one or more prominent persons to
participate in the meetings of the Commission to advise on such
matters as may be necessary; encourage the efforts of non-
governmental organisations and institutions working in the field of
human rights, and for the upliftment and betterment of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes; and make periodical  
reports, at prescribed intervals, to the government.
Section 17
stipulates that the Chairman/Members and employees of the 
Commission shall be deemed to be public servants within the
meaning of
Section 21
IPC.
Section 18(1)
enables the Government,
by notification, to make rules for carrying out all or any of the
purposes of the Act.
As noted hereinabove, the composition of the Commission,
constituted under
Section 3
of the 2003 Act, is to consist of the
members mentioned therein which, under clause (a) of
Section
5(1)
, is the Chairman and, under clause (b) thereof, five members.
The Legislature has, in enacting
Section 5
of the 2003 Act,
considered the Chairman also to be a member of the Commission.  
We must express our inability to agree with the submission of Sri
V. Venkataramana, Learned Senior Counsel, that the Chairman of 
the Commission is a Member under
Section 5(1)(a)
of the 2003 Act 
only for the purpose of a quorum. There is nothing in the language
of
Section 5(1)
to support such a view.   It is
Section 4
of the 2003
Act which relates to meetings of the Commission and not
Section
5(1)
.
Section 4(2)
of the 2003 Act stipulates that the number of
members to constitute the quorum of the meeting, and the
procedure to be followed in such meetings, shall be prescribed by
way of rules made under the Act.  As prescription of the quorum,
for a meeting of the members of the Commission, has been left to
the discretion of the rule making authority, it is evident that
Section 5(1)
of the 2003 Act, which provides that the Chairman
shall also be a member of the Commission, is not merely for the
purpose of prescribing a quorum for the meetings of the
Commission.
Section 5(1)(b)
enables the Government to appoint not more
than five members amongst persons, belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, of ability, integrity and having
outstanding record of selfless service for the cause of justice to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.  Of these five
members, one should be a woman.  The composition of the  
Commission is of six members, i.e., the Chairman and five other
members.  As the Chairman is also a member of the Commission   
under
Section 5(1)
of the 2003 Act, he must necessarily possess
the qualifications, prescribed by the legislature, for being
appointed as a member under
Section 5(1)
i.e., he should be a
person of ability, integrity, and should have an outstanding record
of selfless service to the cause of justice for the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes.
The word 'eminence', used in
Section 5(1)(a)
, is not a defined
expression under the 2003 Act.  It must, therefore, bear its
ordinary connotation and meaning. The word 'eminence'  has been
defined in the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary to mean
"distinguished in character or attainment". The Random House
Dictionary of the English language defines the expression
''eminence' to mean "high in station, rank, or repute; distinguished".
Webster's New Twentieth Century Dictionary of the English
language defines the expression 'eminent' to mean "standing high by
comparison with others; renowned; exalted; distinguished". The meaning
which is ascribed to the expression 'eminent' in these dictionaries
bears a common sense understanding of the expression.  
(Gorakhpur University Aff.
College Teachers Association v.
State of U.P
).
As
Section 5(1)(a)
stipulates that the Chairman should be an
eminent person belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes, a person appointed as the Chairman must not 
only possess the qualifications, stipulated under
Section 5(1)(b)
, to
be appointed as a member i.e., he should not only be a person of
ability, integrity and having an outstanding record of selfless
service to the cause of justice for the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes, he must, in addition, be an eminent person from
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.   As held by the
Learned Single Judge in the order under appeal, in our opinion
rightly so, the legislature has, by the use of the word eminent in
Section 5(1)(a)
of the 2003 Act, directed the executive only to
appoint a person, from among the Scheduled Castes and the  
Scheduled Tribes, who not only possesses the qualifications
stipulated for being appointed as a member of the Commission,
but is also a person of eminence which would mean a person who 
stands far higher in comparison with the other members of the
Commission.
We are in complete agreement with the conclusion of the
Learned Single Judge that the State Government must bear in
mind the parameters of integrity and track record of the
applicants, and should satisfy itself that the person to be
appointed as the Chairman of the Commission is an eminent 
person i.e., a person who stands far higher in comparison with the
other members of the Commission, all of whom are required to be
men and women of ability, integrity and having an outstanding
record of selfless service to the cause of justice for the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, besides being members of the  
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes.    The Commission, 
constituted under the 2003 Act, has been entrusted with several
important functions under
Section 12
thereof with a view to protect
and promote the interest of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes.  Statutory Commissions, such as the 
commission constituted under
Section 3(1)
of the 2003 Act, are
conceived in public interest and discharge public functions. Their
membership cannot be regarded as an instrument for conferring
largesse on a chosen few (Gorakhpur University Aff. College
Teachers Association7), and it is only a person of eminence,
ability and integrity with an outstanding record of selfless service
to the cause of justice for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes, who can be appointed as the Chairman of the Commission.
As the Chairman is also a member of the Commission, under
Section 5(1)
of the 2003 Act, it cannot be said that the legislature
has prescribed different criteria for appointment to the posts of
Chairman and members, or that the qualifications stipulated for
being appointed as a member of the Commission under
Section  
5(1)(b)
of the Act does not apply for appointment to the office of the
Chairman of the Commission under
Section 5(1)(a)
of the 2003 Act.
It is only a person, fulfilling the qualifications stipulated under
Section 5(1)(a)
of the 2003 Act, who can be appointed as a member
of the Commission.  In addition he must, as stipulated in
Section
5(1)(a)
, be a person of eminence.  It is only a person, who stands
far higher in comparison with the other members of the
Commission, who can be appointed as the Chairman of the  
Commission.
The State Government cannot appoint any person it pleases
as the Chairman of the Commission as the legislative mandate is
that only a person, who possesses the qualifications prescribed in
both clauses (a) & (b) of
Section 5(1)
of the 2003 Act, who can be
appointed as the Chairman.  Appointments made, applying the 
doctrine of pleasure, have received Constitutional sanction under
Article 310.
Unlike in the United Kingdom, this doctrine is not
subject in our country to any law made by Parliament but only to
the provisions of the Constitution. (
Union of India v. Shardindu
).
The distinction between a statutory appointment and a pleasure
appointment should be borne in mind.  Pleasure appointments are
those where the incumbents are appointed at the pleasure of the
President, Governors etc. As against this, statutory appointments
are made under the statute and the service conditions of the
incumbents are governed by the statute. They are not pleasure
appointments. Under the Constitution, appointment of Governors
is purely a pleasure appointment, or appointment of such a nature
which the incumbent holds at the pleasure of the President.
(Shardindu8;
Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel
).  Unlike posts to
which persons are appointed, and who hold office under the
pleasure of the Government, appointment to statutory posts, (such
as the posts of Chairman and Members of the Commission under   
the 2003 Act), can only be made in strict adherence to the
qualifications prescribed either under the Statute (i.e., the 2003
Act) or in terms of the rules made thereunder. The posts of
Attorney General of India under
Article 76
of the Constitution of
India, the Controller and Auditor General of India under
Article
148
, and the Governor under
Article 155
, cannot be compared with
the posts of Chairman and members of the Commission as the  
latter posts are governed by the provisions of the 2003 Act, and it
is only such persons, from among those fulfilling the qualifications
stipulated thereunder, who can be appointed as the Chairman and
members of the Commission.
The Courts have power to examine whether the executive
has acted lawfully. (
Hochtief Gammon v. State of Orissa
;
State
of Punjab v. Salil Sabhlok
). If the exercise of a discretionary
power has been influenced by considerations that cannot lawfully
be taken into account, or by the disregard of relevant
considerations required to be taken into account (expressly or
impliedly), a Court will normally hold that the power has not been
validly exercised. (De Smiths Judicial Review, 6th Edn; Salil
Sabhlok11). While this Court, in the exercise of its jurisdiction
under
Article 226
of the Constitution, would not, ordinarily,
interfere with the discretion of the State Government in selecting
and appointing the Chairman of the Commission, if it is shown
that the relevant factors either expressly provided, or those implied
from the very nature of the functions entrusted to the Commission,
have not been considered by the State Government in selecting and
appointing the Chairman of the Commission, this Court would
quash such selection and appointment to ensure that the
discretion of the State Government is exercised within the bounds
of the statute.  (Salil Sabhlok11).   Absence of any procedure being
laid down by
the Legislature for appointment of the Chairman of
the Commission would not confer on the State Government  
absolute discretion in selecting and appointing any person it
pleases as the Chairman of the Commission. Even though no  
procedure has been
laid down in
the 2003 Act for appointment of
the Chairman and Members of the Commission, the State   
Government must select only persons of competence, (ie those who  
fulfil the criteria stipulated under clauses (a) & (b) of
Section 5(1)
of
the 2003 Act), for appointment to such an office, as the discretion
vested in the State Government under the 2003 Act is limited by
the purposes for which the discretion is vested, and the purposes
are discernible from the functions of the Commissions specified in
Section 12
of the 2003 Act. (Salil Sabhlok11).
In cases where the validity of the appointment of either the
Chairman or the Members of the Commission is under challenge,  
this Court, in the exercise of its powers under judicial review, can
undoubtedly examine if the relevant factors, stipulated by the
legislature, have been considered by the Government while making
such appointments, and whether the material on record, before the
State Government shows that the person, appointed as the 
Chairman of the Commission, possesses the qualifications 
prescribed under clauses (a) & (b) of
Section 5(1)
of the 2003 Act.
While the satisfaction of the Government in making appointments
to statutory posts may well be subjective, it must, nonetheless, be
based on the material on record, and on a consideration of relevant
factors.  The opinion of the State Government must be founded on
material, and not rest upon a subjective view unsubstantiated by
demonstrable credentials. (Gorakhpur University Aff. College
Teachers Association7).
Formation of opinion must be preceded by application of
mind as regards consideration of relevant factors and rejection of
irrelevant ones. (
Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. Ltd. v. Darius
Shapur Chenai
;
Devinder Singh v. State of Punjab
).
While
formation of opinion may well be subjective, it must be based on
objective considerations,  (
India Cement Ltd. v. Union of India
,
Rajesh Kumar v. Dy. CIT
), and existence of circumstances
relevant to the inference, as the sine qua non for action, must be
demonstrable.
(
Barium Chemicals Ltd. v. Company Law Board
;
Swadeshi Cotton Mills v. Union of India
).  If the action is
questioned on the ground that no circumstances leading to an
inference of the kind contemplated by the Section exists, the action
might be exposed to interference unless the existence of the
circumstances is made out. It is not reasonable to say that the
Section permitted the Government to say that it has formed the
opinion on circumstances which it thinks exist.  Since the
existence of circumstances is a condition fundamental to the
making of an opinion, the existence of the circumstances, if
questioned, has to be proved at least prima facie. It is not sufficient
to assert that the circumstances exist and give no clue to what
they are because the circumstances must be such as to lead to 
conclusions of certain definiteness.  (Barium Chemicals Ltd.16).
In the formation of opinion regard must be had to the factors
enumerated in that particular Section of the Act, together with all
other factors relevant for the exercise of that power.  There must
exist circumstances which, in the opinion of the competent
authority, suggest what has been set out in Act. Existence of such
circumstances is a condition precedent for the formation of the
requisite opinion and, if the existence of those conditions is
challenged, Courts are entitled to examine whether those
circumstances existed when the order was made. (
Rohtas  
Industries Ltd v. S.D. Agarwal
).  If it is shown that the
circumstances do not exist, or that they are such that it is
impossible for any one to form an opinion therefrom, the opinion
can be challenged on the ground of non-application of mind or
perversity or on the ground that it was formed on collateral
grounds and was beyond the scope of the Statute. (Barium 
Chemicals Ltd.16). If the satisfaction, in regard to the existence of
any of the conditions stipulated in the Act, is based on no evidence
or on irrelevant and extraneous considerations, the Court will be
justified in quashing such an illegal order. (Swadeshi Cotton
Mills17).
We find considerable force in the submission of Sri V.V.
Narayana Rao, Learned Counsel for Petitioners,  that the very fact
that the 4th respondent was appointed as the Chairman of the
Commission on the same day, on which the Commission was     
constituted on 30.06.2016, shows that the Government had 
appointed him as the Chairman even without undertaking the
exercise of ascertaining whether or not he possessed the
qualifications prescribed, under
Section 5(1)
of the 2003 Act, for
being appointed to the said office.  We are saved the trouble of
examining this aspect any further as, on being asked whether
there was any material on record to show application of mind by
respondents 1 and 2 regarding suitability of the 4th respondent to
be appointed as the Chairman of the Commission, the Learned 
Advocate General for the State of Andhra Pradesh fairly stated that
there was no material on record in this regard.  It is evident,
therefore, that the 4th respondent was appointed as the Chairman
of the Commission  even without respondents 1 and 2 having any
material before them to show that the 4th respondent fulfilled the
conditions stipulated in clauses (a) & (b) of
Section 5(1)(a)
of the
Act.
We, however, find considerable force in the submission of the
Learned Advocate General for the State of Andhra Pradesh that, in
the absence of any such stipulation in the 2003 Act, this Court, in
the exercise of its powers of judicial review, would neither be
justified in prescribing qualifications for appointment as the
Chairman of the Commission nor in laying down the procedure to
be followed in making such appointments.  As the provisions of the
2003 Act are clear and unambiguous, it is not for Courts to read
something, which is not specified therein, and infer that the 2003
Act prescribes the mode and manner in which appointment should  
be made to the offices of Chairman and members of the
Commission.  The language used speaks the mind and reveals the  
intention of the framers. (
C.I.T. v. T.V. Sundaram Iyengar (P)
Ltd
).  Where the language of an enactment is plain and clear
upon its face, and is susceptible of only one meaning, then,
ordinarily, that meaning should be given by the Court. In such a
case the task of interpretation can hardly be said to arise.
(Sankalchand Himatlal Sheth6).  If the words of a statute are, in
themselves, precise and unambiguous no more is necessary than  
to expound those words in their natural and ordinary sense, the
words themselves in such case best declaring the intention of the
legislature. (Shri Ram2).
The duty of the Court is to give effect to the intention of the
legislature, as that intention is to be gathered from the language
employed having regard to the context in connection with which it
is employed.  (
Banarsi Debi v. I.T. Officer
; Attorney-General v.
Carlton Bank ).  The primary rule of construction is that the
intention of the Legislation must be found in the words used by the
Legislature itself.
(
Unique Butyle Tube Industries Pvt. Ltd., v.
Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation
).  Applying any other rule
of construction is not permissible when the plain meaning of the
word used by the legislature is clear and unambiguous, and the
acceptance of that meaning does not make the Section otiose. (Shri
Ram2).  If the provision is unambiguous and if, from that
provision, the legislative intent is clear, we need not call into aid
the other rule of construction of statutes.
(
Hiralal Rattanlal v.
State of U.P
).
It is only where the words, according to their literal meaning,
produce an inconsistency, or an absurdity or inconvenience so
great as to convince the Court that the intention could not have
been to use them in their ordinary signification, would the Court
be justified in putting on them some other signification, which,
though less proper, is one which the Court thinks the words will
bear. (Sankalchand Himatlal Sheth6; River Wear
Commissioners v. Willam Adamson ).  It must be borne in mind 
that a provision is not ambiguous merely because it contains a
word which, in different contexts, is capable of different meanings.
It would be hard to find anywhere a sentence of any length which
does not contain such a word.  A provision is ambiguous only if it
contains a word or phrase which, in that particular context, is
capable of having more than one meaning. (Kirkness (Inspector of
Taxes) v. John Hudson & Co., Ltd. ).  It is only when the
material words are capable of two constructions, one of which is
likely to defeat or impair the policy of the Act, whilst the other
construction is likely to assist the achievement of the said policy,
would Courts prefer to adopt the latter construction.
'The golden rule' of construction is to read the statutory
language, grammatically and terminologically, in the ordinary and
primary sense which it bears in its context, without omission or
addition. (Suthendran v. Immigration Appeal Tribunal ; Farrell
v. Alexander ; R v Inhabitants of Banbury ).  Of course, the
Legislature is to be credited with good sense, so that when such an
approach produces injustice, absurdity, contradiction or
stultification of the statutory objective, the language may be
modified sufficiently to avoid such disadvantage, though no
further.
(Suthendran26; Becke v Smith ; R v Inhabitants of
Banbury28; Tzu-Tsai Cheng v. Governor of Pentonville Prison ;
Applin v. Race Relations Board ;
Harbhajan Singh v. Press
Council of India
; Justice G.P. Singh  Principles of Statutory
Interpretation (8th Edn., 2001).    The words of a Statute should,
in its interpretation, not be added to or subtracted from, almost a
necessity. (Shyam Kishori Devi3).
As a plain and literal reading of the provisions of the 2003
Act do not result in absurdity, this Court would not be justified in
reading into it a non-existent procedure for appointment to the
office of Chairman and members of the Commission.  While the 
Government is obligated to appoint only a person, who possesses
the requisite statutory qualifications stipulated under clauses (a) &
(b) of
Section 5(1)
of the 2003 Act, as the Chairman of the
Commission, the manner in which such a person should be  
selected for appointment to this post, whether or not it should be
by comparative evaluation of the degrees of eminence of such
persons, are all matters which, in the absence of any statutory
prescription in this regard, should be left to the discretion of the
Government.
When the Act
has not prescribed any definite term,
and any particular mode, the High Court cannot read into the
Statute a restriction or prohibition that is not expressly provided
by the Act.  The appointing authority, who has the power to
appoint, has the discretion in making such appointment when the
statute does not lay down the method of appointment. (
B.
Srinivasa Reddy v. Karnataka Urban Water Supply & Drainage  
Board Employees Assn.
).
It is no doubt true that
Section 11(1)
of the 2003 Act
stipulates that the Commission shall, while performing its
functions under
Section 12
, have the powers of a Civil Court trying
a suit and, in particular, in respect of matters enumerated
thereunder.  That does not, however, mean that only a person, who
has knowledge in laws, can be appointed as the Chairman of the
Commission.  Any such stipulation would result in rewriting the
statute, and in prescribing qualifications which the legislature has
chosen not to stipulate. While the conditions prescribed under
Section 5(1)(a)
and (b) of the 2003 Act necessitate strict adherence,
and a transparent process being followed in appointing a person as
the Chairman would be in order, this Court would not take upon
itself the task of determining the mode and manner in which the
Chairman of the Commission should be appointed, as these are all
matters for the legislature or the rule making authority to
prescribe, and not for the Courts to stipulate.  It is not competent
to any Court to proceed upon the assumption that the legislature
has made a mistake.  The Court must proceed on the footing that
the legislature intended what it has said.  Even if there is some
defect in the phraseology used by the legislature, the Court would
not,  ordinarily, aid the legislatures defective phrasing of an Act or
add and amend or, by construction, make up the deficiencies in
the Act even where there is a causus omissus.  (Nalinakhya
Bysack1; Commissioner for Special Purposes of Income Tax v.  
Pemsel ; Crawford v. Spooner ;
Hansraj Gupta v. Official
Liquidator of Dehra Dun-Mussoorie Electric Tramway Co.,
Ltd.
).
Causus omissus cannot be supplied by the Court. The
provisions of the statute have to be read as a whole and in its
context. When the language of the provision is plain and
unambiguous the question of supplying the causus omissus does  
not arise. While the Court can interpret the law, it cannot legislate.
(Shardindu8; Padma Sundara Rao (Dead) v. State of T.N. ). The
Judicial function is limited to finding solutions within specified
parameters. Anything more than that would be "judicial heroics"
and "naked usurpation of legislative function". (Shardindu8;
Standard Chartered Bank v. Directorate of Enforcement
).   To
the extent, the Learned Single Judge directed that applications be
invited from interested persons through advertisements, a search
committee be constituted to suggest suitable candidates, an
exercise of comparative evaluation of all eligible candidates be
undertaken, and only a person with knowledge in the Laws be
considered for appointment as the Chairman, the order under
appeal is set aside.
The order under appeal is affirmed to the extent the Learned
Single Judge has held that only a person, who fulfils the
qualifications prescribed both in clauses (a) & (b) of
Section 5(1)
of
the 2003 Act, can be appointed as the Chairman of the
Commission; and the formation of opinion by the State
Government, regarding the eminence of the person being appointed
as the Chairman of the Commission, and that he possesses the  
qualifications stipulated in clauses (a) & (b) of
Section 5(1)
, must
be based on objective material before it.  As the 4th respondent was
appointed as the Chairman of the Commission by respondents 1  
and 2, even without ascertaining whether he possessed the
qualifications stipulated in clauses (a) & (b) of
Section 5(1)
of the
2003 Act, his appointment has been rightly set aside, by the
Learned Single Judge, in the order under appeal.
Subject to the observations hereinabove mentioned, both the
Writ Appeals fail, and are, accordingly, dismissed.  Miscellaneous
Petitions, if any, shall also stand dismissed.  However, in the
circumstances without costs.
_________________________________      
(RAMESH RANGANATHAN, ACJ)        
______________________________     
(A. SHANKAR NARAYANA, J)      
Date: 06-01-2017.