[Cites
19
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Ch.Chinnakishore Venukoti vs The State Of Telangana, Rep.By Its ... on 20 March, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 HYDERABAD 107, (2017) 3 ESC 1523
Author:
A.Ramalingeswara Rao
Bench:
A.Ramalingeswara Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A.RAMALINGESWARA RAO             

WRIT PETITION No.34969 of 2016   

20-03-2017 

Ch.Chinnakishore Venukoti.Petitioner 

The State of Telangana, Rep.by its Commissioner & Director of School Education,
Beside Telephone Bhavan, Lakdi-ka-pool,And others.... Respondents 

Counsel for the Petitioner: Sri J.Sudheer

Counsel for the Respondents:GP for Revenue  
                             GP for School Education

<Gist :

>Head Note : 

? Cases referred

1.      (1994) 6 SCC 302 
2.      (1995) 2 SCC 82  : 1995 (29) ATC 196 
3.      (2003) 12 SCC 408 : 2003 (10) SCALE 892  
4.      (1980) 3 SCC 393 
5.      (1980) 3 SCC 402 
6.      1988 (Supp) SCC 269  
7.      1989 Supp (1) SCC 393  
8.      (2008) 5 SCC 328 
9.      (2009) 7 SCC 283 
10.     (2009) 1 SCC 80 
11.     2010 (4) ALD 16 (DB) 
12.     2013 AIR CC 2642  
13.     2015 (3) ALD 530 


THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE A.RAMALINGESWARA RAO             

WRIT PETITION No.34969 of 2016   
ORDER:
Heard the learned Counsel for the petitioner and the
learned Government Pleader for the respondents.
The petitioner states that he was born to his parents on
04.09.1982 in Christian Hospital, Hanamkonda, Warangal 
District.  The Medical Officer gave a certificate on 11.09.1983
showing his date of birth as 04.09.1982.  His date of birth was
entered in the register of births maintained by the Warangal
Municipal Corporation.  He also obtained a certificate from the
said Corporation on 03.09.2016 showing the same date of birth.
His parents sent him to a private teacher for education and later
on his father admitted him in III standard in St.Johns High
School (English Medium) at Kazipet during the year 1989.
However, his father mistakenly entered his date of birth as
04.05.1982 instead of 04.09.1982.  He passed SSC in 1997, 
Intermediate in 1999, B.Sc. in 2002 and M.Sc. (Microbiology) in
2004 from Kakatiya University with the said date of birth.  It is
his case that his incorrect date of birth was continued in the
academic records due to wrong entry made at the time of
admission in the school.  Now he states that he is preparing for
Civil Services Examination for which the upper age limit is 35
years.  He further states that he has submitted an application
on 06.09.2016 to the Principal of St.Johns High School,
Kazipet, for correction of his date of birth, and the same was
forwarded to the Deputy Educational Officer, Warangal, through
letter dated 08.09.2016.  The Deputy Educational Officer
submitted a report to the second respondent on 15.09.2016
stating that the mistake occurred due to the entry made by the
clerk at the time of admission on request of the parent and
Principal from St. Johns High School, Kazipet, Warangal
District.  The second respondent, in turn, forwarded the said
report to the first respondent through letter dated 19.09.2016.
The first respondent issued proceedings on 26.09.2016
communicating to the second respondent, who in turn 
communicated to the petitioner on 04.10.2016 rejecting the
request for correction of date of birth, as the application for
correction was made after lapse of 19 years and not within the
stipulated time of 3 years as per the orders issued in
G.O.Ms.No.430, Education Department, dated 31.12.1992.   
Challenging the same, the present Writ Petition is filed.
A counter affidavit is filed on behalf of the respondents
stating that as per G.O.Ms.No.430, dated 31.12.1992, the
Director of School Education is empowered to entertain and
effect correction or alterations in respect of applications for
correction or alteration of date of birth in the completed
certificates of SSLC/HSC/HS(MP)/SSC.  But, the said request 
cannot be entertained after a period of three years from the date
of completion of the course.  The registration of births and
deaths is governed by the
Registration of Births and Deaths Act
and it has nothing to do with the correction of dates of birth
entered in the certificates.  In G.O.Ms.No.383, dated
16.11.1993, it was clearly stated that in respect any
proceedings before the Government or any Court, Tribunal or
other authority for any alteration of date of birth in the service
records, the decree of the Civil Court in regard to alteration of
date of birth in the School or the University records or the
contents in the judgments leading to such decree or the effect of
its implementation shall not be taken into consideration in
derogation to the rules.  It is also stated that the Supreme Court
in
State of Tamil Nadu v. T.V.Venugopalan
held that the
administrative decision cannot be overruled by the Tribunal.
In
Chief Medical Officer v. Khadeer Khadri
it was held that the
request for change of date of birth can be considered only if it is
filed within the statutory period.
In
Board of Secondary
Education of Assam v. Mohd.Sarifuz Zaman
it was held that
three years period provided in the Regulations is a reasonable
period.  Since the petitioner failed to apply for correction within
the specified period, his request was not considered.
A reply affidavit was filed by the petitioner stating that the
principles applicable to the service law with regard to alteration
of date of birth are not applicable to the instant case.  It is also
stated that the Government retains its power to relax in spite of
stipulation of period and the clinching and irrevocable evidence
cannot be thrown away on technical grounds.  It is further
stated that when there is a conflict between the school records
and statutory records, the statutory records should prevail, and
in the instant case, the birth extract is a statutory record.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the
rules shall not stand in the way of the Government considering
the request of the petitioner based on the birth certificate issued
by the competent authority.  He further submitted that the
period of three years should be reckoned from the date of
knowledge and the petitioner came to know of the same only
when he applied for the date of birth certificate, which was
issued to him on 03.09.2016.  He relied on
Shri Amrik Singh v.
Union of India
,
R.R.Verma v. Union of India
,
K.Prasad v.
Union of India
,
State of Maharashtra v. Jagannath Achyut
Karandikar
,
State of Karnataka v. R.Vivekananda Swamy
,
CIDCO v. Vasudha Gorakhnath Mandevlekar
,
Mohd.Yunus     
Khan v. U.P.Power Corporation Limited
,
C.Thimmaiah v.
State of Andhra Pradesh
,
Parveen Malik v. Central Board
of Secondary Education
and
Gogineni Gnana Jyothi @  
Gogineni Gnana Jothieswar v. State of Andhra Pradesh
.
Learned Government Pleader submitted that in view of the
existing rules which provide for correction of date of birth in the
certificates within three years of passing the concerned
examination, the authorities have no jurisdiction to make
necessary correction even if the certificate produced by the
petitioner is genuine.
In the instant case, the petitioner was directly admitted to
third standard in St. Johns High School (English Medium) at
Kazipet during the year 1989.  At the time of admission his date
of birth was shown as 04.05.1982 instead of 04.09.1982.  On
the basis of the said date of birth he completed M.Sc.
(Microbiology) in April 2004.  Now he wanted to appear for Civil
Services Examination where the upper age limit is 35 years.  He
initiated the process for correction of date of birth by applying to
the Principal, St. Johns High School, Kazipet, on 06.09.2016
based on the date of birth certificate obtained by him on
03.09.2016.  His request was forwarded by the Principal of the
School to the Deputy Educational Officer on 08.09.2016 along
with necessary enclosures and the Deputy Educational Officer
in turn forwarded the record to the District Educational Officer
on 15.09.2016.  The District Educational Officer recommended
the case of the petitioner on 19.09.2016 to the Director of
School Education stating that the mistake occurred because of
the act of the parent.  The Director of School Education issued
proceedings on 26.09.2016 returning the proposals stating that
the correction cannot be carried out after lapse of 19 years.
Consequential order was passed by the District Educational
Officer on 04.10.2016 directing the Deputy Educational Officer,
Warangal, to handover the proposals along with the original
certificates.
The only point that arises for consideration in the present
case is whether the request of the petitioner for correction of the
date of birth in the educational certificates issued by the
competent authorities can be directed to be corrected after a
period of 19 years?
G.O.Ms.No.1263, Education Department, dated 
06.05.1961, deals with correction of date of birth in completed
Secondary School Leaving Certificates, Higher Secondary 
Certificates and Higher Secondary (Multipurpose) Certificates.
The said Rules are applicable for making correction of the date
of birth in the said certificates.  The said Rules were amended
from time to time by G.O.Ms.No.1130, dated 28.09.1981, and 
G.O.Ms.No.1348, dated 15.12.1981.  But, the Rule relating to
limitation for applying for alteration of date of birth has not
been changed.  No power of relaxation is contained in the said
Rules.  Rule 11 of the said Rules reads as follows:
The Director of School Education is
empowered to entertain and effect corrections or
alterations in respect of the applications for the
corrections or alterations of the date of birth in a
completed Secondary School Leaving Certificate,
Higher Secondary Certificate, Higher Secondary
(Multipurpose) Certificate, S.S.C.  However, no
application for such corrections/alterations of Date of
Birth in the said completed certificates shall be
entertained after a period of three years from the date
of completion of the said course.
In Rule 12 it is specifically stated that in respect of
persons already in Government service those rules are not
applicable and they have to follow the procedure prescribed in
G.O.Ms.No.50, Finance and Planning (F.R.I) Department, dated 
10.02.1976.  This clearly shows that the rules are applicable to
the persons who are not in Government service and it prohibits
entertainment of applications after a period of three years from
the date of completion of the course.  No one can claim
consideration of his case without challenging the said rule.  On
this ground alone, the present Writ Petition is liable to be
dismissed.
The case in
Shri Amrik Singh
(supra) deals with power of
relaxation contained in Rule 3 of the All India Services
(Conditions of Service  Residuary Matters) Rules, 1960.  Hence,
it is not applicable to the facts of this case.
Similarly,
R.R.Vermas
case (supra) also deals with the same aspect.  In
the said decision
, the justifiability of placing such a rule of
relaxation was considered.
Those decisions were considered in
the latter decision of
K.Prasads
case (supra).
The cases of
Jagannath Achyut Karandikar
(supra) and
R.Vivekananda  
Swamy
(supra) are also cases of relaxation of Rules.
CIDCO
(supra) is a case relating to the entry of date of
birth in the service records.  On the facts of that case, the
Supreme Court held that the organization is bound by the date
of birth shown in the official records.  In
the said decision
,
though it was held that deaths and births register maintained
by the statutory authorities raises a presumption of correctness,
such entries made in the statutory registers are admissible in
evidence in terms of
Section 35
of the Evidence Act and would
prevail over an entry made in the school register.  The aid of
such observations cannot be taken in the present case, which is
initiated after 19 years.
In
Mohd.Yunus Khans
case (supra) the Supreme Court
noticed that no time frame was prescribed by the Rules and as
it found that there was still four more years of service left to the
employee and the employee having applied for correction
immediately after coming to know of the mistake, it was held
that the case of the employee requires to be considered.  The
relevant observations are as follows:
No material has been placed before us in regard
to existence of a statutory rule fixing a time-frame for
filing an application for correction of the date of birth
in the service record.  Even if there was such a
provision, the same, in our opinion, would not be of
much significance as the respondents had not shown 
that the mistake in the matter of recording of date of
birth in the service record was known to the appellant
at any earlier point of time.  If the appellants
contention is correct that he came to learn about it
only in April 1988 whereafter he filed a representation,
it must be held that there was no delay on his part in
this behalf.  An employee may take action as is
permissible in law only after coming to know that a
mistake has been committed by the employer.
In
C.Thimmaiahs
case (supra) a Division Bench of this
Court considered
CIDCOs
case (supra) and on the given facts of
that case directed the District Collector to consider the
representation of the petitioner therein.  The period of limitation
for correcting the date of birth did not come up for
consideration in the said case.
Similarly, in
Parveen Maliks
case (supra) the learned
single Judge of Punjab and Haryana High Court discussed the 
effect of by-law 69.2 (iv) of the respondent board which contains
the period of two years provided under the rules for applying for
correction of date of birth.
The case of
Gogineni Gnana Jyothi
(supra) relates to the
correction of clerical/typographical mistake.  In the said case
the date of birth was correctly mentioned in various school
records, but only in the case of Secondary School Certificate it
was wrongly printed.  In those circumstances, the Writ Petition
was allowed by directing the respondents to verify the school
records from primary level to Class X and for correction of SSC
records including the SSC certificate by showing the correct
date of birth.  The facts in the present case are thus different.
The Supreme Court in T.V.Venugopalan and Khadeer   
Khadri cases (surpa) upheld the orders of the Government
rejecting the request for correction of dates of birth long after
the expiry of the prescribed period specified in the rules.
In
Mohd.Sarifuz Zamans
case (supra), the Supreme Court upheld  
the prescription of three year period in the regulations for
correction of date of birth. In the said case, the student applied
for correction of his date of birth within 8 years of passing the
matriculation examination. The relevant observations of the
Supreme Court are found in the following paras:
10. Nobody can claim a right to have an entry
corrected in a certificate solemnly issued by an
educational institution, that too the one enjoying the
status of a statutory Board under the Act. The right of
the applicant to have an error or mistake corrected is
accompanied by a duty or obligation on the part of the
Board to correct its records and the certificate issued
by it. Not only it is a corresponding duty or obligation,
it has also to be perceived as a power exercisable by
the Board to correct an entry appearing in the
certificate issued by it. People, institutions and
government departments etc. - all attach a very high
degree of reliability, near finality, to the entries made
in the certificates issued by the Board. The frequent
exercise of power to correct entries in certificates and
that too without any limitation on exercise of such
power would render the power itself arbitrary and may
result in eroding the credibility of certificates issued by
the Board. We, therefore, find it difficult to uphold the
contention that the applicants seeking correction of
entries in such certificates have any such right or
vested right.
11. Lastly, the submission cannot also be
countenanced that the regulatory measure engrafted
into the Regulations on the subject of correction of
errors in the certificates is absolute in nature. The
Regulation permits correction but subject only to
reasonable restrictions.
12. Delay defeats discretion and loss of limitation
destroys the remedy itself. Delay amounting to laches
results in benefit of discretionary power being denied
on principles of equity. Loss of limitation resulting into
depriving of the remedy, is a principle based on public
policy and utility and not equity alone. There ought to
be a limit of time by which human affairs stand settled
and uncertainty is lost.
Regulation 8
confers a right on
the applicant and a power coupled with an obligation
on the Board to make correction in the date of birth
subject to the ground of wrong calculation or clerical
error being made out. A reasonable procedure has
been prescribed for processing the application through
the Inspector of Schools who would verify the school
records and submit report to the Board so as to
exclude from consideration the claims other than
those permissible within the framework of Regulation
8. Power to pass order for correction is vested on a
high functionary like Secretary of the Board. An
inaccuracy creeping in at the stage of writing the
certificates only, though all other prior documents are
correct in all respects, is capable of being corrected
within a period of three years from the date of
issuance of certificate.
13. Three years period provided by the Regulation,
is a very reasonable period. On the very date of
issuance of the certificate the concerned student is put
to notice as to the entries made in the certificate.
Everyone remembers his age and date of birth. The
student would realize within no time that the date of
birth as entered in the certificate is not correct, if that
be so, once the certificate is placed in his hands.
Based on the certificate the applicant would seek
admission elsewhere in an educational institution or
might seek a job or career where he will have to
mention his age and date of birth. Even if he failed to
notice the error on the date of issuance of the
certificate, he would come to know the same shortly
thereafter. Thus, the period of three years, as
prescribed by
Regulation 3
, is quite reasonable. It is
not something like prescribing a period of limitation for
filing a suit. The prescription of three years is laying
down of a dividing line before which the power of the
Board to make correction ought to be invoked and
beyond which it may not be invoked. Belated
applications, if allowed to be received, may open a
pandoras box. Records may not be available and
evidence may have been lost. Such evidence - even
convenient evidence - may be brought into existence
as may defy scrutiny. The prescription of three years
bar takes care of all such situations. The provision is
neither illegal nor beyond the purview of
Section 24
of
the Act and also cannot be called arbitrary or
unreasonable. The applicants seeking rectification
within a period of three years form a class by
themselves and such prescription has a reasonable
nexus with the purpose sought to be achieved. No fault
can be found therewith on the anvil of
Article 14
of the
Constitution.
In the instant case the petitioner completed Post
Graduation on the basis of the date of birth mentioned in the
school records at the time of admission.  He cannot attribute
lack of knowledge.  This Writ Petition was filed only when he
realized that he would be crossing the maximum age prescribed 
by the UPSC for attending Civil Services examination.  Based on
the date of birth recorded in the school records, the petitioner
might have taken several steps during the past years and
though there cannot be any dispute with regard to the birth
certificate issued by the proper authority supported by evidence
of the hospital authorities, no direction can be given in the
instant case based on those certificates after lapse of 19 years.
It is well known that the law will come to the rescue of the
diligent but not an indolent.
The Writ Petition is, accordingly, dismissed.  The
miscellaneous petitions pending in this Writ Petition, if any,
shall stand closed.  There shall be no order as to costs.       
________________________________     
(A.RAMALINGESWARA RAO, J)       
20.03.2017