[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Sakriya Krishna Bai (Died) Per Lr vs Syed Ismail (Died) Per Lrs on 14 December, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 57
Author:
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
Bench:
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU         

A.S.No.2490 of 1999 

14-12-2017 

Sakriya Krishna Bai (died)  per LR    Appellant/Plaintiff No.3


Syed Ismail (died)   Per LRs. Respondents/Defendants  

Counsel for the appellant: C. Ramesh Sagar

Counsel for the Respondents: K.V. Bhanu Prasad  

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:

  AIR 1983 SC 114 
2 AIR 1971 SC 1949  
3 AIR 1988 SC 1796  
4 (2010) 1 SCC 277 
5 AIR 2008 SC 2866  
6 AIR 1979 SC 14 
7 AIR 1996 SC 1140  


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU         

A.S.No.2490 of 1999 

JUDGMENT:
This appeal is filed by the third plaintiff against the
judgment and decree dated 05.03.1999 passed in O.S.No.82  
of 1983 by the Additional Senior Civil Judge, Warangal.
2.      For the sake of convenience, as this is a first
appeal, the parties are hereinafter referred to as the plaintiff
and defendants only.
3.        The suit is filed for specific performance to direct
the defendants to obtain necessary permission from the
Urban Land Ceiling Authorities and to execute a sale deed in
respect of the suit schedule property or in the alternative for
refund of Rs.40,000/- with interest @ 12% per annum and for
damages of Rs.5,000/-.
4.        The brief facts of the case are that the third
plaintiff is the adopted son of plaintiffs 1 & 2.  The first
plaintiff is the wife of second plaintiff. The first defendant is
the owner of house No.14/23 (new No.4-4-154) situated at
Mandibazar. The first plaintiff was living as tenant in the suit
house. One Munsaruddin, the father-in-law of first defendant
was looking after the suit house and the plaintiffs took it on
lease in 1966 as rent of Rs.15/- per month. Later, the first
defendant authorized his father-in-law, Munsaruddin to sell
the suit house. The second plaintiff agreed to purchase the
same; on the price being settled by elders on 15.01.1979 he
paid an advance of Rs.5,000/-. The first defendant was to
obtain permission from the Urban Land Ceiling Authorities
and was to bear 1/3rd of the conveyance charges. Even
though the plaintiffs paid substantial sum leaving a balance
of Rs.2,000/-, they received to their utter surprise a legal
notice from the first defendant with false allegations as to the
quantum of rent, breach of terms etc. Hence, the suit for
specific performance and other reliefs.
5.        During pendency of the suit, plaintiffs 1 & 2, who
are wife and husband died and their alleged adopted son was
brought on record as plaintiff No.3. The first defendant also
died and defendants 2 to 11 were brought on record as his
legal representatives. The third defendant filed his written
statement, which was adopted by the defendants 2 & 4 to 11 
by filing a memo.
6.        In the written statement, it is stated that the third
plaintiff is not the adopted son of plaintiffs 1 & 2 and as such,
he has no locus standi to maintain the suit. The defendants
allege that the suit has also abated. The plaintiffs suppressed
the factum of their falling due rents claimed in R.C.C.No.47 of
1992 by the first defendant. The second plaintiff approached
the first defendant with an offer to purchase it and entreated
to sell the suit house to him. The first defendant and the
second plaintiff negotiated the deal for a sum of Rs.30,000/-
and the second plaintiff paid advance of Rs.5,000/- and got
executed agreement of sale in January, 1979 in favour of the
first plaintiff.  Since then, the plaintiffs did not perform their
part of contractual obligation and were paying paltry amounts
and in total paid a sum of Rs.14,000/-. The first defendant
executed an agreement on 12.05.1979 agreeing that he would 
pay the remaining amount of Rs.16,000/- by 10 a.m. on
20.05.1979 lest the agreement stood cancelled and that
advance amount of Rs.14,000/- would be forfeited.  However,
the plaintiffs did not pay the balance amount. Therefore, the
first defendant issued notice to the plaintiffs making the time
essence of contract. They state that the plaintiffs are not
entitled to the reliefs claimed.
7.        Based on the said pleadings, the lower Court
framed the following issues for trial.
i)      Whether the third plaintiff can specifically enforce
the agreement of sale, dated 15.01.1979 against
the defendant?
ii)     Whether the alleged additional agreement dated
12.05.1979 set up by the defendant is true, valid
and binding?
iii)    Whether the suit contract was abandoned by the 
plaintiffs as acclaimed by the defendants?
iv)     Whether the suit had abated and cannot be 
revived as claimed by the defendants?
v)      Whether the stipulation of liquidated damages
claimed by the plaintiffs disentitles them to
enforce the agreement of sale?
vi)     Whether the deceased first plaintiff was always
ready and willing to perform her part of contract
under the agreement of sale deed dated
15.01.1979?
vii)    To what relief?
8.        During the course of trial, the third plaintiff
examined himself as PW.1 and also examined his natural  
mother as PW.2 and the attestor of sale agreement as PW.3. 
He marked Exs.A.1 to A.10.  The son of first defendant, who
is the third defendant, was examined as DW.1 and younger 
brother of second defendant was examined as DW.2.  
The defendants marked Exs.B.1 to B.6.
9.      After considering the entire oral and documentary
evidence, the lower Court dismissed the suit and directed the
defendants to deposit the advance of Rs.14,000/- into the
court by 01.04.1999 with interest @ 12% p.a. from the date of
receipt of the amount till deposit in the court.  It is this
judgment and decree that is assailed in the present appeal.
10.     Heard Sri C. Ramesh Sagar, learned counsel for
the appellant/third plaintiff and Sri K.V. Bhanu Prasad,
learned counsel for the respondents/defendants.
11.       As mentioned in the narrated facts, the suit is
initially filed by Sri Sakriya Krishnna Bai and by her
husband-Sariya Balaji.   Later, after the death of plaintiffs
1 & 2, Sariya Jayanarayan joined as the plaintiff No.3 and
continued the litigation.  In the written statement filed, the
defendants have raised a plea that the suit has abated.  They
have raised another plea that the third plaintiff is not the
legal representative nor does he the adopted son of plaintiffs
1 & 2.  The lower Court also was conscious of this issue and
that is why the first issue is to the effect whether the third
plaintiff can specifically enforce the agreement of sale dated
15.01.1979 against the defendants.
12.     A fact that is very conspicuous in this case is the
contention of third plaintiff.  He states he is the adopted son
of the deceased-plaintiffs 1 & 2, but he did not plead or gave
details of the alleged adoption, neither the date nor the details
of the adoption are pleaded in the plaint.  When the third
plaintiff sought to join the suit by filing the application to
bring him on record as the legal representative and adopted
son, he had an option to plead about the adoption and place
the particulars about the adoption before the Court. He did
not choose to give any details whatsoever about the adoption.
Therefore, it is contended by the learned counsel for the
respondent that no evidence can be let in about the facts
which are not pleaded.  As per him, this burden of proving a
valid adoption is not discharged at all in this case.
13.     As pointed out by the learned counsel for the
respondents/defendants, as per the decision of
Madhusudan 
Das v. Smt. Narayani Bai and others
for a valid adoption, the
physical act of giving and taking a child is an essential
requisite. In some cases of adoption a datta homam is also
considered necessarily.  In para-19 of
the said judgment
,
their Lordships of the Honble Supreme Court have clearly
held as follows:
19.    It is well settled that a person who seeks to displace
the natural succession to property by alleging an adoption
must discharge the burden that lies upon him by proof of
the factum of adoption and its validily.  A Raghavamma v.
A. Chenchamma AIR 1964 SC 136.  It is also true that the
evidence in proof of the adoption should be free from all
suspicion of fraud and so consistent and probable as to give
no occasion for doubting its truth.
Kishori Lal v. Chaltibai
(1959) Supp 1 SCR 698: (AIR 1959 SC 504).  None the less  
the fact of adoption must be proved in the same way as any
other fact.
14.     This is the law that has been in vogue even till
date.  There are absolutely no details about the adoption in
the plaint.  In the absence of pleadings, no evidence can be let
in.  Still to prove the adoption, the third plaintiff filed Exs.A.8
to A.10.  Exs.A.8 to A.10 are a date of Birth certificate of a
school, a progress report of the same school and a marriage
invitation.  None of these documents are issued by the public
offices nor are they from the public records. In view of this,
the lower Court rightly rejected the said documents.  Further,
when the truth of the contents of documents itself is an issue,
it is settled law that the author of the document should be
examined.
Bishwanath Rai v. Sachhidanand Singh
is 
relevant in this context.  Nobody was examined to prove these
documents.
15.       The date of birth noted in a private school is not a
valid proof of date of birth unless the person who gave the
date or made the entry is examined.
Birad Mal Singhvi v.
Anand Purohit
is the relevant case.  The original date of birth
entry that is made may have some probative value, but the
same was not produced. It is admitted fact that all the parties
in this case are residents of Warangal town at that time.
Despite this, the third plaintiff did not produce his date of
birth certificate.  Therefore, the lower Court rightly rejected
these documents. Even otherwise, the date of birth certificate
can only be used to prove the date of birth of a child or a
person. It cannot be used as proof of adoption.  Similarly,
Ex.A.9 is also a progress report of a school.  This is not also
acceptable as piece of evidence to prove the alleged adoption.
Ex.A.10-marriage invitation is again not supported by any
oral testimony. Nobody who attended the marriage was 
examined nor was a person who received the said card 
examined. There is no proof that the marriage took place on
that date at all.  The lower Court also expressed an opinion
that when the card was marked in evidence that it was not
mailed or posted and that a bare look at the card gave the
lower Court impression that it was printed before it was filed
into the Court.
The very same judgment cited i.e.,
Madhusudan Dass
case (1 supra) sounds a note of caution to 
the appellate Court to bear in mind that the findings of fact
arrived at by a trial Court should be normally allowed to
prevail unless there is an irregularity etc. or misreading of
evidence etc. The fact remains that there is no proof that this
invitation card was in fact circulated or actually printed and
sent to various people. All these three documents in the
opinion of this Court are self-serving documents.
16.       The second witness for the plaintiff/PW.2 speaks
about the adoption.  She is the natural mother of third
plaintiff. She states that the child was given in adoption.
However, in cross-examination, she states that she does not
remember the date of adoption, that she does not remember 
the name of priest who officiated the ceremony nor does she
remember the names of witnesses who were present at the so-  
called adoption.  She states that the priest and the witnesses
who were present at the time of adoption are dead.  Thus
nothing conclusive is spoken by this witness. Therefore, this
Court is of the opinion that the lower Court rightly rejected
the evidence in this witness. This Court thus concurs the
opinion of the lower Court on the first issue and holds that
the third plaintiff cannot seek specific performance of the
agreement of sale, as he did not prove that he is the adopted
son of the deceased plaintiffs.
17.     The learned counsel for the respondent also
argued that as the third plaintiff is not the adopted son of
plaintiffs 1 & 2, consequent on the death of plaintiffs 1 & 2,
the suit has abated and the third plaintiff cannot continue
the suit. The learned counsel for the appellant, however,
argued that in an application filed under
Order XXII Rule 4
CPC
, the lower Court permitted the appellant/third plaintiff
to come on record and therefore, it is his contention that
further enquiry is not permissible into the issue of legal
representative. This argument is not correct because at the
stage of allowing a person to enter the record as legal
representative, the Court does not go into elaborate oral
evidence nor does it hold a trial to decide on the fact that the
legal representative is a correct legal representative or not. It
only forms a prima facie opinion, except in cases where a very
strong objection that the proposed legal representative is not
the legal representative at all does the Court embark on this
enquiry.  It is also settled law that an opinion found nor an
opinion expressed at the interlocutory stage can always be
reversed/disagreed that during the course of main hearing
when elaborate evidence is let in. It is only when a detailed
enquiry is conducted under
Order XXII Rule 5 CPC
that
certain finality is attached to the finding on the question who
is the legal representative. The decision of the Honble
Supreme Court of India in
Dashrath Rao Kate v. Brij Mohan
Srivastava
is squarely on the point.
18.       The learned counsel for the respondents/
defendants also drew the attention of this Court to a
judgment reported in
Jaladi Suguna v. Satya Sai Central
Trust
, wherein the Honble Supreme Court held finding in
para-10 as under:
10. .The determination as to who is the         
legal representative under Order 22 Rule 5 will of course be
for the limited purpose of representation of the estate of the
deceased, for adjudication of that case.  Such determination
for such limited purpose will not confer on the person held
to be the legal representative, any right to the property
which is the subject matter of the suit, vis--vis other rival
claimants to the estate of the deceased.
Therefore, this Court holds that the argument of the learned
counsel for the appellant/third plaintiff is not correct.
The Court can still decide on the validity of the adoption even
if the LR application is allowed.  As per the settled law on this
subject, the Court proceeded to discuss the other issues,
despite the findings of issue Nos.1 & 4.
19.       The next issue that is to be decided is whether the
agreement of sale dated 15.01.1979 is valid and has been
implemented by the third plaintiff and whether the additional
agreement dated 12.05.1979 set up is true.  It is the case of
the third plaintiff that there was an agreement of sale of the
suit schedule property for a sum of Rs.30,000/-.  After the
initial agreement to sell was entered into on 25.12.1978 on
15.01.1979 (Ex.A.1 and its translation Ex.A.2) another
agreement was concluded which is admitted by both the 
parties.  This agreement was also attested by notary advocate
(Ex.A.3). Thereafter, Ex.A.4 receipt was passed by the
defendant for a sum of Rs.9,000/- paid by the plaintiffs.
These documents are not in dispute. The payment under 
these documents is not in dispute and the sum total of all
payments made under Exs.A1. to A.4 is Rs.14,000/- only. 
The dispute is about the other Rs.16,000/-.  The third
plaintiff produced two receipts Ex.A.5 and A.6 stating that
they paid further sum of Rs.4,000/-.  These two receipts were
held to be false and forged by the lower Court, which
embarked on an enquiry about these documents; compared   
the signatures and came to the conclusion that the said
reports are forged. It is noticed that the signatures were not
sent to a handwriting expert.
20.       The learned counsel rightly drew the attention of
this Court to two important judgments on this issue reported
in
State (Delhi Administration) v. Pali Ram
and
O. Bharathan v. K. Sudhakaran and another
.
Pali Ram
(6 supra) is the first important judgment on this subject,
wherein their Lordships held as follows:
Although there is no legal bar to the Judge using his own eyes to
compare the disputed writing with the admitted writing, even
without the aid of the evidence of any handwriting expert, the
Judge should, as a matter of prudence and caution, hesitate to
base his finding with regard to the identity of a handwriting which
forms the sheet-anchor of the prosecution case against a person
accused of an offence solely on comparison made by himself. It is,
therefore, not advisable that a Judge should take upon himself
the task of comparing the admitted writing with the disputed one
to find out whether the two agree with each other; and the
prudent course is to obtain the opinion and assistance of an
expert.
It is not the province of the expert to act as Judge or Jury. The
real function of the expert is to put before the Court all the
materials, together with reasons which induce him to come to the
conclusion, so that the Court, although not an expert may form
its own judgment by its own observation of those materials.
Ordinarily, it is not proper for the Court to ask the expert to give
his finding upon any of the issues, whether of law or fact,
because, strictly speaking, such issues are for the Court or jury
to determine. The handwriting expert's function is to opine after a
scientific comparison of the disputed writing with the proved or
admitted writing with regard to the points of similarity and
dissimilarity in the two sets of writings. The Court should then
compare the handwritings with its own eyes for a proper
assessment of the value of the total evidence.
21.       While
Section 73
of the Evidence Act does bar the
judge from ultimately deciding whether the signatures are
forged or not still as a rule of prudence in disputed cases, it is
always desirable that a Court should secure the opinion of
quality handwriting expert on the subject. After the opinion of
the expert, is introduced into the evidence as required by law
and the Court can come to a conclusion.
22.       Even if this Court holds that if the two receipts
Exs.A.5 & A.6 are valid, still the question remains about the
payment of sale consideration and the action/inaction of the
third plaintiff in a suit for specific performance.  It is settled
law that the plaintiff should prove continuous readiness and
willingness to perform the agreement of sale at all relevant
points of time in this case.  There is no clear proof to show
that the balance sum of Rs.16,000/- was arranged or it was
tendered to the defendants. In fact, the evidence of PW.1, who
is prosecuting the suit, as third plaintiff, is as follows:
I have no personal knowledge about the suit contract
and about this litigation.  I have no personal
knowledge about the things spoken by me except the  
evidence touching upon adoption.
23.       In the light of this categorical admission; only the
payments that are admitted by the defendants can be said to
be proved.  The other payments which are disputed have not
been validly proved.  Therefore, the available evidence in this
case that only a sum of Rs.14,000/- has been paid.  Even if
the two receipts Ex.A.5 & A.6 are held to be valid receipts, the
only cover a sum of Rs.4,000/- and for the balance there is
no proof at all.  The third plaintiff also did not take the first
step of issuing a notice demanding specific performance.  On
the contrary, the record shows that the first lawyers notice in
this case was issued by the defendants canceling the
agreement on the ground that the plaintiffs did not adhere to
the terms and conditions of the agreement and also failed to
pay the money as agreed under Ex.B.1.  Ex.B.1 is a document  
which is executed by the first plaintiff in favour of the father
of the defendants.  Ex.B.1 clearly states that the balance
amount of Rs.16,000/- will be paid by 20.05.1979.  DW.1
identified the signatures of the deceased first plaintiff; of the
attesting witnesses and also the handwriting of the scribe of
Ex.B.1.  He also states that the document was executed by 
the deceased first plaintiff in the presence of the witnesses.
In the cross-examination, nothing was much elicited from this
witness.  He states that he had no personal knowledge about
the third plaintiff.  He identifies the signatures of the parties
on Exs.A.1 to A.4, but denies the signatures on Exs.A.5 &
A.6.  He states that the signature of second plaintiff was
obtained as he was the main purchaser.  Only suggestions 
are made that Ex.B.1 was created by forging the signature of
second plaintiff. However, no further steps were taken to
prove or to disprove this theory of forgery.  The next witness
was examined as DW.2, who is an attestor of Ex.B.1.  He also 
identifies the signatures of other witnesses and also the
handwriting of the scribe of Ex.B.1.  In the light of this cross-
examination and the evidence of the witnesses, this Court is
of the opinion that Ex.B.1 is proved as required under law.
The contents of Ex.B.1 if they are intrinsically examined also
support the case of the defendants.
24.       This Court, therefore, holds that vide Ex.B.1 time
was made the essence of contract and it was agreed therein
that the balance amount will be paid by 20.05.1979 and
before 10 a.m. on that date.  It is also stipulated that by the
said date and time, if the balance is not paid, the defendant is
at liberty to sell the house bearing No.14-4-154 to anybody
else.  This Court, therefore, holds that the time was made the
essence.
25.       In conclusion, this Court holds that as the plaintiff
could not prove the payment of sums agreed both under 
Exs.A.1 & A.3 original agreements and also under Ex.B.1, the
third plaintiff is not entitled for specific performance. Hence,
the main relief cannot be granted to the plaintiff.  This finding
of the lower Court is, therefore, correct.  Hence, issues 1, 2 &
3 are held in favour of the respondents/defendants and
against the appellant/ third plaintiff.
26.       As far as issue No.4 is concerned, this Court also
agrees with the finding of lower Court that the third plaintiff
did not prove that he is the adopted son and that he has the
right to continue with the suit.  Therefore, on the death of
plaintiffs 1 & 2, the suit has been abated.  As far as issue
No.5 is concerned, the law is also clearly well settled that the
mere fact that a clause for liquidated damages is provided
under the contract, it cannot be said that the third plaintiff is
not entitled to relief for specific performance. As far as issue
Nos.2 & 3 are concerned, they relate to the validity of the
agreement, which is marked as Ex.B.1, dated 12.05.1979.  As 
mentioned in the earlier part of the judgment, this Court also
holds that Ex.B.1 has been proved by the defendants and
that DWs.1 & 2 in their evidence have proved that this
document is validly executed.
27.       The learned counsel for the respondents also
argued that on the basis of
Madhusudan Dass
case (1 supra),
the mere fact that the second witness is a relative of first
witness/defendant, it cannot be said that he is either a
partisan or interested witness. The judgment of the Supreme
Court is totally applicable to the facts and circumstances of
the present case. Therefore, this Court also agrees with the
findings of the lower Court in this matter.
28.       As far as the amount paid by the defendants to
the third plaintiff is concerned, this Court is of the opinion
that the finding of the lower Court is correct.  As the suit is
held to be abated and as there are no heirs for the deceased-
plaintiffs 1 & 2, the lower court rightly ordered that the
amount should be deposited to the credit of the Government.
29.       For all the above reasons, the appeal is dismissed
and the judgment and decree dated 05.03.1999 passed in 
O.S.No.82 of 1983 by the Additional Senior Civil Judge,
Warangal, is hereby confirmed.  However, there shall be no
order as to costs. Miscellaneous Petitions, if any, pending in
this appeal shall stand closed.
________________________    
D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU, J    
Date: 14.12.2017