[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Koppolu Obanna (Died) Per Lrs vs Bheemunipadu Abraham (Died) Per Lrs on 7 December, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 6
Author:
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
Bench:
D.V.S.S. Somayajulu
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU         

A.S.No.336 of 1998 


07-12-2017 

Koppolu Obanna (died) per LRs  Appellants/ Plaintiffs

Bheemunipadu Abraham (died) Per LRs. Respondents/ Defendants      

Counsel for the appellants: V.B. Subrahmanyam  
                                        
Counsel for the Respondents: Karri Murali Krishna

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:

(2014) 9 SCC 445 
2 Manu/TN/1543/2016  
3 MANU/TN/1433/2017   
4 2012 (3) ALD 404 
5 2014 (5) ALD 385 
6 2001 (4) ALT 234 (DB)
7 AIR 2007 SC 2637  
8 2003 (4) ALD 855 
9 AIR 1974 SC 658  
10. AIR 1974 SC 171 
11. (1980) 3 SCC 72 


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU         

A.S.No.336 of 1998 

JUDGMENT:
This appeal is filed by the legal representatives of the
unsuccessful appellant/plaintiff in the suit O.S.No.2 of 1985,
which was dismissed on 30.06.1997 by the Sub-ordinate 
Judge, Cuddapah.
2.      The suit was filed by one K. Obanna for a
declaration of his right and title to the plaint C-schedule
property and other reliefs.
3.      The suit was initially filed against one B. Abraham
and Smt. B. Santhamma.  The averments of the plaint are 
that B. Santhamma, second defendant and her mother  
purchased the A-schedule site by sale deed dated 25.03.1965.
The mother relinquished her share in favour of the second
defendant, vide a registered deed dated 03.02.1969. Thus, the
second defendant became the owner of the entire property,
which is described as B-schedule property. Thereafter, in
1984 after the property was developed, the second defendant
gifted B-schedule property in favour of the plaintiff.
The plaintiff is the brother of the second defendant.
The second defendant also executed a rectification deed to
correct an error in the said gift deed. This property is the
C-schedule property of the plaint.  As per the plaint, the
husband of the second defendant viz., the first defendant and
his children have been proclaiming their interest to claim title
over the property.  The plaintiff also states that after he got
the tenants vacated, the first defendant and his sons
trespassed into the property and have occupied the same.
The second defendant also changed her stand and is residing
with the first defendant.  Therefore, the plaintiff filed the suit
for declaration of his title over the C-schedule property and
for other reliefs.
4.      The contesting first defendant states that the first
sale deed of 1965 was nominally taken by him in the name of
his mother and his wife-second defendant. He states that he
developed the property, constructed the house with loans,
contributions etc., as are described in para-4 of the written
statement.  He states that his wife-second defendant was
coaxed second defendant into giving the property by gift, vide
deed dated 08.05.1984. The second defendant remained  
ex parte.  The defendants 3 to 6, who are added as the legal
representatives, adopted in the written statement filed by
their father.
5.      The matter went to trial and Exs.A.1 to A.6 were
marked for the plaintiff.  Exs.B.1 to B.13 were marked for the
defendants.  The plaintiff was examined as PW.1.  The third
defendant was examined as DW.1 and another witness was    
examined as DW.2.  After hearing, the lower Court by its
order dated 30.06.1997 dismissed the suit.  Hence, the
present appeal.
6.      Heard Sri V.B. Subrahmanyam, learned counsel  
for the appellant/Legal Representatives of the plaintiff and Sri
Karri Murali Krishna, learned counsel for the respondents/
defendants.
7.      The first and foremost point that arises for
consideration in this case is whether the gift deed-Ex.A.3
dated 08.05.1984 is a genuine document or not.  Basing on
this point, the other points would follow.  As narrated in the
plaint and as can be seen from the documents; initially, the
site was purchased by the second defendant and her mother, 
through Ex.A.1-registered sale deed 25.03.1965. The mother
relinquished her half share in favour of her daughter/second
defendant on 03.02.1969 (Ex.A.2).  On 08.05.1984 i.e., after
about 15 years, the second defendant executed a gift
settlement deed in favour of the plaintiff (Ex.A.3). She also
executed a rectification deed on 15.06.1984, which is marked
as Ex.A.4. The contention of the plaintiff is that Ex.A.3-
document is executed out of love and affection that his sister
had towards him. Therefore, he also states that he has
obtained title to the property.
8.      In reply to this, the defendants state that the
property was originally procured by the first defendant with
his funds, but as he was in the government service working
as head constable, he obtained the sale deed in the name of
his wife and his mother-in-law.  The first defendant states
that the second defendant or his mother did not have any
independent source of income and that the Ex.A.3-gift deed
that was given on 18.05.1984 is not a valid deed.  In para-6 of
the written statement, the defendants state that the plaintiff
coaxed the second defendant into executing the gift deed.
9.      It is pertinent to note that in this suit the second
defendant, who is the most critical and crucial person in this
entire transaction and who could have explained the
circumstances under which Ex.A.3-gift deed was executed  
chose to stay away from the court.  She did not give evidence
in this matter.  She supported her husband by stating in her
statement that the gift deed was not voluntary and that she
cancelled the same on 21.02.1986.  In addition to this, first
defendant also died.  Therefore, the evidence of the plaintiff as
PW.1 alone is available. PW.1 was examined as a witness on  
10.04.1996.  The written statement of second defendant was
filed in the court on 08.03.1991.  In the cross-examination by
the second defendant, it is noted that she is present in the
court and she represented that she has no objection to the
suit schedule property of her share and the declaration, as
the declaration and possession. This admission is not very
clear.  In the cross-examination of PW.1 the witness admitted
that possession was not delivered to him after the gift deed as
the property is in the hands of the tenant.  It was also
suggested to him that after the death of first defendant,
second defendant joined the plaintiff.  In the next line he
clearly states that it is true that we compromise the matter
myself and second defendant. As mentioned, the second  
defendant, who filed a separate written statement supporting
her husband, did not come forward to give evidence.
The Court recorded her presence during the course of
examination of the first defendant.  In the cross-examination
of PW.1, the important point that is elicited is about the
possession being not delivered under Ex.A.3-gift deed.  Apart
from this, PW.1 admits that there is a compromise between 
himself and the second defendant.
10.     As far as the lack of delivery of possession is
concerned, both the learned counsels argued for a long time
on this matter.  The learned counsel for respondent argued
that delivery of possession is necessary for the completion of
the gift and that in this case there is no delivery at all.
The learned counsel for the appellants, on the other hand,
drew the attention of this Court to a decision reported in
Renikuntla Rajamma v. K. Sarwanamma
wherein three   
judges of the Honble Supreme Court of India have clearly
noticed the language in
Section 123
of the Transfer of
Property Act, 1882 and clearly held that a conjoint reading of
Sections 122
and 123 makes it clear that the transfer or
delivery of possession of property is not a sine quo non for
making the gift a valid gift.  Their Lordships of the Supreme
Court have observed that
Section 123
of the Act is in two
parts. The first part deals with gift of immovable property,
whereas the second part deals with the gift of movable
property.  In case of movable property, the gift may be
affected either by registered instrument or by delivery.
In the case of immovable property, however, it is noticed that
the registered instrument alone is stipulated and their
Lordships held that if the intention of the legislature was to
make delivery of possession of the property gifted a condition
precedent for a failure of immovable property, the legislature
would have specifically say so.  Their Lordships held absence
of any such requirement can lead us the conclusion that the
delivery of possession is not an essential pre-requisite for
making a valid gift in case of immovable property. In the light
of the authoritative pronouncement of three judges of the
Honble Supreme Court, this Court holds that the failure of
the plaintiff to take possession will not invalidate the gift.
11.       The gift deed is a registered deed which was
followed by a rectification deed also to correct an error.  There
are no circumstances elicited or existing to show that the gift
deed was not voluntarily executed. In addition, the
acceptance of the gift is visible from the following facts that
the plaintiff has issued a lawyers notice to the tenants in the
building.  The lawyers notice issued by the first defendant,
which is marked as Ex.A.5, is testimony to this.  The gift deed
and rectification deed are in possession of the plaintiff who
produced the same along with the original sale deed.
In this
connection, the case of Duraisami v. D. Kuppuswamy  and in
K. Cherunni v. K. Nalini and others
are relevant. The gift
deed is therefore held to be valid and its executor is not in
doubt.
12.     One other point that survives for consideration is
whether Ex.A.3-gift deed was cancelled by the second
defendant. DW.1 marked a document (Ex.B.2), which is a  
deed dated 21.02.1986 by which it is said that second
defendant has unilaterally cancelled Ex.A.3. The unilateral
cancellation of the deed is not valid as per the settled case law
on this subject.  The learned counsel for the appellants also
cited two judgments reported in Kapuganti Jagannadha 
Gupta v. District Registrar,
Srikakulam and others  and
Sudhakara Reddy v. Lakshmamma
.  This Court is of the  
opinion that in view of these judgments and other judgments
that the unilateral cancellation of the gift deed is not valid.
13.       For all these reasons, the gift deed is held to be
validly executed.
14.     The last question that survives is whether the sale
deed of May 1965 (Ex.A.1) is acquired with the funds of first
defendant and was kept nominally in the name of second 
defendant and his mother. Both the learned counsels have
cited case law on the subject of benami.  The learned counsel
for the appellants relied upon
Sharada Bai v. Jamuna Bai
and others
, V. Shankaranarayana Rao (died) by LRs v.
Leelavathi (
died) by LRs , M. Krishna Rao and another v. M.L.
Narasikha Rao and others
, whereas the learned counsel for
the respondents relied upon
Vidyadhar Krishnarao Mungi 
and others, v. Usman Gani Saheb Konkani and others
,
Jayadayal Poddar v. Bibi Hazra
and
Thakur Bhim Singh v.
Thakur Kan Singh
.
15.     The law on this subject is sufficiently clear and
does not require repetition.  It is settled that the burden of
proving that the transaction is benami and that the benami
purchaser is not the real owner always rests on the person
asserting it.  The burden has to be discharged by adducing
legal evidence of a definite character which can directly prove
the fact of benami or firm circumstances which would raise
an inference that the property is purchased benami.  This is
the sum and substance of the judgments relied upon by both
the parties.  Therefore, there should be direct and acceptable
evidence to prove the fact of benami or circumstances which
would lead to a clear conclusion that the transaction is
benami.
16.     It is needless to say that the onus is on the person
impeaching the document. The tests
laid down by
the Honble
Supreme Court are to this effect only.  Viewed against this
backdrop, it is clear that there is no direct evidence adduced
by the defence pertaining to the sale deed of March 1965,
Ex.A.1.  In the written statement, it is pleaded very clearly by
the first defendant that first defendant has invested the
money for purchasing the said site. In para-4, it is further
stated that the defendant raised a loan from the Kadapa
Cooperative House Building Cooperative Society Limited and
constructed the house in 1971.  He also states that he raised
a loan from his Provident Fund Account for the construction.
In addition to this, he is pleaded that the two sons who were
the government service and unmarried in 1971 saved their
salaries and used the same in the construction.  It is pleaded
that the brothers of the defendants also lend the money for
the construction.  The first defendant and his sons have been
discharging the loan to the society till the date of written
statement. The loans raised from the friends and relatives
have been discharged earlier. These positive statements in the
written statement about the loans obtained, loans discharged
etc., have however not been proved.  If the loan was obtained
from the Cooperative Society or from the defendants own P.F.
account, the same would be borne by the record.  Similarly,
the other facts about the loan being discharged till date of the
written statement are also not borne out by record.  To prove
the alleged borrowings, another witness was examined as 
DW.2, who is the younger brother of first defendant. He
clearly admitted in his cross-examination that there is no
written document to show that he lent the money or that he
repaid the same.  Even the first defendant who gave evidence
does not clearly speak about the loan being obtained for the
improvement of the property.  No details are also furnished of
the same.
17.     The matters that are pleaded are not borne out by
evidence.  Since the source of consideration for 1965 sale
deed-Ex.A.1 is not directly available, the construction of the
houses by the first defendant from his own funds or
borrowings would have strengthened his case that he is the
real owner and that the property was kept benami in the
name of his wife and mother-in-law.  The sale deed-Ex.A.1
was in March 1965 and if the construction in 1971 was made
by first defendant with the funds obtained as alleged in
para-4, it would have strengthened the case of the defendant.
Similarly, if he could prove that from 1971 till the filing of the
written statement in the court by first defendant i.e., August
1985, they were discharging the loan, it would have helped in
establishing the case of benami.  Due to the lack of any
evidence whatsoever this Court is constrained to hold that
defendants 1, 3 to 6 failed to prove that the property was
purchased benami by the first defendant in the name of the
second defendant and her mother.
18.
In addition to the above, the learned counsel for
the appellants also brought to the notice of this Court a
Division Bench decision of this Court reported in
M. Krishna
Rao
(8 supra) wherein this Court held that if a government
servant without the prior permission acquires benami
property, the Court should not uphold the benami plea of the
government servant.  In this case, admittedly, both from the
pleadings and from the evidence, it is clear that the case of
the first defendant is that as he was in government service,
the property was acquired in the name of the second
defendant.  This Division Bench judgment is binding on this
Court and it mandates that a declaration of the nature sought
cannot be given.
19.     In the light of all the above, this Court is of the
opinion that the judgment and decree of the lower Court has
to be set aside.  As far as issue No.1 is concerned, the lower
Court concluded that the gift deed is not valid for the reason
that the possession was not delivered and the property is in
the hands of the tenants. This admission of the plaintiff
resulted in this issue being held against him. However, in
view of the judgment of Honble Supreme Court reported in
Renikuntla Rajamma
(1 supra), delivery of possession is no
longer an essential ingredient to uphold the validity of a job.
The execution of the gift deed is also accepted by the court
and the cancellation of the gift deed is invalid in view of the
law on the subject. Therefore, this Court is of the opinion that
the plaintiff is entitled to declaration of his title to the plaint
C- schedule property.  This issue is accordingly answered in
his favour.
20.     As far as issue No.2 is concerned, this Court is of
the opinion that if the evidence available is judged on the
basis of the citations relied upon by both the learned
counsels, it does not lead to a conclusion that the source of
funds or the consideration came from the first defendant.
The burden was squarely on the first defendant to prove that
as to how the sale deed was benami. The probabilities and
inferences do not lead to a conclusion that the source of
funds are from the first defendant. Lastly, the Division Bench
of this Court also held that this Court should not support a
government servant who acquired property benami.
21.     For all the above reasons, the appeal is allowed.
The judgment and decree dated 30.06.1997 in O.S.No.2 of 
1985 by the Sub-ordinate Judge, Cuddapah is hereby set 
aside. The plaintiffs are declared as the owners of C-schedule
property. The defendants are directed to deliver the vacant
possession of the C-schedule property within 60 days from
the date of this judgment. The plaintiffs/appellants are
entitled to costs through out.  As the other prayers in the
plaint are scored out, nothing else remained is to be ordered.
22.     Miscellaneous Petitions, if any, pending in this
appeal shall stand closed.
_______________________    
D.V.S.S. SOMAYAJULU, J    
Date: 07.12.2017