[Cites
3
, Cited by
9
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Shameem Begum vs Vennapusa Chenna Reddy And Another on 20 November, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 HYDERABAD 17, (2018) 1 CIVILCOURTC 548, (2018) 2 ANDHLD 297, (2018) 3 CIVLJ 229
Author:
B.Siva Sankara Rao
Bench:
B.Siva Sankara Rao
HONOURABLE Dr. JUSTICE B.SIVA SANKARA RAO           

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.4105 of 2010    

20-11-2017 

Shameem Begum.petitioner    
                        

Vennapusa Chenna Reddy and another.Respondents      


Counsel for the petitioner :  M/s.V.Raghu

Counsel  for the respondents:  -

<Gist :

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
 CDJ 2016 APHC 619   


HONOURABLE Dr. JUSTICE B.SIVA SANKARA RAO           

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.4105 of 2010    
ORDER :
This revision is filed by the petitioner/plaintiff,
aggrieved by the order dated 08.07.2010 in I.A.No.964 of
2010 in O.S.No.253 of 2010 passed by the Principal Junior
Civil Judge, Vijaywada.
2.      Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner/plaintiff
and taken as heard the respondents, who are defendants in
the said suit, since served failed to attend.
3.      The revision is pending since 2010 even without
ordering notice at the stage before admission before
ordering notice.  The petitioner/plaintiff filed I.A.No.964 of
2010 under
Order XXVI Rule 9 C.P.C
. for appointment of an
advocate commissioner for local inspection to note down
the physical features of the plaint schedule property in the
suit for bare injunction and the lower Court, after contest,
dismissed the petition on 08.07.2010. The same is now
impugned in the revision.
4.      The impugned dismissal order of the lower Court,
under a mistaken impression and without even reading
properly the Order XXVI Rule 9 and
Section 75
C.P.C., says
the purpose of appointment of an advocate commissioner 
sought to note down the physical features regarding
possession of property cannot be allowed as a party cannot
be allowed to fish out evidence by appointment of a
commissioner.  The lower Court did not even notice the
distinction between fishing out information (which is not
permissible) and collection of evidence (which is
permissible). What is prohibited of fish out information by
commissioner is X or Y stated to him at the time of
inspection A or B in possession and the like.  It is not
prohibited of apparently visible physical features (which is
even collection of evidence).
5.
In fact, this Court, in
Bandi Samuel and another v.
Medida Nageswara Rao
referring to the several
expressions considered the scope of Order XXVI Rule 9(1)
and
Section 75
C.P.C. The very wording of Rule IX of Order
XXVI says Commissions to make local investigation. In any
suit in which the Court deems a local investigation to be
requisite or proper for the purpose of elucidating any
matter in dispute, or of ascertaining the market value of
any property, or the amount of any mense profits or
damages or annual net profits, the Court may issue a
commission to such person as it thinks fit directing him to
make such investigation and to report thereon to the Court.
Provided that, where the State Government has made rules 
as to the persons to whom such commission shall be issued, 
the Court shall be bound by such rules. The very rule no way
says in which suit, a commissioner can be appointed and
cannot be appointed, as in any civil suit, a commissioner
can be appointed, where the Court thinks fit of necessary of
any local investigation having deemed fit.  The very wording
is local investigation and the purpose of local investigation
is to elucidate any matter in dispute itself indicates
permissibility of collection of evidence, but mainly from the
unique feature of such collection saves much oral evidence
and valuable time of the Court and parties or by oral
evidence cannot effectively be proved like measurement
and demarcation, identify on ground and physical features
noting etc.,
6.      The lower Court went wrong in saying in a suit for
injunction, the purpose to note down the physical features
is fishing out information.  The expression in
Bandi Samuel
(supra) clearly distinguished what is meant by fishing out
information and what is elucidating the matter in
controversy other than by fishing out information.  Fishing
information prohibited is to make a local enquiry of hearsay
material from the persons gathered there or the like, that
is prohibited and not noting of physical features.
7.      Having regard to the above instead of passing any
order on the revision, that too, in the absence of the other
side and instead of keeping the matter further pending at
this stage, after seven years to order notice, the petitioner
is given liberty to file a fresh petition before the lower
Court to consider on own merits after contest with
reference to the settled expressions by noting the
distinction referred supra.
8.      Accordingly, the Civil Revision Petition is disposed of.
9.      Consequently, miscellaneous petitions, if any, pending
shall stand closed. No costs.
________________________    
Dr. B. SIVA SANKARA RAO, J    
Date:20-11-2017