[Cites
7
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Bk Oakwood Estates A Partnership Firm ... vs District Consumer Disputes Redressal ... on 14 June, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 HYDERABAD 161, (2017) 4 ANDHLD 739 (2018) 1 CIVLJ 42, (2018) 1 CIVLJ 42
Author:
C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy
Bench:
C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy
The Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy and The Honble Ms. Justice J.Uma Devi 

Writ Petition No.10351 of 2017

14-06-2017 

BK Oakwood Estates A partnership firm Hyderabad and another Petitioners   

District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum Hyderabad and 3 othersRespondents
Counsel for the petitioners: Mr.Zeeshan Adnan Mahmood  

Counsel for respondent No.1: AGP for Civil Supplies (TS)

Counsel for respondent Nos.2 & 3:Mr.Kamini Venkateswarlu  

<GIST:
>HEAD NOTE:
? Cases cited:
AIR 2013 AP 93  

WP.No.22686 of 2015, dated 28-09-2015  


The Hon'ble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy 
and 
The Honble Ms. Justice J.Uma Devi 


The Court made the following:
Order: (per Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy)

        
This Writ Petition is filed seeking issue of a Writ of
Prohibition against respondent No.1- District Consumer Disputes
Redressal Forum-II, Hyderabad, from proceeding with EA.No.11 
of 2017 in CC.No.270 of 2013 during the pendency of
FA.No.A/237/2016 before the State Consumer Disputes   
Redressal Forum.
We have heard the learned Counsel for both parties and
perused the record.
A consumer dispute was instituted by respondent Nos.2 and 
3 against the petitioners and respondent Nos.3 to 6 in connection
with an agreement of sale, dated 07-05-2008.  The said dispute
was registered as CC.No.270 of 2013 by respondent No.1.  After
hearing both sides, respondent No.1 has passed an order on 16-
09-2016, granting certain reliefs to respondent Nos.2 and 3
including payment of a sum of Rs.4,08,500/- along with interest @
9% p.a.  Feeling aggrieved by this order, the petitioners filed an
Appeal before the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum for  
Telangana State, which was registered as FA.No.237 of 2016. 
Pending the Appeal, respondent Nos.2 and 3 filed EA.No.11 of
2017 before respondent No.1 for penalising the petitioners for
non-compliance with the Order, dated 16-09-2016, in CC.No.270 
of 2013, passed in their favour.  Feeling aggrieved by
entertainment of the said Application by respondent No.1, the
petitioners filed this Writ Petition.
At the hearing, Mr.Zeeshan Adnan Mahmood, learned   
Counsel for the petitioners, submitted that as the order passed by
respondent No.1 in CC.No.270 of 2013 has not attained Finality
within the meaning of
Section 24
of the Consumer Protection Act,
1986, (for short the Act), respondent No.1- Forum had no
jurisdiction to entertain the Application filed by respondent Nos.2
and 3 under
Section 27
of the Act.  In support of this submission,
he has placed reliance on a Division Bench judgment of this Court
in Maytas Properties Limited, rep. by its Authorized
Signatory V.Nagaiah & Another vs. A.P.State Consumer  
Redressal Commission and others .
Opposing the above submissions, Mr.Kamini  
Venkateswarlu, learned Counsel for respondent Nos.2 and 3,
submitted that there is no prohibition under the Act from
entertaining an Application under
Section 27
of the Act though the
Forum might not proceed with its hearing and pass an order
before the order appealed against attained Finality.  He has,
therefore, submitted that the Writ Petition filed against the very
entertainment of the Application under
Section 27
of the Act is
not maintainable and the same is, accordingly, liable to be
dismissed.
We have considered the submissions of the learned Counsel 
for both parties with reference to the record.
A Division Bench of this Court in Maytas Properties
Limited (cited supra), considered an identical situation and on
analysis of the provisions of the Act in general and
Sections 24
and
27
of the Act in particular, observed as under:
We find force in the submission of the learned Senior Counsel
appearing for the writ petitioner. What is challenged in the present
batch of writ petitions is only an order passed by the State
Commission dismissing the interlocutory applications filed by the
writ petitioner to reject the petitions filed under
Section 27
of the
Act on the ground that no such petitions can be maintained while
the appeals preferred by the petitioner under
Section 19
of the Act
are pending before the National Commission. Since no final order
as such is admittedly passed on the petitions filed by the
respondents under
Section 27
of the Act, the question of appeal
under
Section 27-A
does not arise at all. Hence, the preliminary
objection raised on behalf of the respondents as to the
maintainability of the writ petitions on the ground of availability
of alternative statutory remedy of appeal cannot be accepted.
The submission of the learned Counsel for respondent
Nos.2 and 3 that there is no bar on respondent No.1- Forum
entertaining the application is in the teeth of the ratio laid down in
Maytas Properties Limited (1 supra).  The bar, as per the
Division Bench Judgment, extends to even entertainment of the
application under
Section 27
of the Act.
The learned Counsel for respondent Nos.2 and 3 placed
reliance on a Division Bench Judgment of this Court in Sri Siva
Mutually Aided OP Thrift Society Limited and others vs.
District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum- II,
Vijayawada .  In that case, an appeal along with a delay
condonation petition was filed against the order of the District
Forum by the writ petitioners and pending the application for
condonation of delay, the opposite party in whose favour, the
District Forum passed an order, filed an application under
Section
27
of the Act.  The Division Bench, while disposing of the Writ
Petition, directed disposal of the delay condonation petition
expeditiously and further directed that till such disposal, no
further steps shall be taken on the application under
Section 27
of
the Act filed before the District Forum.  This Judgment has not
addressed the issue of maintainability of an application under
Section 27
of the Act pending the appeal.
On the above analysis, we are of the opinion that
respondent No.1- Forum ought not to have entertained the
application under
Section 27
of the Act and registered the same as
EA.No.11 of 2017.
The learned Counsel for respondent Nos.2 and 3 submitted 
that as the appeals are kept pending for several years, the complete
bar on entertaining and disposing of an application under
Section
27
of the Act would cause serious prejudice and hardship to the
interests of the successful party.
We understand the concern expressed by the learned  
Counsel for respondent Nos.2 and 3 that the very legislative intent
of speedy relief to a consumer will be defeated if the successful
party before the District Forum is prevented from executing the
orders on the ground of pendency of appeals before the appellate
Fora.
Indeed, there is a legislative mandate under
Section 13(3A)
of the Act for making an endeavour by the District Forum to
dispose of the complaints within three months from the date of
receipt of notice by the opposite party and a similar provision is
also incorporated in
Section 18
of the Act, which deals with
disposal of disputes by the State Commission.
Section 19A
was 
inserted by Act 62 of 2002 as per which the State Commission or
the National Commission shall make an endeavour to dispose of 
the appeals within 90 days from the date of their admission.  But,
in reality, these provisions are followed more in breach and cases
are pending before the Fora for substantially long periods.
The absence of a specific provision for stay of the orders of
the original forum, pending the appeals, is, obviously, for the
reason that the legislature has assumed expeditious disposal of the
appeals in conformity with the aforementioned legislative intent.
Long pendency of cases before the District Fora and the State
Commissions disabling successful party from seeking execution of
orders merely on the ground of pendency of appeal causes undue 
hardship to the parties, who succeeded before the District Forum.
We, therefore, feel it expedient to suggest an appropriate
amendment to the provisions of the Act to alleviate such hardship
probably by incorporating a provision for stay of the orders of the
original forum and also a provision, which enables the successful
party before the original forum, to seek execution of its orders, in
the event, the appellant fails to secure an interim order or comply
with the conditional order, if any, passed by the appellate forum.
For the present, while prohibiting respondent No.1 from
proceeding further with EA.No.11 of 2017, we permit respondent
Nos.2 and 3 to file an application for expeditious hearing of the
appeal by the State Consumer Forum.  On such application being 
filed, the State Consumer Forum shall consider disposal of the
appeal as expeditiously as possible.
The Writ Petition is, accordingly, allowed in the manner as
indicated above.
As a sequel, WPMP.No.12820 of 2017, filed by the 
petitioners for interim relief, is disposed of.
_____________________    
(C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy, J) 
____________  
(J.Uma Devi, J)
Dt: 14th June, 2017