[Cites
17
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Karanam Nagaraju @ Snathakumar vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh, Rep. By The ... on 30 June, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 38
Bench:
Suresh Kumar Kait
,
U.Durga Prasad Rao
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT AND HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO                     

Crl.A.No.1586 of 2010

30-06-2017 

Karanam Nagaraju @ Snathakumar...Appellant    

The State of Andhra Pradesh, rep. by the Public Prosecutor...Respondent. 

For Appellant :Sri M.K.Raj Kumar, Advocate.

For Respondent: Public Prosecutor. 

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? CITATIONS:  

1.AIR 1997 SC 2960  
2.2010 (173) DLT 741 
3.(2012) 191 DLT 225 (FB) 

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT         
AND  
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO          

CRIMINAL APPEAL No.1586 of 2010     

JUDGMENT :
(Per Honble Sri Justice Suresh Kumar Kait)  

        Vide the present appeal, the appellant has challenged the judgment
dated 23rd February 2010, passed by VII Additional District & Sessions
Judge (FTC), Vijayawada, in Sessions Case No.171 of 2008, whereby,  
the appellant is held guilty for the offence punishable under
Section 302
IPC and accordingly sentenced to suffer life imprisonment and to pay a
fine of Rs.500/-, in default, simple imprisonment for one month.
2.      Briefly, the case of the prosecution is that on 15.11.2006, Accused
No.1 (appellant) brought Phanindra Kumar (the deceased) to the room
on the upstairs of rented building of one Suryanarayana and tried to
have homosex. The deceased refused, appellant insisted him for carnal
intercourse.  When the deceased tried to make cries, appellant shut his
face with jeans pant and smothered him to death.  Thereafter, latched the
room from outside.  On 16.11.2006 at 11 a.m., appellant reached at the
scene of offence along with Accused Nos.2 and 3 with an intention to
dispose of dead body, however, on account of movement of neighbours, 
having been afraid, they locked the room and went away.  On
17.11.2006, on seeing the padlock to the room in the upstairs, PW-1
K.Uma Maheswari Devi, daughter of the building owner, reached the
scene and applied another padlock.  At 2.30 p.m., appellant and
Accused No.2 reached the scene; unlocked the padlock and tried to break 
open the padlock applied by PW-1.  Then, neighbour by name Uma   
(PW-2) objected and then appellant and Accused No.2 went away.  On  
being informed by PW-2, PW-1 came and sensing some foul smell from   
the room, reported to the Police at S.N.Puram Police Station and on
arrival of Police, she unlocked the room.  On entering the room, they
found the dead body of the deceased in decomposed state.  On the report
of PW-1, A.S.I. registered Crime No.618 of 2006 and later Inspector
investigated the case.
3.      The case against Accused No.2 was abated as he died.
4.      On appearance of Accused No.1 (appellant) and Accused No.3,  
they were charged under
Sections 302
and
377
of IPC and under
Section 
201
r/w.511
IPC
.  They pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
5.      To substantiate its case, the Prosecution has examined PWs.1 to 
22 and marked Exs.P-1 to P-28 and M.Os.1 to 11.
6.      On completion of trial, the accused were examined under
Section
313
Cr.P.C. explaining the incriminative material and evidence against
them to which they denied, however, choose not to examine any 
witnesses on their behalf.
7.      The point for determination before the trial Court was whether the
accused has carnal intercourse with Phanindra Kumar, the deceased, and 
in such inter course, caused the death by shutting the face with jeans
pant ?
8.      On appreciation of oral and documentary evidence on record, the
trial Court convicted Accused No.1 (appellant) for the offence under
Section 302
of IPC, however, acquitted him of the offence under
Section
377
of IPC.  Accused Nos.1 and 3 were acquitted of the offence under
Section 201
r/w. 511
IPC
.
9.      Challenging his conviction and sentence for the offence under
Section 302
of IPC, this appeal has been preferred by Accused No.1.
10.     We have heard learned counsel for the appellant and the learned
Public Prosecutor appearing on behalf of the State.
11.     Learned counsel appearing on behalf of appellant submits that in
the present case, there are no eyewitnesses and the prosecution case
depends only on the circumstantial witnesses.  The conviction was based
mainly on the evidence of PW-16, the ASI/Fingerprint Expert without
considering the fact the fingerprints of A-1 were obtained after his arrest.
12.     In expatiation, he argued, PW-1 gave complaint (Ex.P-1) to the
Circle Inspector of Police, Satyanarayanapuram Police Station, stating
that on 17.11.2006, when she was in school, one S.Uma, who is residing
besides her fathers house, contacted her over phone and informed that
two boys, claiming to be the persons of Chinna Babu, were opening the
lock of the room in the upstairs saying that they kept their luggage in
that room.  When she asked them to wait till the house owner come and 
give the keys, they left the place.  On suspicion, when she went to the
door and peeped into, she got foul smell.  It is further stated in the
complaint that at about 4 p.m., she went to the house and when she
peeped into the room, she got foul smell.  Then she informed the Police
and after their arrival, with their help, the lock was broke opened.  When
they went inside, a boy of 12 to 13 years old was found dead, lying
supine.
13.     Counsel for appellant has argued that in view of the statement of
PW-1, it is established that PW-1 was not present at the scene of offence
at the time of commission of the offence and therefore, her deposition
cannot be relied upon.  He further contended that PW-2, who is
neighbour, has also not witnessed the offence.
14.     Learned counsel further submitted that PW-7
V.V.Lakshminarayana, who is the father of the deceased Phanindra 
Kumar, came to know about the death of his son only when it was 
published in a newspaper.  Thereafter, he went to the Police Station and
identified the deceased as his son on seeing the video.  PW-8 K.
Padmanabhaiah has only accompanied PW-1 to the scene and informed     
about the incident to the Police and was present at the time when the
shed was opened and dead body was found.  PW-10 K. Narayana Rao is    
the house owner and he also came to know about the incident as 
informed by PW-1 and he advised PW-1 to give a report to the Police.
He argued the evidence of these witnesses is of no use to connect accused
to the offence.  He further argued, PW-12 is a hearsay witness, who came
to know about the incident from the Police.  PW-13 is a Ticket Booking
Clerk in Seshu Mahal theatre, who deposed that there is no identity for
Ex.P-11 tickets that said tickets were issued in the year 2006.  Thus, he
argued, evidence of these witnesses is of no use.
15.     He argued, PW-16 is concerned, he is the Sub-Inspector of Police,
who visited the scene of offence along with clues team of concerned
Police Station on 17.11.2006 at 7 p.m. at Door No.21/12-130 upstairs,
Indira Colony, Madhuranagar.  He examined the scene and found one  
steel box round in shape (M.O.8) and one water bottle in the almirah.
He examined and developed chance prints on the steel tiffin box and
water bottle.  Two chance prints were traced on the tiffin box (M.O.8)
and he marked the same as A and B to facilitate for the photographs.
The chance prints were got photographed by the clues team 
Photographer on the same day.  He received the photograph from the
clues team photographer on 18.11.2006.  As the dead body was in de- 
composed state, he could not take the finger prints of the deceased.  On
verification of the photograph, he found that the chance print marked as
B was unfit for comparison.  Thereafter, he compared the chance print
marked as A with local data base prints vide transaction No.73901233
and it remained un-identified.  Accordingly, he sent report to the
Inspector of Police by marking a copy to the Director, Finger Prints
Bureau for information.  He entered A marked print as un-identified
chance print.  He further deposed that on 09.04.2007, he received one
finger prints slip from the investigating officer along with letter dated
09.04.2007 for comparison of the unidentified chance print concerned in
the present case.  On the same day, he compared the same with un-  
identified chance print.  The chance prints were found identical with the
left middle finger impression of K. Nagaraju (appellant).
16.     Severely criticizing the above evidence, learned counsel for
appellant submitted that as stated by PW-16, initially, he found the
chance print marked as A not matched with the database finger prints.
After arrest of A-1, his finger prints were manipulated on M.O.8 and the
finger prints of appellant were sent to PW-16.  Thus, the Police Officer
had taken the finger prints of appellant in custody without the
permission of the Court, which is in violation of the provisions of
The
Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920
.
17.     Learned counsel would thus submit that there is no direct and
substantial oral evidence as to the involvement of the appellant in the
commission of the offence of murder of the deceased.  The prosecution
has mainly relied upon the circumstantial evidence i.e. availability of
chance prints on M.O.8 tiffin box found at the scene of offence and the
evidence of PW-16, who compared the photographs of chance prints  
with the specimen finger prints of the appellant received by him.  He
allegedly issued Ex.P-19 finger print report and Ex.P-20 photo
comparison chart without sending them to finger print expert in FSL for
comparison.  Learned counsel submits that there is no evidence or
material against the appellant, however, the trial Court has convicted the
appellant based on assumption and presumption.  Thus, the present 
appeal deserves to be allowed.
18.     On the other hand, learned Public Prosecutor would submit that
the present case is based on the circumstantial evidence i.e. the
availability of chance prints on M.O.8 tiffin box found at the scene of
offence and the evidence of PW-16, who compared the photographs of 
chance prints with the specimen finger prints of appellant received by
him.  Said witness issued Ex.P-19 finger print report and Ex.P-20 photo
comparison chart.  Ex.P-21 is the letter by the Inspector of Police, Finger
Print Unit, CID, Vijayawada City, through which, Photo comparison
chart (P-20) is sent to the Inspector of Police, S.N.Puram Police Station.
Therefore, identical finger prints itself sufficient to warrant conviction
against the appellant for causing the death of deceased.
19.     Learned Public Prosecutor further submits that PW-16 is an expert
qualified to examine the finger prints.  He possessed the required
certificate issued by All India Board Examination of Finger Print Expert.
The said witness deposed that on 17th June 2006 at 7 p.m., he visited the
scene along with clues team of concerned Police and examined the scene  
and found one steel box round in shape (M.O.8) and one water bottle in
the almirah and developed chance prints on the box and water bottle and
marked the chance prints found on M.O.8 tiffin box as A and B.  He
further deposed that the chance prints were also photographed by the
clues team photographer on the same day.  On 09.04.2007, he received 
one finger print slip from the Investigating Officer along with letter for
comparison of the chance prints and on the same day he compared the  
chance prints with the specimen finger prints of appellant and found
they are identical with left middle finger impression of appellant.
Accordingly issued Ex.P-19 finger print report and Ex.P-20 photo
comparison chart.  Ex.P-21 is the letter by the Inspector of Police, Finger
Print Unit, CID, Vijayawada City, through which, photo comparison
chart (Ex.P-20) is sent to the Inspector of Police, S.N.Puram Police
Station.  He submits that the evidence against the appellant is scientific
one and cannot be disbelieved from any stretch of imagination, therefore,
the trial Court has relied upon the same connecting the appellant to the
offence and accordingly convicted him for the offence punishable under
Section 302
of IPC.
20.     The contention of learned counsel for the appellant is that the
Prosecution has failed to establish that the seized article M.O.8, wherein,
the chance prints are available, were not tampered before it reached the
expert for examination as it was not packed and sealed; no evidence was
led whether the Bureau expert received the packages with the seals
intact, and further, M.O.8 tiffin box was not sent to the finger print
expert, therefore, the case of the prosecution creates any amount of
doubt.  He further contended that no permission was taken by the
prosecution to obtain specimen finger print impression of the appellant
in the presence of Magistrate.  Therefore, the sole circumstance of
connecting the appellant with the crime by way of finger prints, cannot
be believed to arrive at a conclusion as to the guilt of the accused.  He
contends that on two earlier occasions, the finger prints taken were
found not fit for comparison and on 3rd occasion, the finger prints were
found identical, entertaining the doubt   as to the procedure adopted by
the investigating officer in sealing the seized articles; packing the same
and later in sending the articles to the Finger Prints Bureau.  Hence, he
submits, in such a situation, as held in Mohd. Khan v. State of
Rajastan , the appellant cannot be convicted for murder.
21.     It is pertinent to note that PW-16, the finger print expert, who
gave his opinion, had visited the scene of offence along with the clues
team and also the investigating officer PW-22; in their presence, found
M.O.8 steel tiffin box and water bottle; marked two chance prints on the
tiffin box as A and B; got photographed the chance prints by the
photographer of clues team, and later, on receipt of specimen finger
prints of appellant on 09.04.2007, he compared the same and found the
chance prints are identical with the left middle finger impression of the
appellant.  In such a back ground, there is no necessity to put a seal on
M.O.8 and pack it and send the same to FSL or somewhere, as PW-16    
himself was a finger print expert.  PW-16, on receipt of specimen finger
print slip of appellant on 09.04.2007, compared the chance prints and
found that the chance print marked A is identical with the left middle
finger impression of the finger print marked S-1 on the finger print slip
of the appellant.  The expert PW-16 found 10 points of identity.
22.     Here two pertinent aspects would arise for consideration :
1.      Firstly, since PW-22/the Investigating Officer admitted
that he obtained the finger prints of accused on
20.11.2006 but not before the First Class Magistrate,
whether, he was required to obtain the permission of
the concerned Magistrate for obtaining the finger
prints of accused; and
2.      Secondly, whether the evidence of PW-16 is 
acceptable.
23.     On the issue raised by the counsel for the appellant that it is
mandatory to obtain the permission of a Magistrate, or, the finger prints
have to be obtained in the presence of a Magistrate, in the case of
K.K.Saini v. State
decided by a Division Bench of High Court of Delhi,
wherein, one of us (Suresh Kumar Kait, J) was one of the members, held
as under :
As noted above, the investigating officer, nor any other
police witness, have thrown any light as to where, when and
how the sample fingerprint impressions of the fingers of the
appellant were taken.  In any case, there is no proof that
permission was taken from the competent Court to do so.
There is no proof that the prisoner was duly identified as per
the requirement of
Section 5
of the Identification of Prisoners
Act, 1920.  Explaining the Constitutional Bench decision of
the Supreme Court reported as AIR 1961 SC 1808 State of 
Bombay Vs. Kathi Kalu Oghad, in the decision reported as
AIR 1980 SC 791 State of U.P. Vs. Ram Babu Mishra
, which   
decision was followed with approval in the decisions reported
as 1994 (5) SCC 152 Sukhvinder Singh & Ors. Vs. State of 
Punjab and
State of Haryana Vs. Jagbir Singh & Ors.
AIR
2003 SC 4377 it was held that unless permission is taken from
the Court of competent jurisdiction and further unless the
prisoner is identified as per the requirements of
Section 5
of
the Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920 reports of finger print
expert based upon sample fingerprints taken when an accused 
is in custody of the police would be inadmissible in evidence.
Thus, we discard the report Ex.PW-4/B of the fingerprint
expert which has been used by the learned Trial Judge against
the appellant.
24.     Thereafter, this very issue reached to the Full Bench of Delhi High
Court in the case of
Sapan Haldar & another v. State
in Criminal
Appeal No.804 of 2001, whereby, it is held;
22.    What happens if there is no manner prescribed for an
investigating officer to take the measurements of a person
accused of having committed an offence ?
In the decision
reported as AIR 1976 SC 69;
Mahmood v. State of Uttar 
Pradesh
, specimen finger print impressions taken by the
investigating officer under
Section 4
of The Identification of
Prisoners Act, 1920, in the absence of a manner prescribed
for taking the finger print impressions, was held to be a case
of evidence not being admissible with respect to the finger
prints obtained and the opinion of the expert thereon.  The
Supreme Court held that in said situation
Section 5
of The
Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920 ought to have been
followed.
26.
In the decision reported as 2003 Crl.L.J 2642;
Thavaraj
Pandian v. State
, the Division Bench of the Madras High
Court noted that no Rules were framed in the State of Tamil
Nadu with respect to the manner in which an investigating
officer could obtain the finger prints of a person accused of
an offence as contemplated by
Section 4
of The
Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920 but noted that there
were executive instructions with respect to the manner in
which finger print impressions could be taken by the
investigating officer and therefore opined that in said
circumstance evidence relating to finger print impressions
obtained by the investigating officer would be admissible in
evidence; but on facts noted that the said instructions were
not followed and therefore held the evidence to be
inadmissible.
27.     Thus, with respect to a handwriting obtained from a person
accused of having committed an offence or from any person
during investigation, the law is entirely different vis--vis
finger print impressions and a handwriting.  With respect to
handwriting neither can the investigating officer obtain a
sample writing nor can even a Magistrate so direct.
The
Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920
is applicable only to
measurements which include finger print impressions.  Even
with respect to finger print impressions, the weight of the
judicial pronouncements leans to hold that unless there is a
manner prescribed, be it under the Rules framed by the State
Government or an executive instruction issued, evidence
pertaining to finger print impressions obtained by the
investigating officer would be inadmissible in evidence; and
even when the same is provided, as held by the Supreme 
Court in Mohd. Amans case (supra), to obviate any
suspicion, it should be desirable that procedure prescribed
under
Section 5
of The Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920
should be followed.
29.     We note that the legislature has taken corrective action,
when by virtue of Act No.25 of 2005, with effect from June
23, 2006, Section 311A has been inserted in the
Code of
Criminal Procedure
, 1973 and has empowered a Magistrate  
to direct a person accused to give specimen signatures or
handwriting.Section 311A reads as under :-
311A.  Power of Magistrate to order person to give
specimen signatures or handwriting :- If a Magistrate of the
first class is satisfied that, for the purposes of any
investigation or proceeding under this Code, it is expedient
to direct any person, including an accused person, to give
specimen signatures or handwriting, he may make an order 
to that effect and in that case the person to whom the order
relates shall be produced or shall attend at the time and
place specified in such order and shall give his specimen
signatures or handwriting:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section
unless the person has at some time been arrested in
connection with such investigation or proceeding.
31.     We answer the reference as follows :-
(i)     Handwriting and signature are not measurements as 
defined under clause (a) of
Section 2
of The
Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920.  Therefore,
Section 4
and
Section 5
of The Identification of
Prisoners Act, 1920 will not apply to a handwriting
sample or a sample signature.  Thus, an investigating
officer, during investigation, cannot obtain a
handwriting sample or a signature sample from a
person accused of having committed an offence.
(ii)    Prior to June 23, 2006, when Act No.25 of 2005 was
notified, inter-alia, inserting Section 311A in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973, even a Magistrate
could not direct a person accused to give specimen
signatures or handwriting samples.
In cases where
Magistrates have directed so, the evidence was held
to be inadmissible as per the decision of the Supreme
Court in
Ram Babu Mishras
case (supra).  According 
to
Section 73
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, only
the Court concerned can direct a person appearing
before it to submit samples of his handwriting and/or
signature for purposes of comparison.
32.     Though not falling for consideration in this
reference, with respect to finger prints, which are
included in measurements, the weight of the
authorities is that if by way of Rules or Executive
instructions the manner is prescribed to take the
measurements, alone then can an Investigating
Officer, under
Section 4
obtain the measurements but
strictly as per manner prescribed; but it would be
eminently desirable, as per the decision in Mohd.
Amans case (supra) to follow the procedure
ordained under
Section 5
of The Identification of
Prisoners Act, 1920.
33.     Relevant would it be to further note that in relation to
offences punishable with death of imprisonment for
life,
Section 4
of The Identification of Prisoners Act,
1920 would not be applicable because the said
provision specifies a prerequisite; that the person
concerned is accused of having committed an offence 
which is punishable with a sentence to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for a term of one year or
upwards i.e. the sentence must relate to imprisonment
for a term and would thus exclude such offences
where either capital punishment or imprisonment for
life is the sentence contemplated.
25.     In the case in hand, the appellant is convicted and sentenced to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for life.  As per the settled law, cited
above, if the sentence is for death or life, in such case, to take finger
prints, permission of the Magistrate is not required.  However, if the
offence is punishable for a term of one year or upward, the prior
permission of the Magistrate is required.  Thus, if the sentence is upto a
specified period of years, the permission is required but not in case of life
and death sentence.  Why such view has been taken by Courts mentioned   
above, we find no answer even from the counsel appearing for the
parties. It hardly makes difference whether the sentence is upto 10 years
or life.
26.     Be that as it may, in view of the decision of the Full Bench of Delhi
High Court, the settled law is that
Section 4
of The Identification of
Prisoners Act, 1920 would not be applicable because the said provision
specifies a prerequisite that the person concerned is accused of having
committed an offence which is punishable with a sentence to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for a term of one year or upwards i.e. the
sentence must relate to imprisonment for certain term, and would thus,
exclude such offences, where, either capital punishment or imprisonment
for life is the sentence contemplated.  Thus, in view of the settled law as
discussed above, there is no substance in the submission of counsel for
the appellant that the Police had taken finger prints of the appellant
without permission of the Court.
27.     Sofaras the evidentiary value of PW-16 is concerned, he is a finger
print expert in the rank of S.I. of Police in Fingerprint Unit of CID,
Vijayawada City.  Thus, he is an independent Fingerprint expert
working for CID.  He stated that he passed All India Board Examination
for Fingerprint and obtained certificate.  He reached the scene of offence
along with the Clues Team and also Investigating Officer and in their
presence, he found M.O.8/Steel tiffin box and therefrom, he lifted two
chance prints A and B and got those chance prints photographed by
a photographer of the Clues Team and later, on receipt of specimen
finger prints on 09.04.2007, compared the same and found the chance
prints were identical with the left middle finger impression of
K.Nagaraj(A-1).  Since PW-16 reached the scene of offence along with
PW-22 and Clues Team and got photographed the chance prints then   
and there itself, there was no necessity for sealing M.O.8/Tiffin box and
packing the seal and seizure of the same and sending the same to another
expert.  When Ex.P-20/report is perused, PW-16 could found 10 points
of identity between the chance print developed on the stainless steel tiffin
box (M.O.8) and the left middle finger impression of accused No.1.  In
view of the similarities in 10 ridge characteristics, which could not be
challenged to be false or incorrect, the opinion of PW-16, in our
considered view, can be accepted.
28.     Accordingly, we find no illegality or perversity in the judgment
dated 23rd February 2010, passed by the Court below in Sessions Case 
No.171 of 2008.  The appeal is accordingly dismissed.
Pending miscellaneous applications, if any, shall stand closed.
_______________________    
SURESH KUMAR KAIT, J     
_________________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
30th June, 2017