[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
National Insurance Co. Ltd vs Palaparthi Matthaiah And Others on 11 August, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 16
Author:
T. Rajani
Bench:
T. Rajani
THE HONBLE SMT JUSTICE T. RAJANI      

MACMA.Nos.2423 of 2006    

11-08-2017 

National Insurance Co. Ltd. ... APPELLANT 

Palaparthi Matthaiah and others.... RESPONDENTS   

Counsel for Appellants:MR. KOTA SUBBA RAO     

Counsel for Respondents:MR. M. RAVINDRANATH REDDY         

<GIST   :

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred:

1. AIR 2007 SC 2582 
2. (2004) 2 SCC 1
3. AIR 1987 SC 1184 
4. AIR 2007 SC 2870 


SMT JUSTICE T. RAJANI    

MACMA.Nos.2423, 2468, 2469, 2422, 2474,    
2485, 2484, 2443 and 2442 of 2006 

COMMON JUDGMENT:
These appeals are preferred by the appellant-insurance
company, who is respondent No.2 before the Court below, assailing
the judgment passed by the IV the additional district judge in OP No.
267/2002 and similar but separate judgments of the IV Additional
District Judge (Fast Track Court), Ongole in OP.Nos.251, 255, 259,
261, 269, 265, 257 and 253 of 2002 dated 29.04.2002 arising out
of the same accident.
2.      The appellant-insurance company impugnes the judgments as   
regards the propriety of the judgment in fixing the liability on the
appellant as regards the compensation awarded to the claimants,
in all the cases, who are more than six in number, while there is no
liability on this appellant as per the terms of the insurance policy.
3.      The grounds raised in the appeals are that the Court below
failed to see that the deceased were unauthorized passengers in a
goods vehicle, being a tractor and trailer, wherein only the driver is
permitted to travel; the Court below failed to see that there is no
coverage for the deceased under the Act policy; the Court below
failed to see that the driver was not holding driving licence to drive
the vehicle and there is no permit or fitness certificate to cover the
passengers.
4.      Heard both the counsel.
5. Since the points to be decided in all the appeals are the same and
since there is a nexus between the cases which necessitates a
common judgment it is felt convenient and useful that a common
judgement be passed.
6.      Counsel for the appellant, however, presses his challenge on
two grounds in the appeal viz. (1) the liability of the insurance
company in terms of the insurance policy, Ex.B3. (2) the liability of
the insurance company in spite of the crime vehicle being driven by
an unauthorized person.
7.      The facts, to the extent necessary, are, that the deceased or
the injured, as the case may be, in all the OPs, were travelling in the
tractor belonging to the first respondent, as coolies, on 02.04.2002.
Their case is that the first respondent engaged them for coolie work
and one S. Agustin is their mastry. While the tractor was proceeding
to its destination, one J. Srinivasulu, regular driver of tractor,
suddenly fell sick due to stomach pain and left the tractor on the
street and went to get medicine and as he did not return for long
time,
one Nosina Srinu, drove the tractor and caused the accident.
8.      The Court below made an elaborate discussion on the aspect 
of liability and by considering the contents of Ex.B1, which is said to
be the cover note, wherein it was mentioned that the insurance is for
public purpose, fixed the liability on the appellant-insurance
company.
It is the propriety of such liability, fixed on the appellant-insurance
company, which is called in question in these appeals.
9.      The two aforementioned grounds, on which the appellant's
counsel presses, can be taken to be the points that have to be
decided in this appeal. No repetition need be made.
As regards the first point, a look at the cover note of the
insurance policy, in the first instance, would be beneficial, as the
reliance placed by the court below is on it's contents, though, in fact,
it is the terms of the policy based on which liability of the insurance
company has to be decided. The cover note, as already observed,
marked as Ex.B1, shows that the words public purpose were written
in hand, in a column where the specifications with regard to the
driving licence were made. The insurance policy, which is marked as
Ex.B3, however does not specify that it is for public purpose.
The terms of the policy does not cover use for carrying passengers in
the vehicle except employees (other than driver) not exceeding six
in number coming under the purview of the
Workmens 
Compensation Act, 1923
. The other condition nevertheless being
that the driver should hold effective driving licence at the time of the
accident.
10.     Counsel for the appellant contends that since there is no
liability of the insurance company, under the policy, as no premium is
paid for the coolies, no liability can be fixed on the appellant and
even if the Court comes to a conclusion that their risk is covered, as
none of the victims were employed by the first respondent, they
cannot claim any compensation under this policy as, as per the terms
of the policy they should be employees of the owner.
11.     The aforesaid contention has to be noted only to be rejected in
the light of the evidence of the owner of the vehicle, examined as
R.W.1. In his chief examination, speaking about his avocation,
which necessitated engaging the victims as coolies, he stated that
he owned six acres of land in Kotikalapudi village apart from taking
on lease,  six acres of land in the same village; he raised paddy in
the said land; he used to engage coolies from Venkatapuram and 
neighbouring villages; there is no bus facility between those villages;
he came to know about the accident caused by his driver Jakkula
Srinivasarao and when he questioned his driver, he informed that
one of the labourers drover the tractor when he went to purchase
medicines. The cross-examination of R.W.1 elicits that coolies were
going to Kotikalapudi for harvesting the crop and about 20 coolies
were travelling in the tractor trailer and not 40 as suggested;
the coolies were boarded by his driver Jakkula Srinivasarao in his
presence; since four days prior to the accident coolies were going in
the tractor to the fields from Venkatapuram and vice versa. Though
it was elicited that he did not file any documents to show that he
owns lands in Kotikalapudi, there is absolutely no doubt cast on the
credibility of R.W.1, to disbelieve his evidence, which is corroborated
by the evidence of the claimants and a traveller who was in the
tractor on the date of the accident. The other witnesses examined on
behalf of the respondents are the tractor driver, R.W.2 and R.W.3,
who was travelling at the time of the accident and the officials of the
insurance company as R.Ws.4 to 7. R.Ws.2 and 3 also supported the  
version of R.W.1 with regard to engaging the victims as labourers
and they being carried on the vehicle for the purpose of agricultural
operations. Hence, the above evidence would lead to a clear
conclusion that the victims were engaged by R.W.1 for working in his
fields, thereby, satisfying the condition of the policy that they should
be engaged by the owner of the vehicle. So, the relationship between
the owner and the victims is that of employer and employee, as is
the requirement under
Workmen's Compensation Act
, which is  
spelled in the policy terms.
12.     With regard to the second aspect in the first point,
i.e. the coverage and the extent of coverage of the policy, the Court
below though noted that the policy is for public purpose, went wrong
in referring to the document in which the said words were
mentioned, by noting the cover note as the policy. The wrong noting
of the number of the document may not otherwise be material. But
when the court is relying on the contents of the document, the
reference to the document needs to be appropriate. The words derive
their meaning depending on the nature of the document in which
they are mentioned. In fact, as already observed, the words public
purpose were mentioned in the cover note. The cover note
undisputedly is taken prior to the issuance of the policy. Only the
broad purpose for which the policy is being taken has to be assumed
as being mentioned in the cover note, whereas the exact purpose for
which the policy was taken and the extent of coverage would be
specifically mentioned in the policy. The words public purpose
mentioned therein have to be understood as carrying meaning
against the words private purpose, which may carry a narrow
meaning. The words Public purpose mentioned in the cover note
can be interpreted to mean not private purpose. But the policy
terms can restrict the scope of Public purpose by mentioning
specifically the (public) purposes for which the coverage is provided.
Hence, the terms of the insurance policy would become a guiding
factor for deciding the liability of the insurance company and it can
be thereby concluded that the coverage of the insurance policy in
this case is for six passengers in the tractor trailer for agricultural
purpose. It can also be said here, that the permit, taken for a
commercial vehicle, cannot be a testing document for liability. It is
the terms of the policy that form a basis for liability of the insurer. If
there had been no policy taken at all, it could not have been urged
that since the permit is for a certain category of vehicle, insurer
would be liable. It is the existence of a policy and the terms of the
policy that are material for deciding the liability. The evidence of
RW7, as rightly got recorded, is in the form of an opinion and need
not be taken as a basis for understanding the terms of the policy.
13.     Counsel for the appellant relies on a decision of the Supreme
Court in UNITED INDIA INSURANCE CO. LTD. v. SERJERAO       
(Civil Appeal No.5201 of 2007 and batch dated 14.11.2007) in
support of his contention that the risk of gratuitous passengers is
not covered by the policy and insurance company is not liable.
The
Supreme Court, 
in turn, referred to a decision in
ORIENTAL INSURANCE 
COMPANY LTD. v. BRIJ MOHAN
(2007 (7) SCALE 753) and held       
that labourers travelling in trollies are not covered by the insurance
policy therein,
as the policy do not provide for the risk of such persons travelling in
the trollies.
But in
BRIJ MOHAN
's case the Supreme Court was 
dealing with a case where the use of the tractor trailor was not for
agricultural purpose but was for business purpose. Hence no support
forth comes to the insurer, from
the above decision
.
The other decision in
SMT. YALLWWA v. NATIONAL     
INSURANCE CO. LTD
relied upon by the counsel for the appellant 
on the aspect of maintainability of the appeal by the insurance
company, need not looked into as there is no quarrel on the said
contention.
14.     Counsel for the respondents placed reliance, but in vain, on
the decision of the Supreme Court in
NATIONAL INSURANCE CO.     
LTD. v. BALJIT KAUR
to contend that the Supreme Court directed 
the insurance company
,
in that case
, to pay the compensation
amount and recover the same from the owner.
But the Supreme  
Court
,
in that case
, considering that the law was not clear since the
decisions rendered in
NEW INDIAN ASSURANCE CO. v. SATPAL        
SINGH
[(
2000) 1 SCC 237] and NEW INDIAN ASSURANCE CO.         
LTD. v. ASHA RANI
[(2003) 2 SCC 223], made such a direction  
and it was clearly held that the said legal position has only
prospective effect. Hence, the same cannot be taken help of by the
counsel for the respondents to contend that the insurance company
has to be mulcted with liability with regard to all the persons
travelling in the vehicle involved in the accident.
15.     The two terms, 'commercial vehicle' and 'public purpose' from
which an implication that the passengers in the tractor trailor were
covered, was drawn by the Court below, do not find any definition in
the
Motor Vehicles Act
.  If a liability other than a liability provided for
under the Act is to be enhanced under the insurance policy,
additional premium has to be paid. In this case the policy shows that
basic premium was paid for public risk. The policy is an Act policy
requiring coverage for six employees carried in the vehicle for
agricultural purpose. If additional premium is not paid covering the
risk of employees over and above six, the liability can be fixed only
for those six persons. Hence, in this case since no additional
premium is paid, but basic premium is paid, coverage of the policy
extends only for six employees. Whatever be the words employed, a 
policy would cover the risk of only those persons who fall under the
categories specified in its terms. Even if it is for public risk, those of
the public, who meet the criteria within the terms of the policy, will
be entitled for a claim.
16.     As regards the second point, whether the vehicle being driven
by an unauthorised driver would exonerate the insurer from it's
liability, in SKANDIA INSURANCE CO. LTD VS KOKILABEN       
CHANDRAVADAN & ORS  the Supreme Court observed as follows:
Section 96(2)(b)(ii) extends immunity to the insurance
company if a breach is committed of the condition excluding
driving by a named person or persons or by any person who is
not fully licensed, or by any person who has been disqualified by
holding or obtaining a driving licence during the period of his
disqualification. The expression 'breach' is of great significance.
The dictionary meaning of 'breach' is 'infringement or violation
of a promise or obligation'. [See Collin's English Dictionary], It
is, therefore, abundantly clear that the insurer will have to
establish that the insured is guilty of an infringement or violation
of a promise that a person who is not duly licensed will have to
be in charge of the vehicle. The very concept of infringement or
violation of the promise that the expression 'breach' carries
within itself induces an inference that the violation or
infringement on the part of the promisor must be a wilful
infringement or violation. If the insured is not at all at fault and
has not done anything, he should not have done or is not amiss
in any respect how can it be conscientiously posited that he has
committed a breach? It is only when the insured himself places
the vehicle in charge of a person who does not hold a driving
licence, that it can be said that he is 'guilty' of the breach of the
promise that the vehicle will be driven by a licensed driver. It
must be established by the insurance company that the breach 
was on the part of the insured and that it was the insured who
was guilty of violating the promise or infringement of the
contract. Unless the insured is at fault and is guilty of a breach
the insurer cannot escape from the obligation to indemnify the
insured and successfully contend that he is exonerated having
regard to the fact that the promisor (the insured) committed a
breach of his promise. Not when some mishap occurs by some   
mischance. When the insured has done everything within his
power inasmuch as he has engaged a licensed driver and has 
placed the vehicle in charge of a licensed driver, with the
express or implied mandate to drive himself, it cannot be said
that the insured is guilty of any breach. And it is only in case of
a breach or a violation of the promise on the part of the insured
that the insurer can hide under the umbrella of the exclusion
clause.
The evidence of the owner shows that he gave specific
instructions to his driver, not to allow any one else to drive the
vehicle. Thereby he stands satisfying the responsibility that is placed
on him by
the above decision
and becomes entitled for indemnity
from the insurer.
17.     Having concluded that policy provides coverage for six
employees, it has to be now decided as to who out of the 20
employees can be taken as those six employees and as to how   
justice should be balanced, when all the victims stand on the same
plane, leaving no scope for any distinction that can be made.
In that
regard, the counsel for the appellant helps this Court by furnishing a
decision of the Supreme Court in
NATIONAL INSURANCE CO.     
LTD. v. ANJANA SHYAM
wherein the Supreme Court laid down a    
formula for distribution of compensation among all the passengers,
who were travelling in the vehicle, when coverage under the policy is
only for certain number of persons. It was held that the highest of
the awards made in respect of the victims has to be taken into
consideration and distribution should be proportionately done among
all the claimants. The same principle can be adopted in this case.
In the result, the civil miscellaneous appeals are allowed in
part. The Court below is directed to take into consideration the
highest of the 6 awards and distribute the same proportionately
among all the victims in all the above OPs following the decision of
the Supreme Court in
ANJANA SHYAMs
case (3 supra). As a    
sequel,
the miscellaneous applications, if any, shall stand closed. There shall
be no order as to costs.
__________  
T. RAJANI, J
August 11, 2017