[Cites
20
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Mrs.Mary Anne Lamaire vs National Insurance Company Limited, ... on 19 July, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 (NOC) 729 (HYD.)
Author:
A.V. Sesha Sai
Bench:
A.V. Sesha Sai
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A.V. SESHA SAI      

WRIT PETITION No.1338 OF 2005    

19-07-2017 

Mrs.Mary Anne Lamaire..Petitioner  


National Insurance Company Limited,  Sanathnagar Branch 17, Madhavi Nagar, Near BHEL, R & D, Bowenpally, Secunderabad & 3 ot     

Counsel for Petitioner  : Sri C.Sreenivas.

Counsel for respondent Nos.1 to 3: Sri Kota Subba Rao
Counsel for respondent No.4: Sri N.V.Jagannath

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred

1.      (2015) 7 SCC 728 
2.      (2004) 3 SCC 553 
3.      1969 ACJ 419  
4.      1985 ACJ 657  
5.      AIR 1976 SC 2216  
6.      2003 (6) ALT 49 (D.B.)
7.      2000 (4) ALT 531 
8.      1994 ACJ 211  
9.      2008 (6) ALD HC 350  
10.     AIR 2000 SC 2573  
11. 1989 AP 140 

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A.V.SESHA SAI       

WRIT PETITION No.1338 of 2005   

ORDER:
The order of the Ombudsman, confirming the letter of
repudiation issued by the respondents-insurance company is 
under challenge in the present Writ Petition.
Briefly stated, the case of the petitioner is as under:
Petitioner is the wife of one late John Lamaire who had taken an
accident policy valid for the period from 14.07.2001 to
13.07.2002 and when he was travelling as a pillion rider on a
scooter driven by his friend, one Mr.Gunasekhar, he fell down
from the scooter and due to head injury he lost his life on
20.12.2001. Thereafter, police, on the report of the sister of the
deceased, registered F.I.R.No.143 of 2001 on 20.12.2001 under
Section 174
Cr.P.C and finally filed a report. Thereafter when the
petitioner claimed the insurance amount, the insurance
authorities repudiated the same by way of letter dated
26.03.2004. Assailing the said repudiation, the petitioner
approached the Ombudsman, who passed award dated     
16.11.2004 and the same is the subject-matter of the present Writ
Petition.
Heard C.Srinivas, learned counsel for the petitioner, and Sri
Kota Subba Rao, learned Standing Counsel for the respondents- 
insurance company apart from perusing the material available
before the Court.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the order
passed by the Ombudsman, confirming the action of the 
insurance authorities in repudiating the claim of the petitioner, is
highly erroneous, contrary to law and opposed to the very spirit
and object of the provisions of the
Insurance Act
(for brevity, the
Act) and completely in utter disregard of the evidence available on
record. It is further submitted that the Professor of the University,
who conducted autopsy on the dead body of the husband of the 
petitioner, categorically stated in his letter that the death was due
to the head injury and the finding of the Ombudsman in the
impugned order is contrary to the said opinion; that the final
report filed by the police in F.I.R.No.143 of 2001 dated
20.12.2001 clinchingly discloses that the death was due to head
injury; that the  Ombudsman ought not to have taken away by the
complaint of the sister of the deceased based on a phone call from
the driver of the vehicle by completely discarding the other
evidence available; that the order of the Ombudsman is full of
presumptions and surmises; that the judgments cited by the
learned Standing Counsel for the respondents-insurance
company have no relevance to the present case as the petitioner is
questioning the validity of the order passed by the Ombudsman
which is a creature of a statute; that, as the facts are not in
controversy and as the evidence on record is very much clear, the
judgments cited by the learned Standing Counsel for the
respondent-insurance company  do not render  any assistance to 
the petitioner.         Learned counsel for the petitioner, in support of
his submissions and contentions, takes the support of the
following judgments:
11.     (2015) 7 SCC 728
12.     (2004) 3 SCC 553
13.     1969 ACJ 419  
        Per contra, it is strenuously contended by Sri Kota Subba
Rao, learned Standing Counsel for the respondents-insurance
company  that there is no illegality nor there exists any infirmity in
the impugned order passed by the Ombudsman and, in the   
absence of the same, the present Writ Petition is not maintainable
and the petitioner is not entitled for any relief from this Court
under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India; that the finding of
fact recorded by the respondents, as confirmed by the learned
Ombudsman, cannot be disturbed under
Article 226
of the 
Constitution of India in the absence of any perversity; that, since
the Ombudsman considered the entire evidence on record, no 
interference of this Court is warranted; that the present Writ
Petition is not maintainable and the Civil Court is the proper
forum as there are serious factual controversies; that the
statement recorded at the spot shows that the husband of the
petitioner died not because of the head injury; that, as per the
policy conditions, the accident must be the sole cause  of death
and in the present case the petitioners husband was suffering
from other ailment i.e. epilepsy and the post-mortem report
clearly reveals the same. In support of his submissions and
contentions, the learned Standing Counsel for the respondents-
insurance company placed reliance on the following judgments:
14.     1985 ACJ 657
15.     AIR 1976 SC 2216
16.     2003 (6) ALT 49 (D.B.)
17.     2000 (4) ALT 531
18.     1994 ACJ 211
19.     2008 (6) ALD HC 350
20.     AIR 2000 SC 2573
21.     1989 AP 140  
        In the  above background now the issue that emerges for
consideration of this Court is:
Whether the order of the Ombudsman, confirming  
the letter of repudiation issued by the respondents-
insurance company is sustainable and tenable and 
whether the petitioner herein is entitled for any relief
from this Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
India?
The institution of Ombudsman is a creature of statute. In
exercise of the powers under
Section 144
of the Act, the Central
Government framed the Redressal of Public Grievances Rules, 
1998. Rule 14 of the said Rules obligates the Ombudsman to act
legally and equitably. The Central Government, in its wisdom,
incorporated the said Rule obviously keeping in view the intention
of the legislature in enacting the Act.
The institution of the Ombudsman is required to function in
accordance with the object and intention of the Act and the Rules
framed thereunder.  The issue in the present Writ Petition is
whether the said institution acted in accordance with the object of
the said legislature which is obviously intended for the welfare of
the policy holders. There is absolutely no dispute on the aspect of
taking policy by the husband of the petitioner and its validity as
on the date of the accident and the death of the husband of the
petitioner. It is also not in controversy that the husband of the
petitioner died after he fell down from his friends vehicle while
travelling as a pillion rider. As per the final report filed by the
police, under
Section 173
Cr.P.C. in F.I.R.No.143 of 2001 dated
20.12.2001, the police categorically mentioned the cause of death
as an accident. The police arrived at the said opinion obviously in
the light of the letter of the Doctor (Professor) who conducted
autopsy on the body of the deceased. In this context it may be
relevant to refer to the said letter. When the police asked for
clarification on certain queries the Doctor opined as follows:
1.      Whether the deceased died due to head injury or
hyportrophy of  the heart, Myocardial infaction
heart? Myocardial infaction heart?
A. Head injury only. However deceased suffering with
Myocardial infection.
2.      Whether the deceased received firstly head injury or
Hyportrophy of the heart, Myocardial infaction
heart?
A. Head injury first.
3.      Whether the cause of death is natural or accidental?
A. Accidental.
4.      What is the meaning of Hyportrophy of the heart,
Myocardial infaction heart?
A. Refere Davidson Medicine Text Book.
5.      Whether the head injury caused due to the falling on
the road or caused in the road accident?
A. Falling on the road (investigate).
Though the Ombudsman referred to the post-mortem   
report, he failed to consider the opinion and the clarifications
given by the Doctor, who conducted autopsy. The above said
opinion of the Doctor alongwith the final report submitted by the
police under
Section 173
Cr.P.C. thoroughly missed the attention
of the Ombudsman which obviously resulted in rejection of the
claim. Much reliance also cannot be given to the statement of
Mr.Reid who stated that the deceased, after falling from the
vehicle, was moving like a person having epilepsy. The fact
remains that he never stated that because of fits the deceased was
moving in the said manner. The statement of the sister of the
deceased pales into insignificance in view of the medical evidence
available on record.
In this context it may be appropriate to refer to the judgment
relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
In
JOSHI
TECHNOLOGIES INTERNATIONAL INC. v. UNION OF INDIA         
AND OTHERS
. The Honourable Apex Court, while dealing with   
the maintainability of the Writ Petitions in contractual matters, at
paragraphs 69 and 70, held as follows:
69. The position thus summarized in the aforesaid
principles has to be understood in the context of
discussion that preceded which we have pointed
out above. As per this, no doubt, there is no
absolute bar to the maintainability of the writ
petition even in contractual matters or where there
are disputed questions of fact or even when
monetary claim is raised. At the same time,
discretion lies with the High Court which under
certain circumstances, can refuse to exercise. It
also follows that under the following
circumstances, 'normally', the Court would not
exercise such a discretion:
69.1 the Court may not examine the issue unless 
the action has some public law character attached
to it.
69.2  Whenever a particular mode of settlement of
dispute is provided in the contract, the High Court
would refuse to exercise its discretion under
Article 226
of the Constitution and relegate the
party to the said made of settlement, particularly
when settlement of disputes is to be resorted to
through the means of arbitration.
69.3 If there are very serious disputed questions of
fact which are of complex nature and require oral
evidence for their determination.
69.4  Money claims  per se particularly arising out
of contractual obligations are normally not to be
entertained except in exceptional circumstances.
70. Further legal position which emerges from
various judgments of this Court dealing with
different situations/aspects relating to the
contracts entered into by the State/public
Authority with private parties, can be summarized
as under:
(i)  At the stage of entering into a contract, the
State acts purely in its executive capacity and is
bound by the obligations of fairness.
(ii) State in its executive capacity, even in the
contractual field, is under obligation to act fairly
and cannot practice some discriminations.
(iii) Even in cases where question is of choice or
consideration of competing claims before entering
into the field of contract, facts have to be
investigated and found before the question of a
violation of
Article 14
could arise. If those facts are
disputed and require assessment of evidence the
correctness of which can only be tested
satisfactorily by taking detailed evidence, Involving
examination and cross- examination of witnesses,
the case could not be conveniently or satisfactorily
decided in proceedings under
Article 226
of the
Constitution. In such cases court can direct the
aggrieved party to resort to alternate remedy of
civil suit etc.
(iv) Writ jurisdiction of High Court under
Article
226
was not intended to facilitate avoidance of
obligation voluntarily incurred.
(v) Writ petition was not maintainable to avoid
contractual obligation. Occurrence of commercial
difficulty, inconvenience or hardship in
performance of the conditions agreed to in the
contract can provide no justification in not
complying with the terms of contract which the
parties had accepted with open eyes. It cannot ever
be that a licensee can work out the license if he
finds it profitable to do so: and he can challenge
the conditions under which he agreed to take the
license, if he finds it commercially inexpedient to
conduct his business.
(vi) Ordinarily, where a breach of contract is
complained of, the party complaining of such
breach may sue for specific performance of the
contract, if contract is capable of being specifically
performed. Otherwise, the party may sue for
damages.
(vii) Writ can be issued where there is executive
action unsupported by law or even in respect of a
corporation there is denial of equality before law or
equal protection of law or if can be shown that
action of the public authorities was without giving
any hearing and violation of principles of natural
justice after holding that action could not have
been taken without observing principles of natural
justice.
(viii) If the contract between private party and the
State/instrumentality and/or agency of State is
under the realm of a private law and there is no
element of public law, the normal course for the
aggrieved party, is to invoke the remedies provided
under ordinary civil law rather than approaching
the High Court under
Article 226
of the
Constitutional of India and invoking its
extraordinary jurisdiction.
(ix) The distinction between public law and private
law element in the contract with State is getting
blurred. However, it has not been totally
obliterated and where the matter falls purely in
private field of contract. This Court has
maintained the position that writ petition is not
maintainable. Dichotomy between public law and 
private law, rights and remedies would depend on
the factual matrix of each case and the distinction
between public law remedies and private law, field
cannot be demarcated with precision. In fact, each
case has to be examined, on its facts whether the
contractual relations between the parties bear
insignia of public element. Once on the facts of a
particular case it is found that nature of the
activity or controversy involves public law element,
then the matter can be examined by the High 
Court in writ petitions under
Article 226
of the
Constitution of India to see whether action of the
State and/or instrumentality or agency of the
State is fair, just and equitable or that relevant
factors are taken into consideration and irrelevant
factors have not gone into the decision making
process or that the decision is not arbitrary.
(x) Mere reasonable or legitimate expectation of a
citizen, in such a situation, may not by itself be a
distinct enforceable right, but failure to consider
and give due weight to it may render the decision
arbitrary, and this is how the requirements of due
consideration of a legitimate expectation forms
part of the principle of non-arbitrariness.
(xi) The scope of judicial review in respect of
disputes falling within the domain of contractual
obligations may be more limited and in doubtful
cases the parties may be relegated to adjudication
of their rights by resort to remedies provided for
adjudication of purely contractual disputes.
In
ABL INTERNATIONAL LTD. AND ANOTHER v. EXPORT          
CREDIT GUARANTEE CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD. AND            
OTHERS
, at paragraphs 8, 10, 23, 27 and 53, the Honourable 
Supreme Court held as follows:
8. As could be seen from the arguments 
addressed in this appeal and as also from the
divergent views of the two courts below one of the
questions that falls for our consideration is
whether a writ petition under
Article 226
of the
Constitution of India is maintainable to enforce a
contractual obligation of the State or its
instrumentality, by an aggrieved party.
10. It is clear from the above observations of this
Court in the said case though a writ was not
issued on the facts of that case, this Court has
held that on a given set of facts if a State acts in
an arbitrary manner even in a matter of contract,
an aggrieved party can approach the court by way
of writ under
Article 226
of the Constitution and
the court depending on facts of the said case is
empowered to grant the relief. This judgment in
K.N. Guruswamy Vs. The State of Mysore and   
others
was followed subsequently by this Court in
the case of
The D.F.O, South Kheri & Ors. Vs. Ram 
Sanehi Singh
[ 1971 (3) SCC 864] wherein this
Court held: "By that order he has deprived the
respondent of a valuable right. We are unable to
hold that merely because the source of the right
which the respondent claims was initially in a
contract, for obtaining relief against any arbitrary
and unlawful action on the part of a public
authority he must resort to a suit and not to a
petition by way of a writ.
In view of the judgment of
this Court in
K.N. Guruswamys
case (supra), there
can be no doubt that the petition was
maintainable, even if the right to relief arose out of
an alleged breach of contract, where the action
challenged was of a public authority invested with
statutory power."
23. It is clear from the above observations of this
Court, once State or an instrumentality of State is
a party to the contract, it has an obligation in law
to act fairly, justly and reasonably which is the
requirement of
Article 14
of the Constitution of
India. Therefore, if by the impugned repudiation of
the claim of the appellants the first respondent as
an instrumentality of the State has acted in
contravention of the above said requirement of
Article 14
then we have no hesitation that a writ
court can issue suitable directions to set right the
arbitrary actions of the first respondent. In this
context, we may note that though the first
respondent is a company registered under the
Companies Act
, it is wholly owned by the
Government of India. The total subscribed share
capital of this company is 2,50,000 shares out of
which 2,49,998 shares are held by the President of
India while one each share is held by the Joint
Secretary, Ministry of Commerce and Industry and 
Officer on Special Duty, Ministry of Commerce and
Industry respectively. The objects enumerated in
the Memorandum of Association of the first
respondent at Para 10 read :
"To undertake such functions as may be
entrusted to it by Government from time to time,
including grant of credits and guarantees in
foreign currency for the purpose of facilitating the
import of raw materials and semi-finished goods
for manufacture or processing goods for export."
Para 11 of the said object reads thus:
"To act as agent of the Government, or with the
sanction of the Government on its own account, to
give the guarantees, undertake such
responsibilities and discharge such functions as
are considered by the Government as necessary in 
national interest."
27. From the above discussion of ours, following
legal principles emerge as to the maintainability of
a writ petition :-
(a) In an appropriate case, a writ petition as
against a State or an instrumentality of a State
arising out of a contractual obligation is
maintainable.
(b) Merely because some disputed questions of 
facts arise for consideration, same cannot be a
ground to refuse to entertain a writ petition in all
cases as a matter of rule.
(c) A writ petition involving a consequential relief
of monetary claim is also maintainable.
53. From the above, it is clear that when an
instrumentality of the State acts contrary to public
good and public interest, unfairly, unjustly and
unreasonably, in its contractual, constitutional or
statutory obligations, it really acts contrary to the
constitutional guarantee found in
Article 14
of the
Constitution. Thus if we apply the above principle
of applicability of
Article 14
to the facts of this
case, then we notice that the first respondent
being an instrumentality of State and a monopoly
body had to be approached by the appellants by
compulsion to cover its export risk. The policy of
insurance covering the risk of the appellants was
issued by the first respondent after seeking all
required information and after receiving huge
sums of money as premium exceeding Rs.16 lacs.   
On facts we have found that the terms of the policy
does not give room to any ambiguity as to the risk
covered by the first respondent. We are also of the
considered opinion that the liability of the first
respondent under the policy arose when the
default of the exporter occurred and thereafter
when Kazakhstan Government failed to fulfil its
guarantee. There is no allegation that the
contracts in question were obtained either by fraud
or by misrepresentation. In such factual situation,
we are of the opinion, the facts of this case do not
and should not inhibit the High Court or this Court
from granting the relief sought for by the
petitioner.
In MACKINNON MACKENZIE & COMPANY PRIVATE            
LIMITED v. RITTA FARNANDES , at paragraphs 3 & 4, the   
Honourable Supreme Court held as   follows:
3.
Section 3
of the Workmens Compensation  
Act, 1923 reads as follows:
"(1) If personal injury is caused to a workman by
accident arising out of and in the course of his
employment, his employer shall be liable to pay
compensation in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter: Provided that the employer shall not
be so liable- (a) in respect of any injury which does
not result in the total or partial disablement of the
workman for a period exceeding three days; (b) in
respect of any injury, not resulting in death,
caused by an accident which is directly
attributable (i) the workman having been at the
time thereof under the. influence of drink or drugs,
or (ii) the wilful disobedience of the workman to an
order expressly given, or to a rule expressly
framed, for the purpose of securing the safety of
workmen, or (iii) the wilful removal or disregard by
the workman of any safety guard or other device
which he knew to have been provided for the
purpose of securing the safety of workmen.
It is well established that under this Section
there must be some casual connection between the  
death of the workman and his employment. If the
workman dies as a natural result of the disease
from which he was suffering or while suffering
from a particular disease, he dies of that disease
as a result of wear and tear of his employment, no
liability would be fixed upon the employer. But if
the employment is a contributory cause or has
accelerated the death, or if the death was due not
only to the disease but the disease coupled with
the employment then it could be said that the
death arose out of the employment and the
employer  would be liable.
22.     Even if a workman dies from a pre-existing
disease, if the disease is aggravated or accelerated
under the circumstances which can be said to be
accidental, his death results from injury by
accident. This was clearly laid down by the House
of Lords in Clover Clayton & Co. v. Hughes where
the deceased, whilst tightening a nut with a
spanner, fell back on his hand and died. A post
mortem examination showed that there was a large 
aneurism of the aorta, and that death was caused
by a rupture of the aorta. The aneurism was in
such an advanced condition that it might have
burst while the man was asleep, and very slight
exertion or strain would have been sufficient to
bring about a rupture. The County Court Judge
found that the death was caused by a strain
arising out of the ordinary work of the deceased
operating upon a condition of body which was such
as to render the strain fatal, and held upon the
authorities that this was an accident within the
meaning of the Act. His decision was upheld both
the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords.
No doubt the ordinary accident,  said Lord
Loreburn, L.C. is associated with something
external: the bursting of a boiler or an explosion in
a mine, for example. But it may be merely from the
mans own miscalculation, such as tripping and
falling. Or it may be due both to internal and
external conditions, as if a seaman were to faint in
the rigging and tumble into the sea I think it may
also be something going wrong within the human 
frame  itself, such as straining of muscle or the
breaking of a blood vessel. If that occurred when
he was lifting a weight, it would properly be
described as an accident. So, I think, rupturing an
aneurism when tightening a nut with a spanner
may be regarded as an accident.
With regard to Lord Macnangntens definition of
an accident being an unlooked for mishap or
untoward event which is not expected or designed
it was said that an event was unexpected if it was
not expected by the man who suffered it, even
though everyman of commonsense who knew the    
circumstances would think it certain to happen.
Coming to the judgments cited by the learned Standing
Counsel for the respondents-insurance company- in LIFE 
INSURANCE CORPORATION OF INDIA AND OTHERS +v. KIRAN             
SINHA  the Honourable Supreme Court, at paragraph 2, held as 
under:
We have heard the learned Attorney-General
and Mr.A.K.Sen, learned counsel for the
respondent. The High Court could not have in the
circumstances of this case directed the payment of
the money claimed under the insurance policies in
question in a petition filed under
Article 226
of the
Constitution. The only remedy available to the
respondent in this case was a suit before a civil
Court.
In
KULCHHINDER SINGH AND OTHERS v. HARDAYAL           
SINGH BRAR AND OTHERS
the Honourable Supreme Court, at       
paragraph 12, held as under:
The controversy before us in substance will
turn on the construction and scope of the
agreement when the claim to a quota as founded 
cannot be decided in writ jurisdiction without
going back on well-settled guidelines and even
subverting the normal processual law-except
perhaps in extreme cases which shock the 
conscience of the Court or other extra-ordinary
situation, an aspect we are not called upon to
explore here. We are aware of the wide amplitude
of
Art. 226
and its potent use to correct manifest
injustice but cannot agree that contractual
obligations in the ordinary course, without even
statutory complexion, can be enforced by this
short, though, wrong cut.
In RELIABLE POWER SYSTEMS PRIVATE LIMITED,          
MALLAPUR, HYDERABAD v. GOVERNMENT OF INDIA,            
SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, DEPARTMENT OF              
TELEMOMMUNICATIONS, SANCHAR BHAVAN, NEW DELHI               
AND OTHERS ,  a Division Bench of this Court, at paragraph 20,
held as under:
In our considered opinion, the public law
remedy available under
Article 226
of the
Constitution of India cannot be availed to get
enforced the contractual rights and obligations
voluntarily entered by and between the parties.
Public law remedies are not available to change,
annul or for modification of the terms and
conditions of a contract mutually agreed by and
between the parties. Nor this Court in exercise of
its jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the
Constitution of India can undertake to resolve the
disputes arising out of concluded contract.
In
N.VENKATESWARLU @ VENKANNA v. REGIONAL            
MANAGER, UNITED INDIA INSURANCE CO.LTD., HYDERABAD             
AND OTHERS
, this Court, at paragraph 9, held as under:
There is no dispute with regard to the
jurisdiction of the civil Court to settle the claim. A
reading of
the above decision
of the Supreme Court
in
LIC of India
's case (supra) clearly indicates that
the civil Court's jurisdiction is not excluded, even
if there is a clause prohibiting a particular forum
and
Section 46
of the Insurance Act, in clear and
categorical terms with non-obstante clause confers
a right to issue any relief in respect of the policy in
the Court of competent jurisdiction in India.
In the
facts and circumstances of the case, to resolve the
controversy in question and following the dictum
laid down by
the Apex Court in
LIC of India
's case
(supra), I am of the view that the writ petition is
not the adequate and proper Forum and the only
remedy available to the petitioner is to approach
the civil Court, if he is so advised, for settling the
claim.
In
G.PONMANI v. LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION OF          
INDIA AND ANOTHER
, the High Court of Chennai, at paragraph   
5, held as under:
In view of the above position of law it has to be
held that the proper remedy for the petitioner is to
file a civil suit and this court cannot go into the
merits of the matter and find out whether the
repudiation of the claim of the petitioner by the
respondents is correct or not. In these
circumstances the petitioner is not entitled to any
relief in the writ petition and it is liable to be
dismissed. However, the dismissal of the writ
petition will not be a bar to the institution of a suit
before the proper court by the petitioner for the
recovery of the amount due under the policy
insured in the name of the husband of the
petitioner. Further, the plea of limitation in
instituting such suit cannot be put against the
petitioner, as the petitioner had filed the present
writ petition and had been prosecuting the matter
before this court from 1984. The period during
which the writ petition is pending before this court
has to be excluded for the purpose of calculating
the period of limitation for filing the suit before the
civil court for the recovery of the amount on the
basis of the policy of insurance.
In CH.NARASIMHULU v. UNITED INDIA INSURANCE        
COMPANY, CUDDAPAH AND ANOTHER , this Court, at         
paragraphs 3 & 6, held as under:
3. If the rejection of insurance claim by the insurer
can be justiciable issue in a writ petition, the
other question would fall for consideration.
However, having regard to the binding precedents
referred to hereinafter this Court is of the
considered opinioin that a writ petition for
claiming insurance amount, as it involves disputed
questions of fact, would not lie.
6. From the above it is clear that to enforce the
insurance contract i.e. policy, a writ petition would
not lie. In view of this, this Court is not inclined to
express any opinion as to whether the petitioner
comes within clause (c) or clause (d) of policy. If so
advised, the petitioner may institute a suit subject
to law of limitation and claim insurance amount.
The writ petition is misconceived and the same is
accordingly dismissed. No costs.
In
KERALA STATE ELECTRICITY BOARD AND ANOTHER            
v. KURIEN E.KALATHIL AND OTHERS
, the Honourable      
Supreme Court, at paragraphs 9 to 12, held as under:
On the other hand, it was contended for the
contractor that the obligation of the Board arises
as soon as the wages payable to the workmen get  
enhanced on account of Government notification
revising minimum wages and it does not 
contemplate any investigation into the question
whether enhanced payments were in fact made or  
not. The contention further is that under the
Minimum Wages Act
and under the industrial law, 
the authorities do oversee the payments and make 
sure that the workmen are not denied such
benefits. It was further contended that the Board
did not contend in the earlier writ petition before
the High Court or even before the industrial
tribunal that the payment as per the notification
was not made by the contractor and, in fact, the
award of the industrial tribunal which has become
final records the factum of payment at the
enhanced revised rate to the workmen and further
that the memorandum between the union and the  
contractor witnessed by the Deputy Labour Officer
also notices the factum of such payment. It was
stressed that, in fact, the contractor had sought
issue of Writ of Mandamus directing the Board to
discharge its obligation under the notification
issued under the
Minimum Wages Act
, the  
directions contained in the judgment dated 25th
September, 1990 and the award dated 14th  
October, 1993 and to further issue a Writ of
Mandamus to the Board directing it to pay to the
petitioner the amount shown in the settlement
between the contractor and the workmen through 
its union alongwith the interest.
We find that there is a merit in the first
contention of Mr. Rawal. Learned Counsel has
rightly questioned the maintainability of the writ
petition. The interpretation and implementation of
a clause in a contract cannot be the subject matter
of a writ petition. Whether the contract envisages
actual payment or not is a question of construction
of contract? If a term of a contract is violated,
ordinarily the remedy is not the writ petition under
Article 226.
We are also unable to agree with the
observations of the High Court that the contractor
was seeking enforcement of a statutory contract. A
contract would not become statutory simply
because it is for construction of a public utility and
it has been awarded by a statutory body. We are
also unable to agree with the observation of the
High Court that since the obligations imposed by
the contract on the contracting parties come
within the purview of the
Contract Act
, that would
not make the contract statutory. Clearly, the High
Court fell into an error in coming to the conclusion
that the contract in question was statutory in
nature.
A statute may expressly or impliedly confer
power on a statutory body to enter into contracts
in order to enable it to discharge its functions.
Dispute arising out of the terms of such contracts
or alleged breaches have to be settled by the
ordinary principles of law of contract. The fact that
one of the parties to the agreement is a statutory
or public body will not of itself affect the principles
to be applied. The disputes about the meaning of a
covenant in a contract or its enforceability have to
be determined according to the usual principles of
the
Contract Act
. Every act of a statutory body
need not necessarily involve an exercise of
statutory power. Statutory bodies, like private
parties, have power to contract or deal with
property. Such activities may not raise any issue of
public law. In the present case, it has not been
shown how the contract is statutory. The contract
between the parties is in the realm of private law.
It is not a statutory contract. The disputes relating
to interpretation of the terms and conditions of
such a contract could not have been agitated in a
petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
India. That is a matter for adjudication by a civil
court or in arbitration if provided for in the
contract. Whether any amount is due and if so,
how much and refusal of the appellant to pay it is
justified or not, are not the matters which could
have been agitated and decided in a writ petition.
The contractor should have been relegated to other
remedies.
Ordinarily, in view of aforesaid conclusions on
the first contention, we would have allowed the
appeal and directed dismissal of the writ petition
(O.P.283  F 1995) without examining the second 
contention. However, despite holding that the
disputes in question could not be agitated in a writ
petition and thus the High Court wrongly assumed
jurisdiction in the facts of the case, yet we are not
inclined in the exercise of our power under
Article
136
of the Constitution, to dismiss the writ petition
of the contractor at this stage because that is
likely to result in miscarriage of justice on account
of lapse of time which may now result in the
foreclosure of all other remedies which could
otherwise be availed of by the contractor in the
ordinary course. Those remedies are not efficacious
at the present stage and, therefore, in view of
peculiar circumstances of the case, we have
examined the second contention and the factors
which weighted with the High Court in granting
relief.
In
NATIONAL THERMAL POWER CORPORATION LIMITED             
v. M/S BHANU CONSTRUCTION COMPANY PRIVATE LIMITED,             
HYDERABAD AND OTHERS
, this Court, at paragraph 25, held     
as under:
From the above decisions, it is clear beyond
any doubt that merely because the Government, or 
an officer of the Government, or an agency or
instrumentality of the State enters into a contract
for execution of certain works with another person,
it cannot be said to be acting in the public law
field. Its rights and obligations are the same as
those of any other person entering into a contract.
The only limitation is that before entering into the
contract, it must act consistent with the guarantee
contained in Article 14; (vide E.E. & C. Ltd. v.
State of West Bengal , and Ramana v.
International Airport Authority of India ). But once
a contract is entered into, it is the terms of the
contract that govern, and no question of
Article 14
,
or arbitrary action, arises. The very concept of one
party to the contract acting arbitrarily and thereby
violating
Article 14
, is misplaced. The action may
be wrongful; but it is not such an action as is
amenable to writ jurisdiction on the ground that it
is arbitrary. If a contract is terminated wrongfully,
it cannot be questioned in a writ petition saying
that the termination is arbitrary, or unreasonable.
The concept of arbitrary or unreasonable action
amenable to writ jurisdiction is relevant only
where the State acts under a statute, or in
exercise of its executive/administrative power.
Taking any other view would not only be contrary
to well established authority, but would also cast
an uncalled for burden upon this Court. Not only
this Court would be exercising its writ jurisdiction
for determining the private rights of the parties
arising from, or relating to a contract, but would
also be obliged to enquire into disputed questions
of fact, which it would not ordinarily undertake.
It is very much clear from the judgment of the Honourable
Supreme Court in
JOSHI TECHNOLOGIES INTERNATIONAL          
INC.s
case( first cited supra)  that there is no absolute bar to the
maintainability of the Writ Petition in contractual matters and the
Supreme Court also held that the State, in its executive capacity,
even in the contractual field, is under obligation to act fairly and
cannot practice some discriminations.
In view of the law
laid down in
the judgments cited by the
learned counsel for the petitioner, the judgments cited by the
learned Standing Counsel for the respondents-insurance
company would not render any assistance to the case of the
respondents. There is also no factual controversy in the medical
evidence. In the absence of the same, this Court does not find any
merit in the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents
as regards non-maintainability of the Writ Petition. In the
circumstances, this Court has absolutely no shadow of doubt to
hold that the order of the Ombudsman, confirming the order of
repudiation passed by the respondents-insurance company  
cannot stand for judicial scrutiny. In view of the evidence available
on record, this Court does not find any justification on the part of
the respondents in repudiating the claim of the petitioner.
For the aforesaid reasons, the Writ Petition is allowed setting
aside the award No.I.O.(Hyd): G-81/2004-05 passed by the 
Ombudsman, Hyderabad  dated 16.11.2004 in Complaint    
No.I.O.(Hyd)/G-11.003.0193 confirming the repudiation of the
claim by the insurance company. The respondents-insurance  
company is directed to settle and pay the insurance claim
vide Policy No.551801/42/01/8100047 within a period of three
months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order with
interest @ 6% p.a., from the date the same is due.
As a sequel, the miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall stand
closed. There shall be no order as to costs.
__________________   
A.V.SESHA SAI, J  
19th July, 2017