[Cites
8
, Cited by
9
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
1.Joseph Sriharsha & Mary Indraja ... vs 1.Union Of India, Ministry Of Human ... on 6 April, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 HYDERABAD 118, (2017) 3 ANDHLD 594 (2017) 3 ESC 1458, (2017) 3 ESC 1458
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN AND HONBLE MS. JUSTICE J. UMA DEVI                  

WRIT PETITION No.1879 of 2017   

06-04-2017 

1.Joseph Sriharsha & Mary Indraja Educational Society, Plot No.102, High Court
colony, Vanasthalipuram, Hyderabad -500070, rep. by its Hon. Chairman & 
Correspondent, Dr. Rev. K.VK. Rao, and others. Petitioners

1.Union of India, Ministry of Human Resource Development, Shastri Bhawan, C- 
Wing, Dr. Rajendra Prasad Road, New Delhi, rep. by its Secretary, and others.
Respondents  

Counsel for Petitioner ::Mr. Sricharan Telaprolu

Counsel for Respondent No.2: Mr. K. Ramakanth Reddy   

^For the Respondent No.3: Mr. T. Rajashekara RaoG.P. for Higher Education for
(Telangana)
For the Respondent Nos.5 & 6 : Mr. A. Abhishek Reddy  
                                
<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred

1.AIR 2003 SC 355  
2.(2003) 6 SCC 697 
3.(2004) 8 SCC 139 

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN           
AND  
HONBLE MS. JUSTICE J. UMA DEVI      

W.P.No.1879 of 2017  

ORDER:
(per V. Ramasubramanian, J.)   

      A group of minority institutions offering professional and other
courses have come up with the present writ petition challenging the
norms and standards laid down by the All India Council for Technical
Education, under
Section 10(1)(i)
of the AICTE Act, 1987.
2. Heard Mr. Sricharan Telaprolu, learned counsel for the
petitioner. Mr. K. Ramakanth Reddy, learned counsel takes notice for the
2nd respondent, Mr. T. Rajasekhara Rao, learned Government Pleader for 
Higher Education takes notice for State of Telangana and Mr. A. Abhishek
Reddy takes notice for respondents 5 and 6.
3. The grievance of the petitioner, as seen from the averments
contained in the affidavit filed in support of the writ petition appears to be
that due to the norms and standards for course curriculum, physical and
infrastructural facilities, staff patterns, staff qualifications, quality
instructions, assessment and examinations laid down by the AICTE under
Section 10(1)(i)
of the AICTE Act, 1987, the Educational Institutions
across the India are facing lot of problems and resorting to unethical
practices for securing various approvals and that these institutions are
under constant threat of surprise inspections, random inspections and
complaint inspections by the regulatory agencies. The case of the
petitioner is that many institutions are not able to comply with 100% of
the norms stipulated by the regulatory agencies and that therefore these
institutions seek approvals by submitting incorrect information. Therefore,
the petitioners have come up with the above writ petition seeking to issue
a writ of Mandamus to declare the norms and standards laid down by
AICTE as arbitrary and illegal offending
Articles 14
and
30(1)
of the
Constitution. The petitioners also pray for certain other reliefs. Instead of
extracting in their own language, the reliefs sought by the petitioners in
the writ petition, it would be better, for easy appreciation, to present in
simple terms, the reliefs sought by the petitioners as follows:
a) To declare the norms and standards laid down by the AICTE
uniformly for all institutions without prescribing norms commensurate with
the fee fixed by the Admission and Fee Regulatory Committees of the
States as illegal and arbitrary;
b) To direct AICTE to fix the norms depending upon the cost and
tuition fee prescribed by taking into consideration the paying capacity of
the majority population of the country;
c) To declare as illegal, certain prescriptions contained in Appendix
7 and 8 of the Approval Process Hand Book 2017-18, relating to (i) the
faculty for 2nd, 3rd and 4th years of B.Tech/B.Pharmacy, 2nd and 3rd years
of Polytechnic and MCA and 2nd year of M.Tech/MBA; (ii) Teacher student 
ratio of 1:15 for certain courses and 1:12 for certain courses; (iii) faculty
cadre ratio of 1:2:6 for Undergraduate courses and 1:2 for Post Graduate
Courses; and (iv) exorbitant pay scales and service conditions for teaching
and non-teaching staff without taking into account the fee fixed by the
State Level Committees;
d) To grant consequential reliefs of approval/extension of approval
without insisting on the prescriptions contained in Appendix 7 and 8.
4. From the reliefs sought by the petitioners, in the back ground of
the averments contained in the writ petition, it is clear that the petitioners
are finding it economically unviable to run the educational institutions
imparting higher professional education. The grievance of the petitioners
in simple terms is that since the fee that could be charged by the
institutions, is regulated by the Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee,
it is impossible for the educational institutions to maintain the prescribed
norms including the cadre strength of faculty even for the 2nd, 3rd and 4th
years of the course of study, for the unfilled approved divisions of the 1st
year. The petitioners also contend that it is impossible for them to
maintain the teacher student ratio as prescribed by AICTE and also the
faculty cadre ratio of 1:2:6 for Under Graduate courses and 1:2 for Post
Graduate courses.
5. Though the petitioners have extensively referred to the
observations of the Supreme Court in various cases and have also referred
to the situation prevailing in various State-run universities, we do not
think that we need to undertake a journey through all that. This is for the
simple reason that what is under challenge before us is a set of norms
and standards laid down by AICTE, in exercise of the power conferred by
Section 10(1)(i)
of the AICTE Act, 1987. Therefore, the challenge to the
exercise of a power conferred by the statute, should be confined only on
limited grounds.
6. It is needless to point out that All India Council for Technical
Education was originally set up even before independence, in the year
1945, but only as a National Expert Body for advising the Governments for
ensuring coordinated development of technical education in accordance
with the approved standards. But after more than 35 years of experience
with the working of the Council, a need was felt that the Council should
be vested with statutory powers to maintain standards of technical
education. Therefore a National Working Group was set up in November,
1985. The Committees recommendations came at a time when the    
National Policy on Education, 1986 was also promulgated. Therefore, the
Parliament enacted the All India Council for
Technical Education Act,
1987
. The statement of objects and reasons for the Act shows that the
Act sought to provide statutory powers to AICTE to ensure;
(i) proper planning and coordinated development of the
technical education system throughout the country,
(ii) promotion of qualitative improvement of technical
education in relation to planned quantitative growth, and
(iii) regulation of the system and proper maintenance of
norms and standards.
7. The preamble to the Act also reiterates that the Act was
intended to confer powers upon the Council for the regulation and proper
maintenance of norms and standards in the technical education.
8. Even admittedly the Council has the power, nay, duty, to ensure
coordinated and integrated development of technical and management 
education and maintenance of standards, as seen from
Section 10(1)
. For
the purpose of performing the functions under the Act, the AICTE is
vested with the powers listed in clauses (a) to (v) of sub-section (1) of
Section 10
. Clause (i) relates to laying down of norms and standards for
courses, curricula, physical and instructional facilities, staff pattern, staff
qualifications, quality instructions, assessment and examinations.
9. The validity of
Section 10(1)
of the Act is not under challenge
before us. It is admitted by the petitioners that AICTE has the power
statutorily conferred upon them to lay down norms and standards.
10. Once it is conceded that there was a power and that what was
done by the 2nd respondent was validly done in exercise of such a power
and that the procedure for the exercise of such power was followed, then
the area of judicial scrutiny available for this Court to examine every one
of those norms, is extremely circumscribed. Keeping this limited scope
available for us to test the validity of the norms and standards laid down
by the AICTE, if we come back to the grounds of challenge, it is seen that
the only ground on which the petitioners assail the norms and standards is
that they cannot be uniformly fixed for all types of institutions located at
all places, without taking note of regional imbalances, non-availability of
faculties and the restrictions with regard to the fees that could be charged
from the students. In other words, the challenge is on the ground of
economic unviability. But we do not think that educational institutions can
now challenge the statutory prescriptions on the ground of economic
unviability, since the educational institutions have already taken a position
that the right to run the educational institutions is traceable to
Article
19(1)(g)
of the Constitution. Once the educational institutions, by a
conscious choice, have chosen to treat what they are doing as akin to
trade, commerce or industry, it will not be open to them to challenge the
regulatory measures imposed by law as making the institutions unviable
economically.
11. The Admission and Fee Regulatory Committees constituted by
the State Governments of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh are in 
pursuance of the directions issued by the Honble Supreme Court in
TMA
Pai Foundation v. State of Karnataka
,
Islamic Academy of
Education v. State of Karnataka
and
P.A. Inamdar v. State of
Maharashtra
. It is not as though the Admission and Fee Regulatory
Committees fix the fees unilaterally for all educational institutions. Every
educational institution is given an opportunity to present its case and it is
only based upon the material produced by each institution, the fee to be
charged by every institution is fixed by the Committee.
12. Our experience shows that to some extent, the Fee Regulatory
Committees, at least in respect of engineering courses, have become
redundant. Thousands of seats in some disciplines in engineering colleges
go abegging every year without takers. Therefore, even if the institutions
offer these courses free of cost, it may not be possible for them to catch
the students. Eversince the educational institutions converted education
into a big business venture, market forces themselves have put them in
place. Therefore, economic unviability can never be a basis for challenging
the fixation of norms.
13. The arguments based upon
Article 14
are stated only to be
rejected. What is prescribed by AICTE is bare minimum that every
institution is supposed to fulfill. If they cannot fulfill the same on account
of financial incapacity, those institutions have no right to exist. It is a
strange argument to say that norms and standards of education should
vary depending upon the fees allowed to be charged.
14. The insistence of the AICTE for filling up the faculty for the 2nd,
3rd and 4th years of the course of study even when there are unfilled
divisions in the 1st year, cannot be taken exception to. Students admitted
to the 1st year join the course on the strength of the promises held out by
the educational institutions that they have the required faculty in
possession. We cannot expect the students to join the first year of the
course of study with the mere hope and expectation that as and when
they move to the 2nd, 3rd and 4th years of the course of study, the
managements will fill up the vacancies.
15. Similarly, the fixation of student teacher ratio and the
prescription of faculty cadre ratio are all matters of policy determined by
experts in the field of education. The determination of such norms and
standards by an expert body cannot be interfered with by this Court,
merely on the ground that such strict norms will lead to the financial
bankruptcy of some institutions. Therefore in fine, we find no legally
sustainable ground of challenge to the norms and standards statutorily
laid by AICTE. Hence the Writ Petition is dismissed.
16. As a sequel, the miscellaneous petitions pending, if any, shall
stand closed. There shall be no order as to costs.
________________________    
V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN, J      
_____________  
J. UMA DEVI, J 
6th April, 2017