[Cites
5
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Gautam Chand Chordia And 6 Others vs Smt.Majida Hasany And 8 Others on 2 March, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 89
Bench:
C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy
,
T.Rajani
HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE C.V.NAGARJUNA REDDY AND HONBLE SMT JUSTICE T.RAJANI                 

Writ Petition No.6406 of 2017

02-03-2017 

Gautam Chand Chordia and 6 others..... Petitioners

Smt.Majida Hasany and 8 others.....Respondents
Counsel for the Petitioners:Mr.Kishore Rai

Counsel for the respondents: Mr.V.Eswaraiah Chowdhary  

<Gist:
>Head Note:
?  Cases Referred:
1.2017 ALD 655 (DB)  
2.2016 (6) ALT 491 DB 


The Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy 
and 
The Honble Smt. Justice T.Rajani
Writ Petition No.6406 of 2017
Date: 02.03.2017 

The Court made the following:
Order: (Per the Honble Sri Justice C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy)

        This Writ Petition is filed against Order, dated 10-02-2017,
in IA.No.186 of 2016 in LGOP.No.263 of 2017 on the file of the
II Additional Chief Judge, City Civil Court, Hyderabad.
We have heard Mr.Kishore Rai, learned Counsel for the
petitioners, and Mr.V.Eswaraiah Chowdhary, learned Counsel for
respondent Nos.1 to 7.
Respondent Nos.1 to 6 filed LGOP.No.263 of 2017 to 
declare the petitioners as land grabbers in respect of the petition
schedule property.  Along with the OP, they have filed the
aforesaid IA under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 read with
Section 151
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (
CPC
) for grant
of interim injunction restraining the petitioners herein and
respondent No.7 from making further construction.  By the
impugned order, the lower Court has granted interim injunction
while ordering notice to the petitioners.   Feeling aggrieved by this
order, respondent Nos.1 to 7 in the LGOP filed this Writ
Petition.
At the hearing, Mr.Kishore Rai, learned Counsel for the
petitioners, advanced three submissions viz., (i) that the lower
Court has straight away allowed the application for injunction and
granted interim injunction as prayed for; (ii) that even assuming
that the impugned order is interim in nature, the Court below has
failed to comply with the mandatory requirements of Rule 3 of
Order XXXIX CPC
; and (iii) that the lower Court has failed to
consider the IA for injunction by applying the well-known
parameters of prima facie case, balance of convenience and
irreparable injury.
In support of his submission, the learned Counsel has
placed reliance on Dr.KL.Narayana vs. Special Tribunal
u/
A.P.Land Grabbing Prohibition Act, 1982
-cum-Chief
Judge, City Civil Courts, Hyderabad and others .
Mr.V.Eswaraiah Chowdhary, learned Counsel for  
respondent Nos.1 to 6, submitted that by the impugned order, the
lower Court has granted ad interim injunction; that the words
petition is allowed were mentioned by inadvertent mistake by
the lower Court and that a reading of the order in its entirety
makes it clear that the lower Court has granted an ad interim
injunction until further orders.        The learned Counsel further
submitted that since the impugned order of injunction is ex parte
in nature, the Civil Miscellaneous Appeal does not lie.
In support
of his submission, he has placed reliance on the judgment  of this
Court in
Jagadamba Phosphate vs. Coromandel International 
Ltd., Secunderabad
.      The learned Counsel further submitted
that the lower Court has discussed the prima facie merits of the
case; that it was satisfied that his clients deserve an ad interim order
and that therefore, the impugned order does not warrant
interference by this Court.
We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned
Counsel for the parties with reference to the record.
As regards the first submission of the learned Counsel for
the petitioners, undoubtedly, the words in the concluding portion
of the impugned order In the result, the petition is allowed
would indicate that the Court below has disposed of the petition.
However, if we read the order as a whole, these words appear to
be the result of an inadvertent error committed by the lower
Court.   The sentences preceding and following these words
would make it clear that the Court below has intended the
impugned order to be passed purely as an interim order and not
as a final order.  The said portion of the order reads as under:
Hence, in the above circumstances, interim
injunction is granted in favour of the petitioner
restraining the respondents from making any further
construction in the schedule property until further
orders.
In the result, the petition is allowed restraining the
respondents from making further constructions until
further orders.  Issue urgent notice to respondents
through courier and speed post. (emphasis supplied)

        Though the lower Court has not properly applied its mind
in using the words the petition is allowed, as we cannot read this
portion in isolation and having regard to the remaining portion of
the order as extracted above, we have no hesitation to hold that
by the impugned order, the lower Court has only granted an
ad interim injunction while keeping the IA pending.
With regard to the second submission of the learned
Counsel for the petitioners, Rule 3 of
Order XXXIX CPC
mandates that before granting an injunction, the Court has to
direct notice to the opposite party.  However, this provision
carved out an exception where the Court is empowered to grant
an ad interim order of injunction without giving notice of the
application to the opposite party  and in such an event, it shall
record the reasons for its opinion that the object of granting the
injunction would be defeated by delay.  This provision makes
issuance of notice a rule and grant of an ex parte injunction order
an exception.  Wherever the Court chooses to follow the
exception, it has to necessarily comply with the mandatory
requirement of recording reasons for its opinion that the object of
granting injunction would be defeated by delay.   A perusal of the
impugned order shows that nowhere the Court below has  
referred to the aspect of necessity to grant an ex parte injunction
and that by issuing notice the object, with which the injunction
petition was filed, would be defeated.  Therefore, in our opinion,
the impugned order does not conform to the mandatory 
requirement of Rule 3 of
Order XXXIX CPC
.
As regards the third submission of the learned Counsel for
the petitioners, an Application for injunction is considered by the
Courts on the well-known parameters of prima facie case, balance
of convenience and irreparable injury.  But, nowhere in the
impugned order, the lower Court has discussed these elements.
In Dr.KL.Narayana (1 supra), one of us (CVNR, J)
speaking for a Division Bech inter alia held as under:
An order of injunction is a double edged weapon,
in that, while it is a boon for a party litigating bona fide,
it is a bane for a party who suffers such order at the
instance of the other party, unleashing speculative and
vexatious litigation.  Unfortunately the Special Court
which has failed to observe the inherent lacunae and
weaknesses in the case of respondent Nos.2 to 7, has 
chosen to grant a comprehensive order of injunction
having far-reaching consequences.  It has failed to
discuss the three elements of Prima facie case, balance of
convenience and irreparable injury before granting the
order of injunction.
As regards the submission of the learned Counsel for
respondent Nos.1 to 6 on the maintainability of the Civil
Miscellaneous Appeal against the impugned order, this Court in
Jagadamba Phosphate
(2 supra) held as under:
7.     Dealing with the scope of an appeal arising out of an
ad interim injunction order, a Division Bench of this
Court in
Innovative Pharma Surgicals v. Pigeon Medical Devices
(P) Ltd. and others
, 2004 (3) ALD 228 (DB) = 2004 (4)
ALT 8 (DB), held that as a matter of course, no appeal
lies against an ad interim injunction order, except in
extraordinary circumstances, as to the non-compliance
of the mandatory provisions, or the rarest of the rare
cases, where the order is perverse or bias or it suffers
from lack of jurisdiction.
10. Since the impugned order contains reasons, it
satisfies the requirements of the proviso to Rule 3 of
Order-XXXIX
CPC
.  Therefore, applying the tests
indicated in
Innovative Pharma Surgicalss
case (supra), we
are of the opinion that it is not a fit case for entertaining
the appeal against the ad interim injunction order.
In our opinion, the judgment in
Jagadamba Phosphate
(2
supra) does not come to the aid of respondent Nos.1 to 7 for the
reason that the lower Court has failed to comply with the
mandatory requirement of Rule 3
Order XXXIX CPC
.
On a thorough consideration of the impugned order, we are
of the opinion that the Court below has committed a serious
jurisdictional error in failing to comply with the mandatory
requirement of Rule 3 of
Order XXXIX CPC
and also in not
discussing the essential elements of prima facie case, balance of
convenience and irreparable injury for granting an ad interim
injunction even without notice to the petitioners.
For the afore-mentioned reasons, the impugned order
cannot be sustained and the same is, accordingly, set aside.  The
lower Court is directed to dispose of the IA on merits keeping in
view the observations made herein before and after hearing both
parties.
As a sequel, WPMP.No.7839 of 2017, filed by the 
petitioners for interim relief, is disposed of as infructuous.
_____________________    
C.V.Nagarjuna Reddy, J) 
___________  
(T.Rajani, J)
Dt: 2nd March, 2017