[Cites
10
, Cited by
13
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Konidhana Ananda Sharma vs State Of Andhra Pradesh Rep. By Its ... on 22 June, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 17
Author:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
Bench:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           

Criminal Petition No.3452 of 2017

22-06-2017 

Konidhana Ananda Sharma.  ...Petitioner/Accused  

State of Andhra Pradesh Rep. by its Public Prosecutor, High Court at Hyderabad.  Respondent/Complainant  

Counsel for Petitioner  : Sri Akkapeddi Srinivas

Counsel for Respondent: Public Prosecutor for State (A.P)

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

?Cases referred:

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO          

Criminal Petition No.3452 of 2017

ORDER:
Petitioner/accused filed the instant petition under
Section 438
Cr.P.C., seeking pre-arrest bail in P.R.C.No.30 of 2015 on the file of
Additional Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Piler (arising out of
Cr.No.188 of 2014 of Piler PS) in which the petitioner allegedly
committed offence under
Sections 323
,
506
IPC and
Section 3(1)(x)
of SC & ST (POA)Act, 1989.
2)      The de-facto complainant lodged a complaint with the Piler PS
stating that his marriage was held on 19.06.2014 at TTD Kalyana
Mandapam, Piler for which the petitioner, who is a purohit in
Ramalayam, Piler arranged photography, cook and utensils for a
sum of Rs.70,000/-; he paid Rs.40,000/- at the time of marriage and
requested some time to pay the balance amount; thereafter, due to
paucity of money, he could not pay the balance amount. While so, on
30.09.2014 at 7 PM, petitioner came to his house and took him to
the welding shop opposite to the telephone office and demanded the
balance amount of Rs.30,000/- and when he requested for some more  
time to repay the amount,  petitioner grew wild and abused him in
filthy language touching the name of his caste and also beat him with
hands on his cheek and threatened him with dire consequences.
Hence the complaint.
3)      On the basis of the said complaint, the police registered a case
in Cr.No.188 of 2014 and the Sub-Divisional Police Officer,
Madanapalle granted station bail to the petitioner on 28.10.2014 and
after completion of investigation filed charge sheet before the
Additional Judicial Magistrate of First Class, Piler. The learned
Magistrate by order dated 16.11.2015 while committing the case to
the Special Sessions Judge-cum-IV Additional District Judge,
Tirupati for trial observed that since the petitioner was on station
bail, he was ordered to be continued on bail till conclusion of trial.
The learned Special Sessions Judge by letter Dis.No.19 dated
02.01.2016 returned the entire case record for non-compliance of
Section 209(a)
Cr.P.C and observed that bail order of the petitioner
was not on record. Thereupon, the committal Court called for the
explanation of the investigating officer regarding the bail order.  It
appears, the SDPO Madanapalle, in his letter dated 13.04.2017
submitted that his predecessor SDPO Madanapalle, conducted the   
investigation and he served notice to accused under
Sec.41-A
Cr.P.C
since the offences of the case were punishable below 7 years of
imprisonment and he did not consider necessary to arrest the accused
as the accused had not failed to comply with the terms of the notice
under
Sec.41-A
Cr.P.C and he cannot submit more than that and  
prayed the Court to pass orders.
4)      After receiving the aforesaid explanation, the Addl. Junior
Civil Judge, Piler passed an order dated 18.05.2017 which raised an
apprehension in the mind of petitioner to seek for anticipatory bail.
The learned Addl. Junior Civil Judge while observing that
Sec.41-A
Cr.P.C does not apply to the facts of the present case as the offence
was a special Act offence and grave in nature as per Sec.2(d) and 18
of SC, ST (POA) Act and directed the SDPO Madanapalle to comply   
with the provisions of
Sec.209(a)
Cr.P.C and to file neat copy of
charge sheet.
5)      What can be inferred from the above order is that learned
Magistrate felt that since no anticipatory bail can be granted in
respect of an offence under SC, ST (POA) Act in view of the bar
under
Sec.18
, the investigating officer ought not to have granted
station bail to accused while dealing with him under
Sec.41-A
Cr.P.C
and further held that Sec.41-A had no application since the offence is
a special Act offence.
It must be said, the above observation is legally incorrect. No
doubt, Sec.18 of SC, ST (POA) Act, creates a bar for invoking
Sec.438
of Cr.P.C i.e, entertaining a pre-arrest bail application by the
Court.  However,
Sec.18
cannot militate and operate as an interdict
against the power of a police officer under
Sec.41
and
41-A
Cr.P.C.
A conjunctive reading of
Sec.41
&
41-A
Cr.P.C give an
understanding that where a reasonable complaint has been made or a 
credible information has been received or a reasonable suspicion
exist against an accused that he has committed a cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may be less than 7
years or which may extend to 7 years with or without fine, the
investigating officer may, without the warrant  of the Court arrest
such an accused, provided the police officer is satisfied that such
arrest is necessary for the reasons enumerated in
Sec.41
Cr.P.C.
Provided, if the police officer feels that the arrest of the accused is
not required, record the reasons in writing for not making the arrest.
This is the procedure to be followed by the police officer in respect of
a cognizable offence punishable upto 7 years as enumerated in
Sec.41
Cr.P.C. We are not concerned with other part of the said Section.
Then coming to
Sec.41-A
Cr.P.C, in cases where the arrest is
not required under the provisions of
Sec.41(1)
Cr.P.C, the police
officer shall issue notice directing the accused to appear before him
for interrogation. Where such person i.e, accused complies and
continues to comply with the notice, he shall not be arrested in
respect of the offence referred to in the notice, unless for reasons to
be recorded, the police officer is of the opinion that he ought to be
arrested.
6)      The offences alleged in the instant case are under
Sec.323
,
506
IPC and Sec.3(1)(x) of SC, ST (POA) Act, 1989.  All the aforesaid
offences are punishable with a term less than 7 years. Therefore, the
procedure contemplated under
Sec.41
and
41-A
Cr.P.C, squarely  
apply to them and those Sections have not made any express  
distinction between the offences punishable under
IPC
and other
Special enactments. Therefore, the contra view expressed by learned
Addl. Junior Civil Judge, is incorrect. The explanation of the SDPO
Madanapalle dated 13.04.2017 shows that since the offence was 
punishable below 7 years of imprisonment and as the accused had 
not failed to comply with the terms of notice under
Sec.41-A
Cr.P.C,
the I.O did not consider it necessary to arrest the accused. Therefore,
the I.O granted station bail by securing the bail bonds of the sureties
on behalf of the accused. This procedural order under
Sec.41-A
Cr.P.C cannot be equated with an order passed by a Court under
Sec.438
Cr.P.C. Therefore, in my view, there is no procedural
violation. Consequently, the committal Court is directed to submit
the bail bonds produced before the I.O by the accused and sureties to
the Special Sessions Judge-cum-IV Additional District Judge,
Tirupati, in which case they shall be deemed to be the due
compliance under
Sec.209(a)
of Cr.P.C by the Sessions Court.
7)      This Criminal Petition is disposed of accordingly.
_________________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 22.06.2017