[Cites
42
, Cited by
11
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
1) Dr. B. Satish Kumar, S/O B. R. ... vs Union Of India, Represented By Its ... on 24 August, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 (NOC) 1142 (HYD.)
Author:
T. Rajani
Bench:
T. Rajani
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN And THE HONBLE MRS. JUSTICE T. RAJANI                  

W.P.M.P.No.33741 of 2017 and batch   

24-08-2017 

1) Dr. B. Satish Kumar, S/o B. R. Shivaram, aged about 28 yrs,R/o Flat No.101, Baba Residency, Kothapet, Hyderabad.And other 


Union of India, represented by its Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, A wing, Nirman Bhavan, Maulana Azad Roa


For Petitioners :       Mr. S.Satyam Reddy,  
                        Mr. D.V. Seetharam Murthy,
                        Mr. L.Ravi Chander,
                        Mr. S.Ramachandra Rao,
                        Mr. S.Lakshma Reddy and
                        Mr. C.V. Mohan Reddy,
                        Senior Counsel

For Respondents: Mr. B.Narayana Reddy,   
                  Asst. Solicitor General.
                  Mr. S.Vivek Chandra Sekhar,
                  Standing Counsel for MCI.
                  Mr. A.Prabhakar Rao,
                  Standing Counsel for
                  Dr. KNR University of HS.
                  Mr. Taddi Nageswara Rao, 
                  Standing Counsel for
                  Dr. NTR University of HS.
                  GP for Medical & Health.


<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    



?Cases referred:
  (1980) 2 SCC 768 
  (2014) 2 SCC 305 
  AIR 1971 AP 118 
  1973 (1) ALT 1
  AIR 1973 SC 827 
  1998 (2) ALD 460
  (1980) 2 SCC 768 
  (1984) 3 SCC 654 
  (1984) 3 SCC 706 
  (1988) 4 SCC 526 
  (1988) (Supp) SCC 794 
  (2016) 2 SCC 328 
  (2016) 4 SCC 342 
  (2016) 7 SCC 487 
  (2016) 7 SCC 353 



Dr. Srikar Darisetty, S/o Dr. D. Santosh,
aged about 31 years, Occ: Doctor, H.No.8-2-678/2,
Road No.12, Banjara Hills, Hyderabad.
  Petitioner
Vs.

The Union of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
A Wing, Nirman Bhavan, Maulana Azad Road, New Delhi    
And 7 others
.. Respondents  




W.P.M.P.No.34829 of 2017 in W.P.No.28025 of 2017:   

Between: 

Dr. Prasad Neelam, S/o Durga Rao Neelam, aged about   
30 years, Occ: Student, D.No.41-20/2-26, Patchameda  
Bazar Last, Krishnalanka, Vijayawada and 9 others
 Petitioners
Vs.

The Union of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
A Wing, Nirman Bhavan, Maulana Azad Road, New Delhi    
And 14 others 

.. Respondents  

W.P.M.P.No.34830 of 2017 in W.P.No.28026 of 2017:   

Between: 

Y. Sai Krishna, S/o Dr. Y.V. Rao, aged 28 years, Occ: Doctor
R/o Usha Cardiac Centre, 39-2-11, Pitchaiah Street, Labbipet,
Vijayawada 
  Petitioner
Vs.

The Union of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
A Wing, Nirman Bhavan, Maulana Azad Road, New Delhi    
and 5 others
.. Respondents  

W.P.M.P.No.34850 of 2017 in W.P.No.28042 of 2017:   

Between: 

Dr. P. Banu Teja Reddy, S/o Papellaugari Veerareddy,
Aged 28 years, R/o H.No.6-3-596/51, Venkataramana   
Colony, Khairatabad, Hyderabad 
  Petitioner
Vs.

The Union of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
A Wing, Nirman Bhavan, Maulana Azad Road, New Delhi    
And 8 others
.. Respondents  



W.P.M.P.No.34863 of 2017 in W.P.No.28055 of 2017:   

Between: 

Dr. K. Purushotham Reddy, S/o K. Rajeswar Reddy,   
Aged about 30 years, R/o Flat No.501, Sai Brindavan
Towers-1, Road No.5, Venkataramana Colony,   
Kurnool
  Petitioner
Vs.

The Union of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
A Wing, Nirman Bhavan, Maulana Azad Road, New Delhi    
And 8 others
.. Respondents  



HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN           
AND  
HONBLE MRS. JUSTICE T. RAJANI      

W.P.M.P.No.33741 of 2017 in W.P.No.27162 of 2017   
W.P.M.P.No.34786 of 2017 in W.P.No.27988 of 2017   
W.P.M.P.No.34829 of 2017 in W.P.No.28025 of 2017   
W.P.M.P.No.34830 of 2017 in W.P.No.28026 of 2017   
W.P.M.P.No.34850 of 2017 in W.P.No.28042 of 2017   
and 
W.P.M.P.No.34863 of 2017 in W.P.No.28055 of 2017   


COMMON ORDER:
(per V. Ramasubramanian, J)       

        The anguish expressed by Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer, 37
years ago in
Dr. Jagadish Saran v. Union of India
, which goes
as follows, would aptly sum up our feelings on the issues that
have fallen for our consideration in these petitions:
.The people in the States are caught in a happy network of mutuality,
woven into a lovely garment of humanity, whose warp and woof is India.
This is the underlying fundamental of the preambular resolve registered
in our National Parchment. So we insist that blind and bigoted local
patriotism in xenophobic exclusivism is destructive of our Freedom and
only if compelling considerations of gross injustice, desperate
backwardness and glaring inequality desiderate such a purposeful
course can protective discrimination gain entrance into the portals of
college campuses.
A Prelude
2. The Medical Council of India and the Dental Council of India
issued four notifications, two on 21.12.2010 and two on 31.05.2012,
amending the existing Regulations, for admission to graduate and
postgraduate medical courses. These Regulations actually stipulated
the conduct of a uniform entrance examination for admission to
graduate and postgraduate medical courses. These Regulations came  
to be challenged by some institutions before the Supreme Court and
some before various High Courts, on the ground that they infringed
the fundamental right guaranteed under
Article 19(1)(g)
and the right
guaranteed to religious and linguistic minorities.
3. After transferring to itself all the writ petitions pending before
different High Courts, the Supreme Court sustained the challenge in a
decision reported in
Christian Medical College Vs. Union of India
.
4. However, the Medical Council of India filed petitions for
review. These review petitions were referred to a Constitution Bench,
which, by an order dated 11.04.2016, allowed the review petitions and
directed the main cases to be listed for fresh hearing.  The fall out of
this order was that the amendment to the Regulations of the Medical
Council of India and the Dental Council of India came back to force,
though the challenge to the same is still alive.
5. Thereafter, an Ordinance was issued on 24.05.2016 for
amending the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956
. Though a challenge
was made to the Ordinance, in the Vacation Court, the Supreme Court 
refused to stay the Ordinance. Subsequently, the Ordinance became 
an Act and the President of India gave assent on 04.08.2016 and the
Act was notified in the Gazette of India on 05.08.2016.
The Act
was
deemed under
Section 1(2)
of the Act, to have come into force on
24.05.2016. By this amendment,
Section 10-D
was inserted in the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956
which reads as follows:
10D. There shall be conducted a uniform entrance
examination to all medical educational institutions at the
undergraduate level and post-graduate level through such
designated authority in Hindi, English and such other
languages and in such manner as may be prescribed and  
the designated authority shall ensure the conduct of
uniform entrance examination in the aforesaid manner.
Provided that notwithstanding any judgment or
order of any Court, the provisions of this section shall not
apply, in relation to the uniform entrance examination at
the undergraduate level for the academic year 2016-17
conducted in accordance with any regulations made under 
this Act, in respect of the State Government seats
(whether in Government Medical College or in a private
Medical College) where such State has not opted for such
examination.
6. By a notification, dated 10.03.2017, the Medical Council of
India further amended the Postgraduate Medical Education
Regulations 2000 in exercise of the power conferred by
Section 33
of
the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956. This was done with the previous
sanction of the Central Government. By this amendment, Regulation 
9-A was inserted into the Postgraduate Medical Education
Regulations 2000. This Regulation 9A reads as follows:
9A. Common Counseling   

(1)     There shall be a common counseling for admission to
all Postgraduate Courses (Diploma/MD/MS/DM/M.Ch.)    
in all Medical Educational Institutions on the basis of
merit list of the National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test.
(2)     The designated authority for counseling for the 50% All
India Quota seats of the contributing States shall be
conducted by the Directorate General of Health
Services. Such counseling as per the existing scheme
shall be only for Diploma and MD/MS courses.
(3)     The counseling for all Postgraduate Courses
(Diploma/MD/MS/DM/M.Ch.) in all Medical  
Educational Institutions in a State/Union Territory,
including Medical Educational Institutions established
by the Central Government, State Government 
University, Deemed University, Trust, Society or a
Company/Minority Institutions/Corporations shall be
conducted by the State Government. Such common    
counseling shall be under the over-all superintendence,
direction and control of the State Government.
7. Pursuant to the aforesaid Regulations, the National Board of
Examinations issued an Information Bulletin for NEET (Superspeciality
Courses) 2017. The Information Bulletin issued by the National Board
of Examinations made it clear in Clause (12) that as per the
judgment of the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in
W.P.(Civil) No.350 of 1998, there is no reservation of seats for
Superspeciality DM/MCh courses.
8. Regulation 9A of the MCI Regulations, 2017 came to be
challenged in two separate writ petitions under
Article 32
of the
Constitution before the Supreme Court. In W.P. (Civil) No.261 of
2017, the challenge was made by the Christian Medical College.  In
W.P.(Civil) No.267 of 2017, the challenge was by Dar-Us-Salam
Educational Trust. The challenge appears to be limited to the
application of the amendment to minority educational institutions.
Therefore, the Supreme Court issued certain interim directions on
03.05.2017 in W.P. (Civil) No.261 of 2017 filed by the Christian
Medical College, permitting the States to carry out the counseling,
with the authorized representatives of the minority institutions being
present at the time of counseling. Another set of interim directions
were issued in W.P.(Civil) No.267 of 2017 filed by Dar-Us-Salam
Educational Trust, making it clear that common counseling for
admission shall be conducted by the Director General of Health
Services even for deemed Universities. However, the Supreme Court
made it clear in its order, dated 09.05.2017, passed in W.P.(Civil)
No.267 of 2017, that the interim directions issued therein will not
apply to the States of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Jammu &  
Kashmir.  But, it must be noted that the case of Dar-Us-Salam
Educational Trust was confined to admission to graduate medical
courses and not postgraduate medical courses. In any case, the
challenge was in relation to the right of minorities.
9. The impact or the effect of the developments that have taken
place from the year 2010 up to May, 2017, which we have brought on
record in the preceding paragraphs, can be stated in brief, as follows:
i)      By the amendment to
Regulation 9
of the Postgraduate Medical 
Education Regulations 2010 and 2012, admission to 
postgraduate medical courses has come to be regulated 
through a common entrance examination.
ii)     By the insertion of Regulation 9-A, by way of an amendment to
the Postgraduate Medical Education Regulations in the year
2017, admission to postgraduate medical courses has come to  
be channelized through a common nation-wide counseling  
programme designed by the National Board of Examinations.
10. Though the challenge to the common entrance test
introduced under the Regulations of the years 2010 and 2012 was
sustained in the first instance by the Supreme Court in Christian
Medical College
,
the said decision
was recalled by a subsequent
decision reported in (2016) 4 SCC 342, and the Regulation introducing
a common entrance test has come to stay at least for the present
(since the Supreme Court allowed the review in
Christian Medical
College Vs. Union of India
, but kept the challenge alive).
11. But, insofar as Regulation 9A introduced by way of
amendment to the Regulations in the year 2017 is concerned, the
same has neither been stayed nor set aside by any Court including the
Supreme Court. All that the Supreme Court has done is to provide
certain safeguards only to the minority educational institutions, insofar
as Regulation 9A is concerned. Similarly, the Supreme Court has
granted a limited protection to the States of Telangana, Andhra
Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir, insofar as undergraduate medical   
courses are concerned (and not in so far as Post Graduate and
Superspeciality courses are concerned).
12. The net result of all the above developments that took place
in the past seven years is, that the students from the States of
Telangana and Andhra Pradesh (i) had to appear and in fact appeared
for NEET-2017, and (ii) had to apply to the National Board of
Examinations and in fact applied for participation in the common
counseling held pursuant to Regulation 9A of the MCI Regulations,
2017.
13. After appearing for NEET-2017 and after applying for
common counseling pursuant to the Information Bulletin issued by the
National Board of Examinations, a group of 12 doctors holding
postgraduate degrees in medicine came up with a writ petition in
W.P.No.27162 of 2017, seeking the issue of a Writ of Mandamus not to 
throw open the seats available in superspecialities in the colleges
affiliated to KNR University of Health Sciences and Dr.NTR University
of Health Sciences in the States of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh, to
students from outside these two States. This was on the ground that
the same would be in violation of the Presidential Order issued under
Article 371D
of the Constitution. Along with the writ petition, the
petitioners filed M.P.No.33741 of 2017 seeking an interim stay of
counseling for the seats in the superspeciality courses coming under
the control of the aforesaid two Universities located in the States of
Telangana and Andhra Pradesh.
14. On 11.08.2017, we ordered notice to the respondents and
posted the matter to 16.08.2017. No ex parte interim order was passed
on the same day. But, on the next date of hearing, namely, 17.08.2017,
we passed an interim order to the following effect:
The petitioners, who are Post Graduates in Medicine and
who have applied for admission to Super Speciality Courses
in various colleges in the States of Andhra Pradesh and
Telangana, have come up with the above writ petition
challenging the communication sent by the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare, Government of India, dated 04-5-2017,
informing the National Board of Examination that there will
be a common counselling for all seats of NEET-Super 
Specialities at the National Level to be conducted by
Directorate General of Health Services.
Pending disposal of the writ petition, the petitioners are
seeking a stay of the counselling for the seats in Super
Specialities Courses coming under the control of the
respondents 6 and 8.
Heard Mr. S.Satyam Reddy, learned Senior Counsel  
appearing for the petitioners, Mr. B.Narayana Reddy, learned
Assistant Solicitor General of India appearing for the
respondents 1 to 3, Mr. Vivek Chandra Sekhar, learned
Standing Counsel for MCI, the respective Government
Pleaders of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh, who are  
respondents 5 and 7, Mr. A. Prabhakar Rao, learned counsel 
for the 6th respondent-University and Mr. Taddi Nageswara
Rao, learned Standing Counsel for the 8th respondent-
University.
The main, if not the only grievance, of the petitioners is
that admission to professional courses in the States of
Telangana and Andhra Pradesh are governed by the  
Presidential Order issued in exercise of the power conferred
by
Article 371-D
of the Constitution and that since these
Presidential Orders are to have effect notwithstanding
anything contained in any other part of the Constitution, the
respondents are not entitled to conduct a common 
counselling at the National Level, for the seats coming within
the control of the respondents 6 and 8/Universities.
The learned Standing Counsel for the 6th
respondent/University produced before us, the copies of 2
communications, the first dated 21-7-2017 addressed to the
National Board of Examination and the second dated 02-8-
2017 addressed to the Directorate General of Health
Services. In these letters, the 6th respondent pleaded that
they may be allowed to conduct counselling  and process the
admissions for DM/MCh Courses in the colleges affiliated to
their University, in the light of the Presidential Order issued
under Article 371-D. But by a reply dated 27-7-2017, the
National Board of Examinations rejected the request of the
6th respondent.
The 8th respondent has also sent a similar letter to the
National Board of Examinations on 07-8-2017, but there was
no response.
Therefore, the claim made by the petitioners appears to
be supported by both the Universities, namely, the
respondents 6 and 8.  In other words, the respondents 6 and
8 are on the same page as the petitioners.
As we have pointed out earlier, the main issue raised in
these writ petitions is as to whether counselling for admission
to Super Specialities in Medicine can be conducted at the
National Level, even for seats available in the Medical
Colleges affiliated to the respondents 6 and 8, especially
when the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana enjoy a  
special status by virtue of
Article 371-D
of the Constitution.  It
is relevant to note that
Article 371-D
affords immunity to
reservation on the basis of domicile, notwithstanding anything
contained in any other part of the Constitution.  In fact, the
scope and effect of the Presidential Orders issued under
Article 371-D
of the Constitution already came up for
consideration before the Supreme Court while dealing with
the question of National Entrance cum Eligibility Test.
A peep into the history of the introduction of the National
Eligibility cum Entrance Test would show that the Medical
Council of India and the Dental Council of India issued 4
notifications, two on 21-12-2010 and the remaining two on
31-5-2012, amending all existing regulations both for
admission to Graduate Medical Courses and Post Graduate   
Medical Courses. These notifications came to be challenged
before the Supreme Court in a batch of writ petitions. They
were also challenged in various High Courts and the
Supreme Court transferred to itself all the cases filed before
different High Courts. By a common judgment rendered in
Christian Medical College v. Union of India
(2014) 2 SCC
305, a 3-member bench of the Supreme Court, by a  
majority, set aside the notifications. In general, the issues
raised before the Supreme Court revolved around (i) the
Fundamental Right under
Article 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution
and (ii) the right guaranteed to religious and linguistic
minorities under
Article 30
of the Constitution.
Incidentally, the combined State of Andhra Pradesh
raised an objection in those cases, to the notifications of the
Medical Council of India and the Dental Council of India
introducing NEET, on the ground that insofar as the State of
Andhra Pradesh (combined State) was concerned, there are  
special provisions in the form of Presidential Orders under
Article 371-D
of the Constitution.  The said objection was
dealt with by the Supreme Court in paragraph-159 of its
judgment dated 18-7-2013 in Christian Medical College as
follows:
159. This brings us to the last issue, which has been
raised before us regarding the impact of the Presidential
Orders made under
Article 371-D
of the Constitution of India.
As pointed out by Mr. L.Nageshwar Rao, learned Senior 
Advocate, special enactments have been made in the States 
of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu regarding admission of 
students in the different medical colleges and institutions
being run in the said States. The said legislation being under
Entry 25 of List III of the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution, the question which arises is whether the
amended MCI Regulations would have primacy over the said  
State enactments. The question is answered by
Article 371-D
of the Constitution  which empowers the President to make
special provisions with respect to the State of Andhra
Pradesh, including making orders with regard to admission in
educational institutions. Clause 10 of
Article 371-D
provides
as follows:
"The provisions of this article and of any order made by the
President thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding
anything in any other provision of this Constitution or in any
other law for the time being in force."
Accordingly, the enactments made in the States of Andhra 
Pradesh and Tamil Nadu will remain unaffected by the
impugned Regulations. We have already held that the
Regulations and the amendments thereto have been framed  
by the MCI and the DCI with the previous permission of the
Central Government under Entry 66, List I, but that the
Regulations cannot prevail over the constitutional guarantees
under
Articles 19(1)(g)
, 25
, 26
, 29(1)
and
30
of the
Constitution.
Thereafter, review petitions were filed on the file of the
Supreme Court by the Medical Council of India and others in
Review Petition (C) Nos.2159-2268/2013. These review
petitions were referred to a Constitution Bench, which by an
order dated 11-4-2016 allowed the review petitions and
directed the original challenge to the notifications issued by
the Medical Council of India and the Dental Council of India
to be listed for fresh hearing.
But even before the review petition was allowed, another
case came up before the Supreme Court by way of a writ 
petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution challenging the
restrictions imposed by the States of Andhra Pradesh,
Telangana and Tamil Nadu with regard to admission to Super 
Specialities Courses. By a judgment reported in
Sandeep v.
Union of India
(2016) 2 SCC 328, the Supreme Court
rejected the challenge insofar as the same related to the
States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.  This was on the 
basis of the Presidential Order issued under
Article 371-D
of
the Constitution.
After referring to
Article 371-D
and the Presidential Order
issued pursuant thereto, the Supreme Court indicated in
Sandeep that though there should not be any reservation of
any kind in respect of Post Graduate or Super Speciality
Courses, nothing can be done so long as
Article 371-D
held
the field. In paragraph-36 of its judgment in Sandeep, the
Supreme Court held as follows:
36. We have referred to the aforesaid judgments in
extenso as the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners
have laid immense emphasis that there cannot be 
reservation of any kind in respect of postgraduate or
superspeciality courses regard being had to the law
laid
down by
many a judgment of this Court.  It is urged that the
State of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana cannot apply the 
domicile test only to admit its own students and that too also
in respect of 15% quota meant for non-local candidates.  We
have already analysed the factual score and the legal
position.  The undivided State of Andhra Pradesh enjoys a
special privilege granted to it under
Article 371-D
of the
Constitution and the Presidential Order.  The judgments of
the larger bench do not refer to the said Article nor do they
refer to the Presidential Order, for the said issue did not arise
in the said cases.  A scheme has been
laid down in
Pradeep 
Jain and the concept of percentage had undergone certain
changes.  In Reita Nirankari, the same three-Judge Bench
clarified the position which we have already reproduced
hereinbefore.  However, in C. Surekha, the Court had
expressed its view about the amendment of the Presidential
Order regard being had to the passage of time and the
advancement in the State of Andhra Pradesh.  It has been
vehemently urged by Mr. Marlapalle that despite 27 years
having been elapsed, the situation remains the same.  We
take note of the said submission and we are also inclined to
echo the observation that was made in Fazal Ghafoor.
Though the Supreme Court, in Sandeep, echoed the  
same sentiments as expressed in the previous cases, the 
Supreme Court nevertheless dismissed the writ petition
insofar as it pertained to the States of Andhra Pradesh and
Telangana.  In other words, the challenge to the reservation
created in terms of
Article 371-D
was rejected by the
Supreme Court in Sandeep.
As a matter of fact, we have our own reservations on this
issue.
Article 371-D
was inserted, with the avowed object of
removing regional imbalances within the combined State. It
was not introduced for the purpose of removing the
imbalances between the State of Andhra Pradesh vis--vis
other States of the country. Therefore, the process of
rationalization through nationalization, of admission to super
specialities, should not normally be scuttled by any regional
sentiments.
But we are nevertheless bound by the law as it exists
today. The Supreme court itself felt bound, in its decision in
Sandeep by
Article 371-D
and the Presidential Order. In
such circumstances, we have no alternative except to follow
the law as it stands today.
Hence, there will be an interim order directing the
respondents to put on hold the common counselling 
proposed to be held admission to Super Specialties Courses
in Medicine, only insofar as the seats in the colleges affiliated
to the respondents 6 and 8 are concerned.
The respondents 1 to 3 are directed to file a counter on or
before 23-8-2017, so that the issue could be decided before
the deadline fixed by the Supreme Court for admission to
these courses expires.
15. In other words, by the aforesaid interim order passed by us,
we virtually shut the doors (of course, hesitatingly) to students from
the other States in India, to seek admission to superspeciality courses
in the colleges located in the States of Telangana and Andhra
Pradesh.
16. As if proving the law of karma in the realm of religion and
the Newtons third law of motion in the realm of science, the National
Board of Examinations shot back with a notice, dated 18.08.2017, not
allowing the candidates of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana to
participate in the common counseling held nationwide and also
cancelling the allotments made in the first round of counseling to
candidates hailing from Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. The notice
issued by the National Board of Examinations on 18.08.2017 in
response to (or in retaliation to) the interim order passed by this Court,
reads as follows:
In view of the judgment of the Honble High Court
Hyderabad in W.P.No.27162 of 2017, it has been decided 
by the competent authority that candidates of Andhra
Pradesh and Telangana will not be allowed to participate in
the online counseling NEET SS-2017 conducted by MCC.    
Hence the earlier result of Round-1 online NEET Super
Specialty counseling-2017 is treated to be null and void with
immediate effect.
Revised result for round 1 NEET SS-2017 will be
updated soon on the website. All the candidates are
advised to be kept in touch with the website (mcc.nic.in) for
further necessary updation.
This issues with the prior approval of the competent
authority.
17. Shocked at the cancellation of admissions granted to them
in various superspecialities in various colleges located in the other
parts of the country, the natives of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana,
who have been paid back in their own coin, have come up with five
writ petitions in W.P.Nos.27988, 28025, 28026, 28042 and 28055 of
2017, challenging the cancellation of admission granted to them.
18. The theme of the song in the first writ petition,
W.P.No.27162 of 2017, is that all seats in postgraduate medical
courses in the States of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh are 
intended only for those who are domiciles of these two States.
The theme of the song in the other five writ petitions is that the
seats in the colleges in the other States of the Country should
also be thrown open to us. Thus, the petitioners in the first writ
petition and the petitioners in the other five writ petitions represent
competing interests (if not conflicting and sectarian interests). While
the cry of the petitioners in the first writ petition is all that is here is
ours, the cry of the petitioners in the other five writ petitions is all
that is there outside, shall also be made available to be shared by
us.
19. Since the orders of cancellation of allotment challenged in
the batch of five writ petitions, were passed purportedly as a
consequence of the interim order granted by us in the first writ petition
W.P.No.27162 of 2017, it became necessary for us to take up all
these petitions together for consideration. Hence the batch of 5 writ
petitions were tagged along with the first writ petition and heard
together.
20. We have heard Mr.Sathyam Reddy, learned Senior Counsel   
appearing for the petitioners in W.P.No.27162 of 2017 and M/S.
C.V.Mohan Reddy, S.Ramachandra Rao, L.Ravichander,     
D.V.V.Sitaram Murthy and Lakshma Reddy appearing for the   
petitioners in the other 5 writ petitions. Though we had ordered notice
to the Union of India and the National Board of Examinations, way
back on 11-8-2017 with specific directions to them to file a counter by
23-8-2017, Mr.B.Narayana Reddy, learned Assistant Solicitor General
pleaded helplessness and sought further time. But as counseling for
Suprespecialities was already in progress with the deadline being 31-
8-2017, we could not allow the luxury of time either to the respondents
(and even to us).
21. We think that we have to take up W.P.No.27162 of 2017
first, to see  (a) whether the interim order passed by us on 17-8-2017
could have justifiably led to the orders of cancellation dated 18-8-2017
and (b) if so, whether the interim order should be continued for the
sake of those 12 writ petitioners in the first writ petition, at the cost of
scores of candidates who have secured admission in various colleges
across the country.
22. Without compromising on their commitment to the cause of 
their clients, but at the same time not to be seen as offending local
sentiments, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioners in
the entire batch, attempted to save the milk as well as be friendly to
the cat by taking a position on the first issue that the impugned orders
of cancellation could not have been passed justifiably as a fallout of
the interim order passed by us. In other words, the first argument of
all the Senior Counsel for the petitioners was that the interim order
passed in W.P.NO.27162 of 2017 merely directed the implementation  
of a Constitutional mandate flowing out of the Presidential Order
issued under
Article 371-D
of the Constitution and that it would not
follow as a corollary that students from Andhra Pradesh and
Telangana cannot seek admission elsewhere.  As a matter of fact, all
the learned Senior Counsel first assailed the impugned order on the
ground of violation of the principles of natural justice, but the said
argument needs to be rejected outright, since an order, if it had been
passed in implementation of an order passed by a Court, cannot be
assailed as violative of the principles of natural justice by those
affected by the said order, as their only remedy would be to seek the
vacation of the order of the Court. Therefore, the contention regarding
violation of natural justice is rejected.
23. The contention that the interim order passed by us on 17-8-
2017 was not intended to deprive the students of these two States to
seek admission in the Universities and colleges in the other parts of
the country, may be technically correct.  It is true that we were not
conscious of the consequences that would fall out of our interim order.
But it does not mean that the orders of cancellation of admission to the
petitioners in the batch of five writ petitions, were passed upon a
misrepresentation of our interim order dated 17-8-2017. In the course
of the arguments advanced before us, it became clear that by
virtue of the Presidential Order and by virtue of judicial
pronouncements of this Court, no student from any other part of
the country can secure admission to any of the State-wide
educational institutions or State-wide Universities in the States of
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana even today.  By a combination of 
the Presidential Order and judicial pronouncements of this Court,
100% of the seats in all the State-wide educational institutions
and State-wide Universities in these 2 States, are wholly reserved
for the natives of the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.
Therefore, our interim order dated 17-8-2017 directing the Director
General of Health Services and the National Board of Examination to
implement the Presidential Order, was bound to boomerang on the 
principle of torque, upon the very natives of these two States and this
is what has happened through the orders of cancellation of admission.
24. The contention of the learned Senior Counsel appearing for
the petitioners that our interim order dated 17-8-2017 has been
misinterpreted and misunderstood by the respondents, is wholly
incorrect. To be honest and truthful to our conscience, we should
admit that we have understood the consequences of our own 
interim order, only after the impugned orders of cancellation of
admission were passed by the National Board of Examinations.
25. Once it is clear that the orders of cancellation of admission
assailed in the batch of five writ petitions cannot be challenged on the
ground of (i) violation of natural justice and (ii) misinterpretation of our
interim order, then it follows as a corollary that the students on either
side can have only one of the two benefits. Either the students should
understand the fallout of the strict interpretation of
Article 371-D
,
which would cause more harm than benefit or continue to fight on
parochial lines. In other words, if the interim order passed by us on
17-8-2017 is lawfully obliged to be continued, the orders of
cancellation of admission to the petitioners in the other five writ
petitions should be upheld. Otherwise, the interim order passed in
W.P.No.27162 of 2017 should be vacated so as to give the students of
both the States to have greater opportunities Pan India.
26. A feeble attempt was made by a couple of learned Senior
Counsel appearing for the petitioners in the batch of 5 writ petitions to
get out of the impasse, by contending that their clients were not the
beneficiaries of the Presidential Order and that therefore, they cannot
be penalized. It is their contention that the petitioners who have
suffered orders of cancellation of admission, studied M.B.B.S in
various other States and got admission to P.G. courses in Medicine,
in the States of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh, only as against the
seats left unreserved (15%) and available for the non-locals.
27. But the above contention lies in the realm of half truth like
Aswathama hatah kunjarah. As we have pointed out elsewhere, there 
is reservation of 85% of the seats in all institutions for the locals,
under the Presidential Order. The remaining 15%, theoretically
available for non-locals, has already been snatched away under (i)
G.O.P.No. 646, dated 10-7-1979 (ii) a statutory rule issued under the
A.P. Capitation Fee Act, 1983 and (iii) judicial pronouncements of this
court. Therefore, the petitioners in the batch of 5 writ petitions, are
students who got admission as against the unreserved 15% seats, 
only because they were natives of these 2 States and only because
they fulfilled the criteria laid down under (i) G.O.P.No. 646, dated 10-7-
1979 (ii) a statutory rule issued under the A.P. Capitation Fee Act,
1983, even to be eligible for being treated as non locals. In other
words, the petitioners in the group of 5 writ petitions are secondary
beneficiaries of the Presidential Order. If they have had their moorings
in other States, they could not have secured admission to any course,
leave alone P.G. Medical courses in these 2 States. This fact is also
confirmed by the Standing counsel for both the universities. Therefore,
the petitioners cannot wriggle out of the impact of the Presidential
Order when it hurts them, after having been a beneficiary of the same.
28. In view of the above fundamental premise, it is necessary to
take up first, the question as to whether we should continue our
interim order dated 17-8-2017 or not. We have already extracted our
interim order. The purport of our interim order is not to make the seats
available in the two Universities in the States of Telangana and
Andhra Pradesh to the students belonging to the other States.  This
order was necessitated on the bedrock of
Article 371-D
and the
Presidential Order. Therefore, it is necessary at the outset to test
whether the right claimed by the petitioners in W.P.No.27162 of 2017
actually flows out of the Presidential Order and
Article 371-D
of the
Constitution, especially in the changed scenario after the introduction
of NEET and especially after the bifurcation of the State.
History behind the Presidential Order:
29. Prior to independence, the State of Hyderabad ruled by the
Nizam comprised of three linguistic areas, viz., Telangana, Maratwada
and Karnatak. In the year 1919, the Nizam issued a Firman
promulgating what came to be known as Mulki Rules. These Rules  
were contained in Appendix-N to the Hyderabad Civil Service
Regulations. The expressions Mulki and Mulki Rules were used in
Rule 39 of the State Regulations which provided that no person shall
be appointed to any superior or inferior service without the specific
sanction of His Exalted Highness if he is not a Mulki. A Mulki was
defined as a person (1) who was a subject of Hyderabad State by
birth; or (2) who was a permanent resident of the Hyderabad State for
atleast 15 years and who has abandoned the idea of returning to the
place of his previous residence, as reflected in a certificate issued in
the prescribed form attested by a Magistrate; or (3) whose father
having completed 15 years of service, was in the Government service
at the time of the childs birth; or (4) who was the wife of a Mulki.
30. On 26.01.1950, the date on which the Constitution of India
came into effect, the State of Hyderabad was declared as a Part-B
State. Therefore the Government of Hyderabad issued a circular letter
dated 14.06.1950 to the following effect:
Government is now advised that the Mulki Rules
are, save to the extent of their consistency with the
Constitution only, saved by clause (b) of
Article 35.
It is therefore necessary to put out of operation the
requirement
laid down in
the Mulki Rules to the
extent that they prescribe qualifications regarding
birth and descent
As a consequence of the above circular, the Mulki Rules which
prescribed birth and descent became inoperative from 14.06.1950. But
the portion of the Mulki Rules not inconsistant with the Constitution
continued to have the force of law by virtue of
Article 35 (b)
of the
constitution.
31. When the States Re-Organization Act 1956 came into force
on 01.11.1956 and the State of Andhra Pradesh came into existence 
with Telangana Region being included in the said State and the other
two regions, viz., Maratwada and Karnatak being annexed 
respectively to Maharashtra and Karnataka, the Mulki Rules continued
to operate by virtue of Section 119 of the States Re-Organization Act,
1956. But by a historical paradox, the Rules continued to operate not
only in the State of Andhra Pradesh but also in parts of Maharashtra
and Karnataka.
32. Within a few months of the State Re-Organization taking
place on 01.11.1956, the Parliament enacted the Public Employment 
(Requirement as to Residence) Act, 1957 in pursuance of
Article 16
(3)
read with
Article 371 (1)
of the Constitution, making a special
provision for requirement as to residence in regard to certain classes
of Public Employment in certain areas and to repeal the existing laws
prescribing any such requirement. Under
Section 2
of the said Act all
laws, which continued to be in force in any State or Union territory by
virtue of clause (b) of
Article 35
of the Constitution, prescribing any
requirement as to residence, in regard to any class of public
employment stood repealed. In the place of such laws,
Section 3
of
the 1957 Act empowered the Central Government to make Rules   
prescribing a requirement as to residence, within the Telangana Area
for appointment to any subordinate service or post under the State
Government of Andhra Pradesh.
Section 3
empowered the Central  
Government to make similar rules prescribing a requirement as to
residence for appointment to any subordinate service under the control
of the Administrator of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur or Tripura and also
to any service or post under a local or other authority within
Telangana.
Section 5
of the 1957 Act contemplated the rules framed
by the Central Government under
Section 3
to be in force only for a
period of 15 years so that they cease to have any effect after 15
years.
33. Therefore on and from the date of commencement of
Central Act No.44 of 1957, viz., 21.03.1959 (the Act was published in
the Government Gazette under GSR No.323, dated 21.03.1959),  the  
Mulki Rules stood repealed.
34. In exercise of the powers conferred by
Section 3
of Act 44
of 1957, the Central Government issued a set of Rules known as
Andhra Pradesh Public Employment (Requirement as to Residence)    
Rules 1959, prescribing that for appointments to certain posts, within
the Telangana area of the State of Andhra Pradesh, the candidates
should satisfy the requirement prescribed therein as to residence.
35. But it appears that appointments were made to posts in
Telangana area, of persons, who were not domiciles of the area.
Therefore, issues were raised on and off eventually leading to a
resolution being passed by the leaders of all political parties on
19.01.1969 to relieve from service of non-domicile persons of
Telangana region, so that those posts could be filled up by persons
possessing domicile qualifications. Pursuant to
the said decision
, the
Government issued relieving orders to several persons during
January  February, 1969. Some of those persons challenged
the said 
decision
of the Government by way of a writ petition directly before the
Supreme Court under
Article 32
of the constitution.
The Constitution
Bench of the Supreme Court by a decision rendered on 28.03.1969 in
A.V.S. Narasimha Rao v. State of Andhra Pradesh
declared
Section 
3
of the Public Employment (Requirement as to Residence) Act, 1957 
as well as Rule 3 of the Rules framed thereunder as ultra vires the
Constitution. Interestingly, it was brought to the notice of the
Constitution Bench that there were a set of Rules known as Mulki
Rules which provided similar safeguards and that the same continued
to be in force, until repealed by the 1957 Act. But the Constitution
Bench, in A.V.S. Narasimha Rao, refused to go into the said question
as seen from the penultimate paragraph of the decision.
36. Thereafter, a batch of writ petitions came to be filed on the
file of the Andhra Pradesh High Court. Two questions of importance
were raised in those writ petitions and they were:
(1) Whether the decision of the Constitution Bench of the Supreme
Court in A.V.S. Narasimha Rao declaring
Section 3
of the 1957 Act to
be unconstitutional, would automatically result in
Section 2
of the Act
containing a provision for repeal also die a natural death; and
(2) whether the Mulki Rules that were saved by
Article 35(b)
of the
Constitution but repealed by
Section 2
of the 1957 Act would survive
or not.
37.
In
P. Lakshmana Rao v. State of Andhra Pradesh
a Full
Bench of the High court of Andhra Pradesh held on the first question
that once
Section 3
of the 1957 Act had been declared
unconstitutional,
Section 2
containing the repealing provision cannot
survive on a stand alone basis. As a consequence, the Full Bench
held on the first question that the entire Act was invalid. On the
second question, the Full Bench held that the Mulki Rules continued
as valid law and that these Rules, insofar as they fix the residential
qualification of 15 years for the purposes of appointment to a post
under the Government shall continue to be a valid law in force.
However, the Full Bench did not express any opinion in regard to the
other part of the Mulki Rules.
38. But the correctness of the view taken by the Full Bench of
the Andhra Pradesh High Court in
P. Lakshmana Rao v. State of 
Andhra Pradesh
was doubted by a Division Bench, on the ground that 
on a question of far reaching importance, due weight was not given to
several aspects of the question. Therefore, the Division Bench
directed a writ appeal arising out of the redeployment of a few
Extension Officers to the post of Senior Inspectors carrying lesser
scale of pay, to be referred to a larger bench for re-examination of the
question whether the Mulki Rules can be deemed to be effective, in
the light of the decision of the Supreme Court in A.V.S. Narasimha
Rao.
After overruling the objection regarding the maintainability of a
reference by a Two Member Bench finding fault with the Full Bench, a
Five Judge Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court held in
V.
Venkata Reddy v. Director of Industries and Commerce
that the
Mulki Rules are not valid and operative after the formation of the State
of Andhra Pradesh. By a majority, the Five Member Bench held that
the Mulki Rules did not revive and cannot be deemed to be valid in
view of the decision of the Supreme Court in A.V.S. Narasimha Rao.
As a consequence, the Five Member Bench of the Andhra Pradesh   
High Court overruled the decision of the Three Member Bench in P.
Lakshmana Rao.
39. The said decision of the Five Member Bench of the Andhra
Pradesh High court in
V. Venkata Reddy v. Director of Industries
and Commerce
reached the Supreme Court on a certificate granted  
by the High Court.
In a decision reported as
Director of Industries
and Commerce v. V. Venkata Reddy
, the Constitution Bench of the 
Supreme Court reversed the decision of the Five Member Bench of the
Andhra Pradesh High court. In brief, the Constitution Bench held in V.
Venkata Reddy as follows:
1) That the words laws in force in the territory of India appearing in
Article 35 (b)
and
Article 372
of the constitution would include the laws
in force not only in a place that was part of the territory of India before
the commencement of the Constitution but also in a place which got
included within the territory of India after the commencement of the
Constitution;
2) That the Mulki Rules continued in force by virtue of
Article 35 (b)
of
the Constitution;
3) That the Mulki Rules also continued to be in force even after the
constitution of the State of Andhra Pradesh under the States Re-
Organisation Act, 1956; and
4) That Section 2 of the Public Employment Act, 1957 was also bad
insofar as it dealt with Telangana area.
40. During the pendency of the aforesaid case, two agitations,
one in 1969 and another in 1972, known respectively as the Telangana
agitation and Jai Andhra agitation rocked the State. Since the agitation
took a violent turn, Presidents Rule was imposed in the State on 10-1-
1973. Normalcy was restored when a Six Point Formula was arrived at 
by and between the leaders of the two regions. The Six Point Formula
provided for:(1) accelerated development of the backward areas of the
State; (2) Institution of uniform arrangements throughout the State
enabling adequate preference to local candidates in the matter of
admission to Educational Institutions; (3) Preferential treatment to a
specified extent in the matter of direct recruitment to Non-Gazetted
(other than some posts) posts and corresponding posts under the
local bodies and the posts of Tahsildars, Junior Engineers and Civil
Assistant Surgeons; (4) Setting up of a high-power Administrative
Tribunal for dealing with the grievances of those in public
employment; (5)  An amendment of the Constitution in a manner 
conferring enabling powers on the President, so that the
implementation of the formula did not lead to further litigation and
consequent uncertainty; and (6) The discontinuance of the Mulki
Rules and Regional Committee.
41. With a view to implement the Six Point Formula, the
Constitution (32nd
Amendment) Act, 1973
was enacted. By this  
amendment, clause (1) of
Article 371 (pursuant to which the 1957 Act
was passed by Parliament)
was omitted and two new Articles viz.,
Article 371
D and 371 E were inserted. Simultaneously, the State of
Andhra Pradesh also passed the Mulki Rules (Repeal) Act, 1973, as it
became redundant.
42. Clause (1) of
Article 371-D
empowered the President to
provide, by order, for equitable opportunities and facilities for the
people belonging to different parts of the State, in the matter of public
employment and in the matter of education. The order issued by the
President under
Article 371-D(1)
may specify in part or parts of the
State which shall be regarded as the local area for the purposes of
admission to any university within the State or to any other
educational institution which is subject to the control of the State
Government. The order made by the President would also specify the
extent to which and the manner in which and the conditions subject to
which, preference or reservation shall be given in the matter of
admission to any such university or other educational institution.
Clause (10) of
Article 371-D
declared that the provisions of
Article
371-D
and any order made by the President shall have effect
notwithstanding anything in any other provision of the Constitution or
in any other law for the time being in force.
43. In exercise of the powers conferred by clauses (1) and (2)
of
Article 371
, the President of India issued an order known as the
A.P. Educational Institutions (Regulation of Admissions) Order, 1974.
44. The Scheme of the Presidential Order, 1974 in a nutshell,
can be summarized as follows:
(1) The Presidential Order divided the Educational Institutions and the
Universities existing in the State of Andhra Pradesh, into three
categories, viz., (i) institutions listed in the schedule to the
Presidential Order and defined in Para 2(e) of the Presidential Order
as Statewide Educational Institutions; (ii) Andhra Pradesh
Agricultural University, Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University
and Nizams Institute of Medical Sciences, grouped together as
Statewide Universities within the meaning of Para-2(f) of the
Presidential Order; and (iii) five other universities, viz., Andhra
University, Nagarjuna University, Osmania University, Kakatiya
University and Sri Venkateswara University.
(2) Under para-5 of the Presidential Order, 85% of the available seats
in every course of study provided by the Andhra University, Nagarjuna
University, Osmania University, Kakatiya University and Sri
Venkateswara University, which come under the third category as
indicated in the preceding paragraph, shall be reserved in favour of
the local candidates in relation to the local area in respect of such
University.
(3) Similarly, para-6 reserved 85% of the available seats in every
course of study provided by the State-wide Universities and State-
wide Educational Institutions, referable to the Schedule to the
Presidential Order and para-2(f) of the Presidential Order (which come
under categories-1 and 2 indicated in the preceding paragraph) to
local candidates in relation to local areas in the ratio of 42: 36: 22.
(4) The question as to who could be considered as a local candidate
with reference to a particular local area is to be determined in terms
of two different parameters provided in paragraph-4 of the Presidential
Order. Paragraph-4 of the Presidential Order provided two
independent criteria. The first related either to the study in an
educational institution in the very same local area for a period of not
less four consecutive years ending with the academic year in which
the candidate appeared for the relevant qualifying examination or to
his residence in the local area for four consecutive years ending with
the academic year in which he appeared for the relevant qualifying
examination. The second criteria for acknowledging a candidate to be
a local candidate is to find out if (i) he has studied in an educational
institution in the State for a period of not less than seven consecutive
years or (ii) he has resided in the State during the whole period of
seven years ending with the academic year in which he appeared for
the relevant qualifying examination.
(5) Paragraph-3 of the Presidential Order identified 7 districts, namely
Srikakulam, Visakhapatnam, West Godavari, East Godavari, Krishna,  
Guntur and Prakasam as the local area in relation to Andhra
University and Nagarjuna University. The districts of Adilabad,
Hyderabad, Karimnagar, Khammam, Mahaboobnagar, Medak,       
Nalgonda, Nizamabad and Warangal were regarded as local area in  
relation to Osmania University and Kakatiya University.  Similarly, the
districts of Anantapur, Kadapa, Kurnool, Chittoor and Nellore were
identified as local areas in relation to Sri Venkateswara University.
45. Though paragraphs-5 and 6 of the Presidential Order
created a reservation of 85% of the available seats in (i) the
educational institutions listed in the Schedule, (ii) the five Universities
named in para-5(i) namely Andhra University, Nagarjuna University,
Osmania University, Kakatiya University and Sri Venkateswara
University and (iii) those three Universities named in para-2(1)(f)
namely Andhra Pradesh Agricultural University, Jawaharlal Nehru
Technological University and Nizams Institute of Medical Sciences,
the Presidential Order was construed by successive Governments as 
well as this Court, for the past nearly four decades to mean that even
the remaining 15% of the seats were intended to be filled up only from
the students of one or other local area within the State itself.  Such a
scheme was first thought of by a Government Order in
G.O.(P).No.646, 10-7-1979, under paragraph-11 of which, the
Government listed out the candidates who will be treated as non-
locals, to be eligible for being considered for the remaining 15%
unreserved seats.
46. In other words, the Presidential Order was construed to
create an iron wall in respect of 85% of the seats in the aforesaid
institutions and Universities making them available exclusively for the
locals. The hope or expectation that at least the remaining 15% which
were not reserved by the Presidential Order, was available to students
from all over the country, was turned into a myth by G.O.(P). No.646,
dated 10-7-1979.
47. Fortifying what was contained in G.O.(P).No.646, dated 10-
7-1979, the Government of Andhra Pradesh also issued a set of rules
known as Andhra Pradesh Regulation of Admission of Students into 
Medical Colleges/Dental Colleges Rules, 1983.  These Rules were 
issued in exercise of the power conferred by
Section 15(1)
of the
Andhra Pradesh Educational Institutions (Regulation of Admission and
Prohibition of Capitation Fee) Act, 1983.  Rule 7(9) of those Rules laid
down certain criteria for the determination of who could be construed
as a non-local, so as to be eligible for admission even as against 15%
of unreserved seats.
48. Thus the Presidential Order blocked 85% of the seats in all
educational institutions in the State only to locals. The remaining 15%
which were purportedly left unreserved by the Presidential Order, were
blocked effectively by G.O.(P).No.646, dated 10-7-1979 and Rule 7(9)
of the Andhra Pradesh Regulation of Admission of Students into
Medical/Dental Colleges Rules, 1983. In other words, 100% of the
seats in all educational institutions in the State of Andhra Pradesh got
completely blocked only for the localites.
49. Unfortunately, a Bench of this Court affixed its seal of
approval to such balkanisation, in a decision in
State of Andhra
Pradesh v. Kannan Narayanan
(AIR 1985 AP 343). In that case, a 
student who passed Intermediate examination from a school in Jammu  
and Kashmir sought admission to MBBS Course in one of the colleges  
affiliated to one of the State-wide Universities in the State of Andhra
Pradesh, under the 15% of seats left as unreserved.  But a Division
Bench of this Court rejected his claim on the ground that a person who
did not satisfy the criteria
laid down in
G.O.(P). No.646 and the 1983
Rules could not even be considered as a non-local, so as to be eligible
to seek admission as against the 15% unreserved seats.
50. As on date, the law
laid down by
the aforesaid decision of
the Division Bench of this Court in
State of Andhra Pradesh v.
Kannan Narayanan
appears to hold the field.
In fact Mr. A.Prabhakar
Rao, learned counsel apeparing for Dr. Kaloji Narayana Rao
University of Health Sciences and Mr. Taddi Nageswara Rao, learned
counsel appearing for Dr. NTR University of Health Sciences,
confirmed with a lot of conviction that as a consequence of (i) the
Presidential Order, (ii) G.O.(P).No.646, (iii) Rule 7(9) of the 1983
Rules and (iv) the decision of the Division Bench in
State of Andhra
Pradesh v. Kannan Narayanan
, no student from any other part of this
country can be admitted to any course of study in any of the State-
wide Institutions or State-wide Universities within the States of
Telangana and Andhra Pradesh and that the Universities have been
ensuring the same for the past 40 years.
51. As a matter of fact, Private Unaided Medical Colleges found
it hard to accept this 100% reservation, since such reservation
created craters in their coffers. Since it is human nature that any
social philosophy that offends economic interests will not be accepted,
the Private Unaided Professional Colleges sought to admit students
belonging to other States at least under the Management quota, which
is termed as Category-B seats in these States. But that attempt was
also scuttled by a Division Bench of this Court in
J.Sameeran v.
Andhra Pradesh State Council
for Higher Education . It was held in
the said decision
that all private professional colleges in the State
including minority educational institutions are subject to the control of
the State Government within the meaning of para-9 of the Presidential
Order and that therefore the reservation created by the Presidential
Order would apply even to the seats under the Management quota.
52. The net result of (i) the Presidential Order, (ii) the executive
fiat, (iii) the statutory rules and (iv) judicial pronouncements is that the
educational institutions and Universities in the States of Andhra
Pradesh and Telangana need not admit a student hailing from the
other parts of the country and the prohibition is total.
53. So long as this prohibition was convenient and when the
students of the State were pitted only against the students from the
other Students, the seriousness of the problem was not realised.  But
today, the orders of cancellation of admission dated 18-8-2017 issued
by the National Board of Examinations have given a wake up call, in
which the students from the same States are pitted against each
other, one group being a direct beneficiary of the Presidential Order
and the other becoming a victim of the very same Presidential Order.
54. Having thus seen the history of evolution of
Article 371D
and the several twists and turns given to the same by Government
Orders, statutory rules and judicial precedents, let us now see the
decisions of the Apex Court, on which the claim under
Article 371D
is
sought to be sustained.
March of law with regard to admission to Super Specialty Courses
vis-a-vis
Article 371D:
55.
In
Dr. Jagadish Saran v. Union of India
, a student, who
was denied admission to a Post-Graduate course in the Delhi
University, on the basis of reservation of 70% of the seats to the
graduates of the same University. While dealing with the challenge
under
Article 32
of the Constitution, the Supreme Court pointed out in
Para-16 of the report that the primary imperative of
Articles 14
and
15
is equal opportunity for all across the nation to attain excellence and
that this has borne relevance to our times when the country is
gradually broken up into fragments by narrow domestic walls in
politics, economics and education. In paragraph 44 of the report,
the Supreme Court held as follows:
Secondly, and more importantly, it is difficult to denounce or
renounce the merit criterion when the selection is for post-graduate or
post-doctoral courses in specialized subjects.  There is no substitute for
sheet flair, for creative talent, for fine-tuned performance at the difficult
heights of some disciplines where the best alone is likely to blossom as
the best. To sympathise mawkishly with the weaker sections by selecting
sub-standard candidates, is to punish society as a whole by denying the
prospect of excellence say in hospital service. Even the poorest, when
stricken by critical illness, needs the attention of super-skilled
specialists, not humdrum second-rates.  So it is that relaxation on merit,
by overruling equality and quality altogether, is a social risk where the
stage is post-graduate or post-doctoral..
56.
In
Dr. Pradeep Jain v. Union of India
, the very
question that arose before a 3-Member Bench of the Supreme 
Court was whether consistently with constitutional values,
admissions to an institute on higher learning situate in a State
can be confined to those who have their domicile within the
State or who are resident within the State for a specified
number of years. After quoting with approval the decision in
Dr. Jagadish Saran, the Supreme Court to some extent 
approved reservation or preference for persons from a
backward region within a State. But the same was done in Dr.
Pradeep Jain, only in so far as admission to Undergraduate
Medical Courses were concerned. This can be seen from  
paragraph 21 of the report in Dr. Pradeep Jain.
57. But in so far as admission to Postgraduate Medical
Courses are concerned, the Supreme Court made it clear in
Para 22 of the report in Dr. Pradeep Jain that excellence
cannot be allowed to be compromised by any other 
considerations, because that would be detrimental to the
interests of the nation. In fact, the Supreme Court made a
very pertinent observation in paragraph 22, which has proved
to be prophetic. The Supreme Court said that playing with
merit, so far as admission to Post Graduate courses are
concerned, for pampering local feeling, will boomerang.
In fact, the interim order sought by the petitioners in W.P.No.
27162 of 2017 on the basis of
Article 371D
has actually
boomeranged upon their own brethren of the very States of
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.
58. Interestingly, the decision in Dr. Pradeep Jain arose
out of a batch of writ petitions and a Civil Appeal arising out
of the decision of the Delhi High Court. The Civil Appeal
No.6392 of 1983, which was also decided along with the batch
of writ petitions in Pradeep Jain, was filed by Reita Nirankari.
Therefore, the decision rendered on 22-06-1984 in Pradeep
Jain covered the Civil Appeal filed by Reita Nirankari also.
59. However, Reita Nirankari filed a miscellaneous
petition, not by way of an application for review nor by way of
a curative petition nor even by way of an application to recall
the order, but only to postpone the giving effect to of the
decision to the next Academic Year. While disposing of the
said application by a one paragraph order, which also came to
be reported as judgment in
Reita Nirankari v. Union of
India
, the Supreme Court directed that its main judgment
should be implemented with effect from the next academic
year 1985-86.  After saying so, the Supreme Court also
granted one more relief, not sought for in the miscellaneous
application, by holding that the main judgment will not apply to
the State of Andhra Pradesh, in view of special Constitutional
Provisions that required independent consideration.
60. But nevertheless it must be remembered that the
order passed on 26-07-1984 in the miscellaneous petition filed
by
Reita Nirankari
(9 supra), related only to admission to
MBBS course and not to Post Graduate Medical Courses and    
that too the order was passed on an application for
postponement of the effect of the judgment to the next
academic year.
61. Despite the fact (1) that the clarification issued in
the case of Reita Nirankari on 26-7-1984 was not on an
application for review, but on a petition for postponement of
the enforcement of the main judgment and (2) that the same
related only to admission to MBBS course, a 2-Member Bench   
of the Supreme Court rejected a challenge to the
constitutional validity of
Article 371D (2)(b)(iii)
and (c) (ii), in
Dr. C. Surekha v. Union of India
, solely on the basis of the
clarification issued in Reita Nirankari. Though the Supreme
Court expressed a doubt in paragraph 5 of the report in C.
Surekha about what would constitute available seats, the
Supreme Court merely left it to the wisdom of the State and
Central Governments to take appropriate action. The
observations contained in para-6 of the report in Dr. C.
Surekha read as follows:
.Before we part with the case we would, however, like to indicate that
the Scheme in
Dr. Pradeep Jain
's case is, in the opinion of this Court, in
national interest as also in the interest of the States. Competition at the
national level is bound to add to and improve quality. Andhra Pradesh
students on the whole are not at all backward and we are of the opinion
that they would stand well on comparative basis. It is for the State and
the Central Government, apart from the legal issues involved to decide
whether in the general interest of the State, the scheme in the
Presidential Order should either be so understood as to permit and
assimilate the Pradeep Jain principle or should be explained, if
necessary, by an appropriate amendment of the 'Presidential Order. We
would, however, leave it to the respondents to take their decision in the
matter. We would not like, therefore, to pronounce on the legal question
finally in this case.
62. Closely on the heels of the decision in Dr. C. Surekha, the
Supreme Court dismissed another writ petition in
Dr. Fazal Ghafoor
v. Union of India
, wherein a declaration was sought that all post
doctoral seats in all Universities should not have any regional or
domicile reservations. Even while dismissing the writ petition the
Supreme Court expressed a hope, which goes as follows:
We hope and trust that the Government of India and the State
Governments shall seriously consider this aspect of the matter without
delay and appropriate guidelines shall be evolved by the Indian Medical
Council so as to keep the Super Specialties in medical education
unreserved, open and free.
63. Though in its decision in
Sandeep v. Union of India
, the
Supreme Court reiterated the very same hope in paragraph 36 of the
report and noted that the hope did not materialize, the Medical Council
of India, as we have pointed out in the first part of our order, has come
up with
Regulation 9
and 9-A under the amended Regulations of the
years 2010, 2012 and 2017. In other words, we have to test whether
the protection granted under
Article 371-D
, which was recognized in
Reita Nirankari, Dr. C. Surekha and Dr. Fazal Ghafoor would still
hold in the light of 2017 Amendment to the Medical Council of India
Regulations, the legitimacy of which can be traced to the hope
expressed in Dr. Fazal Ghafoor.
64. Heavy reliance is placed by Mr. Satyam Reddy, learned
Senior Counsel for the petitioner in W.P.No.27162 of 2017 and also by
Mr. A.Prabhakar Rao, learned counsel for the University, on the
decision of the Supreme Court in Sandeep, to buttress their contention
that so long as the Presidential Order issued under
Article 371-D
remains in force, the reservation of seats to locals in the matter of
admission to these Universities cannot but be continued.
65. It is true that in Sandeep, the Supreme Court was
concerned with a challenge under
Article 32
of the Constitution to the
reservation for locals in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and
Tamil Nadu. The challenge was also with particular reference to
admission to Superspecialities in Medicine.
66. It is also true that in Sandeep, the Supreme Court took note
of the decisions in Pradeep Jain, the order passed in Rieta Nirankari
and the decisions in Dr. C. Surekha and Dr. Fazal Ghafoor and
eventually dismissed the writ petition. In paragraph-36 of the report in
Sandeep, the Supreme Court held as follows:
We have referred to the aforesaid judgments in extenso as
learned counsel appearing for the petitioners have laid
immense emphasis that there cannot be reservation of any
kind in respect of post-graduate or super speciality courses
regard being had to the law
laid down by
many a judgment
of this Court. It is urged that the State of Andhra Pradesh
and Telangana cannot apply the domicile test only to admit
its own students and that too also in respect of 15% quota
meant for non-local candidates. We have already analysed
the factual score and the legal position. The undivided State
of Andhra Pradesh enjoys a special privilege granted to it
under
Article 371-D
of the Constitution and the Presidential
Order. The judgments of the larger Bench do not refer to the
said Article nor do they refer to the Presidential Order, for
the said issue did not arise in the said cases.
A scheme has
been
laid down in
the case of
Dr. Pradeep Jain
(supra) and
the concept of percentage had undergone certain changes.
In
Reita Nirankari
(supra), the same three-Judge Bench
clarified the position which we have already reproduced
hereinbefore.
However, in
C. Surekha
(supra), the Court
had expressed its view about the amendment of the 
Presidential Order regard being had to the passage of time
and the advancement in the State of Andhra Pradesh. It has
been vehemently urged by Mr. Marlapalle that despite 27
years having been elapsed, the situation remains the same.
We take note of the said submission and we are also
inclined to echo the observation that was made in the case
of
Fazal Ghafoor
(supra) wherein it has been stated thus:-
In
Dr Pradeep Jain
case this Court has observed that in
Super Specialities there should really be no reservation.
This is so in the general interest of the country and for
improving the standard of higher education and thereby
improving the quality of available medical services to the
people of India. We hope and trust that the Government of
India and the State Governments shall seriously consider
this aspect of the matter without delay and appropriate
guidelines shall be evolved by the Indian Medical Council
so as to keep the Super Specialities in medical education
unreserved, open and free.
67. As rightly pointed out by the learned Senior Counsel
appearing for the petitioners in the five writ petitions, two important
developments had taken place after the decision in Sandeep. These
developments are:
(i) The decision in Sandeep was rendered on 27-10-2015, when
the law
laid down by
the Supreme Court in
Christian Medical College
v. Union of India
[(2014) 2 SCC 305], striking down the notifications
of the Medical and Dental Councils of India, dated 21-12-2010 and 15-
02-2012, was holding the field. In other words, on the date on which
the decision in Sandeep was rendered, NEET was not heard of and 
had already been struck down by the Supreme Court. But by a 
subsequent order dated 11-4-2016 passed by a 5-member bench in
Medical Council of India v. Christian Medical College
, the
decision reported in
Christian Medical College v. Union of India
[(2014) 2 SCC 305] was recalled.
As a consequence, the Regulations of the Medical Council of India, of
the years 2010 and 2012 prescribing a common entrance examination  
has come into force, after the decision of the Supreme Court in
Sandeep.
(ii) In paragraph-36 of the report in Sandeep, the Supreme
Court reiterated the hope and trust expressed by the bench in Fazal
Ghafoor. The hope and trust expressed in Fazal Ghafoor were to the
effect that the Governments and Medical Council of India would evolve
suitable guidelines to keep the Superspecialities, unreserved, open
and free. This hope had actually fructified and come alive in the form
of (i)
Section 10-D
of the Indian Medical Council Act and (ii) a new set
of Regulations issued on 10-3-2017 by the Medical Council of India
whereby Regulation 9-A providing for common counselling has been 
inserted.
68. In other words, the Supreme Court showed a great deal of
restraint, right from its decision in Pradeep Jain in the year 1984 up to
the decision in Sandeep in the year 2015 to reservations on the basis
of domicile and repeatedly expressed hope and trust. Since
a law providing for reservation on the basis of residence was created
by the Parliament in the form of
Article 371-D
, the Supreme Court
wanted the law-makers themselves to amend the same. This dream   
has now come true in the form of (i)
Section 10-D
of the Indian
Medical Council Act and (ii) a new Regulation 9-A of the Medical
Council of India Regulations, 2000 inserted by way of Notification
dated 10-3-2017.
69. The Regulations dated 10-3-2017 are not challenged before
us. Though they are under challenge before the Supreme Court in two
writ petitions under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India in W.P.(Civil)
Nos.261 and 267/2017, those challenges pertain to Minority
Educational Institutions. Even for them, the Supreme Court has
refused to grant any interim protection, except insofar as MBBS
Courses in the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana are 
concerned.
70. Therefore, in the light of the important developments that
have taken place after the decision of the Supreme Court in Sandeep,
we do not know whether the petitioners in W.P.No.27162 of 2017 can 
continue to sing the same tune on the chord of
Article 371-D.
71.
In fact, in
Sankalp Charitable Trust v. Union of India
,
the Supreme Court issued positive directions on 28-4-2016 for the
conduct of NEET. In paragraph-10 of the order passed on
28-4-2016, the Supreme Court directed that notwithstanding any
order passed by any Court earlier with regard to not holding
NEET, the order dated 28-4-2016 shall operate. When applications
were filed by Private Medical Colleges as well as some States,
seeking a modification of the order dated 28-4-2016, the Supreme
Court refused to modify the previous order as sought for by the
petitioners.
Reliance was placed on the decision in
Modern Dental
College and Research Centre v. State of Madhya Pradesh
, in
which the Court rejected the contention of the Private Medical
Colleges including minorities that the conduct of entrance test by the
State, violated the right of autonomy of the colleges.
72. Therefore, a host of developments that had taken place after
the decision of the Supreme Court in Sandeep and a host of orders
passed by the Supreme Court after the decision in Sandeep, raise
serious doubts as to whether in the changed scenario, the two
Universities in the States of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh can
continue to block 100% of the seats in Post Graduate Medical
Courses and Superspecialities only to locals identified by specific
regions within the States and non-locals whose nativity could be
traced to these two States. This doubt is also fortified by the following
factors:
(i)
Article 371-D
, as its history shows, was conceived as a tool
for removing regional imbalances within the State of Andhra Pradesh.
Article 371-D
was not articulated for the purpose of removing any
inequalities that the people of Andhra Pradesh suffered qua the people
of the other States in the country. Therefore, its application should
have been and could be limited only to the removal of the imbalances
within the different parts of the States.
(ii) If we have to use a metaphor, we may say that what was
intended only to be a partition wall within the house, cannot be
transformed into a compound wall and raised to the level of
Berlin Wall. The elevation of the protection under
Article 371-D
to the
National level, was never contemplated by the Parliament.
(iii) In fact,
Article 371-D
actually constitutes an integral
component of Part-XXI of the Constitution. As the caption to
Part-XXI indicates, the provisions contained therein were intended to
be Temporary, Transitional and Special. What was conceived to be
Temporary and Transitional under the 32nd amendment to the 
Constitution way back in the year 1974 cannot be continued in
perpetuity. In fact, the Supreme Court made a captivating observation
in para-37 of the report in Sandeep that the said privilege remains
unchanged, as if to compete with eternity.
(iv) The Statement of Objects and Reasons for the
32nd
Amendment Act, 1973
, by which
Article 371-D
was inserted,  
indicated as follows:
When the State of Andhra Pradesh was formed in 1956, 
certain safeguards were envisaged for the Telangana area
in the matter of development and also in the matter of
employment opportunities and educational facilities for the
residents of that area.  The provisions of Clause (1) of
Article 371
of the Constitution were intended to give effect to
certain features of these safeguards.
(v) Therefore, a statutory power conferred by Parliament for a
particular purpose, cannot be allowed to take a dimension completely
out of proportion.
(vi) As the history of evolution of
Article 371-D
shows, the
original demand made at the time of creation of the State of Andhra
Pradesh in the year 1956, was to keep the areas identified as
Telangana, completely different from the State of Andhra Pradesh.  In
fact, at the time of re-organisation of the country on the basis of
language, the region which was part and parcel of the erstwhile State
of Hyderabad called Telangana area was severed and thereafter
merged with the Andhra area, comprising of two regions called (i)
Ceded Districts, otherwise known as Rayalaseema comprising of four 
districts and (ii) Circar Districts comprising of seven districts at that
time. The original demand of the people of Telangana was actually to
treat them not as integral part of Andhra Pradesh, but as distinct and
separate. Instead of conceding to this larger demand, a six-point
formula was evolved leading to the insertion of
Article 371-D
of the
Constitution. But the insertion of
Article 371-D
could not keep the
flame of independence of the people of Telangana subdued for more
than 40 years. Agitations were held after 2009, eventually leading to
the creation of the new State of Telangana under the Andhra Pradesh
Re-Organisation Act, 2014. What was perceived as backward regions  
of the erstwhile combined State of Andhra Pradesh, for the upliftment
of which
Article 371-D
was held out as a fig leaf, has now become an
independent State under the A.P. Re-Organisation Act, 2014.
Therefore, the larger demand made from 1956 to 1969, which was 
rejected and in the place of which a smaller benefit was conferred
under
Article 371-D
, has now been granted by the re-organisation of
the State. Once a larger demand is conceded, the smaller benefit
given as a concession in lieu thereof, would automatically go.
(vii) It must be pointed out that under the Presidential Order
relating to Recruitment to Posts and Services in the State, the posts
were divided into (i) District-wide posts, (ii) Region-wide posts and (iii)
State-wide posts. The Presidential Order was not applicable to All
India Services. Today, by
Section 10-D
of the Indian Medical Council
Act and by the Regulations of the years 2010 and 2012 and by
Regulation 9-A inserted on 10-3-2017, all seats in Post Graduate
Medical Courses and Superspecialities have been transformed by law,
which is not under challenge, into something like All India Services.
Therefore, the Presidential Order and
Article 371-D
cannot continue to
have application to Post Graduate Medical Courses and 
Superspecialities. Such an interpretation is possible in view of the
definition of the expression available seats under para-2(a) of the
Presidential Order, 1974. Para-2(a) defines available seats only to
mean the number of seats provided in that course after excluding
those reserved for the candidates from outside the State.
Reservations under paragraphs-5 and 6 of the Presidential Order were
confined only to available seats. If available seats have been shrunk
to zero, by virtue of the prescription contained in the Medical Council
of India Regulations, 2000 as amended in 2010, 2012 and 2017, the
Presidential Order cannot anymore be applied.
73. As a matter of fact, as rightly predicted by the Supreme
Court in Pradeep Jain, a large chunk of students in the States of
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana have now become victims of the very  
benefit for which they fought and got over 40 years ago.
If x number of seats are available in all State-wide Educational
Institutions and State-wide Universities in the States of Andhra
Pradesh and Telangana, the opportunities available in the rest of the
country for the eligible students of Andhra and Telangana are many
times more than that figure. Therefore, holding on to
Article 371-D
and
the Presidential Order, has today proved to be more of a liability than
of an asset.
74. We are conscious of the fact that the continued applicability
of
Article 371-D
and the Presidential Order, are questions of larger
import that can be decided in the main writ petitions. This is especially
so in the light of the decision of the Supreme Court in Sandeep, which
may perhaps have to be tested in the light of the developments that
have taken place subsequently, in the form of NEET. Therefore, we
have to go back while deciding these miscellaneous petitions, to the
most fundamental principles that govern the grant of interim orders in
cases of this nature. However good, a prima facie case may be, a
person may not be entitled to an interim order, if the benefit that he
would gain, far outweighs the hardship caused to innumerable
individuals.
The interim order passed by us on 17-8-2017 though beneficial to
a few individuals, has caused immense hardship to scores of
candidates who have secured admission to Superspeciality courses in 
various institutions through out the country. These candidates are also
the children of the States of Telangana and Andhra and hence
applying the rule of balance of convenience and irreparable hardship,
the interim order passed on 17-8-2017 is liable to be vacated.
75. Accordingly, the interim order passed in W.P.M.P. No.33741
of 2017 in W.P.No.27162 of 2017 is vacated.
The respondents are free to make allotment through common  
counselling at the National level even for the seats in the medical
colleges affiliated to the two Universities in two States.
As a consequence, the respondents are directed to withdraw the
orders dated 18-8-2017 by which allotments granted to the petitioners
in the other writ petitions were cancelled.  They may be allowed to join
the courses for which they were granted admission.  No costs.
76. The Registry is directed to post the writ petitions for final
hearing on 11-9-2017. The parties are directed to complete the
pleadings within that time.
________________________    
V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN, J      
___________  
T. RAJANI, J
August 24, 2017.