[Cites
28
, Cited by
2
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
M/S. Shriram Transport Finance ... vs S.Salauddin And Another on 7 August, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 76
Author:
T. Rajani
Bench:
T. Rajani
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN AND  THE HONBLE SMT. JUSTICE T. RAJANI                      

C.R.P.No. 3826 of 2008 


07-08-2017 

M/s. Shriram Transport Finance Co.Ltd., Kadapa... Petitioner

S.Salauddin and another.. Respondents 

Counsel for petitioner  : Mr. B. Vijaysen Reddy

Counsel for respondents: None 

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? CASES REFERRED :     

1)      (2011) 6 CTC 11 


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN           
        AND     
THE HONBLE SMT. JUSTICE T. RAJANI      
CIVIL REVISION PETITION No. 3826 of 2008   

ORDER:
(Per VRS,J)  
        
     The petitioner, who secured an award in their favour in an
arbitration case, has come up with the above civil revision
petition, challenging the rejection of their application by the
executing Court for transmission of the award to the District
Court, Kadapa.
2.      Heard Mr. B. Vijaysen Reddy, learned counsel for the
petitioner.
3.      Notice was ordered in this revision petition way back on
12.09.2008.  Service of notice on the respondents was completed
long time ago.  But, there is no appearance for the respondents.
4.      The petitioner herein raised a dispute with regard to the
amounts that became due and payable from the respondents and   
the dispute was referred to arbitration.  The sole arbitrator passed
an award on 04.04.2006 in Arbitration Case No.17 of 2015.  The
arbitration was held at Tirupati and the award was passed there.
5.      Thereafter, the petitioner filed an execution application
before the District Court, Chittoor, under
Section 36
of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 seeking transmission of the
award to the District Court, Kadapa, on the ground that the
properties, against which execution could proceed, were located
within the territorial jurisdiction of the District Court, Kadapa.
6.      The said application was rejected by the District Court,
Chittoor, on the ground that it was not the Court which passed the
decree, so as to enable the said Court to transmit the same, under
Section 39
of C.P.C., to another Court.  In other words, the Court
below held that the award was not a decree passed by that Court,
as the same was also not filed before the Court.
7.      But, after the advent of 1996 Act, the question of filing of
the award into Court for the purpose of making the award a rule
of Court, does not arise.  The award passed by the arbitrator is
deemed to be a decree which can be directly executed.  Therefore,
one set of reasoning given by the executing Court for rejecting the
application was wrong.
8.      There appears to be a great deal of confusion about whether
an award passed by the arbitrator should be transmitted by one
Court to another Court in which it can be executed.  The High
Courts of Bombay, Delhi and Madras have already taken the 
position that there is no necessity to have the award transmitted
from one Court to another Court for execution.  But, the Kerala
and Karnataka High Courts appear to have taken a view that
transmission was necessary.
9.      One of us (VRS,J) had an occasion to consider this question
in great detail, while being part of the Madras High Court, in a
decision rendered in
Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited Vs. Sivakama  
Sundari
.  The relevant portion of
the said judgment
, which
contains a detailed analysis of the provisions of
Sections 38
to
45
of the Code of Civil Procedure and the provisions of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
, is extracted for useful
reference.
7.
Section 38
of the Code of Civil Procedure states that a decree
may be executed either by the Court which passed it or by the Court
to which it is sent for execution. Section 37 of the Code defines the
expression "Court which passed the decree", to include (i) the Court
of first instance where the decree was passed by a Court of appellate
jurisdiction, and (ii) the Court which would have had the jurisdiction
to try the suit, if the Court of first instance had ceased to exist or
ceased to have jurisdiction to execute it.
8.
Section 39(1)
of the Code enables the Court which passed a
decree to send it for execution to another Court of competent
jurisdiction. This may be done on an application of the decree
holder and it may be done if any of the four contingencies in clauses
(a) to (d) of Sub-section (1) of
Section 39
arises. They are:
(a)     If the judgment debtor resides or carries on business within the
local limits of jurisdiction of such other Court;
(b)     If the judgment debtor has no property within the local limits of
jurisdiction of the Court which passed the decree, but has property
within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the other Court to which
it is sought to be transferred;
(c)     If the decree is for sale or delivery of immovable property
situate outside the local limits of jurisdiction of the Court which
passed the decree; and
(d)     If the Court considers it fit to transfer the decree for any other
reason to be recorded in writing.
9.      Sub-section (2) of
Section 39
enables the Court which passed a
decree to transfer it to any Subordinate Court, even of its own
motion, without an application by the decree holder. Sub-section (3)
of
Section 39
, which was inserted by Act 104 of 1976, creates a
deeming fiction. It says that if a Court to which an application for
the transfer of the decree is made, has jurisdiction to try the suit in
which the decree was passed, then it could also be deemed to be a
Court of competent jurisdiction. Sub-section (4) inserted under
Amendment Act 22 of 2002, places an embargo upon a Court which   
passed the decree to execute such a decree against any person or 
property outside the local limits of its jurisdiction.
10.
Section 41
of the Code imposes an obligation upon the executing
Court to inform the Court which passed the decree, about the
completion of execution or about the failure to execute the decree
along with the attending circumstances.
Section 42(2)(a)
empowers
the Court to which a decree is transferred, to send it to some other
Court for execution. For this purpose, the transferee Court would
have the same power as that of the Court which passed the decree.
Sub-section (4) of
Section 42
contains two limitations to the power of
the Court to which a decree is sent for execution. Since we are not
concerned with the same, I am not referring to it.
11.
Section 43
provides for execution of decrees passed by any civil
Court established in India or outside India, to which the provisions
of this Code do not extend.
Section 44
empowers the State
Government to declare by notification in the Official Gazette that the
decrees of any Revenue Court in any part of India to which the
provisions of Civil Procedure Code would not apply, be executed
within the State as if they had been passed by Courts in that State.
Section 44-A indicates the procedure to be followed for execution of
decrees passed by a Court in reciprocating territories.
Section 45
declares that a Court in any State will be entitled to send a decree
for execution to any Court established by the authority of the
Central Government outside India.
Section 46
speaks of precepts.
12.     In tune with
Section 38
of the Code of Civil Procedure, Order
XXI, Rule 10 of the Code states that the holder of a decree shall
apply to the Court which passed the decree, for its execution. The
application may also be made to the Court to which such decree has
been sent under the provisions contained in the Code. Rule 6 of
Order XXI requires the Court forwarding a decree for execution to
another Court, (i) to send a copy of the decree, (ii) to send a
certificate recording satisfaction or non satisfaction of the decree,
and (iii) to send a copy of any order for the execution of the decree
or a certificate to the effect that no such order had been passed. The
mode of transfer is prescribed by Rule 5 of Order XXI. It says that
where a decree is to be sent for execution to another Court, the
Court which passed such decree shall send it directly to such other
Court, irrespective of whether such Court is situate in the same State
or not.
13.     A comprehensive analysis of the various provisions
of the Code
of Civil Procedure
, dealt with in the preceding paragraphs, would
show that every decree of a civil Court is liable to be executed
primarily by the Court which passed the decree. Therefore, an
application for execution is expected to be filed in the first instance,
only in the court which passed the decree. It is only in cases where
the Court which passed the decree is unable to execute it, that the
provisions for the transfer or transmission of such decree and the
procedure prescribed therefor, come into play.
14.     Keeping this fundamental aspect in mind, if we now have a look
at the provisions of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
, it is
seen that the award passed by an Arbitral Tribunal is liable to be
enforced under
Section 36
of the Act, in the same manner as if it is a
decree of the Court, in terms of the provisions of the Code. In other
words, an award passed by the Arbitral Tribunal is equated to the
decree of a Court, for the purpose of execution and only for that
purpose. In so far as foreign awards are concerned, they are also
equated to the decrees of Courts under
Section 58
of the 1996 Act.
15.     But the fact that an Arbitral Tribunal is not bound by the Rules
of Procedure formulated in the Code, is made clear by
Section 19(1)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. Therefore, an Arbitral
Tribunal is not a Court. Hence it follows that the
Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996
, (hereinafter referred to as the "1996 Act")
elevates an award to the level of a decree, for the purpose of
execution. But, it does not elevate the Arbitral Tribunal to the status
of a civil Court.
16.     It is important to note that under the 1996 Act, an award can be
executed directly without a seal of approval by a civil court. The
1996 Act made a total departure in this regard, from the provisions
contained in the
Arbitration Act, 1940
, (hereinafter referred to as
the "Act of 1940"). The difference between the provisions of the 1996
Act and the provisions of the Act of 1940, may be summarised as
follows (insofar as the issue on hand is concerned):
(i)     Under
Section 14(2)
of the 1940 Act, the arbitrators are obliged
to file a copy of the award into Court and the Court is obliged to give
notice to the parties about the filing of the award. After it is so filed,
the Court is empowered to modify or correct an award, in terms of
the provisions of
Section 15
. The Court also has the power to remit
the award under
Section 16
of the 1940 Act. If the Court sees no
reason to remit the award, or if the Court sees no reason to set aside
the award (either after the expiry of the time for filing an application
to set aside the award or after the dismissal of any such application),
the Court shall pronounce a judgment under
Section 17
. A decree is
to follow such judgment under
Section 17
. Thus, an arbitral award
became executable under the 1940 Act, only after a judgment was 
pronounced by a Court under
Section 17
and it was also followed by
a decree. But, under the 1996 Act, the award automatically becomes
a decree in terms of
Sections 36
and
58
;
(ii)    As pointed out earlier,
Section 19(1)
of the 1996 Act liberates
Arbitral Tribunals from the rigors of the provisions contained in
CPC and the Indian Evidence Act. The role of the Court, even while
dealing with an application under
Section 34
, has been restricted by
the 1996 Act. The only place where some role is assigned to a Court
is in Section 27 of the 1996 Act (apart from Sections 8, 9, 11, 34 and
45. By virtue of Sub-section (3) of
Section 27
, the Court to which a
request for assistance in taking evidence is made, is entitled to
follow its own rules for taking evidence. Thus,
Section 27(3)
, read
with
Section 19(1)
of the 1996 Act, gives a clear indication that
while the Arbitral Tribunal can formulate its own procedures, the
civil Court could follow its own, whenever it is approached (a) either
for the grant of interim measures, (b) or for any assistance in taking
evidence, or (c) for execution. In contrast to these provisions of the
1996 Act,
Section 41
of the 1940 Act makes the provisions
of the
Code of Civil Procedure
apply to all proceedings before the Court as
well as to all appeals under the Act.
17.     Once it is seen that an award of the Arbitral Tribunal is deemed
to be a decree, by virtue of
Section 36
of the 1996 Act, it follows as a
corollary that the Arbitral Tribunal is in the position of a Court
which passed the decree (though it may not be the same). But, no
application for execution can be presented to an Arbitrator, by the
holder of an award, under Order XXI, Rule 10, on the ground that
the Arbitral Tribunal is the Court which passed the decree.
Therefore, the provisions of
Section 38
and Order XXI, Rules 5, 6
and 10
of the Code of Civil Procedure
cannot be applied to an
Arbitral Tribunal. To put it differently, it is only when an award
holder is entitled to file an execution petition before the Arbitral
Tribunal itself under Order XXI, Rule 10, (treating it as a Court
which passed the decree) that the provisions of Order XXI, Rules 5
and 6 would come to play.
18.     If no application for execution can be filed before the Arbitral
Tribunal, by treating the Arbitral Tribunal as the Court which
passed the decree, the Arbitral Tribunal cannot also order the
transfer of the decree (or award) to any other Court for its
execution. Similarly, there is no provision either in the Code or
anywhere else, to treat a court, within whose jurisdiction the Arbitral
proceedings took place, as the court which passed the decree. It is
only when a court within whose jurisdiction the arbitral award was
passed, is taken to be the court which passed the decree within the
meaning of
Section 37
and Order XXI, Rule 10 of the Code that the
award holder would be entitled to seek transmission from that court.
19.     While the award passed by an arbitral tribunal is deemed to be a
decree of a civil court under
Section 36
of the 1996 Act, there is no
deeming fiction anywhere to hold that the court within whose
jurisdiction the arbitral award was passed, should be taken to be the
court which passed the decree. Therefore, the whole procedure of
filing an execution petition before the court within whose
jurisdiction the arbitral award was passed, as though it is the court
which passed the decree, is pathetically misconceived.
10.     Therefore, it is clear that no Court, to which an application
for execution is made, can insist on the filing of the execution
petition first before some other Court and to have it transmitted to
it later.  As a matter of fact, the
Arbitration Act
transcends all
territorial barriers. The parties are entitled to prescribe any place
as the seat of arbitration, irrespective of where the parties carry on
the business or where the contract was to be executed.  In
commercial contracts, the parties even choose a foreign country as
the seat of arbitration, despite all the parties to the agreement
being in India.  Therefore, if the requirement of transmission of a
decree is read into the statute, it will lead to the disastrous
consequences of a foreign Court having power to transmit the
award to the executing Court.
11.     In fact, the decision in Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited draws
a parallel from the provisions of the
Chit Funds Act
where the
award passed by the Registrar of Chits is made executable by a
civil Court as if it is a decree of Court.  The awards passed by the
Registrar of Chits are accepted for execution without any demand
for transmission.  The same logic applies to arbitration awards
also.
12.     Therefore, the revision is liable to be dismissed.  However,
we point out that since the date of the award is only 04.04.2006,
the petitioner has time up to April, 2018 to file an execution
petition before the District Court, Kadapa, directly.  Upon the
petitioner filing the execution petition before the appropriate
Court before April, 2018, the Court shall entertain the same
without insisting upon the transmission of the decree.  With the
above observation, the revision petition is dismissed.
Consequently, miscellaneous petitions if any pending in the
revision shall stand dismissed.  No order as to costs.
__________________________    
V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN, J      
T. RAJANI, J.
7th August, 2017