[Cites
15
, Cited by
25
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Miriyala Renuka Devi And Others vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh, Rep. By ... on 20 February, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 HYDERABAD 174, (2018) 1 ALD(CRL) 852
Author:
B.Siva Sankara Rao
Bench:
B.Siva Sankara Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE B.SIVA SANKARA RAO          

CRIMINAL REVISION CASE Nos.182 OF 2017 and batch       

20-02-2017 

Miriyala REnuka Devi and others .Appellants 


The State of Andhra Pradesh, rep. by Public Prosecutor, High Court at Hyderabad
and others . Respondents  

Counsel for the Appellants: SRI V.H.V.R.R.SWAMY   

Counsel for the Respondent:  PUBLIC PROSECUTOR      

<Gist :

>Head Note: 


? Cases referred:

1.      AIR 2007 SC 2626  
2.      2006(4) ALT 758 
3.      2016(2) ALD (Crl.) 684
4.      2007(5) ALD 824 


THE HON'BLE DR JUSTICE B.SIVA SANKARA RAO          
        
CRIMINAL REVISION CASE Nos.182, 236 AND 237 OF 2017        

COMMON ORDER:
These three revisions almost since involve same questions of
law, though facts are different, thereby taken up for common
disposal from different hearings.
2.      Heard both sides and perused the respective impugned 
orders of the District Collector vis--vis the lower appellate Court
and the respective grounds of revisions and the respective
contentions raised with provisions and propositions of law in
relation thereto.
3.      The common questions of law involved in answering the
respective revisions are:
1.Whether the confiscation proceedings of the learned
Collector confirmed or to some extent modified, as the case
may be, by the respective Sessions Judges, while sitting in
appeal, are unsustainable and there are no grounds for
initiation of proceedings for confiscation and the very
seizure itself is not sustainable and there is no violation of
any Statutory provisions or Control Orders and the same
are in ignorance of the said provisions or settled
propositions and, if so, liable to be set aside?
2. To what result, respectively?
4.      The factual background necessary to mention in dealing with
the respective revisions are:
Crl.R.C.No.182 of 2017:-
a)      The Tahsildar, Kanchikacherla filed a petition under
Section 6A
of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 
(for short, the Act) before the District Collector, Krishna,
Machilipatnam in E.C.P.No.331 of 2012 about the seizure
of 182.00 quintals of the so called Public Distribution
System (PDS) Rice, which was being transported in the 
lorry bearing No.AP 16 TB 7459 worth Rs.13,11,220/-
of rice @ Rs.1,710/- per quintal without any documents
from Kuchipudi Village of Kodada Mandal to various rice
mills in Mandapeta of East Godavari District from
Miriyala Nageswara Rao of Kodada Village and two others 
on 09.09.2012 at Kesara Village, Kanchikacherla, in the
presence of mediators for contravention of certain Control
Orders and handed over the same to the MLS Point, 
Incharge, Kanchikacherla, and vehicle was handed over
to the SHO, Kanchikacherla Police Station, for safe
custody and to confiscate the entire seized stock to the
Government. The Tahsildar also pointed out that the
respondents were illicitly transporting PDS Rice without
any documents; that respondent No.1 was in the habit of
purchasing rice meant for PDS illicitly and doing business
in rice (food grains) without valid licence/permission from
the authorities concerned with the active connivance of
other respondents. Thus, the respondents interrupted the
process of smooth functioning of Public Distribution
System in contravention of Clause 17(A) of the Andhra
Pradesh Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 2008
(for short, the Control Order, 2008) and in
contravention of Clause 2000 of the Andhra Pradesh
Scheduled Commodities (LS&R) Order, 2008 without   
licence and transporting the same without bills illegally
that resulted in the seizure of the stock.
The said petition was taken on file as E.C.P.No.331 of
2012 by the District Collector and interim orders were
passed on 20.11.2012 directing the Tahsildar,
Kanchikacherla, to dispose of the seized stock by
conducting public auction and submit sales list for
confirmation. Thereby, respondent No.4 filed
W.P.No.32764 of 20012 and, by order dated 17.10.2012, 
has obtained stay orders on sale of the seized stock,
pending finalization of the case and the vehicle was
released to respondent No.2 on furnishing bank
guarantee of Rs.2,00,000/-.
A show cause notice was issued to the respondents
about the confiscation of the seized stock and the
respondents attended the hearings through Advocate and 
filed explanation stating that respondent No.4 is doing
business in rice with valid licence and he is real owner of
the seized stock and respondent No.1 is his son and
respondent No.2 is his daughter in law, respondent No.3
is the driver of the vehicle of respondent No.2 and
respondent No.1 is only looking after the affairs of his rice
mill in his absence and the allegations of illicitly
transporting the PDS Rice by procuring unauthorisedly
for sale at various places of Mandapet of East Godavari,
are incorrect; that the rice is procured from own mill of
respondent No.4, who is doing business with a valid
license and, as such, no permit or licence is required for
transporting of super fine variety, as he is a food grain
licence holder within the State as per G.O.Ms.No.56,
dated 30.10.2009, and there are no valid grounds for
seizure; that the only option is to follow the procedure
laid down under
Cr.P.C
. and not to invoke the
proceedings under
Section 6A
of the Act.
From the respective seizure report material and report
of the Tahsildar and on contest of the respective
respondents, the District Collector vide order dated
09.05.2013 observed that said contentions of the
respondents are neither correct nor acceptable,
as according to Clause 7(a)(1) of the A.P. Procurement
(Levy) Order, 1984, every miller/dealer has to transport
the rice for sale along with a release certificate issued by
the Collector (Civil Supplies) or District Supply Officer
and one of the respondents have been transporting 182
quintals of the food grain (rice) without any valid bill and
without even release certificate issued by the Competent
Authority, which is clear and also from the statement of
respondent No.3 that at the time of inspection for seizure
in the presence of the mediators to the Tahsildar that
respondent Nos.1 and 4 are in the habit of purchasing
PDS Rice from card holders and transporting the same to
other places for sale to higher rates to gain illegally and
that also supports to the conclusion of the rice is a PDS
Rice and clandestinely dealing with the rice that is meant
for the consumer beneficiaries, since diverted by
intervention of process of smooth functioning of PDS and
the same is nothing but violation of Sections 17 and 17A
of the Order and they are liable for prosecution under
Clause 17B of the Order, besides liable for criminal
prosecution, and the seized stock is liable for confiscation
in ordering confiscation. by also saying same is also in
the contravention of the conditions 5, 6, and 7(i) of the
licence issued under the AP Scheduled Commodities (LR  
& S) Order, 2008, as purchasing PDS rice and 
transporting the same to other places for illegal profit and
that documents are suffice for confiscation of the entire
stock and in ordering 100% confiscation of 182 quintals
of the seized PDS rice and for levy of penalty on the owner
of the vehicle of Rs.1,25,000/- for illegal transportation of
PDS Rice.
When respondent No.4 questioned the said 
proceedings in appeal, the learned Sessions Judge,
Krishna, Machilipatnam in E.C.Appeal No.121 of 2013, 
by the impugned order dated 20.10.2016, modified 100% 
confiscation to that of 75%; and levy of penalty of
Rs.1,25,000/- to that of Rs.75,000/-, while upholding the
findings regarding validation of the confiscation
proceedings and violation of the provisions and the
findings in support of it by learned Sessions Judge are
that the rice is a PDS rice and there is contravention of
the Orders 2008 with no bills or documents or permit or
authorization statutorily required from levy and Control
Orders, respectively, that too as on the date of seizure,
when the Order and Licence Storage and Regulation 
Order, 2008 are in force and the violation of which and
the statement of respondent No.3 before the Tahsildar,
at the time of seizure, also substantiates the same,
and contra to it, but for oral contention of respondent
Nos.1 and 4 could produce nothing.
Crl.R.C.No.236 of 2017:-
b)      The Tahsildar, Peddamandadi Mandal filed a petition
under
Section 6A
of the Act before the Joint Collector,
Mahabubnagar District, in Case No.CS6/492/2015 about  
the seizure of 136.20 quintals of the so called Public
Distribution System (PDS) Rice, which was being 
transported in the lorry bearing No.AP 16 U 0653 worth
Rs.2,83,500/- of the rice @ Rs.1,710/- per quintal
without any documents from Wanaparthy to Sherpally of 
Bhoothpur Mandal from the lorry owner Shaik Khaja 
Moinuddin in the presence of mediators for contravention
of certain Control Orders and handed over the stock to
Smt.S.Sreedevi, Prop M/s.Sri Lakshmi Venkateswara Rice   
Mill, Ghanpur, for safe custody under proper
acknowledgment and vehicle was handed over to the 
Station House Officer, Peddamandadi Police Station for
safe custody.
At the request of respondent No.3-owner of the seized
lorry, for release of the lorry, the same was released on
furnishing bank guarantee for an amount of
Rs.2,00,000/-, pending disposal of 6A proceedings.
A show cause notice was issued to the respondents 
framing charges that they were indulging in clandestine
business by diverting PDS rice into black market for
illegal profits, in violation of the Control Order, 2008 and
transporting the same without bills illegally, that resulted
the seizure. The respondents attended the hearings
through the Advocate and filed explanation, stating that
the respondents are doing business in rice with valid
licence and that the seized stock is not PDS Rice and the
said rice is being transported under valid documents.
   A show cause notice was issued to the respondents
framing charges that they were indulging in clandestine
business by diverting PDS rice into black market for
illegal profits in violation of the Control Order and
transporting the same without bills illegally, that resulted
in the seizure. The respondents attended the hearings
through the Advocate and filed explanation stating that
the respondents are doing business in rice with valid
licence and that the seized stock is not PDS Rice and the
said rice is being transported under valid documents.
   From the respective seizure report, material and report
of the Tahsildar and on contest of the respective
respondents, the Joint Collector vide order dated
28.11.2015 ordered for confiscation of 100% of the value
of the seized stock and imposed a fine of Rs.10,000/-  on
the owner of the seized lorry; that respondent Nos.1 and 2
are indulging in diversion of Government Rice into black
market; and also directed the Tahsildar to utilize the
seized stock of 136.20 quintals under PDS and adjust the
sale proceeds into CS Head of Account.
Crl.R.C.No.237 of 2017:-
The Assistant Supply Officer, Circle-II, Vijayawada
filed a petition under
Section 6A
of the Act before the
Joint Collector, Krishna, Machilipatnam in E.C.P.No.93 of
2011 against Miryala Narasimha Rao, respondent No.7, 
and ten others for contravention of certain Control Orders
and seized the ground stock all worth Rs.2,89,000/- on
30.03.2011. It was also pointed out that the respondents
were indulging in clandestine business of diverting PDS
Rice into black market, which was meant for distribution
under PDS to the BPL families; that respondent No.7 has
purchased 170.00 qtls of PDS Rice with the active
connivance of respondent Nos.5 and 6 and transporting
the same from Vijayawada to other places through lorry
bearing No.AP 16 TW 6828; and that the respondents  
have contravened the condition 2(c) of Annexure-1 &
Clause 17(A) & 17(B) of Order, 2008. While so, the seized
vehicles were released to the owners on their furnishing
bank guarantee, pending finalization of 6
A of the Act
.
The said petition was taken on file as E.C.P.No.93 of
2011 by the Joint Collector and interim orders were
passed on 22.06.2011 with a direction to the Tahsildar,
Kanchikacherla to dispose of the seized stock to the card
holders under Public Distribution System and remit the
sale proceeds under Revenue Deposits. Thereby, when the  
respondents have filed W.P.No.21859 of 2011, this Court
directed the first respondent to dispose of the claim
petition filed by the writ petitioner and pass appropriate
orders in accordance with law.
A show cause notice was issued to the respondents
about the confiscation of the seized stock and the
respondents attended the hearings through the Advocate
and filed explanation, stating that the seized stock of rice
is not PDS rice and that even assuming that seized rice
belongs to PDS, the only option left to the authorities is to
follow the procedure laid down under
Cr.P.C
. and not to
invoke the proceedings under
Section 6A
of the Act and
requested to release the seized stock and the vehicles.
   From the respective seizure report, material and report
of the Tahsildar and on contest of the respective
respondents, the Joint Collector vide order dated
26.01.2013 ordered for confiscation of 100% value of
seized stock in favour of the Government and also
imposed a penalty of 20% of Bank Guarantee on each  
owner of the lorries bearing Nos.AP16 TW 6828, AP 7V 
688 and AP 7V 1503, respectively, for illegal
transportation of rice and also ordered for disposal of the
confiscation of the seized stock by conducting public
auction after appeal time is over.
When the respondents questioned the said
proceedings in appeal, the learned Sessions Judge,
Krishna, Machilipatnam, in E.C. Appeal No.234 of 2013,
by the impugned order dated 20.10.2016 modified 100%  
confiscation to that of 75%, and penalty of 20% to 10%
each of the Bank Guarantees on the owners of the lorries
bearing Nos.AP16TW 6828, AP 7V 688 and AP 7V 1503,     
respectively.
5.      It is impugning the respective orders, the present revisions
are filed with the contentions in the grounds of revisions vis--vis
the oral submissions of the learned counsel for the respondents to
the collector proceedings and partly successful appellants before
the lower Court, by impugning the findings of the lower appellate
Court in the revisions are, that the learned Collector and the
learned Sessions Judges failed to consider that PDS Rice is not an
essential commodity; that clause 2(W) of the Control Order
mentions that for scheduled commodity supplied to the fair price
shops and not otherwise, clause 7(a) of the Order has no
application and there is no contravention of any of the clauses
under the Control Order and once there is no contravention of
Section 3
of the Act, no confiscation shall arise; that
Section 6A
proceedings shall not arise as the seized stocks are not essential
commodities; that initiation of
Section 6A
proceedings would arise
only when the seized stocks are essential commodities; that when
the seized stocks are essential commodities then only proceedings
can be initiated and not otherwise and thereby prayed for setting
aside the orders and for release of entire stock and also for refund
of the penalty imposed while releasing the vehicles.
6.      In deciding the above, points for consideration in the factual
matrix in the three revisions arise and before discussing the facts
further, it is necessary to mention the legal position:
(a)
The Essential Commodities Act
10 of 1955 is an Act to
provide, in the interests of the general public, for the control
of the production, supply and distribution of, and trade and
commerce in certain commodities for securing availability
and equitable distribution of such commodities. It is an
undisputed fact that the proceedings under
Section 6A
of
E.C.Act are penal in nature and quasi criminal so far as
confiscation is concerned, needless to mention the
prosecution under the other provisions of Act, particularly
under
Section 7
of the Act as a criminal offence for
contravention of
Section 3
of the E.C.Act. It is apt to mention
herein the observations of the Honble High court in the
decision reported in 2008(3) LS-106(DB) in
A.Siva Reddy vs.
Collector
, that even the interim disposal order under
Section
6A
of the Act, involve civil consequences.
There is no quarrel
on the proposition relied on by the appellants reported in
(1) 1977 Cri.L.J.-1800 in
Madhav Keshav Mirashi vs., the
State
at para-17 that, an authority being created as a full
fledged appellate authority under
Section 6-C
it has all the
powers of the original authority including to examine
whether the discretion has been properly exercised by the
Collector in passing the order under
Section 6-A
and to
substitute its own decision regarding discretionary powers in
place of the exercise thereof by the original authority.
However, coming to the other proposition relied from this
decision regarding mens rea required to prove from the
contention of the appellants from placed reliance of paras 11
to 16 of the judgment concerned, what was
laid down in
the
above paras in that decision was that the requirement of
mens rea as like for a penal offence under
Section 7
of
E.C.Act also required to be proved for confiscation for the
contravention of the Control Order in proceedings under
Section 6-A
of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. In fact,
the amended E.C.Act,
Section 10-C
, is crystal clear in its
wording that, any prosecution for any offence under this Act,
which requires a culpable mental state on the part of the
accused, the Court shall presume the existence of such
mental state (intention, motive, knowledge of a fact and the
belief in, or reason to believe, a fact) but it shall be a defence
for the accused to prove the fact that he had no such mental
state with respect to the act charged.
(b)     When that prima facie material is there for the
seizure/detention of their stock validly from the above
proceedings of the Enforcement Deputy Tahsildar, that was
perused and taken cognizance under
Section 6A
of the 
E.C.Act by the Collector (CS), the contention of the
appellants that there is no valid seizure shown contravention
of any Control Order is unsustainable and baseless. It is
needless to say the settled proposition from the
Constitutional Bench expressions of the Apex Court that,
even any of the procedure regarding the search and seizure
not validly done by following the procedural traits, seized
article is admissible in evidence to the proceedings, including
for criminal in nature, as held in Porammals case of
1974(1)-SCC-345 followed in Alasaray Mohammads case of   
1978-SCC (Crl)-198; and
State of Punjab vs. Baldev Singhs
case for AIR 1999-SC-2355.
(c)     Coming to the other decision of 1983-S.R.C.-159 Kerala High
Court covered by decision No.8 of list of decisions submitted
by the appellants relied upon concerned, it was held that
under
Section 6-A
proceedings for confiscation, the order of
confiscation depends upon satisfaction by the Collector (CS),
which is a discretionary power vested in him to exercise in a
fair and judicious manner, the provisions of
Section 6-A
and
6-B
, though not mandatory, enables the Collector to conduct
an enquiry before ordering confiscation rather to proceed on
formation of his opinion and the notice to state the proposal
to confiscation of the seized article for the person affected
with two opportunities, one to make representation in
writing and the other of being heard.
7.      Coming to the confiscation of respective vehicles in the three
cases, the counsel for the revision petitioners, respectively,
submits that unless there are findings regarding violation of
Section 3
of the Act arrived by the authorities, confiscation order of
the vehicles cannot be passed and, even if any passed, they would
no way survive. There is no dispute on the proposition, but for to
say, that the orders of the respective Collectors, modified or
confirmed by the respective Sessions Judges, clearly show that the
quantity of rice involved is a PDS Rice. Once that is the report of
the Tahsildar and the mediators, including the version of the
Drivers in one of the cases i.e., respondent No.3 in Crl.R.C.No.182
of 2017 in relation therein, and even to the contention of
respondent No.4 therein much less of petitioner No.1 or in other
cases of respective respondents, once as per
Section10(c)
of the
amended Act, the presumption is in favour of the authorities the
stock in prosecution for any offence or even for confiscation
proceedings from the contention of similar analogy in Kailash
Prasad Yadav and anr. V. State of Jharkhand and Anr  to
apply herein also of existence of culpable mental state on the part
of the accused/respondents, respectively, in the Court shall
presume so of intention, motive, knowledge and belief or reason to
believe the fact within the knowledge and with intention and
motive. It shall be for the accused in the reverse onerous to ask to
rebut the presumption of lack of such intention, motive and/or
knowledge or belief. Here, in any of these three cases,
the respective respondents to the proceedings before the respective
Collectors, did not file any record of any licence for rice milling
business of trading or non-trading, as the case may be, and no way
bills and/or any bills or any other recorded proof of the stock and
for what purpose and to which destination the milled rice they
were transporting, despite it is a clear case of the PDS Rice at the
time of seizure with finding from such identification, which the
Court has to take judicial notice from the respective Tahsildars
dealing with civil supply commodities out of their day to day
dealings to identify, which stock is PDS, apart from the
interception, for lack of bills and the presumption in favour of it.
Nothing more is required in the case and there is no finding at all
of the violation of the provisions. Thereby, the decision has no
application to the present facts of these cases.
8.      Even coming to the other decision referred to in Sri Sai
Traders, rep. by its Proprietor and others vs. Assistant
Supply Officer, Cirlce-1, Vijayawada and others  where
GO Ms.No.79, dated 29.06.2005, and GSR 104(E), dated   
15.02.2002, one is of the State Government and the later of the
Central Government referred, so also of A.P.State Public
Distribution System Control Order, 2001, Clauses 2, (16) and (20)
were also on the allegation of the rice meant for PDS black
marketing, and the Government by G.O.Ms.No.79 supra stated   
that rescinding the A.P.Paddy and Rice (Requisitioning of Stocks)
Order, 1966 issued in G.O.Ms.No.2121, Food and Agriculture 
(CS.IV) Dept., dated 29.06.1966, it would indicate that absolutely
there is no restriction on movement of rice in the State of Andhra
Pradesh and, in fact, Clause 16 of the AP State PDS Control order
2001, once that can be invoked for PDS Rice not exempted, even 
under the Government of India GSR 104(e) clause (vi) of the order,
what was observed is that rice is a scheduled commodity and not
an essential commodity, even taken the same, once it is a
scheduled commodity, even today there is no licence or permit or
way bill for the said rice to  transport much less produced any
amounts or stock registers of said paddy and conversion of the rice
and not even licence in the rice mill trading or any trading
produced in any case, especially, that decision has no application,
apart from the seizure in the respective cases, is subsequent to the
enactment of Licence Storage and Regulation Order 2008 and the 
Control Order.
9.      Now coming to the other contention even referring to the
PDS System Control Order, 2008, violation under Clauses 17 and 
17A has no application concerned, the counsel placed reliance on
the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in
Maimuna Begum
v. State of Telangana and others
, It is in fact, a preventive
detention proceeding for illegally and clandestinely doing business
in purchasing of PDS rice from other commodities from ration card
holders to the petitioners, referring to Prevention of Black
Marketing and Maintenance of Supply of Essential Commodities  
Act, 1980
Sections 3
and
7
of the Act, and Clauses 17 and 17A of
the Control Order, what was observed is only based on the
respective contentions in setting aside the preventive detention
order by the Division Bench therein is, that
Section 3
was not
contradicted and so far as Section 55 of ECA Act concerned,
Section 7
of the said Act deals with penalties for contravention of
any order made under
Section 3
of the Act in the punishment
prescribed thereunder and to contradict the penal Sections, it
must be shown any contravention of any order made under the Act 
and the Control Order 2008 made by the State in exercise of its
power under
Section 3
read with
Section 5
of the Act, if it is shown
that the detenu carries on any of the activities in contravention of
the Control Order, then it attracts the penal sections and clause 17
of the Control Order envisages penalty for confiscation of the stock
making false entry and diverting stocks and that supplies and to
the fair price shop dealers and enumerated dealers and hawkers
and not for others thereby has no application to the detenu; and
even coming to clause 17 of the Control Order shows that the same
is attracted to the fair price shop dealer, or card holder of any
person interferes with smooth distribution of essential
commodities under the PDS or other Government scheme at any   
level till schedule commodity reaches the intended beneficiary and
from its reading, there is no whisper either in the detention order
or in the grounds of detention that any of the detenues is
interfering with the smooth functioning of the public commodities
from the FCI godown till it reaches the intended beneficiary and
the whole allegation is that they have been purchasing the PDS
rice from card holders and it is outside the purview of Section 17A
that applies upto the rice reaches the card holders and not later.
This decision on its reading has no application to the facts. It is
because it is not even the contention of any of the revision
petitioners that after the PDS Rice reached the beneficiary and
they purchased the same from the very beneficiaries, by invoking
the express provisions so far as clause 17A of the Order.
10.     In fact, in the cases on hand, some of the facts reveal that
even FCI sealed bags were there among seized boxes, which clearly 
show diverting the stocks meant for beneficiaries before
distribution to the beneficiaries as part of the PDS. Apart from it, it
is important to note that it is not only in violation of the Control
Order, but also in violation of the LIcence Order, 2008 and further
violation of clause 7(a)(i) for transporting rice from one District to
another thereunder. There is no permit obtained either from the
District Supply Officer or District Collector (Civil Supplies). Once
these are the violations, which clearly prone to seizure and
initiation of the proceedings and prone to confiscation, the
respective orders of the Collectors, as confirmed to that extent by
the lower appellate authority, no way require interference, but for if
at all to consider any interference, on the quantum, of confiscation
of seized stock respectively, though not to reduce vehicle penalty.
11.     Accordingly and in the result:
a) Crl.R.C.No.182 of 2017 is allowed in part viz., so far as the
order of the Collector for confiscation of 100% of the seized stock
modified to 75% by the learned District Judge is reduced to 50% of
the seized stock or its value.
b) Crl.R.C.No.236 of 2017 is dismissed for the reason of
penalty of Rs1,25,000/- imposed by the District Collector, on the
vehicle owner (revision petitioner) that was reduced to Rs.75,000/-
by the District Judge no way requires interference to reduce even
further as it is a clear violation by the owner of the vehicle being
none other than the wife of A1 and daughter in law of A4. and
c) Crl.R.C.No.237 of 2017 is allowed in part viz., so far as the
order of the Collector for confiscation of 100% of seized stock
modified to 75% by the learned Sessions Judge is reduced to 50% 
of the seized stock or its value.
Pending miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall stand closed.
__________________________________      
JUSTICE B. SIVA SANKARA RAO       
20.02.2017