[Cites
7
, Cited by
4
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
The United India Insurance Co. Ltd vs Gurrala Laxmi Varaprasad And Another on 8 September, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 13
Author:
T. Rajani
Bench:
T. Rajani
THE HONBLE SMT JUSTICE T. RAJANI      

MACMA.No.2247 of 2006    

08-09-2017 

The United India Insurance Co. Ltd. ... APPELLANT 

Gurrala Laxmi Varaprasad and another. ... RESPONDENTS     

Counsel for Appellant :MR. E. VENUGOPAL REDDY      

Counsel for Respondents:--NONE APPEARED--     

<GIST   :

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred:
1. (2006) 4 SCC 404 
2. (2003) 2 SCC 223 
3. 2004 (1) TN MAC 340 (SC) 


SMT JUSTICE T. RAJANI    

MACMA.No.2247 of 2006    

JUDGMENT:
The insurer, respondent No.2 before the Court below, prefers
this appeal, assailing the judgment of the II Additional District
Judge, Adilabad in OP.No.783 of 2003 dated 11.05.2006 offended 
by the  order made to it, to pay the compensation and to recover the
same from the insured.
2.      The issue involved in this appeal lies in a very narrow campus,
because, the learned counsel for the claimants/respondents does not
dispute that the deceased was a gratuitous passenger and since the
only ground that was stressed by the counsel for the appellant is
with regard to the liability of the appellant in respect of a gratuitous
passenger. Since, it is admitted that the deceased is a gratuitous
passenger, the question that is left for further decision is whether
the principle of pay and recover could be applied in this case.  The
facts need a brief narration in order to understand the nature of the
travel of the claimant in the crime vehicle.
The crime vehicle is a jeep, which was hired by the friends of
the claimant; he was travelling in the said vehicle when he was
picked up by it on the way to its destination and the vehicle met with
the accident, involving another lorry. But the claimant preferred to
attribute negligence only to the driver of the jeep in which he was
travelling. It is how the nature of his travel becomes relevant,
for deciding the liability of the insurer.
3.      On the basis of the arguments that were extended by the
counsel for the appellant, the aspects that have to be considered fall
under the following four points:
1. Whether the hire of the vehicle is permitted by the
policy conditions;
2. If not, whether the injured or the deceased travelling
in a hired vehicle can be termed as gratuitous
passengers;
3. If yes, whether they should be deprived of the benefit
of compensation from the insurer and
4.      If yes, whether, at least, the order to pay the amount
by the insurer and to recover the said amount from
the insured can be made.
POINT No.1:
4.      The policy is an act policy and the same is not disputed. The
conditions of the policy stipulate that the insurance company shall
not be liable if the vehicle is used otherwise than in accordance with
the limitations as to use. The limitations as to use include hire or
reward, apart from others. Hence, it can be quickly concluded, on the
basis of the terms of the policy, that the hire of the vehicle is not
permitted by the policy conditions.
POINT No.2:
5.      The counsel for the appellant takes help of the decision of the
Supreme Court in
UNITED INSURANCE CO. LTD. v. TILAK      
SINGH
to draw support to his contention that the claimant is a
gratuitous passenger, though he was travelling in a jeep which is not
a goods vehicle. The question that came up for consideration before
the Supreme Court is with regard to the liability of the insurer in
respect of the death of or injury to a gratuitous passenger carried in
a private vehicle. The vehicle involved in this case is not a goods
vehicle.
But, by expanding the principle laid by the Supreme Court in
NEW INDIA ASSURANCE CO. LTD. v. ASHA RANI
, that a       
passenger travelling in a goods vehicle is a gratuitous passenger, in
TILAK SINGH
's case  
(1 supra), the supreme court held that although the observations in
ASHA RANI
's case (2 supra) were in connection with carrying
passengers in goods vehicle, the same would apply with equal force,
to gratuitous passenger travelling in any other vehicle. Accordingly,
the claimant, from the nature of his travel in the vehicle, as admitted
by him, while deposing as P.W.1, nevertheless stands to be a
gratuitous passenger. The vehicle is a hired vehicle, not by him but
by his friends. He is not a fare paid passenger, as he did not pay any
fare towards his travel in the said vehicle. Hence his nature of travel
categorizes him as a gratuitous passenger.
POINT No.3:
6.      Whether a gratuitous passenger should be deprived of
compensation from the insurer, has been a vexed question, which
painfully comes up, in spite of there being several judgments
touching upon that question.
In
TILAK SINGHs
case (1 supra),
the Supreme Court, after considering the decisions in
NEW INDIA
ASSURANCE CO. LTD. v. SATPAL SINGH
[(
2000) 1 SCC 237] and        
ASHA RANIs
case (2 supra), held that that insurer cannot be made
liable for the compensation for the death of a gratuitous passenger
travelling in a vehicle, which is not meant for the gratuitous travel of
a passenger. That is the position of law which stands settled as on
date.
POINT No.4:
7.      The Supreme Court stopped at ruling that the insurer would
not be liable for the death of a gratuitous passenger. It did not go
into the issue of who should pay the compensation. The concept of
pay and recover is of recent origin, meant to take care of the
suffering undergone by not only innocent but also ignorant third
parties.
Hence, neither
ASHA RANIs
case (2 supra) nor
TILAK SINGHs
case (1 supra) can be held as an authority, on the issue involved in
this appeal i.e. whether in case of the death of a gratuitous
passenger, an order of pay and recover can be made against the
insurer.
Both TILAK SINGHs
case (
1 supra) and ASHA RANIs
case    
(2 supra), as already observed, only stopped at deciding that the
insurer will not be liable for the death of a gratuitous passenger.
8.      The approach of the High Court of Madras in CMA 
(MD).No.1772 of 1999 between
BRANCH MANAGER, NEW INDIA          
ASSURANCE CO. LTD. v. NARAYANAN AND OTHERS
, while           
        dealing with a similar case, impresses me. There the tribunal
decided that the deceased was not a gratuitous passenger. But
taking into consideration, an admission that the deceased was a
gratuitous passenger, the question that was considered by the Court
was whether the principle of pay and recover could be applied
in that
case
.
The deceased
in that case
was aged 12 years. The contention of the
counsel for the appellant therein was that since the deceased was
aged 12 years, the family of the deceased could not be economically
deprived and therefore, the principle of pay and recover could not be
applied. The counsel seems to have further argued that in the case
of death of a person, like landlord, in an accident as gratuitous
passenger, there could be no economic deprivation and in those
cases, the principle of pay and recover could not be applied. It was
also the argument of the counsel that if the deceased person, as a
gratuitous passenger, is a bank employee and if the surviving wife is
not an employee then the principle of pay and recover could be
applied and the said principle cannot be applied if the surviving wife
is employed in a bank or other reputed institutions. It was also
argued that if there is death of an agricultural coolie in an accident,
as a gratuitous passenger, then the principle of pay and recover
could be applied.
But his argument with regard to that case was that since the
deceased was aged 12 years, she could not be treated as an 
agricultural coolie and the principle of pay and recover cannot be
applied.
But, ultimately, it was found by the Court that the deceased was
proved to be an agricultural coolie and it was felt that it is a fit case
to apply the principle of pay and recover.
What comes out from the above findings of the High Court of
Madras is that the principle of pay and recover needs examination of
the facts of the case. If the facts deserve application of the said
principle, the said principle can be applied.
9.      The observations of the Supreme Court in
UNITED INDIA 
INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED v. LEHRU
would be of good         
guidance to decide whether the interests of the victims need to be
served by making an order of pay and recover. They are as follows:
The law may provide for compensation to victims of the
accidents who sustain injuries in the course of an automobile
accident a compensation to the dependants of the victims in the
case of a fatal accident. However, such protection would remain
a protection on paper unless there is a guarantee that the
compensation awarded by the courts would be recoverable from 
the persons held liable for the consequences of the accident. A
court can only pass an award or a decree It cannot ensure that
such an award or decree results in the amount awarded being
actually recovered, from the person held liable who may not
have the resources. The exercise undertaken by the law courts
would then be an exercise in futility. And the outcome of the
legal proceedings which by the very nature of things involve the
time cost and money cost invested from the scarce resources 
of the community would make a mockery of the injured victims,
or the dependants of the deceased victim of the accident, who
themselves are obliged to incur not inconsiderable expenditure
of time, money and energy in litigation. To overcome this ugly
situation the legislature has made it obligatory that no motor
vehicle shall be used unless a third party insurance is in force.
To use the vehicle without the requisite third party insurance
being in force is a penal offence. The legislature was also faced
with another problem. The insurance policy might provide for
liability walled in by conditions which may be specified in the
contract of policy. In order to make the protection real, the
legislature has also provided that the judgment obtained shall
not be defeated by the incorporation of exclusion clauses other
than those authorised by Section 96 and by providing that
except and save to the extent permitted by Section 96 it will be
the obligation of the insurance company to satisfy the judgment
obtained against the persons insured against third party risk
(vide Section 96). In other words, the legislature has insisted
and made it incumbent on the user of a motor vehicle to be
armed with an insurance policy covering third party risks which
is in conformity with the provisions enacted by the legislature. It
is so provided in order to ensure that the injured victims of
automobile accidents or the dependants of the victims of fatal
accidents are really compensated in terms of the money and not
in terms of promise. Such a benign provision enacted by the
legislature having regard to the fact that in the modern age the
use of motor vehicles notwithstanding the attendant hazards,
has become an inescapable fact of life, has to be interpreted in
a meaningful manner which serves rather thus defeats the
purpose of the legislation. The provision has therefore to be
interpreted in the twilight of the aforesaid perspective.
10.     In this case, as already observed, the claimant was not the
person, who took the vehicle on hire, so that he could have had an
occasion to go into the details of the insurance policy and to discuss
with the owner of the vehicle as to the limitations of the usage of the
said vehicle. He is a third party to the hirer of the vehicle, who is not
expected to know about the limitations of the use of the vehicle and
as to the terms of the contract between the insurer and the insured.
He is not only an innocent victim but also an ignorant person and the
ignorance is not an obligation, under which he is placed, so as not to
consider his ignorance as a factor weighing, while deciding this
issue. The principle of pay and recover, as applied, in case of absence
of driving licence or an appropriate driving licence to the driver can
be extended to these kind of cases also. The generality of the
observations in
LEHRU
's case (3 supra), would allow me to apply the
principle to this case, if it otherwise deserves.
11.
Section 149
of the Motor Vehicles Act (for short the Act)
specifies the extent of the liability of the insurer;
Section 147
of the
Act is the requirement of the policy and limits of liability. The policy,
in this case, being an Act policy only need to satisfy
Section 147
of
the Act. Clause (c) of proviso to sub-section (1) of
Section 147
prohibits a person being carried in a goods carriage. It does not
speak about a person who travels gratuitously in a private hired
vehicle. Going by the nature of the vehicle also, a third party can be
expected to exercise their discretion before boarding the said
vehicle. If it is a goods vehicle, the very appearance of the built of
the vehicle, would give an understanding to everyone that no
passengers are supposed to travel in such vehicle and if a person
boards such vehicle in spite of the nature of the vehicle being
obvious, such third parties may not be required to be compensated,
as they themselves knowingly violated the obvious condition against
travel in a vehicle, which is not meant for travel of passengers. But
when it is a passenger carrying vehicle, the third party cannot be
expected to understand that there is a prohibition for a person to
travel in such vehicle. With such distinction being available, the
benefit of pay and recover can be extended to the claimant in this
case, who travelled in a jeep, which is apparently meant to carry
people.
12.     At this juncture, what the Supreme Court also said, in
LEHRU
's case (3 supra) is apt to be remembered, as under:
It needs to be emphasised that it is not the contract of
insurance which is being interpreted. It is the statutory provision
defining the conditions of exemption which is being interpreted.
These must therefore be interpreted in the spirit in which the
same have been enacted accompanied by an anxiety to ensure   
that the protection is not nullified by the backward looking
interpretation which serves to defeat the provision rather than
to fulfill its life-aim. To do otherwise would amount to nullifying
the benevolent provision by reading it with a non-benevolent eye
and with a mind not tuned to the purpose and philosophy of the
legislation without being informed of the true goals sought to be
achieved. What the legislature has given, the Court cannot
deprive of by way of an exercise in interpretation when the view
which renders the provision potent is equally plausible as the one
which renders the provision impotent. In fact it appears that the
former view is more plausible apart from the fact that it is more
desirable. When the option is between opting for a view which
will relieve the distress and misery of the victims of accidents or
their dependants on the one hand and the equally plausible view
which will reduce the profitability of the insurer in regard to the
occupational hazard undertaken by him by way of business 
activity, there is hardly any choice. The Court cannot but opt for
the former view. Even if one were to make a strictly doctrinaire
approach, the very same conclusion would emerge in obeisance  
to the doctrine of 'reading down' the exclusion clause in the light
of the ' main purpose' of the provision so that the 'exclusion
clause' does not cross swords with the
'main purpose' highlighted earlier. The effort must be to
harmonize the two instead of allowing the exclusion clause to
snipe successfully at the main purpose."
13.     But I agree that there should be definitely a balancing of
interests between the innocent victim and the insurer, whose policy
is violated by a breach of its terms and fixing liability on whom may
look apparently unjust.
In this regard, again the observation made
by the Supreme Court in
LEHRU
's case (3 supra) is relevant.
 It was said that the assured might be a man of straw and
the insurer might not be able to recover anything from him. But
the answer to that is that it is the insurer's bad luck. In such
circumstances the injured person also would not have been able
to recover the damages suffered by him from the assured, the
person causing the injuries. The loss had to fall on some one
and the statute has thought fit that it shall be borne by the
insurer. That also seems o us to be equitable for the loss falls
on the insurer in the course of his carrying on his business, a
business out of which he makes profit, and he could so arrange
his business that in the net result he would never suffer a loss.
On the other hand, if the loss fell' on the injured person,
it would be due to no fault of his, it would have been a loss
suffered by him arising out of an incident in the happening of
which he had no hand al all."
So being the balance of equities, there need be no demur to
hold that the appellant has to satisfy the award and later recover
from the insured. The right spirited judgment of the Court below,
hence, needs no interference.
The civil miscellaneous appeal is dismissed. As a sequel,
the miscellaneous applications, if any, shall stand closed. There shall
be no order as to costs.
__________  
T. RAJANI, J
September 8, 2017