[Cites
6
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
A.Vimala Devi vs The Registrar (Administration) High ... on 30 August, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 14
Author:
T.Rajani
Bench:
T.Rajani
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN AND THE HONBLE SMT. JUSTICE T.RAJANI                   

W.P. No.9184 OF 2010   

30-08-2017 

A.Vimala Devi ..... Petitioner

The Registrar (Administration) High Court of A.P., Hyderabad and another..... Respondents

Counsel for Petitioner  :Mr. P.Nagendra Reddy  

Counsel for Respondent No.1:Mr. S.Sri Ram  
Counsel for Respondent No.2:Mr. B.Narayana Reddy   

<GIST   :

>HEAD NOTE :   

? Cases referred :
1.1991(1) SCC 725 
2.1997 (1) PLJR (CWJC.No.12092 of 1995 dt.10.12.1996)  
3.1971 SC 1409  
4.(1988) 3 SCC 32 

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN            
AND  
THE HONBLE SMT. JUSTICE T.RAJANI      

W.P. No.9184 of 2010 

ORDER:
(Per the Honble Smt. Justice T.Rajani) 

        The petitioner, under an impression and belief that she parted with
half of the pension, whole of which she alone is entitled to and allowed it
to be paid to the step-son, under a compromise, files this writ petition,
after the death of her step-son, seeking a direction to the respondents to
revert to her that half of the pension that was being paid to her step-son,
which according to her, is only because of the concession that she made
under the compromise.
Heard the learned counsel, Sri. P.Nagendra Reddy, for the
petitioner, Sri S.Sri Ram, learned Standing Counsel for the APHC and
Sri B.Narayana Reddy, learned Assistant Solicitor General appearing for
the 2nd respondent.
The husband of the petitioner, Sri A.Sudhakar Reddy, herein after
referred as the deceased, while working in A.P. State Judicial Service as
Additional Judge, City Small Causes Court at Hyderabad, died on
18.07.1996 leaving behind the petitioner, her daughter, Aila Sai Phani
Mamatha Bhargavi, and her step-son, Aila Phanidhar Reddy.
The petitioner is the second wife of the deceased. The first wife of
the deceased died on 08.08.1987 after which, he married the writ
petitioner.  The first wife of the deceased begot a son. The deceased,
during his life time, executed a will dated 28.06.1996 by which he
bequeathed all his departmental benefits to the writ petitioner and her
daughter, in equal shares.  The petitioner submitted an application to the
department after the death of her husband for grant of family pension.
Prior to the said application, there was a compromise between herself and
her step-son to share the family pension in equal halves.
The compromise proceedings were processed through the first 
respondent, based on which the second respondent apportioned the 
family pension in two equal halves between the petitioner and her step-
son.  While so, on 28.02.2005, her step-son also died and thereafter she
made a representation to the first respondent on 27.02.2006 informing
about the death of her step-son. She also made a request for payment of
full pension to her, by reverting the half pension that was being paid to
her step-son, with a claim that she is entitled to full pension as no one
else is entitled to share the pension.  The first respondent forwarded her
representation to the second respondent, the second respondent issued
the impugned proceedings No.P18/IV/S-3046/FP 103/97-12/630, dated   
14.07.2006, rejecting her request on the basis of Rule 50(5)(iii) of A.P.
(Revised) Pension Rules, 1980 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
It is the contention of the petitioner that the said Rule is not applicable to
her case.  According to the petitioner, by the time of the death of her
husband, she is the only wife to him and therefore, no share can be given
to any other wife under the Rules.  The petitioner further contends that
her family pension is not divided under  Rule 50(6)(a) of the Rules and
under Rule 50(7)(i) and except as provided in sub rule (6) of Rule 50 the
family pension shall not be payable to more than one member of the
family at the same time.
The petitioner earlier filed W.P. No.15081 of 2007 before this Court
but later, she withdrew the said writ petition with liberty to make a
representation to the Government under Rule 54 of the Rules.  As such,
she made a representation for relaxation of the condition and for
payment of full pension to her.  She subsequently came to know that
there is no condition to be relaxed by the Government, and that the
second respondent misunderstood Rule 50(6) of the Rules while issuing
the impugned proceedings.
From what the petitioner averred in the writ petition,
we understand that a will was executed by the husband of the writ
petitioner, bequeathing his pensionary benefits equally to the petitioner
and her daughter. By believing, that by virtue of the said will, herself and
her daughter alone became entitled to the family pension in equal halves,
she entered into a compromise with her step-son, agreeing to share half
of the pension with him.
Mr.Sriram, refuting the contention that pension was shared only
due to the compromise, draws our attention to the Rules, which confer a
right on the step son of the petitioner, to receive pension, independent of
any charity from the petitioner. We would refer to the rules later.
The validity of the will is the first aspect that falls for our
consideration. Deciding the question of validity of such a will, the Apex
Court  in the case of
SMT.VIOLET ISSAC AND OTHERS Vs. UNION OF        
INDIA AND OTHERS
held that the family pension scheme confers   
monetary benefit on the wife and children of the deceased employee,but
the employee has no title to it; the employee has no control over the
family pension as he is not required to make any contribution to it;
the family pension scheme is in the nature of welfare scheme framed by
the employer to provide relief to the widow and minor children of the
deceased employee; since, the Rules do not provide for nomination of any
person by the deceased employee during his lifetime for the payment of
family pension, he has no title to the same; therefore, it does not form
part of his estate enabling him to dispose of the same by testamentary
disposition.  In
the said judgment
, the Supreme Court held that family
pension cannot be ordered to be given to a stranger other than the
widow, as it depends on the status that is acquired on the happening of
certain event, namely becoming widow on the death of the husband and 
hence, it cannot be given to any other person by executing a will or
instrument.
The above ruling makes it clear that no will can be executed by the
employee in respect of his pensionary benefits. Except under section 12A
of the Act, which is in respect of the pension in the nature specified
under section 11, no nomination is permitted to be made, under the Act.
In support of his contention, that pension is a property and hence
is heritable, the learned counsel for the petitioner relies on a ruling of the
Honble High Court of Bihar, in a case between
SHANTA SINHA Vs. THE   
STATE OF BIHAR AND OTHERS
.
The Honble High Court of Bihar     
took the support of two judgments of the Supreme Court reported in the
case of
DEOKINANDAN PRASAD Vs. THE STATE OF BIHAR
and
BHARAT PETROLEUM MANAGEMENT STAFF OFFICERS Vs.                
BHARAT PETROLEUM CORPORATION LTD
, in coming to a conclusion          
that pension is a heritable property. The
ratio
laid down in
the above two
judgments is that the right to receive pension by a Government employee
is a property right and it is not a bounty payable on the will and pleasure
of the Government.  The Supreme Court, in both the cases was dealing
with the right of the Government employee to receive pension and in that
context it held that the right to receive pension is a property right and
not a mere bounty to be paid on the sweet will and pleasure of the
Government.  There was no difficulty for the Apex Court in those cases to
issue a Writ of Mandamus directing the employer to pay the pension to
the employee, as he is the only beneficiary entitled to receive the pension,
being alive when he made that claim. It was construed as property of the
employee lying in the hands of the employer, which the Government
employee cannot be deprived of, at the will of the employer. That was
based on the right of the employee to receive pension, subject to rules. We
understand, that, to the limited extent indicated by the Apex Court in the
above rulings, pension is property. Our such understanding can be
tested on the rules.
Rule 50(6)(a)(i) of the Andhra Pradesh Pension Rules, in short
Rules,  runs as follows:
(6)(a)(i) Where the family pension is payable to
more widows than one, the family pension shall be
paid to the widows in equal shares.
(ii) On the death of a widow, (or remarriage) her
share of the family pension shall become payable to
her eligible child:
Provided that if the widow is not survived by any
child, her share of the family pension shall cease to
be payable.
(b) Where the deceased Government servant or 
pensioner is survived by a widow but has left behind
eligible child or children from another wife who is not
alive, the eligible child or children shall be entitled to
the share of family pension which the mother would
have received if she had been alive at the time of the
death of the Government servant or pensioner.
The scheme of the above rule is to provide for the welfare of the
family of the deceased Government employee or the pensioner, as the
case may be. The extent to which such welfare should be provided is laid
in clear terms.
The above rules make it clear that the step-son of the petitioner
would be entitled to equal share in the pension, in the absence of his
mother, irrespective of the compromise that was entered into between the
petitioner and her step-son. When the husband of the petitioner does not
have a right to execute a will in respect of his pensionary benefits, then
by operation of the rules, the step-son of the petitioner becomes entitled
to half of the pension of her husband.  Rule 50(6) (a)(ii) says that after
the death of the widow, who receives family pension, or after her
re-marriage, her share of the family pension shall become payable to her
eligible child.  The eligibility of the son to a family pension is up to his
age of 21 years. It is because of the death of his mother, that the step son
of the petitioner became eligible for half of the pension, under Rule
50(6)(ii). The petitioner and her step-son were eligible to receive equal
shares of the family pension only because of the exception that is
provided for in Rule 50(6).  Otherwise no two members of the family
would be entitled to receive pension at the same time as Rule 50(7)(i) is to
the said effect.  Rule 50(6) proviso says that if a widow is not survived by
any child her share of family pension shall cease to be payable.
Sub-Rule (7)(i) puts an embargo on the pension being paid to more
than one member of the family at the same time, except as provided in
sub rule (6). Sub-Rule 7(ii) says, if a deceased Government servant or
pensioner leaves behind a widow or widower the family pension shall
become payable to the widow or widower, failing which to the eligible
child.
Proviso to the said rule says that the authority competent to
sanction the family pension may in a suitable case, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, pay the minor children in preference to the widower
who is judicially separated. Under Sub-Rule 7(iii) if sons and unmarried
daughters are alive, unmarried daughters shall not be eligible for family
pension unless the sons attain the age as specified in clause (ii) of
sub-rule (5) and thereby become ineligible for the grant of family pension.
The scheme of Sub-Rule 7 completely overrules the possibility of
any inheritance coming into play, in respect of pension. If a property has
to be inherited, it can be by more than one member of the family, which
is negated by Sub-Rule 7(i).  Under the Rules of succession, it is not
necessary, as laid in Sub-Rule 7(ii), that for a son to inherit the property,
his mother should not be alive, if pension is a heritable property. If it is a
heritable property, no discretion can be vested in the competent authority
to divert the line of succession, by paying it to the minor children, in
preference to the widower who is judicially separated, as was done under
the proviso. Here it can also be noticed that the competent authority is
not given discretion to take such decision in case of a widow who is
judicially separated, thereby supporting the view taken by the Apex
Court in Voilet Isaac's case, that pension is a welfare measure. Then the
route of welfare cannot be changed, by operating rules of succession in
the area of pension. A son and an unmarried daughter cannot take
preference over a married daughter, as prescribed under Sub-Rule 7(iii),
if pension is a heritable property. Thus neither the Act nor the rules do
any where leave any scope to assume that pension is a heritable property.
The rulings relied upon by the Honble High Court of Bihar in the
case of Deokinanda Prasad (3rd supra) can be further looked into for
understanding the intent of  the Honble Supreme Court, in holding that
right to receive pension is property. The Supreme Court was dealing with
a case of a Government employee who was absent from duty for over five
years, which according to the respondents would disentitle the employee
to receive pension under Rule 46 of the pension Rules.  The Apex Court
considered the facts of the said case and found that the petitioner therein
was not given opportunity to show cause against the order proposed,
which disentitled the petitioner to receive pension.  In the background of
such factual situation, the Apex Court held that the right of the
petitioner to receive pension is property under
Article 31
clause (1) of the
Constitution and by a mere executive order the State had no power to
withhold the same. It observed that the right to pension is a valuable
right vesting in a Government servant.  The appreciation made by the
Apex Court, of the contention of the petitioner therein, vis--vis the
pension rules would show that the Apex Court did not intend to hold
anything contrary to the pension rules. As against the pension being
treated as a bounty payable on the sweet will and pleasure of the
Government, the Apex Court held that it is not as such and that it is a
property, being a valuable right vesting in a Government servant.  Taking
help of the above ruling, the High Court of Bihar went a step further and
held that pension is property and hence it is heritable.  The High Court
of Bihar also considered the pension rules and from a reading of para 7 of
1964 scheme, which applied only to the state of Bihar, understood that
family pension and pension are synonymous and identical in sense and 
uses for each other.  By such understanding, it held that family pension
is also property. There may not be any difficulty in agreeing with the said
understanding.  But we certainly have difficulty to accept the
understanding of the High Court of Bihar that family pension and
pension are inheritable properties.  The pension is provided to the
Government servant or the pensioner, for the welfare of the family, the
aim being to sustain the family till it can sustain itself without the help
of the pension. It does not mean that the family should be permitted to
draw the pension in perpetuity by passing on the right to the entire
progeny and that the welfare of the whole progeny has to provided for by
the Government.
Proviso to rule 50 sub rule (6) is to the effect that if the widow is
not survived by any child her share of the family pension shall cease to
be payable.  Rule 50(6)(a)(ii) provides for the payment of pension in equal
shares to all the widows of the Government employee.  The rules carry
the benefit of pension, in the absence of widow, to her eligible child.  The
eligibility of the child, if it is a son, is until he attains the age of 21 years
and if it is a daughter until she attains the age of 30 years or until she
gets marriage, whichever is earlier.  The rules take care of the sustenance
of the family by providing pension to a son up to his age of 21 years and
to a daughter up to the time of her marriage or 30 years, whichever is
earlier. Those are the probable ages by which a son and a daughter are
expected to stand on their own, hence the benefit of pension was
extended till such ages.
High Court of Bihar applied the rules of succession to the pension.
The court was impressed by the argument of the counsel for the
petitioner therein, that the Hindu Law has laid down principles relating
to the survivorship of two or more widows; in sub section (iv) of Section
43 of the Hindu Law two or more widows succeeding as co-heirs to the
estate of their deceased husband take as joint tenants with rights of
survivorship and equal beneficial enjoyment; thus, if a Hindu dies leaving
two widows, they are entitled as between themselves to an equal share of
the income, and on the death of either of them, the other is entitled to the
whole of the income by survivorship, and though co-widows take as joint
tenants, no one of them has a right to enforce an absolute partition of the
estate against the others so as to destroy their right of survivorship; that
under the
Hindu Succession Act
the property of an intestate shall be
divided among the heirs in class I of the schedule in accordance with
rule(1) the intestates widow, or if there are more widows than one, all the
widows together shall take one share;  Rule 54(7) of CCS (Pension) Rules
and under its proviso if the widow is not survived by any child, her share
of family pension shall not lapse but shall be payable to other widow in
equal share, or if there is only one such widow in full; whereas, the
scheme for the payment of family pension to the survivors of the State
Government employees of Bihar provides that if at the time of her death
the widow leaves no eligible minor child, the payment of her pension will
cease.
The Bihar High Court though could accept the rule to the extent of
distribution of the family pension to the family as per the benefit
provided by the rules so much so that where an officer is survived by
more than one widow, they all have been given equal shares and on the
death of a widow, her eligible minor children have also been given
protection by grant of pension of the share of her mother, could not
appreciate the last sentence wherein it provides that If at the time of her
death, a widow leaves no eligible minor child, the payment of her share
of the pension will cease.  The High Court of Bihar felt that if an
interpretation, that a Hindu widow even to the extent of her coverage by
the definition of the family as contained in sub-para (ii) of para 7, cannot
claim pension, has to be given, then the said clause has to be held as
arbitrary and discriminatory.   But, we consider that this is not an area
where misplaced sympathies can be invoked. The welfare measures  
underlying the scheme of the pension Rules, cannot be expanded by 
bringing law of succession into interaction.  The observation of the High
Court of Bihar which imply that the second marriage of the Government
employee is a misdeed, itself would render an answer for us to uphold
the propriety of the pension rule, in providing pension for the second wife
and her eligible children.   Expectations of the widows, who are alive by
the date of death of the Government employee, have to be only as per
their entitlement under the Act and Rules.  The rules provide for the
payment of pension to which the widow or widows are entitled, to their
eligible children, after their death.  The rules take care of the welfare of
the widows and their eligible children. It is not as if a widow is deprived
of something for which she is entitled to as per the rules.  Her share in
the pension is pre-determined. If the rule has to be read in the manner
that a widow who survives the other widows would get the full pension, it
may leave room for unethical    expectations. The family of the deceased
Government employee as it exists by the date of his death, is taken into
consideration and the welfare of such family is taken care of by the rules.
In this case, as on the date of the death of the Government
employee, the widow of the Government employee and her step-son were  
the eligible persons to receive the pension equally. The step-son having
died, the widow comes before us seeking for a reversion of that half of the
pension, which was being paid to her step-son, to her.  Even if we  go by
the ratio laid down by the Honble High Court of Bihar, it is the legal
heirs of her step-son who would become entitled to his pension. The
questions that then would arise are, whether her deceased step-son had
any legal heirs, whether he is married and whether he had any children.
These questions cannot be decided in this writ petition. However, in this
case the pension has taken two routes through the two wives of the
deceased. Since the second wife is alive, she takes half and since the first
wife is no more, her son takes the other half. If the widow dies her
daughter, if eligible under the rules, would get her half and if the son of
the first wife dies, his eligible successors under the rules, would get his
half. If there are no eligible persons in the two branches, the pension
would cease. The rules do not contemplate any reversion.
With the above findings, this writ petition is liable to be dismissed
and is accordingly, dismissed.  There shall be no order as to costs.
__________________________________      
JUSTICE V.RAMASUBRAMANIAN         
_________________________    
JUSTICE T.RAJANI   
Date:30.08.2017