[Cites
3
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Addanki Ranjith Ophir vs State Of A.P. Rep. By Its Public ... on 27 December, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 59
Author:
T.Rajani
Bench:
T.Rajani
THE HONBLE SMT JUSTICE T.RAJANI       

CRL.PETITION NO. 10839 OF 2011.    

27-12-2017 

Addanki Ranjith OphirPetitioner/accused        

State of A.P. rep. by its Public Prosecutorand another.Respondents 

Counsel for the Petitioner:Mr.Thakur Singh

Counsel for the Respondent : Public Prosecutor


<Gist :

>Head Note: 

?Cases referred:

THE HONBLE SMT JUSTICE T.RAJANI       
CRIMINAL PETITION NO.10839 OF 2011      
ORDER:
This Criminal Petition is filed under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. seeking to quash the proceedings in Cr.No.93 of
2011 on the file of the Station House Officer, Biccavole
Police Station, East Godavari District.
2. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner-
accused and the learned Public Prosecutor appearing for
the 1st respondent.
3. It is alleged in the complaint that the petitioner-
accused published a book in the name and style of
Hyndava Christavam and printed the photograph of Jesus
Christ on the National Flag insulting the National Flag;  the
contents of the said book are criticizing the Hindu religion
feelings and insulting the National Flag.
4. Learned counsel for the petitioner-accused
submits that there is absolutely no insult that is projected
by the publication of the said book and he also exhibited
the said book before this Court, which consists of a cover
page, on which, National Flag was printed with the face of
Jesus Christ on the back ground.
5. There is absolutely no reason to understand the
said printing of the cover page as outraging the feelings of
any religion.  There can be no identification of any religion
with the National Flag.
Section 2
of the Prevention of
Insults to National Honour Act, 1971 reads as under:
2. Insult to Indian National Flag and Constitution of
India:  Whoever in any public place or in any other place
within the public view  burns, mutilates, defaces, defiles,
disfigures, destroys, tramples upon or (otherwise shows
disrespect to or brings) into contempt (whether by words,
either spoken or written, or by acts) the Indian National
Flag  or the Constitution of India or any part thereof,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both

     Printing of the photo of the Jesus Christ on the said
book does not in any manner fall within the purview of
Section 2
of the said Act.
6.   As regards
Section 295-A
IPC also, there should
be indication of outrage of religious feelings of any class, by
doing of act, which has to be deliberate and malicious.  The
same reasoning would apply to the above section  and no
offence under
Section 295-A
IPC  can be made out from the
act of the petitioner. The title of the book as Hyndava
Christavam cannot be construed as affecting the
secularism of the country. Moreover it suggests religion
integrity, by considering the title with two religions.  The
Ashok Chakra, which the petitioner now removed, only
represents the Laws of Dharma (Righteousness) which  
everyone should be allowed to follow, irrespective of
religion.
7. Learned counsel for the petitioner-accused
further submits that in order to avoid further
complications, National Emblem on the National Flag was 
removed on the further publications.  Hence, in view of the
same, the complaint is considered as an abuse of process of
law and continuation of proceedings against the petitioner-
accused would only result in abuse of process of law.
8. Accordingly, the Criminal Petition is allowed.
Miscellaneous petitions, if any pending, in this petition
shall stand closed.
______________  
T.RAJANI, J 
DATED: 27-12-2017.