[Cites
15
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Baxalta Bioscience India Pvt. Ltd vs The State Of Telangana, Health, Medical ... on 13 March, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 HYDERABAD 184, (2017) 3 ANDHLD 352
Author:
A.Ramalingeswara Rao
Bench:
A.Ramalingeswara Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A.RAMALINGESWARA RAO             

WRIT PETITION No.40315 of 2016   

13-03-2017 

Baxalta Bioscience India Pvt. Ltd.Petitioner

The State of Telangana, Health, Medical and Family Welfare
Department,Secretariat, Hyderabad,Represented by its Principal Secretary,And
others.... Respondents

Counsel for the Petitioner:Senior Counsel Sri Sanjeev Puri for Sri K.Venkat
Reddy 

Counsel for the Respondents: GP for Medical & Health,  Sri K.Pavan Kumar, 
Senior Counsel Sri Vedula  Venkataramana,   Sri Appaiah Sarma.                  
                
<Gist :

>Head Note : 

? Cases referred


1.      (1991) 3 SCC 273 
2.      (2006) 11 SCC 548 
3.      2016 (1) ALD 760 : 2016 (2) ALT 282
4.      2016 Supreme (Mad) 3787   
5.      (2001) 2 SCC 451 
6.      (2007) 14 SCC 517 
7.      (2012) 8 SCC 216 
8.      (1990) 2 SCC 488 
9.      AIR 1984 Bom 351  
10.     AIR 1982 Ker 81 : 1981 Ker LT 444 
11.     2015 (5) ALT 457 


THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE A.RAMALINGESWARA RAO             

WRIT PETITION No.40315 of 2016   

ORDER:
Heard learned Senior Counsel, Sri Sanjeev Puri for the
petitioner, learned Standing Counsel for the second respondent
and Sri Vedula Venkataramana, learned Senior Counsel  
appearing for the third respondent.
The undisputed facts in the present case are as follows:
The second respondent invited tenders bearing No.2/TS
MSIDC/Medicines/2016, dated 24.05.2016 for procurement of  
certain generic medicines from the interested parties.  The
tender was issued for procurement of 859 medicines.  Though
the petitioner submitted its bids for three products, in the
present case, we are concerned with Factor VIII.  So far as
Factor VIII is concerned, the petitioner and the third respondent
submitted their bids. The tenders have to be submitted on e-
procurement platform for a rate contract for the financial years
2016-17 and 2017-18.  The various dates for the process of
submission of bids are as follows:
Sl.
Particulars
Date and Time
1.
Bid Calling Date
24.05.2016
2.
Downloading of Bid Documents  
From26.05.2016to  
04.07.2016 upto 3.00 PM
3.
Pre Bid Conference Date/Time 
13.06.2016 at 11:00 PM
4.
Last date/Time seeking clarification
14.06.2016 05:00 PM
5.
Bid Submission Closing Date/Time  
05.07.2016 3:30 PM
6.
Bid Opening Date/Time 
05.07.2016 3.30 PM
7.
Last date/Time for submission of hard Copies at
TS MSIDC of Office 
08.07.2016 3.00 PM
8.
Last date for raising objection
11.07.2016 5:00 PM  

        Annexure-7 to the tender contains the check list and it is
in two parts.  Part-A deals with documents to be submitted
online for pre-qualification and Part-B deals with documents to
be submitted offline for technical evaluation.  There are 27
documents which are to be submitted under Part-A out of which
documents at serial numbers 4 to 18 should be submitted in
original by online and documents at serial numbers 19 to 27
should be self-attested copies bearing rubber stamp impression
of firm.  Apart from the above, Part-B provides for submission of
original DD and all the copies of documents mentioned in serial
numbers 30 to 36. The supporting documents have to be 
uploaded in files having size less than 1 MB.  The petitioner
submitted its online bid on 05.07.2016.  The technical bid of
the petitioner ran up to 122 pages which was broken into 18
files, less than 1 MB in size.  Out of 18 documents to be
uploaded, the petitioner could upload only 12 documents within
the specified time, but submitted all the balance required
documents through offline after the last date for submission of
online bids.  The valid bids, after evaluation at the pre-
qualification stage were evaluated technically.  The bid of the
petitioner was also considered for technical evaluation and was
rejected on 14.10.2016 for price bid evaluation on the following
grounds:
7.      Baxalta Bioscience India Pvt. Ltd.
1
1687
Factor IX
Not
Considered 
Online documents as  
per Annexure-7 are
mentioned as till page
no.130 but, uploaded
documents were only  
till 69 pgs.  The firm
has not submitted
valid GMP Certificate,
Market Standing 
Certificate, Non-
Conviction Certificate
and Performance 
Certificate
2
1367
Human  
Albumin 20%  
Not
Considered 
Online documents as  
per Annexure-7 are
mentioned as till page
no.130 but, uploaded
documents were only  
till 69 pgs.  The firm
has not submitted
valid GMP Certificate,
Market Standing 
Certificate, Non-
Conviction Certificate
and Performance 
Certificate
3
1802
Factor VIII
Not
Considered 
Online documents as  
per Annexure-7 are
mentioned as till page
no.130 but, uploaded
documents were only  
till 69 pgs.  The firm
has not submitted
valid GMP Certificate,
Market Standing 
Certificate, Non-
Conviction Certificate
and Performance 
Certificate


Thereafter, the price bids were opened and the third respondent
was found to be the successful bidder.  An agreement was
executed by the third respondent on 21.11.2016 and the
petitioner approached this Court simultaneously.  This Court,
by order dated 22.11.2016, granted status quo and seeking
vacation of the said order W.V.M.P.No.5198 of 2016 was filed.
The said petition along with the Writ Petition is taken up for
consideration.
Since there was a dispute with regard to the number of
files uploaded and the compliance of offline documents with the
online documents, this Court adjourned the matter in order to
enable the second respondent to file an affidavit with regard to
the documents supplied through offline.  After verifying the
uploaded documents and the documents submitted offline, an 
affidavit is filed by the second respondent stating that the
petitioner has submitted all the documents required to be
submitted as per Annexure 7-B.  It is further stated that the
deficient documents under Part A have been submitted by the
petitioner by offline, but not online.
Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner
submits that, though the petitioner could not upload the
required documents online, since it supplied the balance
documents within the time of verification of pre-qualifications,
its bid should have been considered along with other bids, as it
is a valid bid.  He further submits that since the bid of the
petitioner was considered for technical evaluation crossing the
barrier of pre-qualification, non-consideration of the bid for
price evaluation after technical evaluation is bad in law.  He
relied on the decisions of the Supreme Court in
Poddar Steel
Corporation v. Ganesh Engineering Works
,
B.S.N.Joshi & 
Sons Ltd. v. Nair Coal Services Ltd.
, a decision of this Court
in M/s.Cyano
Pharma (P) Limited v. The State of
Telangana
, and a decision of the Madras High Court in
Renaatus Projects Private Limited v. The Tamil Nadu Police
Housing Corporation Ltd.
.
Learned Counsel for the second respondent as well as the
learned Senior Counsel for the third respondent submit that in
view of the specific condition in the tender document at para 1.2
that offline bids will not be accepted and bids submitted online
and supported by offline documents will only be considered, the
bid of the petitioner does not qualify for consideration and the
petitioner cannot take advantage of consideration of the bid at
the technical evaluation stage when the bid of the petitioner was
ineligible even at the threshold.  They relied on
W.B.State
Electricity Board v. Patel Engineering Co. Ltd
,
Jagdish
Mandal v. State of Orissa
and
Michigan Rubber (India)
Limited v. State of Karnataka
.
In the light of the above facts and submissions made by
the learned Counsel appearing for the parties, the point that
arises for consideration in the present case is whether the bid of
the petitioner is qualified to be considered for evaluation along
with other qualified bids, though the petitioner submitted the
documents through online partially and rectified the deficiency
by submitting the balance documents offline.
The pre-bid conference was held on 13.06.2016 and the
last date for seeking clarifications was indicated as 14.06.2016.
As per the schedule shown above, the downloading of bid
documents ended at 3:00 PM on 04.07.2016.  The bids were  
required to be submitted by 05.07.2016 at 3:00 PM. The
incomplete bid was submitted by the petitioner within time.
The bids were opened at 3:30 PM on the same date.  The last 
date for submission of hard copies was 08.07.2016.  Time was
granted up to 5:00 PM on 11.07.2016 for raising objections.  So,
by the time of opening the bids for pre-qualification, all the
required documents were not uploaded by the petitioner and the
deficient documents were supplied by hard copies on
06.07.2016 in the office of the second respondent.  The
technical evaluation of bids was done on 12.07.2016 and the
petitioner submitted a representation on 25.07.2016 stating
that, though all the documents were uploaded, due to some
technical reason, some of the last few documents could not be
attached, and hence, requested for consideration of bid for
technical evaluation.  The petitioner also addressed a letter
through e-mail on 27.07.2016 to Vayam Technologies Ltd., the
technical agency appointed for the bids, pointing out the
problem in uploading the documents.  The second respondent 
released the firm wise Preliminary Technical Bid Evaluation
Report on 14.10.2016 and invited objections from the bidders
giving them three days time.  After receipt of the said notice, a
fresh representation was made to the second respondent on 
17.10.2016 stating that all the technical documents required to
be submitted were duly uploaded by the petitioner on the
website on 05.07.2016 and requested the second respondent to 
consider the bid of the petitioner.  The petitioner sought re-
evaluation of its technical bid with the offline documents
submitted by it in the interest of fair competition, fair play and
public interest.  The said communication was followed by
another e-mail dated 11.11.2016.  Another letter dated
16.11.2016 was submitted on 17.11.2016. In spite of the same,
without giving any reply, when the second respondent uploaded
on their website the rate contract details of 308 items on
16.11.2016, the present Writ Petition was filed on the day when
the contract was entered by the second respondent with the
third respondent.
As stated above, pursuant to the time granted by this
Court, the second respondent opened the offline documents and 
compared them with the requirements indicated for submission
of online documents and they were found to be in order when
they were taken along with online documents.  However, in the
affidavit filed by the second respondent it is stated that
pursuant to the enquiry made by the petitioner, the consultant
of Vayam Technologies Ltd., sent a reply mail on 29.07.2016 to
the petitioner stating that, though they have uploaded the
documents in common folder, but in the bid submission process 
all the documents were not attached to the tender and there
was no technical issue.  In the affidavit it is also stated that the
offline documents cannot be considered as substitute for online
documents and it would amount to doing favour to the
petitioner since five other firms were also rejected on the same
ground, though for other products.
In the first counter affidavit filed by the second
respondent, it was stated that as per the purchase order dated
03.09.2016, the petitioner earlier supplied Factor VIII medicine
at Rs.2999/- for each injection, whereas the third respondent
agreed to supply the same now at Rs.2595/- for each injection.
Thus, the price at which the petitioner was supplying the
medicines was also on higher side.
The relevant conditions of tender read as follows:
7.2. Pre-Qualification Bid Documents:
It shall include the following information about the
firm and/or its proposal.
1.General information on the Bidders
Company in Form P-1
2.  Turn Over Details Form P-2
3.  List of Major Past Supplies in Form P-3
4.  Installed Production capacity for 30 Days
Form P-4
5.    Bank Details of the Bidder Form P-5

      7.3.  Technical Bid:
It shall include all the Documents mentioned in
Checklist.  Annexure  7.
7.4.  Financial Bid:
The financial bid should provide cost calculations
corresponding to unit price of each selected item of the
schedule in the Annexure -8 provided on e-
Procurement Platform.
7.5.  Pre-Bid Meeting:
All the prospective bidders can participate in the Pre-
Bid meeting to seek clarifications on the bid, if any.
Pre-Bid meeting shall be held on Pre Bid Meeting Date
at Conference Hall of O/o of Commissioner, Family
Welfare, Sultan Bazar, Koti, Hyderabad.  The queries
can also be sent to
[email protected]
which must   
be received by TS MSIDC by last date and time fixed
for raising queries.  Queries received after due date
and time, shall Not be considered.
8.1  Opening Of Bids:
Immediately after the closing time, the TS MSIDC
person shall open the pre-qualification bid, and list
them for further evaluation.  The Technical bids of
only those bidders who qualify in the pre-qualification
bid will be opened.  After evaluation of technical bids,
the financial bids of only those bidders who qualify in
technical evaluation will be opened.
10.2.2.  Preliminary Examination Of Bids:
c.  TS MSIDC may waive any minor informality,
nonconformity or irregularity in a bid which does not
constitute a material deviation, provided such waiver
does not prejudice or affect the relative ranking of any
bidder 

      10.2.3.  Clarification Of Bids:
During evaluation of the bids, TS MSIDC may, at its
discretion, ask the bidder, in writing, for Clarification
of bid.  However no change in price or substance of the
bids shall be sought, offered or permitted.
10.2.5.  Evaluation Of Technical Bids:
Technical bid documentation shall be evaluated in two
sub-steps.
a.  Firstly, the documentation furnished by the vendor
will be examined prima facie to see if the offer made,
technical skill base and financial capacity and other
vendor attributes claimed therein are consistent with
the needs of the purchaser.
b.  In the second step, TS MSIDC may ask vendor(s) 
for additional information, visit to vendors site and/or
arrange discussions with their professional, technical
faculties to verify claims made in technical bid
documentation.
In a pre-evaluation stage like this, three types of
situations normally arise and the decisions of the Courts so far
deal with those aspects.  The tenderer may not scrupulously
follow the condition of the tender or the tenderer follows the
method not indicated in the tender conditions but with
substantial compliance with the tender conditions or the
employer, who calls for the tender, relaxes the tender
conditions.
In respect of tender conditions, a distinction is drawn
between the essential conditions and non-essential conditions.
Now the law is well settled that while exercising the power of
relaxation such power cannot be exercised in respect of
essential conditions.  But, the Courts also held that when the
employer does not exercise the power of relaxation, the Courts
cannot compel the employer to exercise the power of relaxation,
but interfere when the employer exercises the power of
relaxation in respect of non-essential conditions.
The distinction between the essential and non-essential
conditions came up for consideration in
G.J.Fernandez v.
State of Karnataka
, and the same was followed in
Poddar
Steel Corporations
case (supra).  In the latter case when the
tender of the highest bidder was accepted, the same was
challenged by the unsuccessful tenderer on the ground that the
necessary condition of payment of Rs.50,000/- as earnest
money with the tender was not complied with.  The tender
conditions stipulated the deposit of earnest money by cash or
Demand Draft on State Bank of India, whereas the successful
tenderer enclosed the Bankers cheque of the Union Bank of
India in lieu thereof.  The employer accepted the said Bankers
cheque in lieu of the stipulation mentioned in the tender
conditions as substantial compliance with the condition and
awarded the work.  In those circumstances, the Supreme Court 
held as follows:
6. It is true that in submitting its tender
accompanied by a cheque of the Union Bank of India 
and not of the State Bank clause No. 6 of the tender
notice was not obeyed literally, but the question is as
to whether the said non-compliance deprived the
Diesel Locomotive Works of the authority to accept the
bid. As a matter of general proposition it cannot be
held that an authority inviting tenders is bound to give
effect to every term mentioned in the notice in
meticulous detail, and is not entitled to waive even a
technical irregularity of little or no significance. The
requirements in a tender notice can be classified into
two categories - those which lay down the essential
conditions of eligibility and the others which are
merely ancillary or subsidiary with the main object to
be achieved by the condition. In the first case the
authority issuing the tender may be required to
enforce them rigidly. In the other cases it must be
open to the authority to deviate from and not to insist
upon the strict literal compliance of the condition in
appropriate cases. This aspect was examined by this
Court in
G.J.Fernandez v. State of Karnataka
((1990) 2 SCC 488: AIR 1990 SC 958), a case dealing 
with tenders. Although not in an entirely identical
situation as the present one, the observations in the
judgment support our view.
The High Court has, in the
impugned decision, relied upon
Ramana Dayaram   
Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India
((1979) 3 SCC 489), but has failed to appreciate that
the reported case belonged to the first category where
the strict compliance of the condition could be insisted
upon. The authority
in that case
, by not insisting upon
the requirement in the tender notice which was an
essential condition of eligibility, bestowed a favour on
one of the bidders, which amounted to illegal
discrimination. The judgment indicates that the Court
closely examined the nature of the condition which
had been relaxed and its impact before answering the
question whether it could have validly condoned the
shortcoming in the tender in question. This part of the
judgment demonstrates the difference between the two 
categories of the conditions discussed above. However
it remains to be seen as to which of the two clauses
the present case belongs.
7. The nature of payment by a certified cheque
was considered by this Court in
Sita Ram
Jhunjhunwala v. Bombay Bullion Association Ltd
.
((1965) 35 Com Cas 526 : AIR 1965 SC 1628) Several  
objections were taken there in support of the plea that
the necessary condition in regard to payment was not
satisfied and in that context this Court quoted the
observations from the judgment in an English decision
(vide Spargos case (Harmony and Montague Tin and  
Copper Mining Co., In re, (l873) 8 Ch A 407 : 28 LT
153) that it is a general rule of law that in every case
where a transaction resolves itself into paying money
by A to B and then handing it back again by B to A, if
the parties meet together and agree to set one demand
against the other, they need not go through the form
and ceremony of handing the money backwards and   
forwards. This court applied the observations to a
transaction requiring payment by one to another. The
High Courts decisions in
B.D.Yadavs
case (
AIR 1984 
Bombay 351) and TV.Subhadra Ammas
case (AIR     
1982 Ker 81) are also illustrations where literal
compliance of every term of the tender notice was not
insisted upon.
The Supreme Court approved
B.D.Yadav and M.R.Meshram v.    
Administrator of City of Nagpur
and
T.V.Subhadra Amma v.
Kerala Board of Revenue
, and accordingly, upheld the
decision of the employer.
In
B.S.N.Joshi & Sons Ltd.s
case (supra) also the tender
of the successful tenderer was challenged on the ground of non-
compliance with the conditions of tender.  The Supreme Court
noticed that the tender document was in two parts: (a) technical
bid and (b) financial bid.  It was also observed that nine
conditions mentioned therein were required to be fulfilled by the
bidders before their respective financial bids could be opened.
The Supreme Court observed as follows:
23.  The terms contained in the notice inviting
tender may have to be construed differently having
regard to the fact situation obtaining in each case. No
hard-and-fast rule can be laid down therefor. We
would, a little later, notice the underlying intention of
the employer in prescribing the so called essential
conditions.
33.  Deviation, if any, therefore, was made by
the competent authority of MAHAGENCO keeping in    
view the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case.
56.  It may be true that a contract need not be
given to the lowest tenderer but it is equally true that
the employer is the best judge therefor; the same
ordinarily being within its domain, courts interference
in such matter should be minimal. The High Courts
jurisdiction in such matters being limited in a case of
this nature, the Court should normally exercise
judicial restraint unless illegality or arbitrariness on
the part of the employer is apparent on the face of the
record.
58.  In Jagdish Swarups Constitution of India,
2nd Edition, page 286, it is stated:
"It is equally true that even in
contractual matters, a public authority does
not have an unfettered decision to ignore the
norms recognized by the Courts, but at the
same time if a decision has been taken by a
public authority in a bona fide manner,
although not strictly following the norms
laid
down by
the Courts, such decision is upheld on
the principle that the Courts, while judging the
constitutional validity of executing decisions,
must grant a certain measure of freedom of
"play in the joints" to the executive."
After observing as above, the following points were summarized:
66.  We are also not shutting our eyes towards
the new principles of judicial review which are being
developed; but the law as it stands now having regard
to the principles
laid down in
the aforementioned
decisions may be summarized as under :
i)  If there are essential conditions, the same must
be adhered to;
ii)  If there is no power of general relaxation,
ordinarily the same shall not be exercised and the
principle of strict compliance would be applied where
it is possible for all the parties to comply with all such
conditions fully;
iii)  If, however, a deviation is made in relation to
all the parties in regard to any of such conditions,
ordinarily again a power of relaxation may be held to
be existing;
iv)  The parties who have taken the benefit of such
relaxation should not ordinarily be allowed to take a
different stand in relation to compliance of another
part of tender contract, particularly when he was also
not in a position to comply with all the conditions of
tender fully, unless the court otherwise finds
relaxation of a condition which being essential in
nature could not be relaxed and thus the same was
wholly illegal and without jurisdiction;
v)  When a decision is taken by the appropriate
authority upon due consideration of the tender
document submitted by all the tenderers on their own
merits and if it is ultimately found that successful
bidders had in fact substantially complied with the
purport and object for which essential conditions were
laid down, the same may not ordinarily be interfered
with;
(vi)  The contractors cannot form a cartel. If
despite the same, their bids are considered and they
are given an offer to match with the rates quoted by
the lowest tenderer, public interest would be given
priority;
(vii)  Where a decision has been taken purely on
public interest, the Court ordinarily should exercise
judicial restraint.
67.  Law operating in the field is no long res
integra. The application of law, however, would depend
upon the facts and circumstances of each case. It is
not in dispute before us that there are only a few
concerns in India who can handle such a large
quantity of coal. Transportation of coal from various
collieries to the thermal power stations is essential.
For the said purpose, apart from transportation job,
the contractor is required to see that coal of
appropriate grade is supplied. Appellant herein is in
business for the last 52 years. It had been taking part
in contracts involving similar jobs in various parts of
India. It had all along been quoting a low rate.
According to it, despite the same it has been
generating profits.
68.  The employer concededly is not bound to
accept a bid only because it is the lowest. It must take
into consideration not only the viability but also the
fact that the contractor would be able discharge its
contractual obligations. It must not forget the ground
realities. MAHAGENCO considered all aspects of the 
matter while accepting appellants offer. In its counter
affidavit, it categorically stated that appellant would be
able to perform the contractual undertaking even at
such a low rate.
Thus, it is left open to the employer to exercise the power of
relaxation and it is held that the duty of the Courts is to see
whether such exercise of power was fair, reasonable and bona
fide.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner placed strong reliance
on M/s.Cyano
Pharma (P) Limiteds
case (supra), wherein the 
present second respondent was a respondent and the dispute 
arose with regard to consideration of the bids invited by it.  In
the said case, the petitioner submitted its bid online before the
stipulated date, but in view of the doubt with regard to the
submission of non-conviction certificate by online or offline,
though the said certificate was submitted offline before the
stipulated date, when the bid of the petitioner was rejected by
the evaluation committee on the ground that non-conviction
certificate was not submitted online, the Writ Petition was filed.
This Court, by considering
G.J.Fernandezs
case (
supra),
Poddar Steel Corporations
case (
supra) and Michigan Rubber 
(India) Limiteds
case (supra) allowed the Writ Petition on the
ground that no prejudice would be caused to any of the bidders
whose price bid is opened and considered on competitive basis
by the second respondent therein and observed as follows:
24. The decisions relied upon by the learned
senior counsel for the petitioner clearly hold that non-
essential or collateral conditions of tender cannot be
treated as on par with essential conditions. In the
present case, in my view, the said ratio would apply,
particularly, in view of the power available with the
second respondent to ignore the minor deviation,
minor non-conformity or irregularity, which does not
constitute material deviation and such waiver would
not affect the relative ranking of any bidder, as
provided under clause 2(3) of Section H of the tender
document, extracted above. The aforesaid conclusion,
in my view, would also advance the public interest, as
the second respondent would be in a position to
consider the price bids offered by the petitioners in
both the writ petitioners along with other successful
tenderers and would be able to procure the medicines
at the best possible price. Since the price bids of the
petitioners are not yet opened, the same can always be
opened and considered on competitive basis along with
the price bids of other qualified bidders without
causing any prejudice to the relative ranking of any
bidder in terms of clause 2(3) of Section H
,
referred to
above
.
But, in this case the deficient documents were submitted
offline after the stipulated date. Thus on facts
,
the said decision
is distinguishable.  The theory of prejudice has no role in
deciding tender cases.
The other decision relied on by the
learned Counsel for the petitioner is
Renaatus Projects Private
Limiteds
case (supra).  In the said case the Writ Petitions were
filed by the tenderers whose tenders were rejected on the
ground that the tender document mentioned in the check list
containing 32 pages was not properly uploaded by the
petitioners.  The Writ Petitions were allowed by taking into
consideration the difference in price quoted by the petitioners
and other tenderers in the interest of the exchequer by making
the following observations:
31. In the present case, the defects pointed out
by the respondent can be construed as ancillary or
subsidiary condition in nature especially when it is
shown that the petitioners have the wherewithal and
have the capacity to undertake the contract, if
awarded, by means of documentary evidence. In the 
present case, the violations pointed out by the
respondent are trivial in nature namely non-uploading
of one page of the affidavit, non-furnishing of solvency
certificate after the date of tender, improper uploading
of the scanned documents etc., Therefore, in my
opinion, these defects cannot be and ought not to be a
reason for the respondent for rejecting the tender
applications of the petitioners. In such circumstances,
this Court is inclined to interfere with the orders of
rejection passed by the respondent.
32. The learned counsel for the respondent
advanced argument that the petitioners have not
challenged the tender notification itself and therefore
the conditions incorporated in the tender notification
will bind them. This submission cannot merit
acceptance. The petitioners have no grievance over the
incorporation of the conditions in the tender. They
only seek a chance to rectify the trivial or minor
defects committed by them and/or to clarify certain
aspects with the respondent before their tender
applications were rejected by the respondent. In this
context, the argument of the learned counsel for the
respondent that clause 13 of the tender notification
only enable the respondent to seek for any clarification
with the tenderers if they entertain any doubt cannot
be accepted. When the respondent themselves can   
entertain a doubt in certain occasion which they could
clarify with the tenderers, equally an opportunity has
to be given to the tenderers to rectify or clarify certain
aspects. As mentioned above, in this case, a pre-bid or
post-bid meeting has not been convened and the 
tenderers have no occasion to seek for any clarification
with the respondent.
33. It is well settled that in matters of
contractual nature, interference of this Court will be
limited unless it is shown that there is an element of
arbitrariness or unfairness in the matter of processing,
accepting or rejecting a tender. However, in this case,
as held by the Honourable Supreme Court, when a  
decision has been taken by a quasi judicial authority
which would affect public interest, this Court can
interfere. In this case, the tender floated by the
respondent involves huge amount. This Court granted
interim order of status quo and when such an order
was in force, the respondent opened the price bid. As
the prices quoted by the other bidders were made
known and/or disclosed, the petitioners have prepared
a comparative statement in the form of tabulation
indicating the difference in the prices offered by them
and the other bidders. The tabular statement would
indicate as to how much the respondent is likely to
lose financially if the bid of the other bidders are
accepted. Therefore, this is also one of the main reason
which weighed this Court to interfere with the orders
of rejection passed by this Court. The comparative
statement given by the petitioners in the respective
petitions as regards the rates quoted by them and that
of the other tenderers is extracted hereunder

Thus, the main consideration for the Court in the said case was
the difference in the quoted price, but not the validity of the
tender which did not comply with the conditions of tender.
In
W.B.State Electricity Boards
case (supra) the
Supreme Court categorically held that negligent mistakes in the
bid documents cannot be permitted to be corrected on the basis
of equity.  The relevant observations made by the Supreme
Court are as follows:
24. The controversy in this case has arisen at
the threshold. It cannot be disputed that this is an
international competitive bidding which postulates
keen competition and high efficiency. The bidders have
or should have assistance of technical experts. The
degree of care required in such a bidding is greater
than in ordinary local bids for small works. It is
essential to maintain the sanctity and integrity of
process of tender/bid and also award of a contract.
The appellant, respondent Nos.1 to 4 and respondent
Nos. 10 & 11 are all bound by the ITB which should be
complied with scrupulously. In a work of this nature
and magnitude where bidders who fulfil pre-
qualification alone are invited to bid, adherence to
the instructions cannot be given a go-bye by
branding it as a pedantic approach otherwise it will
encourage and provide scope for discrimination,
arbitrariness and favouritism which are totally
opposed to the Rule of law and our Constitutional
values. The very purpose of issuing
Rules/instructions is to ensure their enforcement
lest the Rule of law should be a casuality.
Relaxation or waiver of a rule or condition, unless
so provided under ITB, by the State or its agencies
(the appellant) in favour of one bidder would create
justifiable doubts in the minds of other bidders,
would impair the rule of transparency and fairness
and provide room for manipulation to suit the
whims of the State agencies in picking and
choosing a bidder for awarding contracts as in the
case of distributing bounty or charity. In our view
such of approach should always be avoided. Where 
power to relax or waive a rule or a condition exists
under the Rules, it has to be done strictly in
compliance with the Rules. We have, therefore, no
hesitation in concluding that adherence to the ITB or
rules is the best principle to be followed, which is also
in the best public interest.
(emphasis supplied
)
The said decision
was followed by me in
New Hyderabad  
Medak Transport v. State of Telangana
. The highlighted
observations in
the above decision
clearly goes against the case
of the petitioner.
In Jagdish Mandals case (supra) the Supreme Court was 
considering the scope of interference in contractual matters.  In
the said case the tender of the lowest tenderer was rejected on
the ground that it was defective as not being accompanied by a
valid Earnest Money Deposit.  It was contended before the
Supreme Court that no notice was issued before rejection and
the rejection was improper.  In that context, the Supreme Court
held that the judicial review should be directed to see whether
choice or decision taken by the employer was lawful, but not to
check whether the choice or decision is sound.  The
observations of the Supreme Court are as follows:
22. Judicial review of administrative action is
intended to prevent arbitrariness, irrationality,
unreasonableness, bias and mala fides. Its purpose is
to check whether choice or decision is made lawfully
and not to check whether choice or decision is sound.
When the power of judicial review is invoked in
matters relating to tenders or award of contracts,
certain special features should be borne in mind. A
contract is a commercial transaction. Evaluating
tenders and awarding contracts are essentially
commercial functions. Principles of equity and natural
justice stay at a distance. If the decision relating to
award of contract is bona fide and is in public interest,
courts will not, in exercise of power of judicial review,
interfere even if a procedural aberration or error in
assessment or prejudice to a tenderer, is made out.
The power of judicial review will not be permitted to be
invoked to protect private interest at the cost of public
interest, or to decide contractual disputes. The
tenderer or contractor with a grievance can always
seek damages in a civil court. Attempts by
unsuccessful tenderers with imaginary grievances,
wounded pride and business rivalry, to make
mountains out of molehills of some
technical/procedural violation or some prejudice to
self, and persuade courts to interfere by exercising
power of judicial review, should be resisted. Such
interferences, either interim or final, may hold up
public works for years, or delay relief and succour to
thousands and millions and may increase the project
cost manifold. Therefore, a court before interfering in
tender or contractual matters in exercise of power of
judicial review, should pose to itself the following
questions:
(i) Whether the process adopted or decision made
by the authority is mala fide or intended to favour
someone;
OR

       Whether the process adopted or decision made is
so arbitrary and irrational that the court can say: the
decision is such that no responsible authority acting
reasonably and in accordance with relevant law could
have reached;
(ii) Whether public interest is affected.
If the answers are in the negative, there should be
no interference under
Article 226.
Cases involving
blacklisting or imposition of penal consequences on a
tenderer/contractor or distribution of State largesse
(allotment of sites/shops, grant of licences,
dealerships and franchises) stand on a different footing
as they may require a higher degree of fairness in
action.
In
Michigan Rubber (India) Limiteds
case (supra) the
Supreme Court reiterated the above principles and further held
as follows:
23. From the above decisions, the following
principles emerge:
(a) The basic requirement of
Article 14
is fairness
in action by the State, and non-arbitrariness in
essence and substance is the heartbeat of fair play.
These actions are amenable to the judicial review only
to the extent that the State must act validly for a
discernible reason and not whimsically for any ulterior
purpose. If the State acts within the bounds of
reasonableness, it would be legitimate to take into
consideration the national priorities;
(b) Fixation of a value of the tender is entirely
within the purview of the executive and courts hardly
have any role to play in this process except for striking
down such action of the executive as is proved to be
arbitrary or unreasonable. If the Government acts in
conformity with certain healthy standards and norms
such as awarding of contracts by inviting tenders, in
those circumstances, the interference by Courts is very
limited;
(c) In the matter of formulating conditions of a
tender document and awarding a contract, greater
latitude is required to be conceded to the State
authorities unless the action of tendering authority is
found to be malicious and a misuse of its statutory
powers, interference by Courts is not warranted;
(d) Certain preconditions or qualifications for
tenders have to be laid down to ensure that the
contractor has the capacity and the resources to
successfully execute the work; and
(e) If the State or its instrumentalities act
reasonably, fairly and in public interest in awarding
contract, here again, interference by Court is very
restrictive since no person can claim fundamental
right to carry on business with the Government.
24. Therefore, a Court before interfering in tender
or contractual matters, in exercise of power of judicial
review, should pose to itself the following questions:
(i) Whether the process adopted or decision made
by the authority is mala fide or intended to favour
someone; or whether the process adopted or decision 
made is so arbitrary and irrational that the court can
say: the decision is such that no responsible authority
acting reasonably and in accordance with relevant law
could have reached; and
(ii) Whether the public interest is affected?
If the answers to the above questions are in negative,
then there should be no interference under Article
226.


        In view of the above legal position, it cannot be held that
rejection of the tender for non-compliance with tender
conditions is bad.  Admittedly, the petitioner did not upload all
the documents through online and submitted the required
online documents through offline, after the last date for
submission of bids.  This Court cannot express any opinion in
the present case regarding the position of the petitioner, had it
submitted the online documents through offline before the
closure of the tender. Now the law is well settled that this Court
cannot sit as an appellate authority or consider the case on the
grounds of equity.  This Court has to examine whether the
decision taken by the authority was reasonable, not arbitrary
and proper.  It is also on record that five tenders were rejected
on the selfsame ground, though not relating to the present item
of contract.  In view of the same, this Court sees no ground to
interfere with the decision taken by the second respondent in
rejecting the bid of the petitioner.
The Writ Petition is, accordingly, dismissed.  The
miscellaneous petitions pending in this Writ Petition, if any,
shall stand closed.  There shall be no order as to costs.
_______________________________     
A.RAMALINGESWARA RAO, J)       
13.03.2017