[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Kurapati Ranga Raju vs The State Of Telangana Represented By ... on 25 January, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 HYDERABAD 112
Author:
A.V.Sesha Sai
Bench:
A.V.Sesha Sai
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A.V.SESHA SAI       

W.P.No.1637 of 2017  

25-01-2017 

Kurapati Ranga Raju...Petitioner

The State of Telangana Represented by its Sectetary Agriculture & Commerce 
(Coop.II) Department, Telangana Secretariat, Hyderabad and 7 others.
...Respondents 

Counsel for Petitioner:Sri Kowturu Pavan Kumar

Counsel for Respondents 1 to 3:G.P. for Cooperation

Cousnel for unofficial respondents:Sri P.V.Ramana


<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred
1 2004 (4) ALD 1 (FB)
2 2008(2) ALD 616 
3 (2009) 9 SCC 729 
4 2015(4) ALT 517 
5 2015(6) ALD 153 
6 (2009) 9 SCC 729 

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A.V.SESHA SAI       
      W.P.No.1637 of 2017
O R D E R:
Validity of a notice issued by the Special Cadre Deputy Registrar of
Cooperative Socieites, Khammam-3rd respondent herein vide proceedings  
Rc.No.1328/2016-D dated 9.1.2017 under Section 34-A of Telangana State  
Cooperative Societies Act, 1964 is under challenge in the present writ petition.
2.      Petitioner herein is the President of Telangana Non-Gazetted Officers
House Building Cooperative Society Ltd., Khammam.  On the basis of a letter of
motion of no confidence moved by five out of seven members of the Managing
Committee, earlier the 3rd respondent herein issued a notice vide proceedings
Rc.No.1328/2016-D dated 24.11.2016, fixing the date of meeting of the no
confidence motion as 14.12.2016.  Assailing the said notice, petitioner herein
approached the State Government by way of a representation.  The State
Government by way of Memo bearing No.4782/Coop.II(2)/2016-2 dated  
13.12.2016, granted stay of notice dated 24.11.2016 of the 3rd respondent
herein. Challenging the validity of the said order, the unofficial respondents
herein filed W.P.No.46686 of 2016 before this Court and this Court, after
hearing all the parties, passed an order on 5.1.2017 in W.P.M.P.No.57505 of
2016, staying the memo issued by the State Government dated 13.12.2016.  
Thereafter, the 3rd respondent herein issued the impugned notice of motion of no
confidence vide proceedings dated 9.1.2017, fixing the date of meeting of motion
no confidence as 27.1.2017.  Validity and legal sustainability of the said
notice
dated 9.1.2017 is under challenge in the present writ petition.
3.      Heard Sri Kowturu Pavan Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioner,
learned Government Pleader for Cooperation for Respondents 1 to 3 and Sri
P.V.Ramana, learned counsel for unofficial respondents, apart from perusing the
material available before the Court.
4.      Following are the submissions/contentions of the learned counsel for the
petitioner:
(1)     In view of pendency of W.P.No.46686 of 2016, the 3rd respondent herein
ought not to have issued the impugned notice dated 9.1.2017, fixing the
date of consideration of motion of no confidence and ought to have
awaited the outcome of the said writ petition.
(2)     The impugned notice is invalid as the same does not provide for 15 clear
days from the date of service  to the date of meeting as mandated under
Rule 34-A of Telangana State Cooperative Societies Act, 1964 and the
period of 15 days  needs to be reckoned from the date of receipt of the
notice.
(3)     Since the meeting involves debate, the judgments cited by the unofficial
respondents would not render any assistance to the unofficial respondents
in view of the judgment of the Full Bench of this Court in  K.Sujatha V.S
Government Of Andhra Pradesh And Another .
Learned counsel relies on the judgment of this Court in
Gaddampalli Jagpal Reddy and others v. District Collector and
others
.
5.      On the contrary, the learned Government Pleader, appearing official
respondents strenuously contends that there is absolutely no illegality nor
there
exists any procedural infirmity in the impugned action and the notice impugned
is in accordance with the rules and except the petitioner, all other members
received notice on 9.1.2017 itself and as the petitioner evaded to receive the
impugned notice, the respondents herein sent the notice by registered post with
acknowledgement due on 10.1.2017 and the petitioner received the same on 
16.1.2017 and the service of notice was also effected by affixture in addition
to
the registered post.
6.      While totally supporting the submissions of the learned Government
Pleader, the learned counsel appearing for unofficial respondents Sri P.V.Ramana
contends that the contentions of the learned counsel for petitioner are neither
sustainable nor tenable in the eye of law.  It is further contended that
pendency 
W.P.No.46686 of 2016 cannot be a ground to defer no confidence motion and 
the contention contra advanced by the learned counsel for petitioner is
untenable.  It is also further argued that the impugned notice is strictly in
accordance with the provisions of law and the contention that the period of 15
days needs to be reckoned from the date of receipt of the notice is untenable
and that out of seven members, five members signed the motion.
In support of
his submissions/contentions, the learned counsel places reliance on the judgment
of the Honble Apex Court in
State Through Central Bureau of
Investigation v. Parameshwaran Subramani and Another
and the 
judgments of this Court in
R.Narsimhulu v. State of Telangana
,
represented by its
Principal Secretary  and R.Amber Singh and another
v. Deputy Registrar of Cooperative Societies and others
.
7.      In the above backdrop, the issues that emerge for consideration of this
Court in the present writ petition are;
(1)     Whether the pendency of W.P.No.46686 of 2016 is a ground for the 
petitioner to request to defer the no confidence motion ?
(2)     Whether the impugned notice dated 9.1.2017 is in accordance with
law ?
8.      Issue No.1
      Earlier, on the basis of a notice issued by the unofficial respondents,
3rd
respondent herein issued notice dated 24.11.2016, fixing the date of meeting of
motion of no confidence as 14.12.2016.   Assailing the said notice, petitioner
herein filed a representation before the State Government and the State
Government vide Memo dated 13.12.2016 stayed the said meeting and   
challenging the validity of the said order, the unofficial respondents herein
filed
W.P.No.46686 of 2016 before this Court and after extensively hearing all the
stakeholders, this Court granted stay of the impugned memo dated 13.12.2016.
Since the earlier notice could not be carried out to its logical end, the 3rd
respondent herein issued the present impugned notice dated 9.1.2017.  The
pendency of W.P.No.46686 of 2016, by any stretch of imagination, in the
absence of any order in favour of petitioner herein, cannot be a ground to
restrain the respondents from proceeding further by issuing the present notice.
Therefore, Issue No.1 is answered in favour of the respondents herein and
against the petitioner herein, holding that the pendency of above said writ
petition does not debar the respondents from issuing the impugned notice.
9.      Issue No.2
        Yet another contention of the learned counsel for petitioner is that the
notice impugned does not fulfill the mandatory requirements of Section 34-A of
Telangana State Cooperative Societies Act, 1964.  In order to resolve this
issue,
it may be apt and appropriate to refer to Section 34-A of the Act, which reads
as
under:
34-A. Motion of no-confidence in the President and Vice-
President of the committee:
(1) A motion expressing want of confidence in the President or the
Vice-President of a Committee may be made in accordance with the  
procedure
laid down in
the following sub-sections. (2) A written notice
of intention to make the motion, in such form as may be prescribed,
signed by not less than one-half of the total number of members of the
Committee together with a copy of the proposed motion shall be
delivered in person, by any two of the members signing the notice, to
the Registrar having jurisdiction over the Society.
Explanation:- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that
for the purposes of this section, the expression total number of
members of the Committee shall mean the total number of elected
members inclusive of its President and Vice-President but irrespective
of any vacancy existing in the office of member at the time of meeting.
(3) The Registrar shall then convene a meeting for the consideration of
the motion at the office of the society on a date appointed by him
which shall not be later than thirty days from the date on which the
notice under sub-section (2) was delivered to him. He shall give to the
members notice of not less than fifteen clear days of such meeting in
such manner as may be prescribed : Provided that where the holding
of such meeting is stayed by an order of a Court the meeting shall be
adjourned, and the Registrar shall hold the adjourned meeting on a
date not later than thirty days from the date on which he received the
intimation about the vacation of stay, after giving to the members
notice of not less than fifteen clear days of such adjourned meeting.
(4) The quorum for such a meeting shall be majority of the total
number of members of the Committee and the Registrar shall preside
at such meeting. If within half an hour after the time appointed for the
meeting the Registrar is not present to preside at the meeting, the
meeting shall stand adjourned to the next day. (5) If the Registrar is
unable to preside at the meeting he may after recording his reasons in
writing adjourn the meeting to the next day to be presided over
either by himself or by an officer authorised by him in his behalf. The
person authorised under this sub-section shall be deemed to be the
Registrar for purposes of sub-sections (7), (10) and (11).
(6) Save as provided in sub-sections (3), (4) and (5) a meeting
convened for the purpose of considering a motion under this section
shall not for any reason be adjourned. (7) As soon as the meeting
convened under this section commences the Registrar shall read to the
Committee the motion for the consideration of which the meeting has
been convened and declare it to be open for debate, 1. Inserted by Act
No. 21 of 1985, w.e.f. 3-6-1985.
A.P. Cooperative Laws A.P.
Cooperative Societies Act
1964 (8) No debate on the motion under this
section shall be adjourned. (9) Such debate shall automatically
terminate on the expiration of two hours from the time appointed for
the commencement of the meeting if it is not concluded earlier. On the
conclusion of the debate or on the expiration of the said period of two
hours, whichever is earlier, the motion shall be put to vote. (10) The
Registrar shall not speak on the merits of the motion and he shall not
be entitled to vote thereon. (11) If the motion is carried 1[with the
support of not less than two thirds of the total number of members] of
the Committee, the Registrar shall by order remove the President or,
as the case may be, the Vice-President and the resulting vacancy shall
be filled in the manner prescribed. (12) If the motion is not carried by
such a majority as aforesaid or if the meeting could not be held for
want of a quorum, no notice of any subsequent motion expressing
want of confidence in the same President or, as the case may be, the
Vice-President shall be made until, after the expiration of the one year
from the date of the meeting. (13) No notice of a motion under this
section shall be made within one year of the assumption of office by a
President or the Vice-President. 2[(14) The provisions of this section
shall not apply in respect of President of any co-operative society
elected by the members of the general body from among 
themselves.]
10.     In the instant case, admittedly notice dated 9.1.2017 was sent to the
petitioner by the office of 3rd respondent on 10.1.2017 by registered post with
acknowledgement due, which is one of the modes as per Rule 24-A of the 
Telangana State Cooperative Societies Rules.  There is absolutely no dispute as
to the reality that the petitioner herein received the same on 16.1.2017 as per
the acknowledgement enclosed.  While referring to the same, it is the contention
of the learned counsel for the petitioner that in the absence of gap of 15 clear
days between the date of receipt by the petitioner i.e. on 16.1.2017 and the
date
of proposed meeting i.e. on 27.1.2017, the impugned notice is invalid.  In this
context, it may be appropriate to refer to the judgments cited by the learned
counsel for respondents.
11.
In
R.Narsimhulu v. State of Telangana
, represented by its
Principal
Secretary
(3 supra), this Court at paragraphs 12 to 15, held as under:
12. The petitioner filed certain documents showing that he was hospitalized,
his eye was operated upon during the relevant period and therefore, he has
no knowledge about the notice. This Court is not inclined to examine the
truth or correctness of the said documents, because this Court wishes to
adjudicate the issue on the supposition that the petitioner was in fact is not
aware of the notice of no confidence motion on account of his non-
availability in the village.
In this context, it would be necessary to peruse
the
judgment of the Supreme Court in
Madan and Company v. Wazir Jaivir 
Chand
, wherein the Supreme Court dealing with a notice calling upon to pay
arrears of rent and also terminating the tenancy, took the view that where
the Act provides for the service of the notice, by post, when once the notice
is sent by post and the notice is delivered to the post office, the person who
sent the notice has no control over it. It is to be presumed to have delivered
to the addressee under
Section 27
of the General Clauses Act. The Supreme 
Court further viewed that to interpret the provision, as requiring that the
letter must have been actually delivered to the addressee, would be virtually
rendering it a dead letter. The Supreme Court further explained that a
landlord must be held to have complied with the statutory requirement by
sending a notice correctly addressed to the tenant by registered post.
Though, the Supreme Court was interpreting a provision in a different
enactment, the ratio
laid down by
the Supreme Court will equally apply to
the facts of the present case, while interpreting Rule 24-A(2) of the Rules.
13. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner filed a document
obtained from internet and tried to demonstrate before the Court that even
by 19.03.2015, the impugned notice sent by registered post was not served
on the petitioner. But the very same document shows that the notice was
sent on 05.03.2015. The learned Government Pleader filed the receipts,
which show that the notices were sent to all the members of the Managing
Committee on 05.03.2015. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner
submits that though the said receipt shows that the notice was sent to the
petitioner on 05.03.2015, the receipt does not contain the address of the
petitioner and, therefore, the respondents have to establish that notice was
sent to the correct address of the petitioner.
14. In the instant case, there is no ambiguity with regard to the address of
the petitioner. The only contention raised by the petitioner in this writ
petition is that during the relevant period, he was in the hospital for the
purpose of eye operation. Moreover, while exercising jurisdiction under
Article 226
of Constitution of India, this Court is not supposed to evaluate
the evidence adduced by both parties. However, this Court for the purpose
of arriving at an opinion has to examine the material placed by both parties
and has to arrive at a prima facie opinion as to the contentions raised by the
either of the parties.
15. Therefore, meticulous examination of evidence is not required while
disposing of this writ petition. As already stated that by enacting Rule 24-A,
certainly it is not the intention of the Legislature that notice has to be
actually served on the members of the Managing Committee. The Rule only 
mandates giving of notice by tendering it in person or by sending by
registered post. The provision also provides for affixing the notice on the
notice board of the society and also on the notice board of the Office of the
Registrar. The provision further provides that if the area of the society
extends to more than one Panchayat or Mandal Office, the notice shall be
affixed in all Panchayat Offices or Mandal Offices. Thus, the Legislature took
care of the absence of service of notice so as to enable the members to
know about the proposed no confidence motion. Since the official
respondents could be able to demonstrate before the Court that the notices
were sent to all the members of the Managing Committee by post and 
produced receipts, this Court is of the considered view that the impugned
notice cannot be set aside as there is enough compliance of Rule 24-A(2) of
the Rules by the Registrar.
12.
In
R.Amber Singh and another v. Deputy Registrar of Cooperative
Societies
(4 supra), this Court at paragraph 10 held as under:
The learned Special Government Pleader for Co-operation furnished
to this Court, the acknowledgements of the petitioners 1 and 2 and the
envelope sent to the 1st petitioner. The envelope sent to the 1st petitioner
shows that the addressee refused. The envelope also shows that it was
despatched on 24.2.2015 and the Postal authorities approached the 1st
petitioner on 25.2.2015. Therefore, the refusal of the 1st petitioner relates
back to the date 25.2.2015 and the endorsement clearly shows that when 
the concerned person of the Postal Department approached the 1st 
petitioner, he did not accept the envelope and refused to take notice.
Further, the acknowledgment of the 2nd petitioner also shows that the
envelope was despatched to him on 24.2.2015, which is indicative of the fact
that he must have also received the same on 27.2.2015 cannot be accepted. 
Further, there is an alternative efficacious remedy available to the petitioners
by way of an appeal under Section 76 of the APCS Act if at all they wanted
the evidence has to be meticulously examined. The petitioners without
approaching the Co-operative Tribunal under Section 76 of the APCS Act by
way of an appeal, approached this Court. This Court, however, examined the
material placed by the respondents for arriving at the prima facie opinion as
to when the notice was tendered to the petitioners in time. Either in Section
34-A of the APCS Act or in Rule 24-A of the APCS Rules, the expression used 
by the Legislature is by giving or tendering the notice. Nowhere the
expression that the notice has to be actually served on the members of the
Society is used. By placing relevant material, the respondents could be able
to demonstrate before this Court that notice was tendered to the petitioners
and there was 15 days' clear notice to the petitioners of the Motion of No-
confidence proposed to be moved against them on 13.3.2015.
13.     In the case of K.Sujatha (supra 1), the Full Bench of this Court, at
paragraphs 27 and 28, held as follows:
27. The ordinary meaning of the word 'notice' is knowledge,
information or announcement. Therefore, the purpose and object of
issuing the notice is to give due intimation of the proposed meeting of
No-confidence mention to all the members of the Panchayat or Mandal 
Parishad or Zilla Parishad and to make it possible for the members to
adjust their work in such a manner so as to enable them to attend the
proposed meeting of No-confidence Motion, Once the member receives  
intimation, he is not required to make any further preparation for the
purpose of meeting except by making himself available in the meeting.
Rule 8 says that the proposed Motion will be put to vote without any
debate and voting would be by show of hands. In case no preparation
is required to be made by the member for the meeting except by
presenting himself in the meeting, whether the member gets shorter
period of time than fifteen days or not is irrelevant and meaningless.
Had some discussion to take place or debate to follow, the matter
would have been slightly different. Even the submission that holding
the rule to be mandatory might lead to a situation of certain members
interested scuttling the purpose is of no relevance inasmuch as in case
a section of members is interested to scuttle the Motion, the purpose
can be served differently. Mere causing delay in accepting the notice
within the requisite period of fifteen days is not the only mode of
scuttling the meeting. Such section of the members can , conveniently
avoid attending the meeting so as to ensure that quorum is not
complete when meeting is called to order, because as per Rule 7 of the
rules if within two hours there is no quorum, the notice shall stand
lapsed.
28. The purpose and object of giving notice of consideration of No-
confidence Motion is only to give due intimation to the members or
information of the proposed meeting. Therefore, the fact that a
member has got a shorter period of notice than fifteen clear days from
the date of receipt of the notice would not matter. When notice is sent
by post and the law permits the date of sending of notice to be treated
as the date of delivery in that case obviously the period available to
the member will be shorter than fifteen clear days from delivery to
meeting, therefore, there is no reason why the Rule 3 be held to be
mandatory as regards the service of notice. Unless it is shown that the
shortfall in the period of notice of the meeting has caused some
prejudice to the member, neither the meeting nor the proceedings
taken thereunder would be said to be invalid. It is only in the
eventuality of prejudice being shown that the meeting or the
proceedings taken thereunder can said to be invalid. The Legislature
has rightly not provided in the rule that non-compliance of any shortfall
in the notice would render the meeting or the proceedings taken
thereunder to be invalid. Had that been the intention, the Legislature,
obviously, would have provided since the law had been clearly settled
by the time the Act was enacted and the Rules were framed by the
judgment in Narasimhaiah's case (supra). In that view of the matter,
we are of the opinion that the ratio of the judgment of the Division
Bench of this Court laid down in Anandareddy's case (supra) that non-
service of notice of fifteen clear days would make the meeting and the
proceedings taken thereunder null and void cannot be said to be the
correct law.
14.
In the case of
State Through Central Bureau of Investigation v.
Parameshwaran Subramani and Another
, the Honble Apex Court, at  
paragraphs 18 and 19,  held as follows:
18.    It is settled law that where there is no ambiguity and the
intention of the legislature is clearly conveyed, there is no scope for
the court to undertake any exercise to read something into the
provisions which the legislature in its wisdom consciously omitted.
Such an exercise if undertaken by the courts may amount to amending 
or altering the statutory provisions.
19.     In a plethora of cases, it has been stated that where, the
language is clear, the intention of the legislature is to be gathered from
the language used. It is not the duty of the court either to enlarge the
scope of legislation or the intention of the legislature, when the
language of the provision is plain. The court cannot rewrite the
legislation for the reason that it had no power to legislate. The court
cannot add words to a statute or read words into it which are not
there. The court cannot, on an assumption that there is a defect or an
omission in the words used by the legislature, correct or make up
assumed deficiency, when the words are clear and unambiguous.  
Courts have to decide what the law is and not what it should be. The
courts adopt a construction which will carry out the obvious intention
of the legislature but cannot set at naught legislative judgment
because such course would be subversive of constitutional harmony
[See: Union of India& Anr. Vs. Deokinandan Aggarwal2].
15.     It is very much evident from the law laid down in the above referred
judgments that the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that 15
clear days period is to be counted from the date of receipt of notice by the
petitioner cannot be sustained and in fact, the above referred judgments
declined to accept the said contention.  In these circumstances, this Court has
no
scintilla of hesitation to hold that the impugned action is in accordance with
law.
As such, Issue No.2 is also answered in favour of respondents and against the
petitioner.  The judgment cited by the learned counsel for petitioner in
Jagpal
Reddy v. District Collector
(2 supra) would not render any assistance to the
petitioner herein in the facts and circumstances of the case.
16.     For the aforesaid reasons, the writ petition is dismissed.  As a sequel,
the
miscellaneous petitions, if any shall stand closed. There shall be no order as
to
costs.
______________  
A.V.SESHA SAI, J  
Date:  25.1.2017