[Cites
16
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Ponamalla Koteshwara Rao And Another vs A.V.Raja Gopal Rao (Died) And Others on 13 November, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 85
Author:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
Bench:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           

Second Appeal No.847 of 2007  

13-11-2017 


Ponamalla Koteshwara Rao and another. ... Appellants 

A.V.Raja Gopal Rao (died) and others.  Respondents  

Counsel for Appellants  : Smt. K.Aruna 

Counsel for Respondent No.2: Smt.G.Jhansi  

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
(1) (1997)  5 SCC 366
(2) (1998) 4 SCC 317
(3) (1998) 6 SCC 358 = AIR 1998 SC 3021 = 1998(6) Supreme To-day 441   
(4) AIR 1939 Oudh 55 
(5) AIR 1941 Lahore 316

HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO             

SECOND APPEAL No.847 of 2007      

JUDGMENT:
This Second Appeal is preferred by the appellants/respondent
Nos.2 and 3 in I.P.No.56/1975 aggrieved by the Decree and Judgment 
dated 04.06.2007 in A.S.No.7 of 2004 passed by the VII Additional
District and Sessions Judge (Fast Track Court), Vijayawada, whereby
and whereunder the learned Judge allowed the appeal filed by the
petitioners and set aside the order in I.A.No.5079 of 1991 in I.P.No.56
of 1975 on the file of  II Additional Senior Civil Judge, Vijayawada,
filed for delivery of schedule property.
2)      The factual matrix of the case is thus:
a)      The case of the petitioners in I.A.No.5079 of 1991 before the
Insolvency Court is that one Namburi Sridhara Rao was adjudicated
as an insolvent in I.P.No.56 of 1975 and his properties were handed
over to the Official Receiver, Krishna, Machilipatnam, for
administration of estate of the insolvent. The schedule property was
sold in public auction on 18.01.1980 subject to two mortgages. In the
said auction held by the Official Receiver, A.V.Raja Gopal Raothe
1st petitioner, happened to be the highest bidder and auction was
knocked down for Rs.1650/- subject to the above mortgages and he 
subsequently deposited entire sale consideration and also discharged
the above mortgages and the said sale was also ratified by the
proceedings of the Insolvency Court on 14.10.1980.
b)      It is the further case of petitioners that whenever 1st petitioner
approached the Official Receiver to register the sale deed, he
postponed the same on the ground that Urban Ceiling Authority has
to accord permission for registering the document as the properties
were covered under the agglomeration of Vijayawada Sub-registry and
that he applied for permission. However, permission could not be
secured as there was no follow-up action by Official Receiver.
Subsequently, 1st petitioner suffered heart attack and his boy used to
go to the office of Official Receiver and finally he was informed that
adjudication orders were annulled under
Section 43
of Provincial
Insolvency Act (for short the Act) as per the proceedings of the
Insolvency Court dated 07.03.1981. Then the 1st petitioner filed two
petitions i.e, I.A.No.5660/1989 to set aside the annulment order dated
07.03.1981 and I.A.No.5661/1989 to direct the Official Receiver,
Krishna to execute the sale deed and both the petitions were allowed
on 26.06.1990 and thereafter the Official Receiver, executed the sale
deed and registered on 22.08.1991 in favour of 1st petitioner.
c)      It is further contended that on 07.09.1991, respondents 2 and 3
got issued legal notice to the 1st petitioner with all false and concocted
allegations alleging that they have purchased 1900 sq.yards of site in
R.S.No.14 of Machavaram with an old tiled house belonging to the
insolvent from his wife and daughter by a registered sale deed dated
07.12.1987 and that they were in possession of the same since then. It
is contended that the alleged sale deeds neither bind the 1st petitioner
nor do they confer any rights or title over the schedule property in
favour of respondents 2 and 3.  Hence, the petition
I.A.No.5079/1991.
d)      The 1st respondentOfficial Receiver, Krishna filed counter and
contended that what all done by him was under due process of law and
the sale deed executed by him in favour of 1st petitioner is valid and
binding and the sale deeds executed in favour of the respondents 2 and
3 by the wife and daughter of the insolvent were not valid and hence
they need to be rejected.
e)      The 2nd respondent by filing counter, contended that in
I.P.No.56/1975, Namburi Sridhar Rao was adjudged as an insolvent 
and the said adjudication was annulled without imposing any
conditions and without vesting the property to any person and hence
the effect of annulling adjudication was to wipe out the effect of
insolvency altogether and restoring the prior state and thereby, the
property vested in the insolvent with retrospective effect.  Sridhar Rao
died on 27.10.1983 i.e, long after the annulment of adjudication
leaving behind him, his wife Kanakadurga Tayaramma and daughter  
Dr.Durga Bhramara Voona Kumari. They sold the property on  
02.12.1997 in favour of respondents 2 and 3 with a dilapidated
thatched house, after obtaining the Urban Ceiling Permission and since
then they were in possession and occupation of the same paying taxes 
and enjoying as their own. Hence, prayed to dismiss the petition.
f)      Basing on the above pleadings, the Trail Court framed the
following point for determination:
Whether the petitioners are entitled for delivery of
property as per sale deed executed by the Official Receiver
in favour of 1st petitioner and for removing the
constructions of the respondents 2 and 3 in the schedule
property?
g)      During trial, PWs.1 to 4 were examined and Exs.A.1 to A.19
were marked on behalf of petitioners.  RWs.1 to 3 were examined and
Exs.B.1 to B.17 were marked on behalf of respondents.
h)      It should be noted that pending I.A.No.5079/1991, the 1st
petitioner died and his son was brought on record as petitioner No.2.
i)      After hearing both sides, basing on the oral and documentary
evidence, the Insolvency Court dismissed the petition on the
observation that there was ample evidence on record to show that
respondents 2 and 3 were in possession and enjoyment of petition
schedule property even prior to Exs.B.1 and B.2registered sale
deeds and that they are bonafide purchasers from the legal heirs of the
insolvent.
j)      Aggrieved, the petitioners filed A.S.No.7 of 2004 before the VII
Additional District and Sessions Judge (Fast Track Court),
Vijayawada, which was allowed and respondents 2 and 3 were  
directed to deliver the schedule property to the petitioners.
Hence the instant Second Appeal by respondents 2 and 3.
3)      While admitting the instant appeal, this Court framed the
following substantial questions of law:
1)      Whether the lower Appellate Court ought to have seen,
once the I.P proceedings are annulled under
Sections
43
and
45
of the Act, no subsequent proceedings can be 
entertained much less an application to set aside the
annulment proceedings?
2)      Whether the lower Appellate Court ought to have seen
that the annulment under
Section 37
is complete and
property is not vested in any other person and on such
annulment the rights over the property stand restored or
reverted to the applicant who applied for insolvency?
4)      Heard arguments of Sri C.Nageswara Rao, learned Senior 
Counsel for Smt. K.Aruna, learned counsel for appellants and Sri
Bodduluri Srinivas Rao, learned counsel for Smt.G.Jhansi, learned
counsel for respondent No.2. Respondent No.1 died vide cause title.
Though notice to respondent No.3 was served, there is no
representation.
5a)     Fulminating the order of the lower appellate Court, learned
senior counsel Sri C.Nageswara Rao appearing for appellants would
argue when once the Insolvency Court by exercising its power under
Section 43
of the Act, annulled the adjudication earlier made by it
under
Section 28
, it will have no power to set aside the annulment on
the application of a third party as it did in I.A.No.5660 of 1989. The
only remedy for the debtor against whom annulment order was passed  
is to file a fresh insolvency petition with the leave of the Court under
Section 10(2)
of the Act. Contrary to it, the Court on the application
filed by Raja Gopal Rao, a third party auction purchaser, set aside the
annulment in I.A.No.5660 of 1989. Hence, the said order is nonest in
the eye of law and annulment shall be deemed to be in force.
b)      Nextly, he would argue when the annulment is in force
consequences would follow under
Section 37
of the Act and thereby,
the schedule property which was sold in auction by the Official
Receiver to Raja Gopal Rao would revert back to the insolvent
Sridhar Rao, as the Court while passing the annulment order, did not
make any specific order that the auction sale shall hold good and the
property be retained by the auction purchaser. In that view, the sale
deeds (Exs.B1 and B2) subsequently executed by the legal heirs of the
un-discharged insolvent in favour of the appellants are valid and the
appellants get clear title on the property. To buttress his arguments, he
relied upon the following decisions.
1.
Arora Enterprises Limited vs. Indubhushan Obhan
2.
Tukaram Ramchandra Mane vs. Rajaram Bapu Lakule
3.      Babu Ram vs. Indrapal Singh
c)      Finally, he argued the auction was held in 1980 and annulment
order was passed in 1981 and thereafter, petition to set aside the
annulment was filed by the auction purchaser with a delay of 8 years
and in the meanwhile, the appellants have purchased the property in a
private sale. Due to inordinate delay also, the auction purchaser do not
deserve any relief. Without considering all these aspects the lower
appellate Court erroneously allowed the appeal.
6)      Per contra, while supporting the impugned judgment, learned
counsel for 2nd respondent would firstly argue that the consequences of
annulment have been clearly laid down in
Section 37
of the Act as per
which, the auction sale held by the Court or Official Receiver will be
valid and the auctioned property will not revert back to the insolvent.
Therefore, the auction purchaser will get absolute title on the said
property. In the instant case, Raja Gopal Raoauction purchaser
discharged the debts covered by the auction sale and deposited the
balance amount and also stamp duty and there was no delay on his 
part. However, the Official Receiver postponed the registration of the
sale deed on the ground that clearance from Urban Land Ceiling
authorities has to be obtained. In the meanwhile, the annulment order
was passed by the Insolvency Court. Having come to know it, the
auction purchaser filed I.A.No.5660 of 1989 to set aside the annulment
and I.A.No.5661 of 1989 to direct the Official Receiver to execute the
sale deed. Learned counsel vehemently argued under
Section 4
of the
Act, the Insolvency Court has wide powers to pass necessary orders to
do complete justice and accordingly, the Insolvency Court allowed
both the applications. In the entire process there was no delay,
muchless wilful delay, on the part of auction purchaser. Pending the
above proceedings, the appellants have clandestinely purchased the
schedule property in collusion with the legal heirs of insolvent. It was
only a private sale which is void and hit by
Section 37
of the Act,
because, the property was already sold in auction long back and
thereby the said property do not revert back to the insolvent or his
legal heirs. Consequently, they have no right to execute the sale deeds
in favour of appellants. Having known about the collusive sale the
auction purchaser filed I.A.No.5079 of 1991 to deliver the property.
Though the Insolvency Court erroneously dismissed the said petition,
the lower appellate Court rightly allowed the appeal. He relied upon
the following decisions to buttress his argument that auction sale is not
hit by annulment.
1.      Wazirey vs. Mathura Prasad
2.      Nizam Khan vs. Hukam Chand    
He thus prayed to dismiss the appeal.
7)      Substantial Question No.2: Admitted facts are that in I.P.No.56
of 1975 N.Sridhar Rao was adjudicated as Insolvent under
Section 27
r/w 28 of the Act vide Ex.A2 dated 21.09.1978. In the adjudication
order the Court while appointing Official Receiver to administer his
estate, directed him to apply for discharge within one year. Consequent
to adjudication the properties including the schedule property of the
insolvent vested in the Official Receiver.  Ex.A3sale list would show
the Official Receiver sold the schedule property in public auction on
18.01.1980 and A.V.Raja Gopal Rao1st petitioner purchased  
schedule property in the auction subject to two mortgages. The
adjudication was annulled under
Section 43
by the Insolvency Court
by its order dated 07.03.1981 since the insolvent did not apply for
discharge. Thereupon, A.V.Raja Gopal Rao filed I.A.No.5660 of 1989
to set aside annulment order and I.A.No.5661 of 1989 to direct the
Official Receiver to execute registered sale deed in his favour pursuant
to the auction sale and both the petitions were allowed by the
Insolvency Court on 26.06.1990 vide Exs.A6 and A7. Pursuant to
aforesaid orders, the Official Receiver executed Ex.A8sale deed
dated 22.08.1991 in favour of A.V.Raja Gopal Rao. While so, Sridhar
Rao the un-discharged insolvent died on 27.10.1983 and the appellants
purchased the schedule property from his legal heirs under Exs.B1 and
B2sale deeds dated 07.12.1987.
In this back drop, the crux of the case is whether the sale deed
obtained by A.V.Raja Gopal Rao in an auction held by the Official
Receiver is legally valid or the sale deeds obtained by the appellants in
a private sale are valid. The answer to this question has relevance to
the substantial questions framed by this Court. In this context
Sections
10
,
27
,
28
,
37
and
43
of the Act are germane for discussion.
8 a)
Section 10
lays down the conditions on which the debtor may
present an insolvency petition.
Section 10(2)
lays down that when
once adjudication has been annulled owing to the failure of debtor to
apply for discharge, or due to his failure to prosecute an application
for the discharge, he shall not be entitled to present a fresh insolvency
petition without the leave of the Court.
b)
Section 27
says that the Court while making an order of
adjudication shall specify in such order the period within which the
debtor shall apply for his discharge.  Under sub-Section (27), the
Court, if sufficient cause is shown, has power to extend the period
within which the debtor shall apply for his discharge.
c)
Section 28
speaks of effect of an order of adjudication.  In
substance, on the making of the order of adjudication, the whole of the
property of the insolvent shall vest in the Court or in receiver and shall
become divisible among the Creditors and thereafter, no Creditor shall,
during the pendency of the insolvency proceedings, have a remedy
against the property of the insolvent or commence any suit or other
legal proceedings except with the leave of the Court.  Further, all
property which was acquired by or devolved on the insolvent after the
date of the order of adjudication and before his discharge, except the
property exempted under sub-section(5), shall forthwith vest in the
Court or receiver, which can be dealt with under sub-section(2). The
order of adjudication shall relate back to, and take effect from the date
of the presentation of the petition on which it is made.
d)      Pursuant to the direction under
Section 27
, if the debtor fails to
apply for discharge, the Court can annul the adjudication under
Section 43
. This Section lays down that if the debtor either does not
apply for discharge within the period specified by the Court or does
not appear on the day fixed for hearing his application for discharge,
the Court may annul the order of adjudication or make such other
order as it may think fit and if the adjudication is so annulled, the
provisions of
Section 37
shall apply.
e)      Then
Section 37
speaks of consequences of annulment which is  
pertinent in this case.  This Section reads thus:
Section 37
. Proceedings on annulment.
(1) Where an adjudication is annulled, all sales and dispositions
of property and payments duly made, and all acts therefore
done, by the Court or receiver, shall be valid; but, subject as
aforesaid, the property of the debtor, who was adjudged
insolvent, shall vest in such person as the Court may appoint, or,
in default of any such appointment, shall revert to the debtor to
the extent of his right or interest therein on such conditions (if
any) as the Court may, by order in writing, declare.
(2) Notice of every order annulling an adjudication shall be
published in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as
may be prescribed.
f)      A close scrutiny of this Section would show, the sub-section (1)
contains two limbs.  The first limb would manifest that despite an
adjudication is annulled, all sales and dispositions of property and
payments duly made, and all acts therefore done, by the Court or
receiver, shall be valid. The second limb lays down that subject to the
first limb, the property of the debtor, who was adjudged insolvent,
shall vest in such person as the Court may appoint, or, in default of
any such appointment, shall revert to the debtor to the extent of his
right or interest therein on such conditions as the Court may, by order
in writing, declare. Therefore, under first limb, all the acts done by the
Court or the receiver prior to the annulment, such as sales,
dispositions of the property and payments duly made, shall hold good
and they are valid and they will not be set at naught on the annulment
order passed by the Court.  Subject to the validity of the aforesaid acts
done under first limb, the remaining properties of the debtor shall vest
either in the person whom the Court may appoint or in default of any
such appointment, shall revert to the debtor to the extent of his right
on such condition as the Court may, by order in writing declare. Thus,
if the Court or receiver dealt with any of the properties of the insolvent
between adjudication and annulment, such transactions shall stand
valid irrespective of subsequent annulment of adjudication. The
remaining properties are concerned, they vest in such person
depending on the order of the Court and if no such order is passed,
such property shall revert to the debtor to the extent of his right on
such conditions as the Court may by order in writing, declare. The
above are the consequences of annulment of adjudication.
This legal position is discussed in many cases.
9 a)    In Wazireys case (4 supra), it was held thus:
The annulment of the adjudication under the conditions defined
under
Section 43
, Provincial Insolvency Act, is intended as a
punishment to the insolvent and cannot be used in his favour.  The
protection conferred on him by reason of adjudication is
withdrawn but it does not necessarily follow that he is to get back
from the control of the Court his assets. Where therefore
insolvents property is sold by receiver with the sanction of the
insolvency Court before the order of adjudication was annulled,
the receiver has power to execute the sale deed even after the
annulment.
b)      In Nizam Khans case (5 supra), on a creditors petition, one
Mehndi Khan was adjudicated as insolvent on 07.10.1936 and he was  
directed to apply for discharge within one year.  On 12.01.1937, the
official receiver filed a petition, in which he asserted that the alienation
in question amounted to a fraudulent preference of the creditors in
whose favour it had been made and he requested the Court to annul the
transfer under
Section 54
.  While-so, the insolvent had applied for
discharge but on 09.2.1938, when the matter came up for hearing, he
was absent and the Court thereupon annulled the adjudication under
Section 43
of the Act but at the same time directed that his estate
should continue to vest in the official receiver for the benefit of the
creditors and the proceedings initiated under
Section 53
should be
continued.  The transferees of the property effected by the proceedings
under
Section 53
contended that on annulment, proceedings under
Section 53
could not be continued.  Referring the various decisions, the
Court ultimately held that the insolvency Court continues to have
jurisdiction in this matter, the official receiver being the proper person
to take control of any remaining estate where an adjudication is
annulled under
Section 43
.
The above decision would thus show that with the annulment of
the adjudication under
Section 43
, the properties would not
automatically revert back to the insolvent as sought to contend by
counsel for appellants in the instant case.  On the other hand, the sales
and dispositions already made by the Court or the receiver shall stand
valid and in respect of the other properties, the Court order will
prevail. Even the citations of the Apex Court relied upon by the
appellants would in fact, more or less confirm the same position.
c)      In
Arora Enterprises Limiteds
case (1 supra), the Apex Court
no doubt held that the effect of annulling the adjudication is to wipe
out the effect of insolvency and to vest the property retrospectively
in the insolvent.  However, it should be noted that from the facts of
the said case, it does not appear that the disputed property was
already sold in auction either by the insolvency Court or by the
receiver between adjudication and annulment.  The facts would also
do not disclose whether the insolvency court while annulling the
adjudication passed any specific order in terms of
Section 37
to the
effect that the property be retained by the official receiver.  In the
absence of either prior sale or a specific order by the Insolvency
Court, naturally the property will revert back to the insolvent with
retrospective effect and there is no demur in it.  This appears to be
one of such cases.
d)      In
Tukaram Ramchandra Manes
case (2 supra), the insolvent 
at first executed mortgage by conditional sale dated 22.01.1962 in
favour of the appellants/creditor.  Thereafter on 08.01.1963, he
executed a regular sale deed in favour of appellant/creditor. While-so,
one of the creditors of the insolvent filed an insolvency petition against
the insolvent and he himself also filed an insolvency application. The
court adjudicated him as insolvent on 08.01.1965. In an application
filed by official receiver, the Court declared that the sale deed dated
08.01.1963 was a collusive one.  While-so, by an order dated
26.06.1971, the Insolvency Court passed order of annulment.
Subsequently, the undischarged insolvent filed Civil Suit 62/76 for
redemption of mortgage on the ground that the subsequent sale deed
executed by him was held to be sham.  He also filed a petition under
Maharashtra Debt Relief Act, 1975
for the relief of extinguishment of
the mortgage debt.  The appellant contested the suit and the said
petition but they were allowed and debt was wiped out.  The appellant
went to the Supreme Court, wherein his main contention is that with
the annulment of adjudication under
Section 43
, the sale deed executed
by the insolvent revived and therefore, the debtor-creditor relationship
was no more in existence and hence the question of debt being wiped
out under
Debt Relief Act
does not arise.  This argument was not
found favour with the Apex Court which observed thus:
Para 13: xx xx xx.We are afraid, the argument is not quite
correct.  In the instant case, the effect of the declaration (that the
sale is collusive) was that the property vested in the Receiver
because the order of appointment of Receiver was very much
there.  If no order was passed by the Court directing the property
to continue to vest in the Receiver or if there was no other order
passed by the Court directing the property to vest in any other
person, the third result contemplated by said clause (1) is that it
would revert back to the debtor. That means it would vest back in
the debtor.  The incident of vesting is not mentioned in the order
because there is no order passed in that behalf.  It could be,
therefore, legitimately argued that it would vest in the debtor
entirely.
The Apex Court dismissed the appeal.
e)      Thus the ratio in
the above decision
is to the effect that the sales,
dispositions and acts done by the Insolvency Court or the receiver
shall stand valid despite the subsequent annulment of the adjudication.
In that view, the declaratory order passed by the Insolvency Court
prior to the annulment to the effect that the sale deed was a sham,
stood valid despite subsequent annulment.
f)      In Babu Rams case (3 supra), the Apex Court observed thus:
Para 35: Summarising the legal position, the position is as
follows.  In the case of an annulment under
Section 37
read with
Section 43
of the Act, where the property is not vested in any
other person and no conditions are imposed by the Insolvency
Court, the property and rights of the insolvent stand restored or
reverted to him with retrospective effect from the date of the filing
of the insolvency petition and the insolvency gets wiped out
altogether.  All acts done by the undischarged insolvent between
the date of the insolvency petition and the date of annulment get
retrospectively validated.  However, all sales and dispositions of
property and payments duly made and all acts theretofore done
by the Court or Receiver, will remain valid.
It was clearly held that the effect of
Section 37
r/w
Section 43
is
that where the property was not vested in any other person and no
condition was imposed by the Insolvency Court, the property and
rights of the insolvent stand restored or reverted to him with
retrospective effect from the date of the filing of the insolvency petition
and the insolvency gets wiped out altogether. However, all sales and
dispositions of property and payments duly made and all acts
theretofore done by the Court or Receiver, will remain valid.
Therefore, the dispositions and sales held by the Court or receiver
before the annulment shall remain valid.
g)      Applying the above precedential jurisprudence on the effect of
Section 37
r/w
Section 43
of the Act, it is clear that the in the instant
case, auction sale held by the official receiver in favour of A.V. Raja
Gopal Rao stood valid despite the subsequent annulment of the
adjudication.  Merely because the  registered sale deed was executed by
the official receiver sometime later, will not vitiate the auction sale in
view of the clear legislative mandate shall be valid employed in
Section 37(1)
of the Act.  Registration is only a consequential act.
Further, in view of
Section 47
of the Registration Act, 1908, the
registration shall relate back to the date of auction.  In that view,
Exs.B.1 and B.2sale deeds obtained by the appellants are not legally
valid for the reason that as discussed supra, even though annulment
order was passed, the auction sale conducted by the official receiver
stood valid and the schedule property did not revert back to the
undischarged insolvent as contended by the appellants.  Hence neither
himself, nor his LRs could have executed sale deeds in favour of
appellants.  Thus, substantial question No.2 is answered accordingly
against the appellants.
10)     Substantial Question No.2: The auction purchaserA.V. Raja  
Gopal Rao filed I.A.No.5660/1989 to set aside the annulment order
dated  07.03.1981 and I.A.No.5661/1989 to direct the official receiver
to execute the sale deed in his favour and both the petitions were
allowed on 26.06.1990. I.A.No.5660/1989 is concerned, in my view,
the said order is bad at law because neither
Section 43
nor any other
provision of the Act empowered Insolvency Court to set aside the
annulment on the request of a third party.  The remedy against
annulment is provided to the debtor in
Section 10(2)
of the Act.  Hence
the order in I.A.No.5660/1989 cannot be sustained.  Sofaras order in
I.A.No.5661/1989 is concerned, the same is well within the powers of
the Court in terms of
Section 37
of the Act which says that despite the
annulment, the sale held by the Court or official receiver shall be valid.
Therefore, the Court was well within its power to direct the official
receiver to execute sale deed in favour of A.V.Raja Gopal Rao.
Accordingly, this substantial question is answered.
11)     In the result, this Second Appeal is dismissed confirming the
judgment and decree dated 04.06.2007 passed by the first Appellate
Court in A.S.No.7 of 2004. No costs.
As a sequel, miscellaneous applications pending, if any, shall
stand closed.
_________________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 13.11.2017