[Cites
4
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
G.Radha Madhavi vs M/S Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. And ... on 22 September, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 HYDERABAD 22, (2017) 6 ANDHLD 406 (2018) 2 CIVLJ 141, (2018) 2 CIVLJ 141
Bench:
Sanjay Kumar
,
M.S.K.Jaiswal
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR AND THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.S.K.JAISWAL                  

CMA NO.742 OF 2017    

22-09-2017 

G.Radha Madhavi  .. Appellant

M/s Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. and others  .. Respondents

Counsel for the Appellant:   Sri Kishore Rai            
                                
Counsel for Respondents:Sri Dominic Fernandes  

<Gist:

>Head Note:     


? CASES REFERRED:      

1. 2017 (1) ALT 257 (D.B.)
2. (1999) 2 SCC 479 
3. (2012) 2 SCC 93 
4. (2008) 16 SCC 774 

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SANJAY KUMAR         
AND  
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.S.K.JAISWAL        

CIVIL MISCELLANEOUS APPEAL NO.742 OF 2017          

J U D G M E N T
(Per Sri Justice Sanjay Kumar)
      This civil miscellaneous appeal under
Section 37
of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for brevity, the Act of 1996),
arises out of the order dated 13.07.2017 passed by the learned
Principal District Judge, Chittoor, in C.F.R.No.3249 of 2017 in an
unnumbered Arbitration Petition filed by the appellant herein. The
said arbitration petition was filed under
Section 9(ii)(d)
of the Act of
1996, seeking a permanent injunction restraining the Indian Oil
Corporation Limited, the respondent herein, from interfering in any
way with the business operations of the appellant, either by forcibly
effecting her eviction or by discontinuing supply of petroleum
products, till the disputes between them were resolved finally through
the process of arbitration. Therein, the appellant filed C.F.R.No.3249
of 2017, seeking interim relief on the same lines till disposal of the
petition.
By the order under appeal, the Court below held that the
correct provision of law that was applicable was 9(1)(ii)(d) and not
Section 9(ii)(d)
of the Act of 1996; that the agreement between the
parties stood terminated at the end of the agreement period, which
expired on 28.03.2004 and therefore, there was no arbitration clause
existing and in operation, whereby the appellant could invoke the
jurisdiction of the Court under
Section 9(1)(ii)(d)
of the Act of 1996;
that even in terms of the arbitration clause, it was not open to the
appellant to nominate a sole Arbitrator thereby conferring jurisdiction
on the Principal District Court, Chittoor; and that the Court below
had no jurisdiction to entertain the matter.
Sri Kishore Rai, learned counsel for the appellant, would
contend that the Court below erred in dismissing the main
Arbitration O.P. at the stage of considering the petition filed therein
for interim relief. He would contend that the Court below was in error
in coming to the conclusion that it had no jurisdiction to entertain
the Arbitration O.P., as the cause of action arose within its territorial
jurisdiction. He would assert that in terms of the law laid down by
this Court in M/s.SUSHEE VENTURES PRIVATE LIMITED V/s.       
RAHUL AGARWAL , the Court below undoubtedly had jurisdiction to   
entertain the petition. He would further state that though the initial
agreement between the parties was executed as long back as on  
27.10.2003, there was no termination of the relationship by the
Indian Oil Corporation Limited and therefore, the arbitration clause
in the said agreement would continue to exist and operate,
notwithstanding the expiry of the period stipulated thereunder.
Per contra, Sri Dominic Fernandes, learned counsel for the
Indian Oil Corporation Limited, would state that this case has a long
and chequered history and that the attempt on the part of the
appellant is only to defeat the orders passed by the Supreme Court.
He would further submit that it is only if an arbitration clause is in
existence and available that the question of the Court below
examining whether it had jurisdiction to entertain the matter would
arise. He would therefore state that notwithstanding the error, if any,
committed by the Court below on that issue, the matter first requires
to be examined in the context of the finding of the Court below that
no such arbitration clause is available to the appellant as on date. He
would place before this Court the judgments rendered by this Court
and thereafter, by the Supreme Court which have significance.
It appears that a Maintenance and Handling (M & H) Contract
in respect of a retail outlet was entered into by IBP Company Limited,
the predecessor-in-interest of the Indian Oil Corporation Limited,
with the appellant on 27.10.2003. Clause 48 of this agreement
categorically stated that the agreement would be for a period of one
year, effective from 29.03.2003, subject to renewal by one year at the
companys option at the same rates and on the same terms and  
conditions. The clause further stated that unless otherwise
mentioned or renewed in writing, the agreement stood automatically
terminated at the end of the agreement period.
It appears that IBP Company Limited had adopted the practice
of accepting land from owners for the purpose of establishing retail
outlets and M & H Contracts in relation to such outlets were given to
contractors who, in most of the cases, were the friends/relations of
the land owners. This practice was however done away with when the 
Government of India introduced new guidelines with regard to
allotment of dealerships. The appellant also was one such M & H
Contractor who was appointed to run a retail outlet in the land
offered by her husband on lease to IBP Company Limited.
Aggrieved by the change in policy, the appellants husband
filed W.P.No.25859 of 2006 before this Court. By common order dated
18.01.2007 rendered in all such like cases, including W.P.No.25858
of 2006, a learned Judge of this Court held that the leases granted
were unconditional and appointment of M & H Contractors did not
confer absolute rights. The writ petitions were accordingly dismissed.
This order was confirmed in appeal by a Division Bench of this Court,
in which one of us, SK,J, was a member, vide order dated 09.07.2014
passed in W.A.No.127 of 2008 and batch. Significantly, W.A.No.128 
of 2008 in the said batch was filed by none other than the husband
of the appellant. The matter was then taken to the Supreme Court in
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (c) Nos.20354-20364 of 2014.
The husband of the appellant also figured as a petitioner in this
batch before the Supreme Court. By order dated 10.04.2017, the
Supreme Court confirmed the order dated 09.07.2014 passed by the 
Division Bench of this Court, but accepting the plea of the
petitioners, the Supreme Court granted time till 30.06.2017 for
vacating the premises. The petitioners were required to file
undertakings that they would not create any third party rights and
would peacefully vacate the premises concerned by 30.06.2017.
During the pendency of the writ petitions before the learned
single Judge, orders of status quo held the field, by virtue of which
the existing M & H Contractors continued to run the outlets in the
leased premises. Significantly, only four such M & H Contractors
figured as petitioners before the learned single Judge and the other
cases were filed only by the land owners. Similar was the case with
the appellant, as her husband filed the writ petition and she did not
choose to espouse any grievance of her own.
This Court therefore finds merit in the submission of Sri
Dominic Fernandes, learned counsel, that the present attempt on the
part of the appellant is only to get over the commitment given by her
husband to the Supreme Court that he would vacate the premises on 
30.06.2017. The petition was therefore utterly lacking in bonafides.
However, as Sri Kishore Rai, learned counsel, raised the plea
that notwithstanding the expiry of the agreement, the arbitration
clause therein would continue to survive and operate, we address the
said issue. It may be noted at this stage that the Court below was
required by law to satisfy itself as to the existence of an arbitration
clause before entertaining the petition under
Section 9
of the Act of
1996 (See SUNDARAM FINANCE LTD. V/s. NEPC INDIA LTD ).
Sri Kishore Rai, learned counsel, relied upon REVA ELECTRIC
CAR COMPANY P. LTD. V/s. GREEN MOBIL , wherein upon an        
application filed under
Section 11
of the Act of 1996, the Supreme
Court, while appointing an Arbitrator, observed that notwithstanding
the initial period under the MOU expiring by a particular date, the
disputes that arose in relation to its termination and the
consequences thereof would be clearly covered under the arbitration
clause found therein. The Supreme Court further observed that even
on termination of the agreement, the arbitration agreement would
still survive.
Similar was the view taken in EVEREST HOLDING LIMITED   
V/s. SHYAM KUMAR SHRIVASTAVA , wherein the Supreme Court         
observed that once there is a valid arbitration agreement between the
parties contained in the joint venture agreement and if any disputes
arose between them in relation to the subject matter of the said joint
venture agreement, they would have to be adjudicated through the
process of arbitration and though the joint venture agreement may
have been terminated and cancelled, such disputes would still be
amenable to resolution through arbitration. The argument to the
contrary that the disputes could not be referred to arbitration as the
agreement was not in existence as on that date was therefore held to
be devoid of merit.
There can be no disputing the fact that an arbitration clause in
an agreement would survive even after expiry/termination of such
agreement in relation to any disputes that arose in the context of the
period of the agreement or even the termination thereof. In the case
on hand, however, it is not in dispute that the M & H Contract
executed on 27.10.2003 was never renewed. In terms of Clause 48 of
the agreement, it stood automatically terminated at the end of the
initial agreement period. Continuance of the appellant thereafter was
not permissive or with the tacit consent of the Corporation. It was
only because of the status quo order secured by her husband in
W.P.No.25859 of 2006 that the appellant continued to operate as a
M & H Contractor. This state of affairs seems to have continued till
the Supreme Court directed the appellants husband, amongst 
others, to vacate the premises by 30.06.2017. That being so, the
judgments cited are of no avail to the appellant. The agreement in
question did not stand extended automatically by virtue of the status
quo order granted by this Court during the pendency of the writ
petition. In effect, the agreement, as such, expired in terms of Clause
48 thereof and the continuance of the appellant thereafter was not by
virtue of or under the said agreement but under the binding order of
this Court. Once the agreement itself ceased to exist so long ago and
the relationship between the parties thereafter was attributable to a
Court order, the question of the arbitration clause contained in the
said agreement surviving till this date does not arise.
On the above analysis, this Court finds that on the principal
issue as to whether there was an arbitration clause existing as on
date, whereby the appellant would have the right to approach the
Court below with a petition under
Section 9
of the Act of 1996, the
Court below rightly held that no such arbitration clause was available
to the appellant. The other issue as to whether the Court below had
jurisdiction otherwise to entertain the application therefore does not
call for a finding on merits.
The order under appeal is therefore valid and correct in so far
as the issue of existence of the arbitration clause is concerned and we
find no grounds to interfere with the same. The appeal is accordingly
dismissed. Pending miscellaneous petitions, if any shall also stand
dismissed. No order as to costs.
___________________   
SANJAY KUMAR,J     
___________________   
M.S.K.JAISWAL,J   
22nd SEPTEMBER, 2017