[Cites
19
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Sriram Chandra Sekhar @ Chintu vs State Of Andhra Pradesh Rep. By Its ... on 5 July, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 36
Author:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
Bench:
U. Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           

Criminal Petition No.4171 of 2017

05-07-2017 

Sriram Chandra Sekhar @ Chintu....  Petitioner/1st Accused

State of Andhra Pradesh Rep. by its Public Prosecutor, High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad For the State of Telangana and

Counsel for Petitioner: Sri Akurathi Ramakrishna

Counsel for Respondent: Public Prosecutor for State (A.P)

< Gist:

> Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1)(2007) 1 SCC 242 
2)(2017) 5 SCC 406 
3)2017 SCC Online Hyd 112  

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO          

Criminal Petition No.4171 of 2017

ORDER:
In this petition filed under
Section 437
and
439
Cr.P.C, the
petitioner/A.1 seeks regular bail in SC No.110 of 2016 pending on the
file of IX Additional District and Sessions Judge, Chittoor arising out
of Crime No.130 of 2015 of I Town PS, Chittoor, which was
registered for the offences under
Sec.147
,
148
,
302
,
307
,
326
, 120-B,
109
r/w 149
IPC
,
Sec.212
,
216
,
201
IPC,
Sec.25(1A)
,
Sec.25(1AAA)
,
Sec.25(1B)(a)
,
Sec.25(1B)(c)
,
Sec.27(3)
and
Sec.30
of the Arms Act,
1959.
2)      It was a ghastly murder of Mayor couple occurred on
17.11.2015, wherein Smt. Katari Anuradha, the Mayor of Chittoor
and her husband Katari Mohan were brutally killed in the Mayors
chamber at Municipal Corporation Office by A.1 to A.5. The other
accused were involved in the offence in one way or other. The police
have charge sheeted altogether 23 Accused.
3)      The charge sheet would disclose, the barbaric act was planned
and perpetrated by the petitioner/A.1 who is the Brutus in this episode
as he happened to be the own nephew of the Mayor Couple.
Briefly stating, as per charge sheet there were political rivalries
between two groupsone group headed by Ex-MLA, C.K.Babu      
belonging to Congress Party and other group headed by deceased  
no.2Katari Mohan belonging to Telugu Desam Party for achieving 
the political supremacy over the area, which led to physical attacks
and counter attacks, resulting in cases between the two groups. The
petitioner/A.1 originally belonged to the group of deceased no.2
Katari Mohan.  It is alleged that during the period, when the deceased
no.2 was jailed for about three years in the group rivalry cases,
petitioner/A.1 used to look after the business and political activities of
deceased no.2 and used to assist his wife deceased no.1 and gradually
he held sway over his group. However, after deceased no.2 returned
from jail, it is alleged, petitioner/A.1 had to return the supremacy to
him and had to content with second slot which he did not relish. That
apart over the period some business and group rivalries cropped up
between both of them which ultimately led petitioner/A.1 to terminate
the Mayor couple. Accordingly, it is alleged, on 17.11.2015 in the
morning at about 11:45am, when the Mayor couple and some others   
assembled in the Chamber of Mayor at Municipal Corporation and 
attending some work, A.1 to A.5 went in Burkas and at first A.1
opened fire on deceased no.1 and she received head injury and fell
down and died instantaneously. When the defacto complainant (LW.1)  
and some others who were present in Mayors chambers, came to the  
rescue of deceased no.2, A.4 hacked LW.1 on his back and A.2 fired at
deceased no.2 and the deceased no.2 ran towards Council Conference  
Hall, and A.1 to A.5 chased deceased no.2 in the Conference Hall and
hacked him with sickles. Later the accused retreated and the injured
were rushed to the District Headquarters Hospital, Chittoor, where the
Medical Officer examined the deceased no.1 and declared as dead. 
Later LWs.1 and 2 were referred to CMC, Vellore for better treatment
and while undergoing treatment, deceased no.2 succumbed to injuries
and died at 9pm on the same day. The police of Chittoor I Town PS,
on being informed, rushed to the Hospital and recorded the statement
of LW.1 and continued other proceedings. On completion of
investigation, charge sheet was laid against 23 accused as stated.
Hence, the instant bail application.
4)      It may be noted that earlier the petitioner/A.1 filed
Crl.P.No.16351/2016 seeking bail and the same was dismissed by the  
High Court on 15.12.2016 as withdrawn.
5)      Heard Sri P.Kesava Rao, learned counsel representing for Sri
Ramakrishna Akurathi, learned counsel for petitioner and learned
Public Prosecutor for the State (Andhra Pradesh).
6)      Staunchly denying the petitioners involvement in the offence,
learned counsel for petitioner sought bail on the following
submissions:
Firstly, he argued, as per charge sheet, there were political
rivalries between the groups of deceased no.2 and C.K.Babu and cases 
are also pending between them and in that backdrop, any of the
disgruntled might have murdered the deceased but the police have
implicated the petitioner/A.1 on untenable grounds.
Secondly, he would argue that the incident was occurred around
11:45am and police came to know about the incident and also about 
the assailants by about 12:00noon but they have registered the FIR
belatedly at 7:00pm on 17.11.2015 which implies that they have roped
in the petitioner/A.1 after due deliberations.
Thirdly, he argued that as per LW.1s version, before opening
fire on deceased, the petitioner/A.1 removed his Burka and thereby
LW.1 and others present there, could identify one of the assailants as
petitioner/A.1.  When the petitioner/A.1 and others wanted to commit
the offence by secreting their identity, the question of A.1 opening his
Burka before opening fire does not arise and it is quite unbelievable. It
would indicate LW.1 and LW.2, who claimed to have seen A.1  
opening his Burka, concocted a story to implicate A.1.
Fourthly, he would submit that as per G.D entries of Chittoor I
Town PS, A.2 and A.4 went to the I Town PS at about 12:45pm on  
the date of incident and allegedly stated to the S.I that they came to
know that the Mayor couple were murdered and A.1 and his 
henchmen were suspected to be the assailants and since they were the 
followers of A.1, though they had nothing to do with the offence, the
followers of the deceased may cause harm to them and sought  
protection and police extended protection to them in the Police
Station.  He would further submit that on the same ground, A.3 also
allegedly approached Police Station at about 7:30pm and sought for
protection and he too was extended protection and later at about
7:45pm, the S.I of Police sent A.2 to A.4 to Marredpally village on
their request with the police escort and kept them under surveillance.
Learned counsel vehemently argued that when by 12:00noon itself, the
police knew the particulars of the assailants and by 7:00pm, they
already registered FIR against A.1 and more particularly against A.2
to A.4, sending A.2 to A.4 under police escort to a different village and
keeping surveillance on them would appear ridiculous and imaginary.
He argued that the entire episode would cast serious doubt about the
involvement of the accused in the offence and veracity of FIR.
Nextly, he would submit that petitioner/A.1 being a law abiding
citizen, voluntarily surrendered before the Court and he has been in
custody since last 19 months and entire investigation was completed
and Sessions Case No.110 of 2016 is now coming up for framing 
charges and as there is no threat of meddling with investigation and as
the case will take some time for completion of trial, the petitioner/A.1
may be released from pre-trail incarceration so as to enable him to
defend his case and he would abide by the conditions if any, imposed
by the Court. He placed reliance on
Chenna Boyanna Krishna Yadav  
vs. State of Maharashtra and another
.
7)      Per contra, severely opposing the bail, learned Public Prosecutor
would argue that it is the case of a day-light murder of the Mayor and
her husband in her Chambers at Corporation Office in the midst of eye
witnesses, who came to meet the Mayor on some work. The brutality  
of petitioner/A.1 was such that despite the deceased no.1, who was his
aunt and a lady, requesting him not to kill her, he pierced bullets into
her head from close range and not satisfied, he along with other
assailants chased the fleeing deceased no.2, who was his own uncle
and hacked him to death in the Conference Hall which ghastly incident
tremored the entire Chittoor Town and also the District with shock
and fear. He would submit that petitioner/A.1 and some other
assailants were clearly identified by LW.1, LW.2 and some other eye
witnesses and as such, the police have strong evidence about his
involvement in the crime.
Nextly, he would submit that petitioner/A.1 was involved in
some other crimes also and while on bail in some cases, he committed 
the present offence and therefore, the propensity of his committing
some more offences, if granted bail, cannot be ruled out. Further,
having regard to the background facts of the case that both the
deceased and petitioner/A.1 belonged to same family and political and
property disputes existed between them, there is a threat to the life of
petitioner/A.1 in the hands of the political opponents if he is enlarged
on bail. He would further submit that the petitioner/A.1 has a
considerable political clout and muscle strength to apply threat and
coercion on the witnesses.
He would thus argue that having regard to the grave nature of
offence and the background of petitioner/A.1 and his tendency to
repeat the similar type of offences, the possibility of his influencing the
witnesses, bail may be refused. He placed reliance on
Virupakshappa
Gouda and another vs. State of Karnataka and another
wherein the
parameters for granting bail were discussed.
8)      Answering the points raised by learned counsel for petitioner,
learned Public Prosecutor argued that there was no delay in registering
the FIR. In this case, the police no doubt received the information
about the brutal murder of Mayor couple at about 12:00noon and also
regarding the involvement of some accused. However, since the victims
were in critical situation lying in the hospital and as the incident
spread in the entire town as a flame of forest posing law and order
problem due to some miscreants going rampage causing destruction of 
public and private properties, the police department in general and the
Police Officers of I Town PS in particular were preoccupied with many
crucial and important functions like rushing to the Hospital to monitor
the condition of the wounded LW.1 and deceased no.2 to record their
statements if possible; arranging the police to guard the crime scene;
clamping the police force at vulnerable points of mob-frenzy Town to
prevent vandalism. After recording the statement of LW.1, the
Inspector of Police I Town PS registered the FIR at about 7pm and
issued express FIR to all concerned. Therefore, he would argue, there
was absolutely no delay in registering the FIR. He relied upon a
judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in
Maskoori Srinivas vs.
The State of A.P
rep. by its Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P,
Hyderabad  to buttress his argument that when cryptic information
was received and police preoccupied with other essential functions,
delay in registration of FIR was not fatal.
Nextly, defending the action of the Inspector in keeping
surveillance on A.2 to A.4 while sending them to Marredpally village
under police escort, learned P.P would argue that as per Rule No.450
of A.P Police Manual, the police have discretion to keep surveillance
on suspected persons without arresting them so as to watch their
movements and ascertain the facts relating to an offence. As such,
merely because A.2 to A.4 were FIR mentioned accused, their non- 
arrest and keeping surveillance on them is not a procedural deviation
to infer that a false case is foisted against the accused particularly A.1.
He thus prayed to dismiss the bail.
9)      The point for determination is:
        Whether bail can be granted to petitioner/A.1?
10)     POINT:   Sessions Case No.110 of 2016, it is informed, at the
stage of consideration of charges by the IX Additional District and
Sessions Judge, Chittoor. It is trite law that a pre-trial incarceration
shall be neither punitive nor preventive unless the facts and
circumstances severely compel. What is germane for consideration of a
bail application has been enunciated by Apex Court in a number of
cases including the
Virupakshappa Gouda
(2 supra). A compilation of
those prerequisites are:
a)      severity or gravity of the offence;
b)      prima facie accusation against the offender;
c)      severity of punishment in the event of conviction;
d)      the chances of accused absconding if granted bail;
e)      the propensity of accused repeating the crimes;
f)      reasonable apprehension that the accused influencing the witness
and thwart the course of justice.
The case on hand needs to be tested on the anvil of the above
canons.
11)     Record shows, the case on hand is a barbarous crime wherein 
the Mayor couple were brutally murdered in their Chamber at
Corporation Office in Chittoor under the broad day light in the
presence of some persons who came on their works. As rightly stated
by learned Public Prosecutor, the piteous appeals of the Mayor fell in
deaf ears of the assailants and bullets were pierced into her head
causing her instantaneous death. Neither her husband was left as he
was chased and hacked to death in the Conference hall. That, within
minutes the entire town was gripped under fear and shock could be
understood. Thus no exposition is necessary to describe the offence as
gruesome, shocking and grave one. Coming to the involvement of
petitioner/A.1, a perusal of the charge sheet shows, the prosecution
flanked eye witnesses to speak of the involvement of petitioner/A.1
and some other accused who allegedly participated in the murder. True
that learned counsel for petitioner raised an argument that if the
assailants wished to conceal their identity by wearing Burkas, it would
be unbelievable that they would remove their Burkas at the crucial
time of offence. This argument in the light of evidence of LW1 and
LW2 has to be scrutinized only after trial but it is not apt to make any
observation at this stage in this bail application. Similarly, the
argument about the delay in registration of FIR and the surveillance on
A.2 to A.4 is concerned, they require a thorough examination only
after completion of trial. At present, these instances projected by
learned counsel for petitioner will not have any direct impact on the
innocence of petitioner/A1. As already stated, the said argument can
be considered only after full-fledged trial. As the matter stands, in the
light of the statements of the eye witnesses, it must be said, there is a
strong prima facie material against petitioner/A.1.
Sofaras severity of the punishment is concerned, one of the
charges is under
Sec.302
IPC which is punishable with death or life
imprisonment. Thus, it is needless to emphasize the gravity of the
charge.
Then the possibility of abscondance of accused if granted bail is
concerned, the prosecution has not raised such apprehension.
The possibility of accused repeating the crimes if granted bail is
concerned, learned P.P vehemently argued that the accused involved in
S.C No.330/2010 on the file of IX Additional District Court, Chittoor
and after getting bail
in that case
, he committed the present offence and
he also involved in some other cases and therefore, there is every
likelihood of his committing some other offences if granted bail. The
apprehension of the prosecution cannot be brushed aside lightly in
view of the background facts relating to the petitioner/A.1.
Sofaras the possibility of petitioner/A.1 influencing the
witnesses if released on bail is concerned, the submission of learned
P.P is that the petitioner enjoyed clout on the town due to his political
affiliation and men and money power and therefore, it will be very
difficult for the police to protect the witnesses from being influenced
by the petitioner. This apprehension having regard to the background
and conduct of the petitioner appears to be reasonable one. It is
further submitted by the P.P that there is a danger to the life of
petitioner too in the hands of the supporters of the deceased, which
also cannot be ignored. So when a holistic view of the matter is taken
into consideration, bail cannot be granted to the petitioner at this
stage.
12)     Accordingly, the bail application is dismissed.
_________________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 03.07.2017