[Cites
14
, Cited by
4
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Ekkaladevi Devaiah vs Bojja Laxmi And Others on 30 June, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 (NOC) 454 (HYD.), 2017 AIR CC 3379 (HYD), (2017) 5 ANDHLD 194, 2018 (183) AIC (SOC) 11 (HYD)
Author:
M. Satyanarayana Murthy
Bench:
M. Satyanarayana Murthy
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE M. SATYANARAYANA MURTHY             

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No. 2981 OF 2011     

30-06-2017 

Ekkaladevi Devaiah..Petitioner

Bojja Laxmi and others. . Respondents  

Counsel for the petitioner: Sri P.V.Narayana Rao

Counsel  for the Respondent: Sri M.Raja Malla Reddy 
                                        
<Gist :

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:

1.1996(4) ALT 129 
2.1997(4) ALT 77 
3.2012(1) ALD 114 
4.2013(6) ALT 169 
5.AIR 2007 Uttaranchal 10
6.1977 M.P.H.C. 1 F.B. 
7.2013(4) CCC 122 (Ori.)
8.AIR 1987 SC 42 
9.1997 (4) ALT 77
10. 2013(4) ALD 72 
11.  2000(2) ALD 565 
12. AIR 2003 SC 3527  
13. AIR 2002 SC 2436  
14. 2013(6) ALD 499 
15. 2008(5) ALD 333     

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE M. SATYANARAYANA MURTHY             

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No. 2981 OF 2011     

ORDER:
The first respondent in CMA No.5 of 2010 on the file of
Senior Civil Judge, Siricilla, who is the plaintiff in O.S. No.44 of
2008, filed this revision petition under
Article 227
of the
Constitution of India challenging the Order dated 08.04.2011 in
CMA No.5 of 2010, whereby the learned Senior Civil Judge allowed
the CMA while setting aside the order dated 04.10.2010 in I.A.
No.107 of 2010 in O.S. No.44 of 2008 passed by the Junior Civil
Judge, Vemulawada.
The revision petitioner was the plaintiff in O.S. No.44 of
2008 and 1st respondent in I.A. No.107 of 2010, whereas the first
respondent herein was the 6th defendant in O.S. No.44 of 2008 and
the petitioner in I.A. No.107 of 2010 and respondents 2 to 6 were
the defendants 1 to 5 in O.S. No.44 of 2008.  But to avoid
confusion in referring the parties, they will hereinafter be referred
to as the revision petitioner and respondents as arrayed in the civil
revision petition, for convenience sake.
The revision petitioner filed suit in O.S. No.44 of 2008 for
partition and other consequential reliefs before the Junior Civil
Judge, Vemulawada, Karimnagar District. Respondents 1 and 6  
contested the suit appearing through their counsel and filed
written statement, whereas the other respondents were set exparte.
During trial, P.Ws.1 and 2 were examined on behalf of the
plaintiffs, but they were not cross-examined by the counsel for
respondents 1 and 6 herein.  Later the matter went on several
adjournments, but neither the first respondent nor his counsel
turned up, to cross-examine P.Ws.1 and 2 and to adduce evidence 
on behalf of respondents 1 and 6. Thereupon the court passed the
decree on 17.03.2016.
Later on, the first respondent filed I.A. No.107 of 2010 under
Rule 13 of
Order IX of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (for short
CPC
) to set aside ex parte preliminary decree, explaining the delay
contending that during first week of October 2009 she suffered
from severe back ache and spondylosis.  As per the advise of the
Doctor, she has taken bed rest for about six months, thereby she
could not contact her counsel to know the stage of suit and the
counsel also could not cross-examine P.Ws.1 and 2 and other 
witnesses produced by the plaintiff, who is the revision petitioner
herein, due to lack of instructions as she was completely on bed
she could not file affidavit in lieu of examination-in-chief and
tender herself to cross-examine her by the adversary, examining
any witness before the court.  Therefore, she was prevented by a
cause which is beyond her reasonable control i.e. back ache and
spondylosis and thereby preliminary decree passed by the trial
court is an ex parte decree and prayed to set aside the ex parte
decree.
The revision petitioner filed counter denying the material
allegations inter alia contending that his affidavit in lieu of
examination-in-chief was filed on 09.11.2009 and thereafter
documents were marked as Exs.A.1 to A.15 and the suit was  
adjourned for his cross-examination by the counsel for
respondents 1 and 5, but they failed to cross-examine the
petitioner.  Later, he filed affidavit in lieu of examination-in-chief of
P.W.2 under Rule 4 of
Order XVIII of CPC
.  He was also not cross-
examined inspite of granting several adjournments.  Ultimately the
cross-examination of P.W.2 was also closed and the suit was 
adjourned for defendants evidence.   But respondents 1 and 6 did
not examine any witness and the matter was heard on 15.03.2010, 
pronounced the judgment on 17.03.2010 passing the preliminary 
decree, on merits. Therefore, the decree passed on merits cannot be
set aside and the petition under Rule 13 of
Order IX of CPC
is not
maintainable.  It is also contended that the allegations that she
suffered from backache and spondylosis during the first week of
October 2009 and took bed rest on the advise of doctor for a period
of six months and thereby she could not contact her counsel are all
false and that the docket proceedings of the suit would disclose the
tactics adopted by the petitioner in protracting the trial of suit
thereby the court cannot exercise its discretion, set aside the ex
parte decree exercising power under Rule 13 of
Order IX of CPC
.
The allegations made in the affidavit filed along with petition are
concocted and invented for the purpose of the petition and they are
all false, finally prayed to dismiss the petition.
The trial court upon hearing argument of both the counsel
dismissed the petition holding that the suit was disposed of on
merits. On account of failure of respondents 1 and 6, P.Ws.1 and 2
were not cross-examined and did not adduce any evidence.
Aggrieved by the order dated 04.10.2010 in I.A. No.107 of
2010, the first respondent herein preferred the appeal, in CMA
No.5 of 2010 on the file of Senior Civil Judge at Siricilla, under
Rule 1 of
Order XLIII of CPC
.  The appellate court, upon hearing
argument of both the counsel, based on the principle laid down by
this Court in
Galla Laxmamma v. Reparthi Anjaiah
and Raju
Kumar and another v. G.Anasuya   concluded that the 
preliminary decree passed under Rule 13 under VIII
of CPC
is
maintainable while setting aside the order dated 04.10.2010 in I.A.
No.107 of 2010 in O.S. No.44 of 2008 passed by the Junior Civil
Judge at Vemulawada and restored the I.A. to its original number
directing the learned Junior Civil Judge to dispose of the petition
within two months from the date of receipt of this order.
Aggrieved by the order dated 08.04.2011 in CMA No.5 of
2010, the present civil revision petition under
Article 227
of
Constitution of Indian is filed raising several contentions mainly on
the ground that on account of conduct of respondents 1 and 6
herein to cross-examine the witnesses and did not adduce evidence
on their behalf; the trial court was forced to pass the preliminary
decree on merits, but it would fall within the Rule 3 of
Order XVII
of CPC
, not under Rule 2 of
Order XVII of CPC
and the appellate
court without considering the explanation annexed to Rule 3 of
Order XVII of CPC
, erroneously allowed the CMA, thereby
committed illegality in allowing the petition reversing the order
passed by the trial court.  It is further contended that the
preliminary decree passed by the trial court is not an ex parte
decree, but on merits, thereby the petition under Rule 13 of
Order
IX of CPC
is not maintainable, the said fact was not considered by
the appellate court in proper perspective.  The appellate court also
failed to take into consideration, the conduct of the first respondent
in prosecuting the proceedings, more particularly, non-payment of
costs imposed by the trial court on 08.02.2010 for obtaining
adjournments one after the other, to protract the matter at
considerable length of time.  When the first respondent failed to
comply the conditional order for payment of costs, the court has no
alternative except to accept the contention of the revision
petitioner, but the appellate court on erroneous appreciation of
facts allowed the petition setting aside the order dated 04.10.2010
in I.A. No.107 of 2010 in O.S. No.44 of 2008 passed by the Junior
Civil Judge and prayed to set aside the same.
During hearing, Sri P.V.Narayana Rao, learned counsel for
the revision petitioner, contended that when the matter was argued
by the counsel for the first respondent, the decree cannot be
described as an ex parte decree.   Apart from that the trial court
considered the entire material both documentary and oral evidence
and arrived at the conclusion that the petitioner is entitled to a
share in the property claimed in the plaint.  He also produced a
copy of docket proceedings to establish that the first respondent
was guilty of negligence in prosecuting the proceedings, which
disentitled him to claim any relief in the petition filed under Rule
13 of
Order IX of CPC
.  It is also contended that when the court
found substantial evidence to decide the real controversy between
the parties as per the explanation to Rule 3 of
Order XVII of CPC
,
decided the matter on merits, cannot be faulted, consequently only
appeal lies on preliminary decree, but the appellate court on
erroneous appreciation committed grave error in allowing the CMA
setting aside the order passed by the trial court.
In support of his contention placed reliance on several
judgments of this court and other High courts. He has drawn the
attention of this court to the judgments in M.Ramanjulu v.
Sapparaju Venkata Seshaiah ,
Velpuri Krishna Rao v. Randhi 
Suryanarayana and others
,
State of U.P. v. Jaman Singh and
Anr.
,
Budhulal Kasturchand v. Chhotelal and Others
and
finally
Jitendra Kumar Choudhury v. Banku Sahoo
.  On the
strength of the principles
laid down in
the judgments, he
contended that the decree under challenge cannot be said to be ex
parte decree to invoke jurisdiction under Rule 13 of
Order IX of
CPC
to set aside the preliminary decree passed by the trial court.
Therefore the appellate court did not follow the principles
laid
down by
this court and other high courts in the
judgments
referred
to above
and prayed to set aside the order passed by the appellate
court restoring the order passed by the trial court in I.A. No.107 of
2010 in O.S. No.44 of 2008.
The learned counsel for the first respondent while supporting
the order under challenge, contended that when the first
respondent failed to cross-examine P.Ws.1 and 2 and failed to
adduce evidence, the course open to the court is to follow the
procedure under Rule 2 of
Order XVII of CPC
and A.P. amendment  
to Rule 3 of
Order XVII of CPC
also directs the court to decide any
such suit when the party did not produce evidence and contest the
matter to decide such suit under Rule 2 of
Order XVII of CPC
.
Therefore, the appellate court rightly held that it is only an ex parte
decree and the petition under Rule 13 of
Order IX of CPC
is
maintainable.
In support of his contention he placed reliance on
the judgment of the Apex Court in
Prakash Chander Manchanda   
and another v. Smt.Janaki Manchanda
, and the judgment of 
this Court in
Raj Kumar and another v. G.Anasuya
, Mandadi
Srinivasa Rao v. Shaik Mehrunnisa  and
Daka Venkatrami  
Reddy v. Central Bank of India, Ongole
. Based on the principles
propounded in the
judgments
referred to above
, the decree can be
treated as an ex-parte decree for all practical purposes.  He also
further contended that the first respondent never participated in
the proceedings, though there is a reference about hearing of
argument of counsel for the 1st respondent in the preamble of the
judgment, it is a patent error in view of the observation of the trial
court at last paragraph in page 5 of the judgment, since preamble
is prepared by the stenographer.
On the other hand the docket proceedings produced before 
this court by the counsel for the revision petitioner herein also
disclosed that P.Ws.1 and 2 were not cross-examined despite 
imposing costs of Rs.50/- on 01.12.2009, Rs.100/- on 18.01.2010
and again on 08.02.2010.   On any of the dates of the
adjournments, the first respondent or his counsel appeared and
prosecuted the proceedings, except one or two occasions,
advancement of argument by the counsel for the first respondent is
unbelievable and thereby hearing of arguments mentioned in the
preamble cannot be accepted and as such the principle
laid down
in
M.Ramanjulu v. Sapparaju Venkata Seshaiah  (3rd supra) has 
no application to the present facts of the case and prayed to
dismiss the revision petition affirming the order passed by the
appellate court in CMA No.5 of 2010.
Considering rival contentions, the point that arose for
consideration is;
Whether the Decree and Judgment dated 17.03.2010   
passed by the Junior Civil Judge, Vemulawada, is an
ex parte Decree and Judgment?  If not, whether the
petition under Rule 13 of
Order IX of CPC
is
maintainable?
POINT:
The revision petitioner filed suit for partition against several
defendants including the first respondent herein who was arrayed
as 6th defendant in the suit. Respondents 2 to 5 remained ex parte.
Respondents 1 and 6 alone contested the suit by filing written
statement.  But for one reason or the other, the counsel for the first
respondent before this court did not cross-examine the witnesses,
who were examined on behalf of the revision petitioner (P.Ws.1 and
2).  Respondents 1 and 6 filed their written statement and the suit
was posted for framing of issues on 19.04.2007, thereafter the
matter was adjourned for more than 20 times for framing issues,
finally on 02.02.2009 the trial court framed the issues, thereafter
the suit was adjourned for about 8 times from 20.04.2009 to
03.11.2009; i.e., almost for a period of 7 months.  On 09.11.2009
the affidavit of the plaintiff was filed under Rule 4 of
Order XVIII of
CPC
in lieu of examination-in-chief, without serving any notice.
On 13.11.2009 a copy of affidavit filed under Rule 4 of
Order XVIII
of CPC
was served.  On 23.11.2009 P.W.1 entered into witness box, 
Exs.A.1 to A.5 were marked and the matter was posted for the
revision petitioner/plaintiffs further evidence.  On 26.11.2009
affidavit of P.W.2 under Rule 4 of
Order XVIII of CPC
in lieu of
examination-in-chief was filed and posted for cross-examination on
01.12.2009.  However, he was absent on that day and adjourned 
the suit on payment of costs of Rs.50/- to 07.12.2009.  Even on
that day costs not paid and no representation for the revision
petitioner/plaintiff and again adjourned to 14.12.2009.  Even on
that day he was absent, but filed a Memo informing that P.W.2 was
suffering from paralysis, again filed another affidavit of P.W.2 by
name Chinna Rajaiah under Rule 4 of
Order XVIII of CPC
on
02.01.2010, due to intervention of vacation, the matter was posted
to 18.01.2010.  Even on that day, P.W.2 was called absent and
again adjourned on payment of costs of Rs.100/- to 29.01.2010.
On 29.01.2010 P.W.2 was present, costs paid, and counsel for the
revision petitioner/ plaintiff reported no further evidence, thereby,
the revision petitioner/ plaintiffs evidence was closed. For
defendants evidence the matter was posted to 08.02.2010.
Curiously on 08.02.2010 there was no representation on behalf of
the defendants, but adjourned the suit on payment of costs of
Rs.100/- to 15.02.2010, again 16.02.2010 and 22.02.2010.  But
there was no representation for one reason or the other on behalf of
the defendants 5 and 6.   The trial court on 02.03.2010 heard
argument in the suit in part, again on 12.03.2010 heard in part,
finally on 15.03.2010 hearing of argument in suit was concluded
and pronounced judgment on 17.03.2010.
It is evident from the docket proceedings on various dates
referred to above, it is clear that P.Ws.1 and 2 were not cross-
examined by the counsel for respondents 1 and 6/ defendants 5
and 6 before the trial court and docket does not disclose whether
P.Ws.1 and 2 were cross-examined by the counsel for the 
defendants or not? The court afforded more than four opportunities
to the defendants to adduce evidence on their behalf.  On one
occasion due to abstaining courts by the Advocates, there was no
representation, but on the other three occasions, none appeared
and represented the matter on behalf of respondents 1 and 6/
defendants 5 and 6.
Based on the factual back ground referred to above, the first
respondent contended that the decree passed by the trial court is
only an ex parte decree under Rule 2 of
Order XVII of CPC
, but not
the decree on merits.  The trial court did not accept the contention.
However, the appellate court accepted the contention and set aside
the decree and judgment holding that the decree is only an ex
parte decree, while holding the petition under Rule 13 of
Order IX
of CPC
is maintainable.  The counsel for the revision petitioner
contended that though sufficient opportunity was afforded, the
first respondent failed to adduce evidence.  In such case, when
sufficient evidence is available on record, the court can pass decree
and judgment on merits in terms of the explanation to Rule 2 of
Order XVII of CPC
.  Therefore, the decree and judgment passed by
the trial court are only on merits not ex parte.  In view of specific
contention of the counsel for the revision petitioner, it is apposite
to advert Rules 2 and 3 of
Order XVII of CPC
.
According to Rule 2 of
Order XVII of CPC
where, on any day
to which the hearing of the suit is adjourned, the parties or any of
them fail to appear, the court may proceed to dispose of the suit in
one of the modes directed in that behalf by order IX or make such
other order as it thinks fit.  But the explanation annexed to it
clarified that where the evidence or a substantial portion of the
evidence of any party has already been recorded and such party
fails to appear on any day to which the hearing of the suit is
adjourned, the court may, in its discretion, proceed with the case
as if such party were present.  Thus, it is clear from explanation
when a substantial portion of the evidence of any party has already
been recorded, the court can decide the matter on merits instead of
proceeding under any one of the modes under order IX
of CPC
.
It is clear that in case where a party is absent only course is
as mentioned in Order XVII Rule 3(b) to proceed under Rule 2.  It is
therefore clear that in absence of the defendant, the Court had no
option but to proceed under Rule 2.  Similarly the language used of
Rule 2 as now stands also clearly lays down that if any one of the
parties fails to appear, the Court has to proceed to dispose of the
suit in one of the modes directed under
Order IX of CPC
.  The
explanation to Rule 2 conferred discretion on the court to proceed
under Rule 3 even if a party is absent but that discretion is limited
only in cases where a party who is absent, has led some evidence
or has adduced substantial part of their evidence.  It is therefore
clear that if on a date fixed, one of the parties remain absent and
for that party no evidence has been adduced up to that date the
court has to option to proceed to dispose of the matter in
accordance with Order XVII Rule 2 in any one of the modes
prescribed under
Order IX of CPC
.
Here, the trial court proceeded to decide the matter on merits
under Rule 3 of
Order XVII of CPC
as if there is substantial
evidence on record adduced by the party who was absent i.e.
defendants in the suit, but ignored A.P. amendment to Rule 3 of
Order XVII of CPC
. It is extracted hereunder:
Provided that in a case where there is default under
this rule as well as default of appearance under Rule
2 the court will proceed under Rule 2.  (27-04-1961).
Thus, from the Proviso annexed to Rule 3 of
Order XVII of
CPC
by A.P. amendment, any default is committed by any of the  
parties either under Rules 2 or 3 of
Order XVII of CPC
, the court
has to proceed under Rule 2 alone, but not under Rule 3.
For application of Rule 3 the following requisites are to be
satisfied, namely:
(1) The hearing is adjourned on the application of a
party to the suit, as distinguished from an
adjournment by the court of its own motion;
(2) The hearing is adjourned on the application of the
party who subsequently makes the default;
(3) The adjournment is granted to enable the party to
produce his evidence or to cause the attendance of his
witness, or to perform any other act necessary to the
further progress of the suit; and the party fails to
perform any of the acts for which the adjournment
was granted within the time allowed by the court.  In
the end of Rule 3, in view of the addition of the
wording the court may, notwithstanding under Rule
2 the distinction between Rules 2 and 3 is clear and
the power to act as laid down therein is
discretionary.
Rules 2 and 3 are not mutually exclusive.  Amendment to
Rule 3 now makes it clear that even in case of default within the
meaning of Rule 3 there can be no decision on merits unless both
the parties are present.  In the absence of both or either, the court
is to fall back upon Rule 2.  Rule 2, no doubt still authorizes the
court to dispose of the suit in one of the modes directed in that
behalf by Order IX or make such other order as thinks fit.  But an
explanation had been added to explain and guide what would be
such other order.  The guidelines incorporated is that the party
absent shall not be treated as absent, but shall be deemed to be
present if his evidence or the substantial portion of his evidence
had already been recorded.  The words to make such other order
can no longer be interpreted to mean that the court would still be
entitled to proceed under Rule 3 for the purpose of disposing of the
suit on merits, in such a way as to deny the remedy under Order
IX Rule 13 to the defendant, where he was absent and had not
adduced any evidence earlier.
Therefore, to proceed under Rule 3 of
Order XVII of CPC
, the
absent party must adduce evidence or substantial portion of the
evidence. Otherwise the court cannot proceed under Rule 3 of
Order XVII of CPC
to decide the suit on merits.  But A.P.
amendment by way of Proviso to Rule 3 takes away the right of the
court to decide on merits even under Rule 3 and the court is bound
to proceed under Rule 2.
An identical question came up before the Apex Court in
Prakash Chander Manchanda and another v. Smt.Janki   
Manchanda
(8th supra).  Wherein the Apex Court held as follows:
"It is clear in cases where a party is absent only
course is as mentioned in O.17(3)(b) to proceed under
R.2.  It is therefore clear that in absence of the
defendant, the Court had no option but to proceed
under R.2.  Similarly the language of R.2 as now
stands also clearly lays down that if any one of the
parties fails to appear, the Court has to proceed to
dispose of the suit in one of the modes directed under
O.9.  The explanation to R.2 gives a discretion to the
Court to proceed under r.3 even if a party is absent
but that discretion is limited only in cases where a
party which is absent has led some evidence or has
examined substantial part of their evidence.  It is
therefore clear that if on a date fixed, one of the
parties remain absent and for that party no evidence
has been examined up to that date the court has no
option but to proceed to dispose of the matter in
accordance with O.17 R.2 in any one of the modes 
prescribed under O.9 Civil P.C. It is therefore clear
that after this amendment in O.17 R.2 and 3 Civil
P.C. there remains no doubt and therefore there is no
possibility of any controversy.
In
B.Janakiramaiah Chetty v. A.K. Parthasarthi and Ors.
the Apex court explained the scope of Rules 2 and 3 of
Order XVII
of CPC
and the purpose for which the explanation to Rules 2 and 3
of
Order XVII of CPC
was added.   The crucial expression in the
explanation is, where the evidence or a substantial portion of the
evidence of a party, there is a positive purpose in this legislative
expression.  It obviously means that the evidence on record is
sufficient to substantiate the absentee party stand and for disposal
of the suit.  The absentee party is deemed to be present for this
obvious purpose.  The court, while acting under the explanation,
may proceed with the case, if that prima facie is the position.  The
court has to be satisfied on the facts of each case about this
requisite aspect.  It would be also imperative for the court to record
its satisfaction in that perspective.  It cannot be said that the
requirement of substantial portion of the evidence or the evidence
having been led for applying the explanation is without any
purpose.  If the evidence on record is sufficient for disposal of the
suit, there is no need for adjourning the suit or deferring the
decision.
The discretion conferred under Rules 2 and 3 of
Order XVII
of CPC
is that the power to proceed to decide on merits is
permissive and not mandatory.  The explanation to Rule 2 is in the
nature of deeming provision, when under given circumstances, the
absentee party is deemed to be present. Thus, the Apex court also
laid down certain essential requirements to decide the matter on
merits, exercising power under explanation to Rule 2 of
Order XVII
of CPC
and observed that the explanation to Rule 2 of
Order XVII of
CPC
permits the court in its discretion to proceed with a case
where substantial portion of evidence of any party has already been
recorded and such party fails to appear on any day to which the
hearing of the suit is adjourned.  As the provision itself shows,
discretionary power given to the court to be exercised in a given
circumstances.  For application of the provision, the court has to
satisfy itself that (a) substantial portion of the evidence of any party
has been already recorded; (b) such party has failed to appear on
any day: and (c) the day is one to which the hearing of the suit is
adjourned.
Rule 2 permits the court to adopt any of the modes provided
in Order IX or to make such order as he thinks fit when on any day
to which the hearing of the suit is adjourned, the parties or any of
them fail to appear.  The explanation is in the nature of exception
to the general power given under the Rule, conferring discretion on
the court to act, under the specified circumstances. Therefore, there
must be a substantial part of evidence on record of the defaulting
party. In the present case, respondents 1 and 6/ defendants 5 and
6 absentee parties did not even cross-examine P.Ws.1 and 2 did not
adduce any evidence on their behalf.  In such case the trial court
cannot exercise its discretion under explanation to Rule 2 of
Order
XVII of CPC
in ignorance of A.P. amendment to Rule 3 of
Order
XVII of CPC
, proceeded to decide the suit on merits. Therefore, the
order under challenge is erroneous on the face of record and at best
it can be treated as ex parte decree for all purposes as if the court
proceeded under Rule 2 of
Order XVII of CPC
.  In a similar
situation, the Apex Court in Mohandas and Ors., v. Ghisia Bai
and Ors.  held that neither the plaintiff nor his witnesses were
present on the date fixed by the court, suit has to be dismissed
under Rule 2 of
Order XVII of CPC
.  It is further observed that even
Rule 3 of
Order XVII of CPC
itself provides that if the parties or any
of them absent, the court shall proceed to decide the suit under
XVII, Rule 2.  The same analogy can be applied when the
defendants failed to adduce evidence and proceed with the matter
in the suit.
In Mailwar Narsappa and Pendyala Prabhakar v. 
B.Sangamma  this Court held that though the defendant was 
absent and failed to adduce any evidence, such suit shall be
disposed of in any of the modes under
Order IX of CPC
and such
decree shall be deemed to have been an ex parte decree.
In Mekala Ramasubbaiah v. Potula Yesepu and ors.,  this
Court relying on the judgment of the Apex Court in
Prakash
Chander Manchanda and another v. Smt.Janaki Manchanda
(8th    
supra), Galla Laxmamma v. Reparthi Anjaiah (
1st supra) and
Daka Venkatrami Reddy v. Central Bank of India, Ongole
(11
supra) held that a decree passed in the absence of any of the
parties who failed to adduce evidence or substantial portion of the
evidence must be treated as an ex parte decree.
Learned counsel for the first respondent also placed reliance
on the judgments of this court in
Daka Venkatrami Reddy v.
Central Bank of India
,
Ongole
(11 supra),
Raj Kumar and
another v. G.Anasuya
(9 supra) and  Mandadi Srinivasa Rao v.
Shaik Mehrunnisa (10 supra) and the judgment of the Apex Court 
in
Prakash Chander Manchanda and another v. Smt.Janaki   
Manchanda
(8 supra).  In these Judgments, the Apex Court and 
this court consistently took a view when default party failed to
adduce any evidence or any substantial part of evidence, the court
if passed the decree shall be deemed to be a ex parte decree and the
petition under Rule 13 of
Order IX of CPC
is maintainable in such
case.
In the instant case the trial court passed the judgment and
decree discussing all the four issues at one stretch, while
observing, at last paragraph of page 5, that inspite of taking several
adjournments, respondents 1 and 6 failed to cross-examine P.Ws.1 
and 2 and the court observed that though the counsel for
respondents 1 and 6 received affidavits of P.Ws.1 and 2 filed under
Rule 4 of
Order XVIII of CPC
, did not chose to cross-examine the
witnesses.  Therefore, cross-examination of P.Ws.1 and 2 treated as
NIL and later the matter was adjourned for defendants evidence,
but they did not adduce any evidence.  Therefore, the defaulting
parties are respondents 1 and 6 and when they did not adduce any
evidence much less substantial portion of evidence, the court shall
not proceed to decide the matter under Rule 3 of
Order XVII of CPC
invoking the explanation to Rule 2 of
Order XVII of CPC
, ignoring
the AP amendment to Rule 3 of
Order XVII of CPC
to conclude that
the decision is on merits.  The trial court must advert to the various
contentions raised in the written statement and the evidence if any
and arrive at a conclusion recording specific finding on each issue.
But here just extracted the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2, making
certain observation about the conduct of defendants 5 and 6,
passed the Decree and Judgment in favour of the revision
petitioner/plaintiff.  Therefore, such decree and judgment are
virtually ex parte decree and judgment and they cannot be treated
as decree and judgment under Rule 3 of
Order XVII of CPC
in view
of proviso added to the Rule 3 by A.P. amendment.
Sri P.V. Narayana Rao, learned counsel for the revision
petitioner vehemently contended that the decree is only on merits,
since the trial court heard arguments of the counsel for the
defendants 5 and 6 and drawn the attention of this court to the
preamble of the judgment.
The preamble of the Judgment was prepared by the 
Stenographer.  The court itself recorded about the advancement of
arguments of Sri G.Bhaskar Reddy, counsel for respondents 1 and 
6/ defendants 5 and 6, in fact the preamble of the Judgment is not
dictation of the Judge and in
the entire judgment
, the argument
allegedly advanced by Sri G.Bhaskar Reddy was not referred and 
considered.  Therefore, mere recording in the preamble that the
argument of Sri G.Bhaskar Reddy, counsel for respondents 1 and 
6/ defendants 5 and 6 was heard is not a ground.  It would not
change the nature of disposal i.e. ex parte decree and judgment.  In
M.Ramanjulu v. Sapparaju Venkata Seshaiah (3supra) this court,
is of confirmed view that when he counsel advanced argument and
participated in the trial and the same was recorded in the preamble
of the judgment, the judgment shall be treated as judgment on
merits, but not an ex parte judgment.
Here the very advancement of argument by Sri G.Bhaskar 
Reddy, counsel for respondents 1 and 6/ defendants 5 and 6 is
false in view of docket proceedings produced by the counsel for the
revision petitioner on various dates.  From 26.11.2009 there was
no representation on behalf of the parties and the docket is not
clear whether Sri G.Bhaskar Reddy is the counsel for respondents
1 and 6/ defendants 5 and 6. Therefore, mere recording about
hearing of counsel for defendants 5 and 6 in the preamble prepared
by the stenographer is not sufficient to conclude that the counsel
advanced argument.   The counsel also relied on the Full Bench
Judgment of Madya Pradesh High Court in
Budhulal Kasturchand   
v. Chhotelal and Others
(
6supra), Jitendra Kumar Choudhury v.
Banku Sahoo
(
7supra) and State of U.P. v. Jaman Singh and 
Anr.
(5supra).  In these judgments, the High courts held that when
judgment was pronounced due to availability of substantial part of
evidence, it can be treated as judgment on merits under Rule 3 of
Order XVII of CPC
, not an ex parte decree or judgment.  But those
judgments are not binding on this court, except persuasive value.
In the States of Madya Pradesh, Uttaranchal and Orissa, there was
no amendment identical to the A.P. amendment referred to supra 
to Rule 3 of
Order XVII of CPC
. But the law declared by in these
Judgments is contrary to the law declared by the Apex Court
referred supra. Therefore, the contention of the counsel for the
revision petitioner that the judgment is on merits is without
substance.
The trial court recorded that the defendants failed to pay
costs, but non payment of costs by itself is not a ground to decide
the suit on merits in view of sub-section (2) of
Section 35-B
of CPC
which says that the costs, ordered to be paid under sub-section (1),
shall not, if paid, be included in the costs awarded in the decree
passed in the suit; but, if such costs are not paid, a separate order
shall be drawn up indicating the amount of such costs and the
names and addresses of the persons by whom such costs are   
payable and the order so drawn up shall be executable against
such persons.
Thus, in view of sub-section (2) of
Section 35-B
of CPC, if the
court imposed costs and the party failed to pay costs, it is the duty
of the court to prepare a separate order, which is executable.
Instead of following sub-section (2) of
Section 35-B
of CPC, the
court decided the matter on merits without adverting to the
contentions raised by respondents 1 and 6/ defendants 5 and 6.
Therefore, the decree in O.S. No.44 of 2008 is only under Rule 2 of
Order XVII of CPC
, but not the decree under Rule 3 of
Order XVII of
CPC
.   In such case the respondents 1 and 6/ defendants 5 and 6
are entitled to move an application under Rule 13 of
Order IX of
CPC
and if the court finds sufficient cause which prevented the
respondents 1 and 6/ defendants 5 and 6 to appear and to adduce
the evidence, the court can set aside the ex parte decree.  Here the
respondents 1 and 6/ defendants 5 and 6 explained the reason for
his failure to adduce evidence, which is required to be considered
by trial court, on its remand by the appellate court.  Therefore the
appellate court exercised its discretion in accordance with law.  But
the trial court on wrong appreciation of facts and law, in ignorance
of the State amendment to Rule 3 of
Order XVII of CPC
by way of
proviso, passed the order dated 04.10.2010 in I.A. No.107 of 2010
in O.S. No.44 of 2008 which was set aside by the appellate court
rightly.
In view of foregoing discussion, I hold that the decree and
judgment passed by the trial court are only ex parte decree and
judgment in terms of Rule 2 of
Order XVII of CPC
read with proviso
to Rule 3 of
Order XVII of CPC
(AP amendment) and thereby the 
petition under Rule 13 of
Order IX of CPC
is maintainable.  As
such the appellate court rightly set aside the order passed by the
trial court exercising its discretion and consequently I find no
merits in the civil revision petition to exercise jurisdiction under
Article 227
of Constitution of India which is supervisory in nature.
Article 227
of Constitution of India deals with power of
superintendence by the High Court over all Subordinate Court and
Tribunals. The power of superintendence conferred upon the High
Court by
Article 227
is not confined to administrative
superintendence only, but includes the power of judicial revision
also even where no appeal or revision lies to the High Court under
the ordinary law, rather power under this Article is wider than that
of
Article 226
, in the sense that it is not subject to those
technicalities of procedure or traditional fetters which are to be
found in certiorari jurisdiction and such power can also be
exercised suo motu.  It is a well settled principle that the High
Court can exercise supervisory power under
Article 227
of
Constitution of India and interfere with the order in several
circumstances, as held by the Apex Court in
State (N.C.T. Of
Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu@ Afsan Guru
.
In view of the law
laid down by
the Apex Court, this Court
cannot exercise its power under
Article 227
of the Constitution of
India though the order is wrong, since the power can be exercised
only to keep the subordinate Courts and Tribunals within its
bounds.  Therefore, I am unable to exercise power under
Article
227
of the Constitution of India to interfere with the findings
recorded by the appellate court, since the appellate court acted
within its bounds and passed the order, which is under challenge.
Hence the civil revision petition deserves to be dismissed.
In the result, the civil revision petition is dismissed,
confirming the order dated 08.04.2011 in CMA No.5 of 2010
passed by the Senior Civil Judge, Siricilla.  No costs.
Miscellaneous petitions, if any, pending in this CRP shall
stand closed.
_________________________________      
M.SATYANARAYANA MURTHY, J         
Date:30.06.2017