[Cites
18
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
O.Prabhaker Reddy And Others vs The Registrar Of Mutually Aided ... on 8 September, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 (NOC) 346 (HYD.)
Author:
A.Ramalingeswara Rao
Bench:
A.Ramalingeswara Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A.RAMALINGESWARA RAO             

WRIT PETITION No.33608 of 2016   

08-09-2017 

O.Prabhaker Reddy and othersPetitioners  

The Registrar of Mutually Aided Co-operative Societies and Special Commissioner for Cooperation and Registrar of Co-operatio
And others. Respondents   

Counsel for the Petitioners: Sri A.Venkatesh

Counsel for the Respondents: GP for Cooperation 

<Gist :

>Head Note : 

? Cases referred

1.2013 (3) ALT 298 : 2013 (1) ALD 242
2.1998 (4) ALD 689 
3.2012 (6) ALD 693 
4.2013 (1) ALD (Crl.) 895 (AP)
        

THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE A.RAMALINGESWARA RAO             

WRIT PETITION No.33608 of 2016   
ORDER:
Heard the learned Counsel for the petitioners and the
learned Government Pleader for the respondents.
The petitioners claim that they are the members of the
Managing Committee of Sri Rama Raghavendra Mutually Aided    
Co-operative Thrift & Credit Society Limited, which was
registered under the provisions of the
Andhra Pradesh Mutually
Aided Co-operative Societies Act, 1995
(for short, the Act), on
21.03.2009.  The first respondent directed the second
respondent to conduct an enquiry into the affairs of the Society
by proceedings dated 24.04.2016. An enquiry was conducted  
and the report was submitted. Based on the said report, the first
respondent passed an order on 19.09.2016 directing the second
respondent to initiate action indicated in the said order.
Challenging the said order, the present Writ Petition is filed.
Though various averments are made in the affidavit filed in
support of the Writ Petition relating to the findings recorded in
the enquiry report, this Court is not adverting to the said
averments, as the present Writ Petition is being disposed of on
the legal issue involved in the Writ Petition.  This Court is also not
inclined to go into the merits of enquiry report as further action
has to be taken by the General Body in accordance with
Section
31(a)
of the Act.  In view of this approach, the reference to
averments made in the counter affidavit relating to the facts
involved in the enquiry report also would become unnecessary.
Though a reply affidavit is filed controverting the averments
mentioned in the counter affidavit, the same is also not taken into
account for the purpose of disposal of the case.
The relevant portion of the impugned order reads as
follows:
While accepting the recommendations of the 
Enquiry officer, the following instructions have been
issued.
1.       The Managing committee is directed to
convene a General Body meeting within 30 days from 
the receipt of this proceedings and place the findings of
the enquiry report conducted U/s 29 of the APMACS  
Act, 1995.  The DCO, Kurnool is directed to depute one
of the Deputy Registrar to the General Body meeting
and ensure that the findings of the Enquiry Officer
shall be placed and discussed in the General Body as
per provisions of Sec 31(a) of the APMACS Act, 1995.
2.       The DCO, Kurnool is authorized and
directed to file criminal complaint against the Members
of the Managing Committee as listed in annexure A for
violation of provisions in investment of Society funds
in the Sri Rama Raghavendra Chits Pvt. Ltd., U/s 38
of the AP, MACS Act, 1995 read with
Sections 405
,
409
,
418
,
420
and
423
IPC.
3.       The DCO, Kurnool authorized and
directed to file petition before the AP, Cooperative
Tribunal Vijayawada U/s 36 of the AP, MACS Act by  
invoking
Section 73
of the APCS Act, 1964 for
attachment of the properties of the Members of
Managing Committee as listed in annexure  A for
diversion of funds and also initiate action U/s 31(b) of
the AP, MACS Act, 1995 for recovery of diverted funds.
4.       The Members of Managing Committee
and Chief Executive Officer of the Society are directed
to file petition before the AP, Cooperative Tribunal for
recovery of all pending overdue loans from the loanee
members.
5.       The DCO, Kurnool, is directed to report to
the Registrar of stamps for deficit payment of stamp
duty in purchase of property for taking further action
at their level.
The said impugned order was passed enclosing a copy of 
the enquiry report along with the list of Managing Committee
Members who were responsible for irregular management of 
Society funds in Sri Rama Raghavendra Chits Private Limited.
The relevant Sections of the Act are as follows:
29. Inquiry:- (1) Every Co-operative Society
shall furnish any relevant information required by the
Registrar in order to enable him to satisfy whether the
Co-operative Society has conducted its affairs in
accordance with the cooperative principles and the
provisions of this Act.
(2) The Registrar may, of his own motion, and
shall on the application, of a federation to which the
Co-operative Society concerned is affiliated, or of a
creditor to whom the Co-operative Society is indebted or
of not less than one-third of the Directors, or of not less
than one-tenth of the members, hold an inquiry or
cause an inquiry to be made into the specific matter or
matters relating to any gross violation of any of the
provisions of this Act by the Co-operative Society.
(3) The inquiry shall be completed within a period
of one hundred and twenty days from the date of
ordering the inquiry.
(4) If the inquiry is not completed within the time
specified in sub-section (3) it shall lapse at the end of
the said period and the Registrar shall refund to the
applicants, the fee collected from them.
(5) The Registrar shall, within a period of thirty
days from the date of the completion of the inquiry, as
specified in sub-section (3) or of the lapse of the inquiry
as specified in sub-section (4), communicate the report
of the inquiry or the reasons for the non-completion of
the inquiry, as the case may be,-
(a) to the Co-operative Society concerned;
(b) to the applicant federation, if any;
(c) to the applicant-creditor, if any;
(d) to the person designated by the applicant-
directors, if any;
(e) to the person designated by the applicant-
members, if any;
(f) to any person, on payment of fee fixed by the
Registrar; and
(g) to the Co-operative Tribunal where necessary.
(6) The inquiry officer acting under this section
shall, among others, specifically state the amount of
deficiency, waste or loss which appears to have been
caused by the gross negligence or misconduct of any 
person in the performance of his duties.
31. Action on special audit or inquiry report:-
On communication of a special audit report under sub-
section (5)  of
Section 28
or an inquiry report under
sub-section (5) of
section 29
to the persons concerned,
the Registrar may, where the  special audit or inquiry
report reveals mismanagement on the part of any or all
of the office bearers or Directors, without prejudice to
any civil or criminal proceedings to which they may be
liable:-
(a)     direct the Board to convene a General
Body Meeting within such reasonable time 
as he may specify, to enable him to bring
to the notice of the General Body, either
directly or through his nominee, the
findings of the special audit or inquiry
report, for necessary action; or
(b)     approach the Co-operative Tribunal for
necessary action.
33. Power of the Tribunal to order recovery:- (1)
A Member, Director or Chairperson of the Co-operative
Society may, and the Registrar shall file a copy of the
report of the Auditor or the Special Auditor or the
Inquiry Officer, before the Tribunal with an application
for necessary action against the person on account of
whose conduct the Co-operative Society has incurred
loss. The Tribunal may on the basis of such report
disallow every item of expenditure incurred contrary to
law and order recovery of the same from the person
incurring or authorising the incurring of such
expenditure, or held responsible in the said report for
any deficiency, loss or unprofitable outlay occasioned
by his negligence or misconduct or of any such amount
which ought to have been accounted but is not brought
into account by that person and shall, in every such
case, specify the amount liable to be paid by such
person to the Co-operative Society.
Explanation:- It shall not be open to any person
whose negligence or misconduct has caused or  
contributed to any such deficiency or loss, to contend
that notwithstanding his negligence or misconduct the
deficiency or loss would not have occurred, but for the
negligence or misconduct of some other person.
(2) The Tribunal shall state in writing the reasons
for its decision in respect of every dis-allowance,
surcharge and a copy of such decision shall be served
on the person against whom it is made in the manner
laid down for the service of summons in
the Code of
Civil Procedure
, 1908:
Provided that the Tribunal shall not pass any
order of recovery under this section unless the person
against whom any such order is passed has had an  
opportunity of making a representation either by
himself or through the counsel.
(3) Any person aggrieved by an order passed
under this section may, within sixty days after the date
of service on him of the order by the Tribunal file an
appeal against such order in the High Court.
(4) Where an appeal is filed in the High Court
under sub-section (3), the persons who filed the
application before the Tribunal or, as the case may be,
the Registrar shall be the sole respondent thereto, and
the applicant shall not make any other person a party
to the proceedings.
(5) Every order passed by the Tribunal or an order
passed by the High Court shall be executed in the same
manner as a decree of a Civil Court under
the Code of
Civil Procedure
, 1908.
38. Offences and Penalties:- (1) It shall be an
offence under this Act, if a Co-operative Society:-
(a)     fails to give a notice, send a return or
document, or fails to do or allow to be
done any act which a Co-operative Society
is by this Act or under its bye-laws
required to give, send, do or allow to be
done;
(b)     wilfully neglects or refuses to do an act or
to furnish information required for the
purposes of this Act or does an act
forbidden by this Act, or the byelaws; or
(c)     makes a return, or wilfully furnishes
information, in any respect false or
insufficient.
(2) It shall be an offence under this Act, if any
person or Co-operative Society contravenes the
provisions of this Act or the bye-laws of a Co-operative
Society.
(3) An offence by a Co-operative Society shall be
deemed to have been also committed by each office-
bearer of the Co-operative Society bound by the bye-
laws thereof to fulfil the duties whereof the offence is a
breach, or if there is no such office-bearer then by each
of the Director, unless the office-bearer or Director
proves to have attempted to prevent the commission of
the offence.
(4) An offence under this section shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year or with fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees or with both:
Provided that where a person is guilty of
misappropriation, fraud, breach of trust, cheating or
any other act involving moral turpitude, resulting in a
loss to the Co-operative Society, he shall be punishable
under the relevant provisions of the
Indian Penal Code
,
1860 (Central Act 45 of 1860).
Learned Counsel for the petitioners addressed his
arguments touching the merits of the case and also submitted
that the General Body meeting was convened and it passed a 
resolution pursuant to the report submitted by the Enquiry
Officer, which was transmitted to the Society.  He relied on
M.V.Ramanaiah v. A.P.Secretariat Employees Mutually Aided   
Cooperative Housing Society Ltd.
Learned Government Pleader, on the other hand, submitted 
that the impugned order is valid as it clothes the first respondent
with the power to take action involving civil and criminal liability
apart from the action under
Section 31
of the Act.  He relied on
the words without prejudice to any civil or criminal proceedings
occurring in
Section 31
of the Act in support of his contention.
He relied on Regula Bruhaspathi Rao v. State of A.P ,
Telangana Non-Gazetted Officers Colony Welfare 
Association, Serilingampally Mandal, Ranga Reddy District
v. Pankaj Dwivedi , The Fishermen Marketing Cooperative
Society Moosi Project v. The Commissioner of Fisheries
(W.A.No.131
of 2012, dated 07.08.2012) and Garimella Subba  
Rao v. State of Andhra Pradesh
.
A reading of
Section 31
of the Act makes it clear that after
receipt of the report, the Registrar is given an option either to
direct the Board to convene a General Body meeting within the
time specified or to approach the Co-operative Tribunal for
necessary action.  Thus, he can take action on his own or refer to
the General Body for taking action on the report.  This power
under
Section 31
of the Act is independent of the power under
Section 33
and
Section 38
of the Act.
Section 33
of the Act
enables a Member, Director or Chairperson of the Co-operative
Society and the Registrar to file a copy of the enquiry report
before the Tribunal with an application for necessary action
against the person on account of whose conduct the Co-operative
Society has incurred loss.  Thereupon, the Tribunal would take
the consequential action.  This is the civil action which is
independent of action under
Section 31
of the Act.
Section 38
of
the Act deals with the actions of the persons or the Society
contravening the provisions of the Act including the situations
mentioned therein.  This is the criminal liability.
Section 38
of the
Act merely provides for offences and penalties, but the complaint
has to be lodged by the competent authority.  It does not speak of
the power of the Registrar to invoke
Section 38
of the Act.
The decision reported in M.V.Ramanaiahs case (supra) 
relied on by the learned Counsel for the petitioners supports the
above view.
However, the learned Government Pleader by relying on
Pankaj Dwivedis case (supra) submitted that the enquiry report
itself is sufficient for taking action under
Section 38
of the Act.
No doubt
Section 31
, in clear terms, states that the action of the
Registrar under the said Section is without prejudice to any civil
or criminal proceedings to be taken against the persons who are
held responsible and, as stated above, there are specific
provisions for taking civil and criminal proceedings.  But, the
point involved in the present case is whether the Registrar can
pass a composite order while exercising his power under
Section
31
of the Act.  I am of the view that he cannot pass a composite
order and action on the enquiry report and civil and criminal
proceedings should be initiated independently by indicating the
reasons for taking such action by the respective authorities.  A
reading of the impugned order indicates the action of the
Registrar on the report by referring the matter to the General
body of the society in para 1 thereof and in other paras, the
competent authorities are authorized to take appropriate action
and the Registrar himself has not taken any action. Hence the
impugned order cannot be found fault.
The decision in The Fishermen Marketing Cooperative
Society Moosi Projects case (supra) is not applicable to the
facts of the present case.
Similarly, the decision of the Division Bench in
Garimella
Subba Raos
case (supra) does not lay down a different proosition
as it clearly says that even without fixing the liability on the
person under
Section 60
of the Andhra Pradesh Cooperative 
Societies Act, criminal prosecution can go on for the offence
punishable under
Section 409
of Indian Penal Code, meaning 
thereby that even without fixing any liability on a person or an
Officer of the Society, criminal prosecution can be proceeded with
subject to the facts constituting the offence.  Thus, the Division
Bench is also of the opinion that the facts should constitute an
offence for initiating criminal proceedings and hence the
application of the mind by the concerned authority for initiation
of criminal proceedings is necessary.
The decision in Regula Bruhaspathi Raos case (supra) is
also irrelevant for the present case as it deals with the
jurisdiction of the Special Court for the trial of offences
committed by employees of Cooperative Society.  It lays down that
the Special Court can try not only the offences under the
Andhra
Pradesh Cooperative Societies Act
, but also those under the
Penal Code.
In view of the above, this Court is of the opinion that the
impugned order for placing the enquiry report before the General
Body and directing civil and criminal proceedings to be taken by
the respective authorities is not bad. It is left to the competent
authorities to take appropriate action, if warranted, under the
provisions of the Act by initiating civil and criminal proceedings.
The Writ Petition is, accordingly, dismissed.  The
miscellaneous petitions pending in this Writ Petition, if any, shall
stand closed.  There shall be no order as to costs.
________________________________     
(A.RAMALINGESWARA RAO, J)       
08.09.2017