[Cites
12
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Smt.G.Jyothi vs The State Of Telangana Rep By Its ... on 21 March, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 20
Bench:
Suresh Kumar Kait
,
U.Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT AND THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO                 

Writ Petition No.32225 of 2016

21-03-2017 

Smt.G.Jyothi  Petitioner

The State of Telangana Rep by its Principal Secretary, General Administration
(Law & Order) Dept.Secretariat, Hyderabad and another.Respondents   

Counsel for Petitioner : Sri Challa Dhanamjaya

Counsel for Respondents: Advocate General (TG) 
                         G.P. for Home (TG)
<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1. (2002) 7 SCC 759 
2. 1995 (2) SCJ 683

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT          
and 
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           
W.P.No.32225 of 2016  
ORDER:
(Oral) 
                                  (Per Honourable Sri Justice Suresh Kumar Kait)

        Vide the present petition, the petitioner has challenged the detention
order vide S.B.(I) No.356/PD/S-1/2016, dated 28.07.2016 whereby the
detenu was detained on 29.07.2016 and since then he is in jail.
2)      Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has argued the
only ground that the detenu was detained on 29.07.2016 and as per Section 8
of Telangana Prevention of Dangerous Activities of Boot Leggers,
Dacoits, Goonda, Immoral Traffic Offenders and Land Grabbers Act,
1986 (for short the Act) the detaining authority is duty bound to supply
the relied upon documents in the known language of the detenu
maximum within five days, so that he would be able to make an
effective representation before the detaining authority. However, in the
present case, the relied upon documents were not provided to the detenu
within five days in the language known to him.
3)      Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents has fairly
conceded that the relied upon documents could not be supplied to the detenu
within five days however, supplied thereafter and he submits that if there is
one or two days delay, that will not prejudice to the right of the detenu as
held
by the Supreme Court in the case of
Dr. Prakash vs. State of Tamil Nadu
and others
whereby the Honourable Supreme Court has held as under:
Para-9. The learned counsel then contended that there is a total
non-communication of grounds and the order of detention
inasmuch as the same is supplied to him in a language not known 
to the petitioner. He submitted even though some of the copies of
the document in Tamil was furnished to him on his demand on 
28.2.2002 the same was far beyond the required time period and
because of this belated supply of the document she was prevented
from making an effective representation to the detaining
authority. In this regard, we notice on receipt of the order and
grounds of detention with enclosures, the detenu had written a
letter to the 2nd respondent intimating him of his inability to read
and write Tamil. In reply the detaining authority has denied the
same immediately. However, he, along with the said letter, has
supplied the copies of the said documents on 28.2.2002. It is true
that the detaining authority in the order of detention has
mentioned that if the detenu so chooses he may make a 
representation to him before the confirming authority, namely, the
State Government confirms his order of detention. The detaining
authority in his affidavit before this Court has stated that he
received the representation of the petitioner and considered and
rejected the same on 4.3.2002. Therefore, it is clear that the
petitioner had sufficient time to make a representation to the
detaining authority. At this stage, it may be relevant to notice that
even though the detenu had no legal right to make a
representation to the detaining authority, still the same was given
to him and he did use this right, which representation was
considered at an early date by the detaining authority and was
rejected. By the delay of two days in furnishing the translated
copies of the detenu, there was no prejudice caused to the
petitioner in making his representation effectively to the detaining
authority.
Learned counsel submits that in the present case the relied upon documents
were supplied to the detenu on the 6th day of detention of detenu. Therefore,
no prejudice has been caused to the detenu for making an effective
representation to the detaining authority. He further submits that detenu has
three opportunities to make effective representation; first before the detaining
authority, second to the Government i.e. Chief Secretary and third is the
Advisory Board. Therefore, if the documents were supplied with one day
delay, it will not affect the rights of the detenu.
4)      Section 8 of the Act provides as under:
Section 8Grounds of order of detention to be disclosed to
persons affected by the order
(1) When a person is detained in pursuance of a detention order,
the authority making the order shall, as soon as may be, but not
later than five days from the date of detention, communicate to
him the grounds on which the order has been made and shall 
afford him the earliest opportunity of making a representation
against the order to the Government.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall require the authority to
disclose facts which it considers to be against the public interest
to disclose.
As per the said provisions, it is clearly mentioned that the
authority making the order shall, as soon as may be, but not later than
five days from the date of detention, communicate to the detenu the
grounds on which the order has been made and shall afford him the
earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order to the
Government. Thus, as per the said provisions, the respondents are duty
bound to supply the relied upon documents as early as possible but not
later than five days in the language known to the detenu. Purpose to
supply documents as earliest is that as per Section 3(3) of the Act, the
State Government has to approve the detention order within twelve days.
Thus, the detenu has time only between the date of detention and date of
approval to make the representation before the detaining authority. If the
detention order is approved by the Government as provided under
Section 3(3), in that context, the detaining authority would become
functus officio and the detenu will lose his first right of making
representation before the detaining authority.
5)      Coming to the case on hand, the detention order was passed on 
28.07.2016 and the detenu was taken into custody on 29.07.2016. 
Thereafter, the State Government has approved the said order on
05.08.2016. Thus, the detenu had only six days time to file effective
representation before the detaining authority as admitted by the
respondents that the relied upon documents were not supplied within
five days. Thus, there was no opportunity to the detenu to make effective
representation before the detaining authority.
6)
Article 22(5)
of the Constitution of India reads thus:
Article 22(5)
When any person is detained in pursuance of
an order made under any law providing for preventive
detention, the authority making the order shall, as soon as
may be, communicate to such person the grounds on which   
the order has been made and shall afford him the earliest
opportunity of making a representation against the order
        As per the said provision, the detenu has right to make a
representation before the concerned authority and if by the act of the
respondents he failed to make an effective representation, such act of the
respondents is in violation of Section 8 of the Act and
Article 22(5)
of
the Constitution of India.
7)      In case of
Kamleshkumarn Ishwardas Patel vs. Union of India
and others
the Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court held as
under:
para--34.
In the National Security Act
there is an express
provision [
Section 3(4)
] in respect of orders made by the
District Magistrate or the Commissioner of Police under
Section 3(3)
and the District Magistrate or the Commissioner of
Police who has made the order is required to forthwith report
the fact to the State Government to which he is subordinate. The
said provision further prescribes that no such order shall remain
in force for more than twelve days after the making thereof,
unless, in the meantime, it has been approved by the State
Government. This would show that it is the approval of the State
Government which gives further life to the order which would
otherwise die its natural death on the expiry of twelve days after
its making. It is also the requirement of
Section 3(4)
that the
report should be accompanied by the grounds on which the 
order has been made and such other particulars as, in the
opinion of the said officer, have a bearing on the matter which
means that the State Government has to take into consideration
the grounds and the said material while giving its approval to
the order of detention. The effect of the approval by the State
Government is that from the date of such approval the detention
is authorised by the order of the State Government approving
the order of detention and the State Government is the detaining
authority from the date of the order of approval. That appears to
be the reason why
Section 8(1)
envisages that the representation
against the order of detention is to be made to the State
Government. The COFEPOSA Act and the PIT Narcotic Drugs     
& Psychotropic Substances Act do not require the approval of
an order made by the officer specially empowered by the State
Government or by the Central Government. The order passed by 
such an officer operates on its own force. All that is required by
Section 3(2) of COFEPOSA Act and PIT Narcotic Drugs &   
Psychotropic Substances Act is that the State Government shall
within 10 days forward to the Central Government a report in
respect of an order that is made by the State Government or an
officer specially empowered by the State Government. An order
made by the officer specially empowered by the State
Government is placed on the same footing as an order made by 
the State Government because the report has to be forwarded to
the Central Government in respect of both such orders. No such
report is required to be forwarded to the Central Government in
respect of an order made by an officer specially empowered by
the Central Government. Requirement regarding forwarding of
the report contained in Section 3(2) of the COFEPOSA Act and 
the PIT Narcotic Drugs & Psychotropic Substances Act cannot, 
therefore, afford the basis for holding that an order made by an
officer specially empowered by the central Government or the
State Government acquires deemed approval of that government 
from the date of its issue. Approval, actual or deemed, postulates
application of mind to the action being approved by the
authority given approval. Approval of an order of detention
would require consideration by the approving authority of the
grounds and the supporting material on the basis of which the
officer making the order had arrived at the requisite satisfaction
for the purpose of making the order of detention. Unlike
Section 3(4)
of the National Security Act there is no requirement
in the COFEPOSA Act and the PIT Narcotic Drugs &   
Psychotropic Substances Act that the officer specially
empowered for the purpose of making of an order of detention
must forthwith send to the concerned government the grounds
and the supporting material on the basis of which the order of
detention has been made. Nor is it prescribed in the said
enactments that after the order of detention has been made by
the officer specially empowered for that purpose the concerned
government is required to apply its mind to the grounds and the
supporting material on the basis of which the order of detention
was made. The only circumstance from which inference about 
deemed approval is sought to be drawn is that the order is made
by the officer specially empowered for that purpose by the
concerned government. Merely because the order of detention
has been made by the officer who has been specially empowered  
for that purpose would not, in our opinion, justify the inference
that the said order acquires deemed approval of the government
that has so empowered him, from the date of the issue of the
order so as to make the said government the detaining authority.
By specially empowering a particular officer under
Section 3(2) of the COFEPOSA Act and the PIT Narcotic Drugs  
& Psychotropic Substances Act the Central Government or the  
State Government confers an independent power on the said 
officer to make an order of detention after arriving at his own
satisfaction about the activities of the person sought to be
detained. Since the detention of the person detained draws its
legal sanction from the order passed by such officer, the officer
is the detaining authority in respect of the said person. He
continues to be the detaining authority so long as the order of
detention remains operative. He ceases to be the detaining
authority only when the order of detention ceases to operate.
This would be on the expiry of the period of detention as
prescribed by law or on the order being revoked by the officer
himself or by the authority mentioned in
Section 11
of the
COFEPOSA Act and
Section 12
of the PIT Narcotic Drugs &   
Psychotropic Substances Act. There is nothing in the provisions
of these enactments to show that the role of the officer comes to
an end after he has made the order of detention and that
thereafter he ceases to be the detaining authority and the
concerned government which had empowered him assumes the     
role of the detaining authority. We are unable to construe the
provisions of the said enactment as providing for such a limited
entrustment of power on the officer who is specially empowered
to pass the order. An indication to the contrary is given in
Section 11
of the COFEPOSA Act and
Section 12
of the PIT  
Narcotic Drugs & Psychotropic Substances Act which preserve  
the power of such officer to revoke the order that was made by
him. This means that the officer does not go out of the picture
after he has passed the order of detention. It must, therefore, be
held that the officer specially empowered for that purpose
continues to be the detaining authority and is not displaced by
the concerned government after he has made the order of
detention. Therefore, by virtue of his being the detaining
authority he is required to consider the representation of the
person detained against the order of detention
8)      As per the aforesaid dictum of the Supreme Court, in case of
COFEPOSA Act
the detaining authority continued to be the authority
even after approval of the Central Government or Advisory Board, thus
the detaining authority does not lose its status till the order expires,
lapses or quashed by the competent authority. Whereas, in the present
case, as per the provisions of the Telangana Prevention of Dangerous
Activities of Boot Leggers, Dacoits, Goonda, Immoral Traffic Offenders
and Land Grabbers Act, 1986, the detaining authority ceases to be the
authority on the day the detention order is approved by the State
Government under
Section 3(3)
of the Act.
9)      In the result, writ petition is allowed and further detention of
detenu pursuant to proceedings No.S.B.(I) No.356/PD/S-1/2016 dated 
28.07.2016 is hereby set aside. Consequently, the detenu viz.
Gaddampally Vijay Kumar Reddy @ Rajeshwar Reddy @ Raju @       
Reddy Mama s/o late G.Ramachandra Reddy shall be released forthwith,  
if he is not required in any other case.
10)     Before parting, we have come across the cases where there are
clear cut violations of the provisions of the Act. In the instant case,
admittedly the relied upon documents were not supplied to the detenu
within five days as prescribed under
Section 8
of the Act.
11)     Having come across such lapses often, we hereby direct the
respondents to examine all the cases pending with them and if they
found any clear violation of any of the provisions of the Act, the
authorities shall, without wasting time of the Courts, come forward and
admit such violations on the very first date of hearing, failing which,
after enquiry if violations are found to be true, the authority concerned
shall be mulcted with heavy costs.
______________________    
SURESH KUMAR KAIT, J     
_________________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 21.03.2017