[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
R.Vengal Reddy (Died) R.Raghupathi ... vs R.Subramanyam Reddy (Died) R.Krishna ... on 27 January, 2017
Equivalent citations: 2017 AIR CC 3161 (HYD), (2017) 175 ALLINDCAS 286 (HYD), (2017) 2 CIVILCOURTC 605, (2017) 3 ANDHLD 529, (2017) 3 CIVLJ 301, (2017) 3 ICC 210, (2018) 1 ICC 223
Author:
C.Praveen Kumar
Bench:
C.Praveen Kumar
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C.PRAVEEN KUMAR           

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No. 4545 of 2016   

27-01-2017 

R.Vengal Reddy (died) R.Raghupathi Reddy and others.....PETITIONERS   

R.Subramanyam Reddy (died) R.Krishna Reddy (died) R.Annapurnamma and others ..      
RESPONDENTS     

Counsel for Petitioners:Sri T.C.Krishnan
                                                
Counsel for Respondents: Sri S.V.Muni Reddy  


<GIST : 

>HEAD NOTE :   


? Cases referred :
1. (1993) 2 ALT 95
2. AIR 1924 P.C. 198 
3. (1997) 5 ALT 183 (S.B.)
4. ILR 1971 Delhi 547
5. (1996) AIR SC 116 
6. (2001) 5 ALT 645 (D.B.)


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE C. PRAVEEN KUMAR         

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No. 4545 of 2016   

ORDER:
1)      Assailing the order, dated 30.03.2016, passed in I.A.No.524
of 2014 in I.A.No.263 of 2013 in O.S.No.747 of 1988, on the file of
the II Additional Junior Civil Judge, Chittoor, wherein an
application filed under
Order I Rule 10 of C.P.C
., seeking
permission to come on record as petitioners 3 to 10, being the
legal representatives of deceased plaintiffs 1 and 2, was allowed,
the present Civil Revision Petition is filed.
2)      The facts in issue are as under:
R.Subramanyam Reddy and R.Krishna Reddy, filed
O.S.No.747 of 1988 against the petitioners herein seeking partition
of the plaint schedule property.  The said suit was decreed and a
preliminary decree came to be passed on 23.03.1995.  Aggrieved 
by the said judgment and decree, the petitioners herein preferred
A.S.No.51 of 1995 on the file of the VII Additional District Judge,
Chittoor, which was dismissed for default, on 29.01.2002.  While
things stood thus, the plaintiff No.1 died on 06.05.1999  and
plaintiff No.2 died on 10.03.2004, leaving behind respondents 3 to
10 herein as their legal heirs.  As they are the only legal
representatives to the deceased plaintiffs, they filed I.A.No.263 of
2013 for passing of final decree.  The said petition was dismissed
on 23.08.2014, on the ground that the said I.A., was not
maintainable since the proposed petitioners have not yet come on
record.  Having regard to the above, an I.A. came to be filed by
the respondents herein to come on record in the final decree
proceedings, being the legal representatives of deceased plaintiffs
1 and 2.
3)      A counter came to be filed opposing the same.  It is urged
that filing of a petition under
Order I Rule 10 of C.P.C
., is
impermissible under law.  It is stated that if the plaintiffs have
died after passing of preliminary decree, it is the duty of the
proposed parties, who are the legal heirs of the deceased
plaintiffs, to come on record within the prescribed time and if no
such application is filed, the suit would automatically gets abated.
It is further stated that though the suit was decreed on
23.03.1995, the present application came to be filed after lapse of
twelve years, which is barred by limitation under the provisions of
the
Limitation Act
.
4)      After considering the rival submissions made by both the
parties, the trial Court allowed the said application holding that
an application under
Order I Rule 10 of C.P.C
., is maintainable to
bring the legal representatives of the deceased on record after
the death of the concerned parties for passing of a final decree.
It is further held that after passing of preliminary decree, there
could be no abatement on the death of the parties.  Since the
rights of the parties are already determined before the death of
the deceased, the death of the parties does not have any effect
on the proceedings.
5)      The issue that arises for consideration is; whether filing of
an application by the proposed parties to come on record after
passing of a preliminary decree is permissible under law, if so,
under which provision.
6)      Before proceeding further, it would be appropriate to refer
to Order I Rule 10 and Order XXII Rules 5 and 6
of C.P.C
., which
reads as under:
Order I Rule 10 of C.P.C
. Suit in name of wrong
plaintiff:
(1)     Where a suit has been instituted in the name of
the wrong person as plaintiff or where it is
doubtful whether it has been instituted in the
name of the right plaintiff, the Court may at
any stage of the suit, if satisfied that the suit
has been instituted through a bona fide
mistake, and that it is necessary for the
determination of the real matter in dispute so
to do, order any other person to be substituted
or added as plaintiff upon such terms as the
Court thinks just.
(2)     Court may strike out or add parties: The Court
may at any stage of the proceedings, either
upon or without the application of either party,
and on such terms as may appear to the Court 
to be just, order that the name of any party
improperly joined, whether as plaintiff or
defendant, be struck out, and that the name of
any person who ought to have been joined,
whether as plaintiff or defendants, or whose
presence before the Court may be necessary in 
order to enable the Court effectually and
completely to adjudicate upon and settle all
the questions involved in the suit, be added.
(3)     No person shall be added as a plaintiff suing
without a next friend or as the next friend of a
plaintiff under any disability without his
consent.
(4)     Where defendant added, plaint to be amended:
Where a defendant is added, the plaint shall,
unless the Court otherwise directs, be
amended in such manner as may be necessary,    
and amended copies of the summons and of the  
plaint shall be served on the new defendant
and, if the Court thinks fit, on the original
defendant.
(5)     Subject to the provisions of the Indian
Limitation Act, 1877,
Section 22
, the
proceedings as against any person added as 
defendant shall be deemed to have begun only 
on the service of the summons.
Order XXII Rules 5 and 6 of C.P.C.
Rule 5: Determination of question as to legal
representative:  Where a question arises as to
whether any person is or is not the legal
representative of a deceased plaintiff or a
deceased defendant, such question shall be
determined by the Court:
Provided that where such question arises before an
Appellate Court, that Court may, before
determining the questions, direct any subordinate
Court to try the question and to return the records
together with evidence, if any, recorded at such
trial, its findings and reasons therefor, and the
Appellate Court may take the same into
consideration in determining the question.
Rule 6: No abatement by reason of death after
hearing:
Notwithstanding anything contained in the
foregoing rules, whether the cause of action
survives or not, there shall be no abatement by
reason of the death of either party between the
conclusion of the hearing and the pronouncing of
the judgment, but judgment may in such case be 
pronounced notwithstanding the death and shall
have the same force and effect as if it had been
pronounced before the death took place.
7)      In
Kedarisetti Suryanarayana v. Kedarisetti
Venkataraju
,  this Court was dealing with a situation where the
petitioner/defendant filed an I.A., to bring on record certain third
parties as legal representatives of seventh defendant therein.  It
was also a case for partition and separate possession, which was
decreed on 27.02.1970 and a final decree petition was pending.
The seventh defendant died on 13.05.1979.  Ten years later, an
application under
Order I Rule 10 of C.P.C
., came to be filed to
bring some third parties, as respondents, in the final decree
proceedings.  An objection came to be raised stating that after
the death of the seventh defendant, L.R. application should have
been filed under
Order XXII Rule 4 of C.P.C
., and not under
Order I
Rule 10 of C.P.C
.  After considering the judgment of Privy Council
in
Lachmi Narayan v. Balmakund
and other judgments, this Court
held that since the seventh defendant died after the preliminary
decree was passed, an application to bring his legal
representatives under
Order XXII Rule 3 of C.P.C
., need not be
made, but an application under
Order I Rule 10 of C.P.C
. to add
the parties is maintainable.
8)      In
Nima Kaur v. Surjith Singh and others
,  this Court,
while dealing with an identical situation, held as under:
It is amply clear that as long as the partition suit is
pending and until a final decree is actually passed,
application for impleading a party is maintainable.
That a duty is cast on the Court in a partition suit to
adjudicate upon the claims of all the parties who
claim a share in the subject matter of the suit and
that there is nothing in
the Code of Civil Procedure
which prohibits the passing of more than one
preliminary decree if circumstances justify the same.
It is not only convenient to the Court and
advantageous to the parties, specially in partition
suits to have disputed rights finally settled before a
final decree is prepared.
The construction of the language of Order I Rule 10
(2)
C.P.C
. requires that the same should not be
restricted merely to the parties involved in the suit,
but that an attempt should be always to make
parties, all persons who may be necessary in order
that there might be a final and complete adjudication
of the points involved in the suit, specially so, in a
suit for partition.
9)      In
Kishan Lal and others v. Nathi Lal
, the Delhi High
Court was dealing with a situation where a revision petition was
preferred by the legal representative of Nanhay Ram, who
instituted a suit against one Nathi Lal for recovery of amount due
under mortgage.  It was also a case where a decree was passed on 
21.07.1964 and after passing of the decree Nanhay Ram died on 
22.09.1964.  Thereafter, an application was made by the
petitioner therein to implead him in the suit.  An objection was
raised with regard to maintainability of the application under
Order XXII Rule 3 of C.P.C
.  One of the issues in the said case was;
whether
Order XXII Rule 3 of C.P.C
. can be invoked after passing
of the preliminary decree.  After referring to various judgments,
the Court held that Once a preliminary decree is passed, there is
no necessity to make an application under
Order XXII Rule 3 of
C.P.C
., to implead the legal representatives of the
deceased/plaintiff and there is no time limit to implead such
representatives.  The
Court further held
that the situation can
only be met by passing an order under
Section 151
of C.P.C.,
allowing the legal representatives to be impleaded in place of the
deceased plaintiff so that they may be in a psotiion to move the
Court for passing of a final decree.
10)     In
N.P.Thiruganam v. R.Jagan Mohan Rao
, the Apex  
Court held as under:
In the face of the explicit language in Rule 6 of
Order 22, there can be no abatement by reason of the
death of any party between the conclusion of the
hearing and the pronouncement of the judgment.  It
may be pronounced, notwithstanding the death, and 
shall have the same force and effect as if Judgment
had been pronounced before the death took place.
Therefore, the contention that the judgment and
decree of the appellate Court is a nullity is devoid of
substance.
11)     In
Golla Krishna Murthy v. Golla Yellaiah
(died) per his
L.R.s , a Division Bench of this Court was dealing with a situation
where the first appeal was heard after the death of the plaintiffs.
The question before the Court was; whether the judgment
delivered in appeal, which was heard after the death of a party,
was in nullity, or not.  After referring to the judgment of the Apex
Court in
N.P.Thiruganam v. R.Jagan Mohan Rao
(5 supra), this
Court held that in view of the clear pronouncement of the
Supreme Court, the contra is also correct, that if the party had
died before the conclusion of the hearing, the judgment rendered
would be nullity.
12)     From the
judgments
referred to above
, it is clear that after
passing of the preliminary decree, the proceedings shall not get
abated.  A reading of
Order XXII Rule 6 of C.P.C
., clearly states
that notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing rules,
whether the cause of action survives or not, there shall be no
abatement by reason of the death of either party between the
conclusion of the hearing and the pronouncement of the
judgment.  Since hearing is already over and preliminary decree is
also passed, the question of proceedings getting abated, due to
death of the plaintiffs after passing of preliminary decree and
before passing of the final decree, would not arise.
13)     Hence, this Court is of the view that an application to bring
the legal representatives of the deceased need not be under
Order
XXII Rule 3 of C.P.C
., but an application under
Order I Rule 10 of
C.P.C
., to add them as parties is maintainable.
14)     Accordingly, I see no reasons to interfere with the impugned
order passed by the trial Court and the Civil Revision Petition is
dismissed.  There shall be no order as to costs.
15)     Miscellaneous Petitions, if any, pending in this Civil Revision
Petition, shall stand closed.
_______________________    
JUSTICE C. PRAVEEN KUMAR       
27.01.2017