[Cites
29
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Annapureddy Subba Reddy vs State (Inspector Of Police, Acb), ... on 29 June, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 50
Author:
M. Seetharama Murti
Bench:
M. Seetharama Murti
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE  M. SEETHARAMA MURTI          

Criminal Revision Case No.2146 of 2016 

29-06-2017 

Annapureddy Subba Reddy. Petitioner   

State (Inspector of Police, ACB), Nellore range, Nellore, Through Spl.Public Prosecutor, High Court of Judicature at Hyd. .

Counsel for the Petitioner: Sri J. Prabhakar

Standing Counsel for ACB/respondent: Sri Udaya Bhaskara Rao   

<Gist :

>Head Note: 


? Cases referred:

1.(2014) 11 SCC 431 
2.(2013) 14 SCC 299 
3.(1984) 2 SCC 183 
4.(2016) 9 SCC 598 
5.(2011) 7 SCC 141 
6.AIR 1958 SC 107  


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.SEETHARAMA MURTI           

Criminal Revision Case no.2146 of 2016

ORDER:
This Criminal Revision Case, under
Sections 397
and
401
of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, (the Code) is filed by the petitioner/A1 having
been aggrieved of the orders, dated 18.07.2016, of the learned Special Judge
for SPE & ACB Cases-cum-II Additional District & Sessions Judge, Nellore,
passed in Crl.M.P.no.220 of 2016 in C.C.no.9 of 2016.
2.      I have heard the submissions of Sri J.Prabhakar, learned counsel
representing Sri K.Raghavacharyulu, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner, and of Sri Udaya Bhaskara Rao, learned Standing Counsel for ACB,
appearing for the respondent/State of AP.  I have perused the material
record.
3.      On merits and by the order impugned in the revision case, the trial
Court dismissed the application filed by the petitioner under
Section 239
of
the Code for his discharge.  Therefore, the aggrieved petitioner is before this
Court.
4.      On consideration of the pleadings and submissions, it appears that the
following are the two grounds, based on two sets of contentions, urged by
the petitioner-A1  (i) the charges are groundless and that the averments in
the charge sheet, the evidence collected and the incidental circumstances on
consideration do not disclose even a prima facie case, leave alone a strong
case; and, hence, the petitioner is entitled to be discharged; and, (ii) the
sanction orders issued by the Government of Andhra Pradesh are invalid;
therefore there is no valid sanction to prosecute the petitioner-A1; and,
hence, the petitioner-A1 is entitled to be discharged.
5.      In support of the first ground, the case of the petitioner/A1 and the
submissions made on his behalf, in brief, are as follows: - A charge sheet is
filed in the above said case against the petitioner/A1 for the offences
punishable under
Sections 7
and
13(2)
read with 13(1) (d) of the
Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988
(Act 49 of 1988) (hereinafter referred to as Act of
1988).  No prima facie case is made out against the petitioner for the said
offences.  The charge against the petitioner is groundless.  No allegation is
made that he is habitually corrupt.  No case is made out for framing a charge
under
Section 7
of Act of 1988.  The petitioner is innocent and did not
commit any offence.  The allegations in the prosecution case are false.  No
official favour pertaining to LW1-S.Siva Reddy is pending with the petitioner
at any point of time.  The petitioner never demanded or accepted any bribe
amount as alleged in the prosecution case.  The petitioner never received
any cover containing currency notes and never instructed A2 to receive any
cover from the said LW1.  The petitioner/A1 is not the competent authority
to issue the releasing orders for the Lorries of LW1 and three others.  No
proper preliminary enquiry was conducted and the background of the case
was also not properly considered.  The trap panchanama does not reflect the
true and correct facts.   The correct version is not incorporated in the said
panchanama.  It is prepared by incorporating a false version.  Both the
accused are honest and upright and are also vigilant in discharge of their
duties.  They never allowed illegal sand quarrying and transportation.   Since
the petitioner/A1 and A2 did not allow illegal activities of LWs 1 to 3, they
bore grudge against the petitioner-A1 and got foisted a false case by giving a
false complaint to the ACB officials.  The colour test is not properly
conducted.  The colour test done on the petitioners hands did not yield
colour.  Hence, the petitioner is entitled to be discharged.  However, the
trial Court erroneously dismissed the application of the petitioner.  The
observation of the trial Court that there is a prima facie evidence or prima
facie material against the petitioner to frame charges for the offence with
which he is charged is erroneous and is baseless.
5.1     Per contra, the case of the prosecution and the submissions made on
its behalf are as follows: - A perusal of the entire record, which lead to the
filing of the charge sheet, makes it manifest that there is not only a prima
facie case but a strong case for prosecuting the petitioner-A1.  There are
grounds to frame charges and try him for the offences with which he is
charged.  In view of the said facts, the petition is not maintainable and is
liable for dismissal in limine.  The law is fairly well settled that unless the
Special Judge considers the charge against the accused to be groundless, he
shall not discharge the accused.  The allegations that the petitioner never
demanded and accepted the bribe and other allegations in the petition are
false.  The version of the prosecution is only correct. The learned Special
Judge recorded valid reasons while dismissing the petition filed by the
petitioner/A1 for his discharge.
5.2     On a plain perusal of the entire material on record placed before this
Court and the order of the Court below, on the aspect as to whether there
are sufficient grounds to proceed against the petitioner/A1, it is clear that
the averments/contents in the charge sheet, the evidence collected during
the course of investigation and the other incidental facts & circumstances
are sufficient to come to a safe conclusion that there is prima facie
case/strong case for holding that the charges against the petitioner-A1 are
based on sufficient grounds.  Therefore, the finding of the Court below that
there is prima facie material and grounds for framing charges against the
petitioner-A1 and trying him for the offences with which he is charged
warrants no interference.
6.      Dealing now with the aspect of validity of the sanction order, it is
necessary to refer to the contentions of the parties on this aspect.
6.1     Learned counsel for the petitioner-A1 contends as follows: -
Admittedly, in the case on hand, sanction was accorded, on 27.01.2016, vide
Proceedings no.1072/E1/2013, of the Director of Mines and Geology,
Hyderabad, Government of Andhra Pradesh.  It is also not in dispute, that as
on that date, the petitioner/A1 was provisionally/tentatively allotted to the
State of Telangana.  Since the sanction orders are issued by the Director of
Mines & Geology, Government of AP, subsequent to such tentative allotment 
of the petitioner/A1 to the State of Telangana and after he is relieved from
his duties with immediate effect so as to enable him to report to the State of
Telangana, the sanction order issued by the Government of AP is not a valid
sanction order and that, therefore, there is no valid sanction to prosecute
the petitioner-A1.  The petitioner is entitled to be discharged on this ground
alone.  The trial Court did not appreciate the provisions of Act of 1988 and
that of the
A.P. State Reorganization Act, 2014
, and came to an erroneous
conclusion that the sanction order given by the Government of AP is valid to
prosecute the petitioner/A1 though the said State Government is not
competent to do so once the petitioner was allotted to the State of
Telangana.  The observation of the trial Court that the allotment of the
petitioner/A1 to the State of Telangana is provisional and for that reason
also, the sanction order issued by the State of AP is valid is erroneous and is
not based on proper interpretation and consideration of the provisions of
law.
6.2     Learned counsel for the petitioner also has drawn the attention of this
Court to certain provisions of A.P. State Re-organization Act, 2014, whereby
the existing State of AP was reorganised into two states, i.e., State of AP
and the State of Telangana.
6.3     On the other hand, the learned Standing Counsel placing reliance on
Section 19(2)
of the Act of 1988, would contend that the sanction order is
valid.  He would further submit as follows: - After following the procedure,
necessary record was submitted to the Government.  After meticulous
examination of the entire record, the sanctioning authority, having applied
its mind to the facts of the matter accorded sanction to prosecute the
accused officer.  Since the Office which the petitioner-A1 was alleged to have
misused or abused was the Office of the Assistant Geologist in the
department of Mines and Geology in the State of Andhra Pradesh, the
Government of Andhra Pradesh is alone competent to accord sanction even  
if sanction is necessary.
6.4     In view of the rival contentions, it is necessary to refer to infra the
relevant provisions of the AP State Re-Organization Act, 2014, and
Section 19
of the Act of 1988.
A.P. State Re-Organization Act:
S. 77. Provisions relating to other services: (1) Every person who immediately
before the appointed day is serving on substantive basis in connection with the
affairs of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall, on and from that day
provisionally continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Andhra
Pradesh unless he is required, by general or special order of the Central
Government to serve provisionally in connection with the affairs of the State of
Telangana:
Provided that every direction under this sub-section issued after the expiry
of a period of one year from the appointed day shall be issued with the consultation
of the Governments of the successor States.
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Government
shall, by general or special order, determine the successor State to which every
person referred to in sub-section (1) shall be finally allotted for service, after
consideration of option received by seeking option from the employees, and the
date with effect from which such allotment shall take effect or be deemed to have
taken effect:
Provided that even after the allocation has been made, the Central
Government may, in order to meet any deficiency in the service, depute officers of
other State services from one successor State to the other:
Provided further that as far as local, district, zonal and multi-zonal cadres
are concerned, the employees shall continue to serve, on or after the appointed
day, in that cadre:
Provided also that the employees of local, district, zonal and multi-zonal
cadres which fall entirely in one of the successor States, shall be deemed to be
allotted to that successor State:
Provided also that if a particular zone or multi-zone falls in both the
successor States, then the employees of such zonal or multi-zonal cadre shall be
finally allotted to one or the other successor States in terms of the provisions of this
sub-section.
(3) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of sub-section
(2) to a successor State shall, if he is not already serving therein, be made
available for serving in the successor State from such date as may be agreed upon
between the Governments of the successor States or, in default of such agreement,
as may be determined by the Central Government:
Provided that the Central Government shall have the power to review any
of its orders issued under this section.
78. Other provisions relating to services: (1) Nothing in this section or in section
77 shall be deemed to affect, on or after the appointed day, the operation of the
provisions of Chapter I of  Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to determination
of the conditions of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs of the
Union or any State:
Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the
appointed day in the case of any person deemed to have been allocated to the
State of Andhra Pradesh or to the State of Telangana under section 77 shall not be
varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central
Government.
(2) All services prior to the appointed day rendered by a person,
(a) if he is deemed to have been allocated to any State under section 78, shall be
deemed to have been rendered in connection with the affairs of that State;
(b) if he is deemed to have been allocated to the Union in connection with the
administration of the successor State of Telangana, shall be deemed to have been
rendered in connection with the affairs of the Union, for the purposes of the rules
regulating his conditions of service.
(3) The provisions of section 77 shall not apply in relation to members of any All-
India Service.
Section 19
of the Act of 1988:
19. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution.
(1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under
sections 7
,
10
,
11
,
13
and
15
alleged to have been committed by a public servant, except with the
previous sanction,
(a) in the case of a person who is employed in connection with the affairs of the
Union and is not removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the
Central Government, of that Government;
(b) in the case of a person who is employed in connection with the affairs of a State
and is not removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the State
Government, of that Government;
(c) in the case of any other person, of the authority competent to remove him from
his office.
(2) Where for any reason whatsoever any doubt arises as to whether the previous
sanction as required under sub-section (1) should be given by the Central
Government or the State Government or any other authority, such sanction shall be
given by that Government or authority which would have been competent to
remove the public servant from his office at the time when the offence was alleged
to have been committed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2
of 1974),
(a) no finding, sentence or order passed by a special Judge shall be reversed or
altered by a court in appeal, confirmation or revision on the ground of the absence
of, or any error, omission or irregularity in, the sanction required under sub-section
(1), unless in the opinion of that court, a failure of justice has in fact been
occasioned thereby;
(b) no court shall stay the proceedings under this Act on the ground of any error,
omission or irregularity in the sanction granted by the authority, unless it is satisfied
that such error, omission or irregularity has resulted in a failure of justice;
(c) no court shall stay the proceedings under this Act on any other ground and no
court shall exercise the powers of revision in relation to any interlocutory order
passed in any inquiry, trial, appeal or other proceedings.
(4) In determining under sub-section (3) whether the absence of, or any error,
omission or irregularity in, such sanction has occasioned or resulted in a failure of
justice the court shall have regard to the fact whether the objection could and
should have been raised at any earlier stage in the proceedings.
Explanation.For the purposes of this section,
(a) error includes competency of the authority to grant sanction;
(b) a sanction required for prosecution includes reference to any requirement that
the prosecution shall be at the instance of a specified authority or with the sanction
of a specified person or any requirement of a similar nature.
6.5     On this aspect of validity of sanction, learned counsel for the
petitioner also relied upon the following decisions:
(
i) P.L.Tatwal v. State of Madhya Pradesh
:   The facts of the case are
as follows: The appellant was an employee of the Municipal Corporation.
The Municipal Corporation at one point of time was presided over by an
Administrator, on ad hoc arrangement made by Government when elected   
committee is superseded/dissolved.  However, for prosecution of the
appellant, sanction was accorded by the Standing Committee, by its order
dated 27.08.1996.  The appellant contended that as the elected committee is
superseded or dissolved at the relevant time and as the appointment of the
appellant was at the time when the Municipal Corporation was ruled by the
Administrator, the Standing Committee of the Municipal Corporation is not
competent to accord sanction for prosecution of the appellant under the
PC
Act
.  Rejecting the contention, the Supreme Court held that though it so
happened that the appointment of the appellant was at a time when the
Municipal Corporation was ruled by the Administrator, that does not mean
that there should be an Administrator to take any decision with regard to the
sanction for prosecution of the appellant under the
PC Act
and that the
statute is very clear that the authority competent to remove an officer from
service is the authority to give sanction for prosecution and the appellant
being an employee drawing salary of more than Rs.400/- per month, the
authority competent to remove him from service is the Standing Committee;
and that it is the Standing Committee, which gave the sanction and
therefore, the trial Court and the High Court cannot be faulted in taking the
view that there was an order of sanction for prosecution from the competent
authority.  This decision was relied upon in support of the contention that
sanction must be given by the competent authority, which is competent to
remove an officer from service and that as on the date of according
sanction, the competent authority to remove the petitioner is Director,
Mines & Geology, Government of Telangana, but not the Government of AP.
(
ii)    State of Uttarakhand v. Yogendra Nath Arora
: The facts of the case
are as follows: The accused prayed for his discharge inter alia contending
that the materials on record are not sufficient for framing of the charge and
further, in the absence of valid sanction from the competent authority, as
required under
Section 19(1)(c)
of the Act, the trial Court cannot legally
proceed.  The learned Judge of the trial Court observed as follows: .the
question of sanction being merely an incident to the trial of the case is not
to be considered at this stage.  It is undoubtedly true that the accused was
an employee of the State of Uttar Pradesh and was on deputation to the
State of Uttaranchal and under the subordination and administrative control
of the State of Uttaranchal.  Thus, the question of sanction being incidental
to the trial of the case and on perusal of the record, there is sufficient
material on record to charge the accused, the accused shall be charged
under
Section 7
read with
Sections 13(1)(d)
and
13(2)
of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988.  Accordingly, the learned Special Judge rejected the
prayer of the accused.   The accused contended before the High Court that
the accused being an employee of an undertaking of the State Government of
Uttar Pradesh, the State Government of Uttarakhand is not competent to
grant sanction.  This submission found favour with the High Court and the
High Court held that the sanction accorded is not valid and quashed the
prosecution.  The State of Uttarakhand filed Special Leave Petition before
the Supreme Court.  The Supreme Court having regard to the facts of the
case and the legal position obtaining, considered the following question,
whether the expression removal from service would mean dislodging him
from holding that office and shifting him to another office.   The Supreme
Court also considered the issue as to whether the power of State
Government of Uttarakhand to repatriate the accused would mean that it has
power to remove him.   The Supreme Court finally held as follows:
In our opinion, office means a position which requires the
person holding it to perform certain duties and discharge certain
obligations and removal from his office would mean to snap that
permanently.  By repatriation, the person holding the office on
deputation may not be required to perform that duty and
discharge the obligation of that office, but nonetheless he
continues to hold office and by virtue thereof performs certain
other duties and discharge certain other obligations.  Therefore
the power to repatriate does not embrace within itself the power
of removal from office as envisaged under
Section 19(1)
(c ) of
the Act.  The term removal means the act of removing from
office or putting an end to an employment.  The distinction
between dismissal and removal from service is that former
ordinarily disqualifies from future employment but the latter does
not..  The Supreme Court then referred to the decision in
V.K.Sharma v. State (Delhi Admn.) [(1975)1 SCC 784] and 
dismissed the appeal.
Placing reliance on this decision, it is sought to be contended that since the
petitioner/A1 is allotted to the State of Telangana, as on the date of
according sanction, the sanction order granted by the Government of AP is
invalid and that the sanction, if any, ought to have been granted by the
competent authority of the State Government of Telangana and that
therefore, there is absence of valid sanction from the competent authority
as required under the provision of
Section 19
of Act of 1988 and the trial
cannot legally proceed.
6.6     However, the learned Standing Counsel relied upon the following
proposition in the decision in
R.S.Nayak v. A.R.Antulay
: -Upon a true
construction of
Section 6
, it is implicit therein that sanction of that
competent authority alone would be necessary, which is competent to
remove the public servant from the office, which he is alleged to have
misused or abused for corrupt motive and for which a prosecution is
intended to be launched against him.
6.7.    Dealing with this main contention that the sanction accorded by the
Government of Andhra Pradesh, on 27.01.2016, that is, after the tentative
allotment of the petitioner-A1 to the State of Telangana is not a valid
sanction, it is to be noted that in the case on hand, sanction was admittedly
accorded, on 27.01.2016, vide Proceedings no.1072/E1/2013, of the Director
of Mines and Geology, Hyderabad, Government of Andhra Pradesh.  It is also
not in dispute that as on that date, the petitioner/A1 was already
provisionally/tentatively allotted to the State of Telangana.  The copy of the
proceedings no.14123/E1/2015-4, dated 30.06.2015, of the Director of Mines
and Geology, Government of Andhra Pradesh, disclose that the Government,  
vide Memo no.10700/Estt./A1/2015-1, dated 30.06.2015, of the Secretary,
Industries & Commerce (Estt.) Department, issued orders permitting the
Director, Mines & Geology, Government of AP to relieve the employees and 
that accordingly the petitioner/A1, Assistant Geologist (under suspension),
office of the Assistant Director, Mines & Geology (Vg), Nellore, who is
tentatively allotted to Telangana State, was relieved of his duties with
immediate effect so as to enable him to report in the Telangana State.
Accordingly, the petitioner/A1 was relieved with immediate effect so as to
enable him to report in the State of Telangana.
6.8.    Since the issue is about the validity of sanction, it is necessary to note
the importance of requirement of sanction for prosecution of a public
servant.  Grant of sanction is not an idle formality but a solemn and
sacrosanct act.  Requirement of sanction provides an umbrella of protection
to Government servants against frivolous prosecutions.  Therefore, it is the
duty of the competent authority to apply its mind before according sanction.
Therefore, it unquestionably follows that the sanction to prosecution can be
given by an authority competent to remove the public servant from the
office, which he has misused or abused because that authority alone would
be able to know whether there has been a misuse or abuse of the office by
the public servant and not some rank outsider.  It is undoubtedly true that
only the authority competent to accord sanction must accord sanction that
too after application of the mind to the facts, evidence collected and other
incidental facts.  The authority competent to remove alone would be able to
accord sanction when the facts and evidence are placed before it to judge
whether a serious offence is committed or the prosecution is frivolous or
speculative.  In the case on hand, the Office which the petitioner-A1 held as
a public servant was the post of Assistant Geologist in the office of Assistant
Director, Mines and Geology, Nellore, in the State of Andhra Pradesh, and he
was alleged to have misused or abused the said office which he held in the
State of Andhra Pradesh.  Subsequently, he was tentatively allotted to the
State of Telangana.  The functions and duties of the said Office and its
misuse or abuse by the person, who held the said office would be known to
his superior officers in the State of Andhra Pradesh and the Government of
Andhra Pradesh.  As the misuse and abuse of office was said to have been
committed while he held his Office as a public servant in the State of Andhra
Pradesh, the sanction accorded by the Government of Andhra Pradesh is 
appropriate and the contention that the Government of Andhra Pradesh is
not a competent authority to accord sanction, therefore, needs no
countenance.
6.9.    Coming to the provisions of
State Reorganisation Act
, which are
already extracted supra, a plain reading of those provisions does not support
the contentions of the petitioner-A1 more particularly in the light of the fact
that his allotment is only tentative and as the acts and omissions
constituting the offence and the misuse and abuse of the functions and
duties of Office related to a post he held in the State of Andhra Pradesh
before his tentative allotment to the State of Telangana.  In the case on
hand, admittedly, the petitioner was a public servant of the State of Andhra
Pradesh at the time when the alleged acts of misuse and abuse of office
constituting the offence were alleged to have been committed. Further, the
allotment of the petitioner to the State of Telangana is tentative and not
final.  In that view of the matter, it can be said that till his allotment to the
said State is final, he continues to be a public servant of the State of Andhra
Pradesh and at least he holds a lien on his post in the said State till his final
allotment to one of the two States.    As long as he holds a lien on his said
post in the State of Andhra Pradesh till his allotment to the State of
Telangana is made final, his said post in the State of Andhra Pradesh cannot
be filled up by direct recruitment or promotion or transfer, as the case may
be.  In that view of the matter, the sanction accorded by the Government of
AP is valid and his prior tentative allotment to the State of Telangana does
not affect the validity of the sanction order.
6.10
Section 19(2)
of the Act 48 of 1988, on a plain reading, makes it
manifest that when there is any doubt as to which authority has to accord
sanction, the sanction has to be accorded by that Government or authority
which would have been competent to remove the public servant from Office
at the time when the offence was alleged to have been committed.  In this
case, the competent authority or the Government, which is competent to
remove the public servant from his office at the time when the offence was
alleged to have been committed, is the Government of Andhra Pradesh.
7.      Now it is apt to deal with the alternative contention of the learned
Standing Counsel, which is as follows: - The petitioner-A1 during the period
he was alleged to have committed the offence with which he is charged was
working as a public servant in the State of Andhra Pradesh and discharged his
functions and duties of Office as a public servant of that State.  As per the
case of the prosecution, the petitioner-A1 misused and abused his Office as a
public servant while working in the State of Andhra Pradesh.  Subsequently,
by tentative allotment, he was allotted to the State of Telangana.  By the
date of according sanction by the Government of Andhra Pradesh, he was no 
doubt tentatively allotted to the State of Telangana.  The relevant period
with reference to which a valid sanction is a sine qua non is the period
during which the acts and omissions constituting the offence were
committed, but, not the date of according sanction.  Admittedly, on his
allotment to the State of Telangana, the petitioner-A1, who is a public
servant, is not holding the same post which he held at the time of
commission of the offence.  On his allotment to the State of Telangana,
since he was not holding the same post, which was alleged to have been
misused or abused, he loses the protection under
Section 19(1)
of the Act 48
of 1988 though he continues to be a public servant albeit in a different State.
On his allotment to another State, he was not holding that office which he
was stated to have abused and ceased to hold that office and was holding a
different office in a different State.  Therefore, sanction at all is not
necessary.
7.1.
In support of the alternative contention, reliance is placed upon the
decision in
L.Narayana Swamy v. State of Karnataka
. In this decision, the
Supreme Court while answering the following question   Whether a public
servant who is not on the same post and is transferred (whether by way of
promotion or otherwise to another post) loses the protection under
Section
19(1)
of the P.C. Act, though he continues to be a public servant, albeit on a
different post, inter alia, held that where the public servant had abused the
office which he held in the check period, but had ceased to hold that office
or was holding a different office, then sanction would not be necessary and
that where the alleged misconduct is in some different capacity than the one
which is held at the time of taking cognizance, there will be no necessity to
take the sanction.  The ratio in the decision appears to be that if a public
servant continues to be a public servant but in a different capacity or is
holding a different office than the one which he has alleged to have abused,
still there would be no question of sanction.
Further, the learned Standing
Counsel contended that if on the date of taking cognizance, accused
continues to be a public servant but in a different capacity or is holding a
different Office than the one which was alleged to have been abused, then no
sanction is required is the settled legal position
laid down in
the decision in
Abhay Singh Chautala v. Central Bureau of Investigation
.
In
S.A.Venkataraman v. The State
, the question that fell for consideration was
with regard to necessity for a sanction under
Section 6
of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1947, before a Court would take cognizance of offence under
Section 151
of the IPC or
Section 5
of the Prevention of Corruption Act or
both alleged to have been committed by a person who at the time the Court
was asked to take cognizance was not a public servant but was so at the
time of the commission of the offence.  On facts, it was found that the
appellants ceased to be public servants at the time the Court took
cognizance of the offences alleged to have been committed by them as
public servants and hence, it was accordingly held that the provision of
Section 6
of the Act did not apply and the prosecution against them was not
vitiated by the lack of previous sanction by a competent authority.
7.2     In the case on hand, there is no need to dilate on this alternative
contention, for the following reasons: The petitioner-A1, who is a public
servant of the State of Andhra Pradesh, was alleged to have misused or
abused the Office which he held at that time.  However, subsequently and
before the sanction is accorded by the Government of Andhra Pradesh for his
prosecution, he was tentatively allotted to the State of Telangana.  Thus, his
allotment is not final.  In the considered view of this Court, he might again
be allotted to the State of Andhra Pradesh or his tentative allotment to the
State of Telangana might be approved while finalising final allotments by the
two States.  These contingencies are not ruled out.  Therefore, till his
allotment is made final, he holds a lien on his post in the State of Andhra
Pradesh and his post in the State of Andhra Pradesh, on his tentative
allotment to the State of Telangana, cannot be filled up either by direct
recruitment or by promotion or by transfer, as the case may be, till his
allotment to the State of Telangana attains finality.  Since the allotment of
the petitioner-A1 in the State of Telangana is only tentative and not final,
there is no need to consider the alternative contention of the learned
Standing Counsel, in the considered view of this Court.
8.      On the above analysis of the facts and law, this Court is of the
considered view that the contentions of the petitioner-A1 are untenable and
are, therefore, liable for rejection and are accordingly rejected confirming
the order impugned in this revision case.
9.      In the result, the Criminal Revision Case is dismissed.
Pending miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall stand closed.
_______________________    
 M. SEETHARAMA MURTI, J     
29th June, 2017