[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Mattam Ravi S/O Raja Yellaiah, Aged ... vs Mattam Raja Yellaiah, S/O. Late ... on 23 June, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 HYDERABAD 155, (2017) 179 ALLINDCAS 273 (HYD), (2017) 4 ANDHLD 655, (2018) 1 CIVILCOURTC 205
Author:
P.Naveen Rao
Bench:
P.Naveen Rao
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE P.NAVEEN RAO        

CIVIL REVISION PETITION NO.348 OF 2017     

23-06-2017 

Mattam Ravi S/o Raja Yellaiah, Aged about 49 years, Occu: Agriculture, r/o Veleru Village, Dharmasagar Mandal, Warangal Dist

Mattam Raja Yellaiah, s/o. late Ramaiah, Aged about 77 years, Occu: Agriculture,r/o.Veluru Village, Dharmasagar Mandal,Waran 
Plaintiffs

Counsel for the petitioners: Sri  B.Ranganatha Rao

Counsel for the Respondents:  Sri P.Hari Prasad

<Gist :

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:

1.  (1969) 1 ALT 32     
2.  1996 (3) ALT 1019
3.  AIR 1964 SC 1563 
4.  (2012) 4 SCC 327
5.  (1976) 1 SCC 727
6.  (2001) 2 SCC 205
7.  (1976) 4 SCC 233

HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE P.NAVEEN RAO           

CIVIL REVISION PETITION NO.348 OF 2017     

ORDER:
O.S.No.347 of 2009, on the file of II Additional Senior Civil
Judge, Warangal, is instituted praying to grant preliminary decree
declaring that the plaintiffs are entitled to 5/6th share in item Nos.1
to 4 of the suit schedule properties and to pass a final decree in
terms of the preliminary decree.  Defendants 1 and 2 filed
I.A.No.720 of 2016 to summon DW.2, namely, Chilpuri Shekaraiah  
@ Srekaraiah, S/o Mallaiah r/o. Veluru Village, Dharmasagar
Mandal, Warangal District to declare him hostile and to cross-
examine him by the defendants. The said application was
dismissed by the learned II Additional Senior Civil Judge on
11.11.2016, impugned in this revision.
2.      The averments made in the affidavit filed in I.A.No.720 of
2016 would disclose that DW.2 filed chief affidavit on 26.08.2016
supporting the stand of the defendants.  When he was cross-
examined by the plaintiffs, he deposed against his chief-
examination and supported the plaintiffs. The defendants,
therefore, prayed to declare him hostile and to permit to
cross-examine him.  The said plea of the petitioners was opposed
by the respondents/plaintiffs.  According to them, in order to divert
the issue and to create a false story contrary to the record, chief-
examination affidavit was filed on behalf of DW.2.  They have also
opposed the plea to declare the witness as hostile.
3.      Trial Court rejected the said application on the ground that
invoking
Section 154
of the Indian Evidence Act in civil cases is not
permissible and that Section is invariably invoked in criminal
proceedings only.  Trial Court held that decision relied by the
petitioners is not relevant for the civil cases. Aggrieved thereby, this
revision is filed.
4.      Heard Sri B.Ranganatha Rao, learned counsel for petitioners
and Sri. Podila Hari Prasad, learned counsel for respondent no.2.
5.      Learned counsel for petitioners contends that the trial Court
erred in dismissing the application on the ground that provision in
Section 154
of the Indian Evidence Act is not attracted to civil
cases.  According to the learned counsel, when a wrong deposition
was given in cross-examination by the defense witness,
opportunity should be given to the defendants to further cross-
examine the said witness, who turned hostile and denial of the
same would amount to denying the opportunity to rebut the
allegations of the plaintiffs.  He further submits that even
assuming that
Section 154
of the Indian Evidence Act is not
attracted the trial Court has got inherent powers under
Section
151
of Civil Procedure Code.  The application is filed both under
Section 154
of the Evidence Act and
Section 151
of Civil Procedure
Code and by exercising inherent powers under
Section 151
to do
complete justice, the trial Court ought to have allowed the
application filed by the petitioners/defendants.
6.      Learned counsel for respondents/plaintiffs opposed the claim
of the petitioners.  According to the learned counsel, application is
not filed in a bona fide manner to elicit the information to support
the stand of the petitioners. This application is filed to drag on the
litigation.  The suit is of the year 2009 and is at the stage of trial
and petitioners are dragging the matter on one pretext or the other.
He, therefore, submits that petitioners lack bona fides and that
trial Court rightly dismissed the said application.
7.      The issues for consideration in this revision are:
(1) Whether
Section 154
of the Indian Evidence Act is
        applicable only to criminal proceedings and has no
        application to the civil cases as held by the trial     Court?;
        (2) In what circumstances the trial Court can grant such
        permission? and 
        (3) to what relief ?
8.1.
Section 154
of Indian Evidence Act reads as under:
S.154
. Question by party to his own witness :-- The
Court may, in its discretion, permit the person who calls
a witness to put any questions to him which might be
put in cross-examination by the adverse party.
8.2.    A plain reading of the section makes it clear that it does not
make any distinction between civil and criminal cases. It only vests
discretion in the Court to permit the person, who calls a witness, to
put any question which can be put in cross-examination by the
adverse party.  Such a request can be made in civil as well as in
criminal cases.   What is required to be considered is when such a
request should be made and how such wide discretion vested in
the Court ought to be exercised by the Court.
9.      Though on a bare look at the provision, it does not appear to
impose any fetters on both aspects, wealth of precedents on
Section
154
illuminate path on which trial Court can tread and examine
the claims made under
Section 154
.  Having regard to narrow and
pedantic view adopted by trial Court, I deem it proper to consider
few precedent decisions touching various aspects of
Section 154
.
9.1.   In B.N.Chobe v. Sami Ahmed , Justice Gopal Rao Ekbote, as 
he then was succinctly delineated the scope and width of Section
154.  Learned Judge pleased to hold that hostility may appear
either during the examination-in-chief or the cross-examination.
But, permission must be obtained during the course of the
examination of the witness and before it includes.   Even a one day
delay in making a request would defeat the very object of Section
154.  Learned Judge reasoned that on such delay, it is not possible
to the trial Judge to recollect the demeanor of the witness and to
remember whether his attitude was hostile.  No formal written
application is necessary and an oral request is sufficient for the
trial Judge to consider.
9.2.   This Court held:
..To me, it seems clear that
Section 154
applies
when the witness is under examination.  Such a
permission can be sought and granted during the
examination-in-chief or at the stage of cross-examination
or perhaps there may be cases even where he is under 
re-examination.  In any case, however, before his
evidence is concluded, his hostility must be brought to
the notice of the Court and the permission sought to put
questions in cross examination by the party who
happens to produce him.  If this procedure is not followed
and an application is filed on a subsequent date before
altogether a new Judge, as is the case here, I do not
think such an application can be granted.
9.3.
In
Y.Syamalamma v. Kamalamma
, trial Court held that
Section 154
is not attracted in  civil cases.   Learned single Judge
is pleased to hold as under:
12. On a reading of the provision and the various
decisions of several Courts on this aspect, I am
inclined to say, there is no embargo to cross-examine a
witness by the party who calls the witness even in civil
proceedings. The provision Under
Section 154
of the
Evidence Act does not distinguish between civil and
criminal proceedings. What all the provision postulates
is that a party could be permitted to cross-examine his
own witness if such witness has exhibited an element
of hostility and the Court must satisfy itself as to
whether such cross-examination could be permitted or
not. The words so used in the provision are "The Court,
may, in its discretion permit the person to put any
question........." Legislature has guardedly used the
word "may" while giving discretion to the Courts to
grant permission or not. The Court must satisfy itself
on the question of permitting a party to cross-examine
his own witness. This permission, however, is not as a
matter of right Therefore, it is clear mat there is no
embargo in the provision Under
Section 154
of the
Evidence Act to restrict the benefit of cross-
examination of one's own witness only to criminal
proceedings.
9.4.
In
Dahyabhai Chhaganbhai Thakker v. State of Gujarat
,
Supreme Court delineated the scope of
Section 154
.  It held:
14. .
Section 154
does not in terms, or by 
necessary implication confine the exercise of the
power by the court before the examination-in-chief is
concluded or to any particular stage of the
examination of the witness. It is wide in scope and
the discretion is entirely left to the court to exercise
the power when the circumstances demand. To   
confine this power to the stage of examination-in-chief
is to make in ineffective in practice. A clever witness in
his examination-in-chief faithfully conforms to what he
stated earlier to the police or in the committing court,
but in the cross-examination introduces statements in a
subtle way contradicting in effect what he stated in the
examination-in-chief. If his design is obvious, we do not
see why the court cannot, during the course of his
cross-examination, permit the person calling him as a
witness to put questions to him which might be put in
cross-examination by the adverse party. To confine the
operation of
s. 154
of the Evidence Act to a
particular stage in the examination of a witness is
to read words in the section which are not there. We
cannot also agree with the High Court that if a party
calling a witness is permitted to put such questions to
the witness after he has been cross-examined by the
adverse party, the adverse party will not have any
opportunity to further cross-examine the witness on the
answers elicited by putting such questions. In such an
event the court certainly, in exercise of its discretion,
will permit the adverse party to cross-examine the
witness on the answers elicited by such questions. The
court, therefore, can permit a person, who calls a
witness, to put questions to him which might be put
in the cross-examination at any stage of the
examination of the witness, provided it takes care to
give an opportunity to the accused to cross-examine him
on the answers elicited which do not find place in the
examination-in-chief.                  (emphasis supplied)
9.5.
In
Bhajju @ Karan Singh v. State of M.P.
, Supreme Court
observed:
19. ..
Section 154
of the Act enables the Court, in its
discretion, to permit the person, who calls a witness, to
put any question to him which might be put in cross-
examination by the adverse party.  The view that the
evidence of the witness who has been called and cross-
examined  by the party with the leave of the court,
cannot be  believed or disbelieved in part and has to be
excluded altogether, is not the correct exposition of law.
9.6.    In  Sat Paul v. Delhi Admn. , Supreme Court extensively
dealt with the terms hostile, adverse and unfavorable witnesses,
the object of the provisions of the
Evidence Act
and the distinction
between English Law of Evidence and Indian Law.  Supreme Court  
held:
38. To steer clear of the controversy over the meaning
of the terms hostile witness, adverse witness,
unfavourable witness which had given rise to
considerable difficulty and conflict of opinion in
England, the authors of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
seem to have advisedly avoided the use of any of those
terms so that, in India, the grant of permission to cross-
examine his own witness by a party is not conditional
on the witness being declared adverse or hostile.
Whether it be the grant of permission under
Section 142
to put leading questions, or the leave under
Section 154
to ask questions which might be put in cross-
examination by the adverse party, the
Indian Evidence
Act
leaves the matter entirely to the discretion of the
court (see the observations of Sir Lawrence Jenkins in
Baikuntha Nath v. Prasannamoyi [AIR 1922 PC 409 : 72  
IC 286] ). The discretion conferred by
Section 154
on
the court is unqualified and untrammelled, and is
apart from any question of hostility. It is to be
liberally exercised whenever the court from the
witnesses' demeanour, temper, attitude, bearing, or
the tenor and tendency of his answers, or from a
perusal of his previous inconsistent statement, or
otherwise, thinks that the grant of such permission
is expedient to extract the truth and to do justice.
The grant of such permission does not amount to an
adjudication by the court as to the veracity of the
witness. Therefore, in the order granting such
permission it is preferable to avoid the use of such
expressions, such as declared hostile, declared
unfavourable, the significance of which is still not free
from the historical cobwebs which, in their wake bring a
misleading legacy of confusion, and conflict that had so
long vexed the English courts.
(emphasis supplied)
9.7.
In
Gura Singh v. State of Rajasthan
, Supreme Court
cleared the misconception on the efficacy of the testimony of a
witness declared hostile.  After extensively referring to precedent
decisions, Supreme Court held:
11. There appears to be a misconception regarding the
effect on the testimony of a witness declared hostile. It
is a misconceived notion that merely because a witness
is declared hostile his entire evidence should be
excluded or rendered unworthy of consideration..
12. The terms hostile, adverse or unfavourable
witnesses are alien to the
Indian Evidence Act
. The
terms hostile witness, adverse witness,
unfavourable witness, unwilling witness are all
terms of English law. The rule of not permitting a party
calling the witness to cross-examine are relaxed under
the common law by evolving the terms hostile witness
and unfavourable witness. Under the common law a 
hostile witness is described as one who is not desirous
of telling the truth at the instance of the party calling
him and an unfavourable witness is one called by a
party to prove a particular fact in issue or relevant to
the issue who fails to prove such fact, or proves the
opposite test. In India the right to cross-examine the
witnesses by the party calling him is governed by the
provisions of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
.
Section 142
requires that leading question cannot be put to the
witness in examination-in-chief or in re-examination
except with the permission of the court. The court can,
however, permit leading question as to the matters
which are introductory or undisputed or which have, in
its opinion, already been sufficiently proved.
Section 154
authorises the court in its discretion to permit the
person who calls a witness to put any question to him
which might be put in cross-examination by the adverse
party. The courts are, therefore, under a legal
obligation to exercise the discretion vesting in them
in a judicious manner by proper application of mind
and keeping in view the attending circumstances.
Permission for cross-examination in terms of
Section
154
of the Evidence Act cannot and should not be
granted at the mere asking of the party calling the
witness.
(emphasis supplied)
9.8.
In
Rabindra Kumar Dey v. State of Orissa
, Supreme Court
explained how to exercise discretion vested in the trial Court under
Section 154
of the Evidence Act.  Supreme Court observed:
11.  It may be rather difficult to lay down a rule of
universal application as to when and in what
circumstances the court will be entitled to exercise its
discretion under
Section 154
of the Evidence Act and
the matter will largely depend on the facts and
circumstances of each case and on the satisfaction of
the court on the basis of those circumstances. Broadly,
however, this much is clear that the contingency of
cross-examining the witness by the party calling him
is an extraordinary phenomenon and permission 
should be given only in special cases. It seems to us
that before a court exercises discretion in declaring
a witness hostile, there must be some material to
show that the witness has gone back on his earlier
statement or is not speaking the truth or has
exhibited an element of hostility or has changed
sides and transferred his loyalty to the adversary.
Furthermore, it is not merely on the basis of a small or
insignificant omission that the witness may have made
before the earlier authorities that the party calling the
witness can ask the court to exercise its discretion. The
court, before permitting the party calling the witness to
cross-examine him, must scan and weigh the  
circumstances properly and should not exercise its
discretion in a casual or routine manner.
(emphasis supplied)
10.     Principles deducible from the precedent decisions, noted
above are as under:
a)      Permission under
Section 154
can be sought before 
evidence of witness is concluded;
b)
Section 154
vests vide discretion in the Court to grant
or refuse permission and it is an unqualified
discretion.
c)      Such discretion should be liberally exercised whenever
the Court, from the witnesses demeanour, temper,
attitude, bearing, or the tenor and tendency of his
answers, or from a perusal of his previous inconsistent
statement, or otherwise, thinks that the grant of such
permission is expedient to extract the truth and to do
justice.
d)      In Indian law, there is no scope to use words hostile
and adverse, therefore, grant of permission to cross-
examine his own witness by a party is not conditional
on the witness being declared adverse or hostile.
e)      While granting permission under
Section 154
, Court
should avoid use of expression as declared hostile and
declared un-favorable.
f)
Section 154
authorizes the Court, in its discretion, to
permit the person who calls a witness to put any
question to him which might be put in cross
examination by the adverse party.
g)      The Courts are under a legal obligation to exercise the
discretion vesting in them in a judicious manner by
proper application of mind and keeping in view the
attending circumstances. Such permission should not 
be granted at the mere asking of the party calling the
witness.
h)      Contingency as provided by
Section 154
is
extraordinary phenomenon and permission should be  
given only in special cases.  There must be some
material to show that the witness has gone back on
his/her earlier statement or is not speaking the truth
or has exhibited an element of hostility or has changed
sides and transferred his loyalty to the adversary.  The
Court must ignore small or insignificant omission.
Court must scan and weigh the circumstances  
properly and should not exercise its discretion in a
casual or routine manner.
i)      Under
Section 154
, it is not necessary to file a formal
application and oral request can be made during the
cross examination or re-examination or immediately
after the conclusion of the examination of witness.
11.     Having regard to the language employed in
Section 154
of
the Indian Evidence Act and the law
laid down in
precedent
decisions, few of which are noted above, it is beyond pale of doubt
that the trial Court grossly erred in dismissing the application only
on the ground that
Section 154
is not attracted to Civil cases and
erred in not applying its mind to the facts on record and to come to
appropriate conclusion on the prayer of petitioners.
12.     Having regard to the parameters
laid down by
the precedent
decisions
referred to above
on the scope of exercise of discretion by
the trial  Court under
Section 154
, heard learned counsel for
petitioners on the merits of the plea.
13.     Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that no request
could be made immediately after the closure of cross-examination
of Dw.2, as the counsel was not present at the time of closure of
evidence as he was engaged before another Court.  Thus, the
moment the counsel realized that the evidence given by DW.2 was 
contrary to what was deposed in his chief-affidavit, the party  was
advised to file petition for declaring DW.2 as hostile and to cross-
examine him.  The time taken thereafter was only to ensure filing
of affidavit and petition by the party.
14.     Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that on
08.09.2016, after closing of cross-examination of DW.2, matter was
adjourned for further defence evidence to 20.09.2016 and on a
request made on behalf of the petitioner, on payment of costs,
adjournment was granted to 27.09.2016. On 27.09.2016  
petitioners filed I.A.No.720 of 2016.
15.     On these adjournments, learned counsel for the petitioners
submits that the delay occurred only to secure presence of the
party and to file affidavit and it was not deliberate and wilful and
in the peculiar facts of the case, the delay of 20 days cannot be
treated as inordinate delay, in order to deny the genuine claim of
the petitioner to cross-examine the defence witness No.2 having
regard to his deposition in chief-examination and taking contrary
stand in cross-examination.
16.     The affidavit filed in support of the said I.A., makes bald
assertion that DW-2 turned hostile, deposed against chief-
examination, colluded with the plaintiff and, therefore, to summon
him to declare him as hostile and permit to cross examine him.  No
details are furnished as to in what context and how DW-2 resiled
from his earlier statement and such statements made are against
the petitioners.
17.     It is not in dispute that after conclusion of cross-examination
and before closure of evidence of DW.2 or immediately thereafter,
no request was made to permit the petitioner to cross-examine
DW.2.  The application was filed after two adjournments and after
20 days of the closure of the evidence of DW.2.  Though learned
counsel for the petitioner made vain attempt to explain the delay,
neither in the affidavit filed in support of I.A.No.720 of 2016 nor in
the grounds urged in the Revision, no such explanation was given.
18.     As seen from the principles
laid down in
the precedent
decisions, though the discretion of the trial Court is wide under
Section 154
, each application requires consideration, in the facts of
the given case.  As succinctly put by this court in B.N.Chobe
(supra), request for putting questions by a person who calls a
witness, as can be put by adverse party in the cross-examination,
ought to be made during the course of the examination of the
witness and before the examination is concluded, but not after
words.  Even one day delay after conclusion of recording of
evidence of the concerned witness is fatal.   Demeanor/hostility of
the witness should be apparent either during the examination-in-
chief or in the cross-examination or further examination and it is
only then the question of permission by the Court to put questions
in cross examination by the party, to his witness can arise. There
must be sufficient material to show that the witness has gone back
on his earlier deposition, Court must scan and weigh the
circumstances properly and should not exercise discretion in
casual or routine manner.  Such assessment may not be possible if
such request is made after closure of the evidence and after some
delay, as in this case.   In B.N.Chobe, the evidence was closed on
16.12.1965, whereas application was filed on 9.1.1966.  Having
regard to the facts of the case and the delay in filing such
application, the decision of the trial Court in rejecting the request
for recalling the witness under
Section 154
, was upheld by this
Court.  The principle laid down therein would also equally apply to
the facts of this case.
19.     Further, in B.N.Chobe, on the conclusion of the evidence of
P.W.3, plaintiff expressed his intention to file an application to
treat P.W.3 as hostile.  This Court held that mere declaration of
intention that he would intend to file an application to treat the
witness as hostile without asking the Court for permission to cross
examine his witness would not attract the provisions of
Section
154
of the Evidence Act.   In the case on hand, even such a request
was not made immediately after the closure of evidence.  After the
closure of evidence of DW.2, two adjournments were sought to
bring further evidence.
20.     Having regard to the above assessment of the facts of the case
and law, though the Court is of the opinion that the reasons
assigned for rejection by the trial Court were erroneous, refusal to
permit the petitioners to call DW.2 to the witness box for cross-
examination is upheld. The points in issue are answered
accordingly,
21.     Accordingly, the Civil Revision Petition is dismissed.
Miscellaneous petitions, if any, pending in this revision petition
shall stand closed.   There shall be no order as to costs.
___________________________     
JUSTICE P.NAVEEN RAO      
Date: 23.06.2017