[Cites
15
, Cited by
2
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Smt. Mahabunnisa Begum vs The State Of Telangana And 2 Others on 25 October, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 30
Author:
B. Siva Sankara Rao
Bench:
B. Siva Sankara Rao
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE Dr. B. SIVA SANKARA RAO        

CRIMINAL PETITION No.7108 of 2017    

25-10-2017 

Smt. Mahabunnisa Begum Petitioner      

The State of Telangana and 2 others .Respondents   

Counsel for the petitioner:Sri J. Ravindra

Counsel for the respondents:Sri Mohd. Muzafferullah Khan
                               Learned Public Prosecutor

<GIST: 
        
>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred
1.      AIR 2016 SC 4369  
2.      AIR 2001 SC 1102  
3.      1999 7 SCC 467  
4.      2015 (2) ALT (Crl.) 216
5.      AIR 1959 SC 375  
6.      Crl.P.No.5674 of 2015 dated 26.06.2015 


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE Dr. B. SIVA SANKARA RAO        
CRIMINAL PETITION No.7108 of 2017    

ORDER:
The petitioner is the defacto complainant in C.C.No.993 of
2104 pending on the file of XX Metropolitan Magistrate at
Malkajgiri, Cyberabad.  The respondent Nos.2 & 3 are the accused
therein among other, A.1 is her husband.  The C.C. is outcome of
crime No.75 of 2010 from her report dated 24.02.2010 in all
against 7 accused among whom A.2 and A.3 are parents in law, the 
3rd respondent to the quash petition is her husbands brothers wife
and the other 2 are sisters of her husband.  The crime registered is
for the offences punishable under
Sections 498-A
IPC and
Sections
3
and
4
of Dowry Prohibition Act and after investigation police final
report filed and taken cognizance by the learned Magistrate for the
said offences.  It is in the pending C.C., the defacto complainant
filed Crl.M.P.No.505 of 2017 under Section 302 read with 24(8)
amended
Cr.P.C
. to permit her to prosecute through private
advocate.  The accused persons opposed the same by filing counter 
and the learned Magistrate dismissed the same by impugned order 
dated 24.07.2017.
2. The contentions impugning the said dismissal order in the
present quash petition are that the said order is contrary to law
and settled proposition and provisions and learned Magistrate
ought to have permitted to prosecute the case and thereby the
dismissal order is liable to be set aside.  The learned counsel for the
defacto complainant/petitioner herein reiterated the said
contentions in seeking to set aside the dismissal order and allow
the same.  Whereas the learned counsel for respondent Nos.2 and 3 
submits that the impugned order is within the judicial discretion
exercised by the trial Court and that no way requires interference
much less by exercising the inherent powers under
section 482
Cr.P.C. and thereby sought for dismissal of the quash petition.
The learned Public Prosecutor representing the 1st respondent-
State sought for deciding the matter on own merits to abide.
3. Heard both sides and perused the material on record.
4. The petition averments in seeking permission reads that
the prosecution examined PWs.1 to 4 and after closure of the
prosecution evidence the accused was examined under
Section 313
Cr.P.C, the accused later filed application under
Section 294
Cr.P.C. to receive some documents which are copies of some private
correspondence.  The learned Public Prosecutor did not file counter
in opposing, consequently the petition was allowed to receive the
documents in defence evidence. Earlier she filed Crl.M.P.No.1961 of
2014 dated 29.09.2014 seeking to engage private advocate to assist
the prosecution and the Court allowed the same only to assist the
learned Additional Public Prosecutor including to file any written
arguments vide order dated 08.09.2014.  It is her averment that the
learned PP is over burdened and is in-charge of 4 courts and
unable to concentrate and it requires detailed cross-examination of
the accused by her with reference to documents filed by accused
also and because the learned PP who is in-charge for several courts
is unable to concentrate, which causes prejudice to her for avoiding
such prejudice and injury to her rights from the inability of learned
PP to attend and concentrate with facts in thoroughness, it
requires to permit her to engage a private advocate to conduct the
prosecution and referred the expression of the Apex Court in
Dhariwal Industries Limited Vs. Kishore Wadhwani and Others
where the Apex Court observed that Court got power to grant
permission to defacto complainant to conduct prosecution
independently as per
Section 302
Cr.P.C. at any stage of the
proceedings and thereby it is just to permit in so seeking.
5. The counter filed by the accused in opposing the same is
with contest that all the allegations are false and the police
mechanically filed the final report without proper investigation and
court taken cognizance and framed the charges.  The documents  
received are relevant for the purpose of case on behalf of accused by
showing of such necessity, the Court considered to exhibit in
defence, earlier the defacto complainant filed application only
under
section 301
Cr.P.C. that was allowed to assist the learned PP
and to file written arguments if any and she cannot now because of
accused filed 19 documents in seeking to receive that was allowed,
seek permission to conduct prosecution through private advocate
even there is learned APP allotted to the Court and what she
contends of the APP is busy and in-charge of  several Courts is not
correct and the decision placed reliance of
Dhariwal
supra has no
application and it is placing reliance by misreading by the defacto
complainant, that too earlier filed only application under
Section
301
Cr.P.C and once allowed again filing another application
under
Section 302
Cr.P.C by the present one to conduct
prosecution through private advocate cannot be allowed.  The
learned PP on the behalf of the State filed counter saying the
petition is not maintainable as earlier permission is accorded to
assist learned APP and file written arguments thereby another
petition to conduct case through private advocate cannot be
allowed.
6. The impugned order of the learned Magistrate is with a
view from the rival contentions supra that
section 24(8)
Cr.P.C
amended proviso is applicable to High Court and District Courts
but not to Magistrate courts.  What
section 302
Cr.P.C. provides
the victim may be permitted to conduct prosecution is discretionary
and earlier permission is accorded to assist learned APP under
Section 301
Cr.P.C. and thereby she cannot step into the
prosecution agency to conduct prosecution independently.
7. The expression of Apex Court in
Dhariwal
supra is on the
scope of
Sections 301
and
302
Cr.P.C and not on the scope Section 
24(8) proviso of the amended
Cr.P.C
. It is observed therein mainly
referring to the earlier Constitution Bench expression of the Apex
Court in JK international Vs. State  on the scope of
section 302
Cr.P.C. of the Magistrate inquiring or trying the case may permit to
conduct prosecution by any person other than police officer below
the rank of Inspector, but no person other than Advocate General
or Government Advocate or a PP or APP shall be entitled to do so
without such permission and no police officer who investigated the
case can be permitted for that purpose and a person conducting
the prosecution may do so either personally or by a pleader and it
also referred earlier expression of the Apex Court in Shivkumar Vs.
Hukum Chanel  wherein also it was held that in the Magistrate
Court anybody other than the police officers below the rank of
Inspector and who conducted investigation can be permitted to
conduct prosecution and once permission is granted to the person
concerned, said person can appoint any private counsel on his
behalf to conduct the prosecution.
In fact referring to JK
international and Shivkumar supra among several other
expressions and on the scope of section 24(8) proviso of the
amended
Cr.P.C
by Act No 5/2009, of the right of victim this Court
in Delta Car Private Limited Vs Sanjeev Shah  held that defacto
complainant  a victim even in bail application can be permitted to
come on record as co-respondent either to assist the court or to
assist the PP as the case may be and even from the wording of
Section 24(8) proviso
Cr.P.C
for such power is available as it
should not be forgotten the factum of victim who is put to injury
physically or mentally suffering being the ultimate loser can not be
prevented from knocking the doors of the Court or participating in
the proceedings, including under the guise of there is a danger by
biased representation from victims; as it is the victim put to pain,
trouble and damage as a result of offence mainly and no amount of
compensation even awarded can bring back the life or limb nor
restore the actual pain or damage or injury suffered and though
under the public policy it is primary duty of the State to conduct
prosecution that is not the be all or end all, much less to prevent
the victim to participate in the proceedings including to conduct
prosecution. In fact the Four Judge Bench expression of the Apex
Court in Leo Roy Frey Vs. State of Punjab  interpreted the word
prosecute used in
Article 20(2)
of Constitution of India and at Para
10 of the expression it was observed that to prosecute means to
seek, to obtain, to enforce or the like by legal process as to
prosecute a right or claim in Court of law and otherwise to pursue
by legal proceeding to redress or for punishment so to proceed
judiciously to accuse of some crime or breach of law or pursue for
redressal or punishment of crime or violation of law before legal
Tribunal to prosecute a man.
8. Thus the word prosecution thereby means proceeding
either by way of indictment or information in criminal Courts to
put the offender upon trial.  The proviso to section 24(8) of the
amended Act No.5 of 2009 of
Cr.P.C
seeks that the Court may 
permit the victim to engage an advocate of his or her choice to
assist the prosecution.  Here to assist the prosecution does not
mean mere assisting the Public Prosecutor under
Section 301
Cr.P.C., but for conducting the prosecution itself by the victim or
defacto complainant in person or through private advocate of his or
her choice either under Section 24(8) proviso or under
Section 302
Cr.P.C. as the case may be, but for to clarify further that
irrespective of what is stated in
Sections 225
&
226
Cr.P.C., even in
a Sessions case, a victim can be permitted under Section 24(8)
proviso of
Cr.P.C
. to conduct prosecution either independently or
in addition to the public prosecutor by putting further questions in
evidence during trial or in any enquiry or other proceedings
including in any application to file counters or objections and
participate.
9. It is in fact therefrom held by this Court in Delta Car case
supra that defacto complainant and victim respectively are entitled
to conduct prosecution and participate in the proceeding including
either personally or by engaging advocate of his/her choice.
10. It is also the need of the hour for the trial Courts to
exercise the power, that too when APPs or Additional PPs or PPs 
not sufficiently available for each one to each Court so that the trial
process cannot be delayed thereby and also for one APP may not  
concentrate effectively by attending regularly cases in more than
one Court that too their duties are not only to conduct prosecution
but also to represent in bail applications, policy custody petitions
and several other pre-trial proceedings during investigation of the
cases.
11. Further relying on the expression even in a subsequent
expression of this Court in Gude Bhavani Sujatha Vs. Muggulla
Srinivasa Rao , it was held that either under
Section 302
Cr.P.C
or even under section 24(8) proviso of amended
Cr.P.C
Magistrate
Court got power to permit the victim or the defacto complainant to
conduct prosecution by participating in the proceeding by
engaging private advocate.
12. Having regard to the above, the order of the learned
Magistrate impugned herein dismissing the application saying
Section 302 Cr.P.C is not applicable to the learned Magistrate is
unsustainable so also in ignoring section 24(8) r/w Section 2(wa)
of the amended Cr.P.C. which further recognizes the right of the
victim and in ignoring the scope of Section 301 Cr.P.C. is only
limited when compared to scope of Section 302 and Section 24(8)
proviso r/w 2(wa) of Cr.P.C. and even permitting once under
Section 301 Cr.P.C. is not a bar for later permitting under Section
302 or 24(8) proviso r/w 2(wa) Cr.P.C.
13. Having regard to the above, the Criminal Petition is
allowed and the dismissal order of the lower Court is set aside and
while conducting the prosecution by the State represented by APP
of the accused witnesses, the defacto complainant-cum-victim is
directed to be permitted by virtue of this order by the learned
Magistrate to engage a private advocate and conduct prosecution
by further examination of any witness in addition to what APP
conducts if any.  Needless to say any permitting of putting of
questions and eliciting of answers will be within the scope of law
and power of the Court including on relevancy and admissibility
within the scope of Section 136 of Indian evidence Act in particular
and on proof with reference to other provisions, including from the
availability of the power under
Section 165
of the Indian Evidence
Act.
Consequently, miscellaneous petitions, if any shall stand
closed.
_____________________________________      
JUSTICE Dr. B.SIVA SANKARA RAO       
Date: 25.10.2017