[Cites
27
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Andhra Pradesh State Financial ... vs K.V.Ramana Murthy And Another on 7 June, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 71
Bench:
Ramesh Ranganathan
,
T.Rajani
HONBLE THE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN AND  THE HONBLE SMT JUSTICE T.RAJANI                      

Writ Appeal Nos.665  of 2017 and batch 

07-06-2017 

Andhra Pradesh State Financial Corporation..Appellant

K.V.Ramana Murthy and another.. Respondents   


Counsel for the appellant: Sri A.K.Jayaprakash Rao

Counsel for respondents: Sri L.Ravi Chander, Senior Counsel

<GIST:  

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Citations:
1.  2017(1) ALT 1
2. (1985) 1 SCC 345 
3. (2004) 6 SCC 186 
4. 1951 AC 737 
5. (1970) 2 ALL.E.R 294
6. 1971 (1) WLR 1062 
7. 1972 (2) WLR 537 
8. (2004) 8 SCC 579 
9. Full Bench Judgment in TRC Nos.274 of 2001 and batch dated 25.11.2011  
10. 2014 Indlaw JHKD 294 
11. (2006) 5 SCC 399 
12. 2013 Indlaw MAD 832  
13. AIR 1981 SC 1786  


THE HONBLE THE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE RAMESH RANGANATHAN                
AND  
THE HONBLE SMT JUSTICE T.RAJANI       
Writ Appeal Nos.665 and 666 of 2017 
COMMON JUDGMENT:
{Per the Honble the Acting Chief Justice Ramesh Ranganathan}       
        These two appeals are preferred by the A.P. State Financial
Corporation (APSFC for short) against the interlocutory orders passed
in W.P.M.P.No.21024 of 2017 in W.P.No.17175 of 2017 dated   
18.05.2017, and in W.P.No.17376 of 2017 dated 26.05.2017, directing
them to continue the respondent-writ petitioners in service beyond the
age of superannuation of 58 years.
Before both the Learned Single Judges, the respondent-writ
petitioners had placed reliance on the order of the Supreme Court in
S.L.P(C).No. 13623 of 2017 dated 27.04.2017 and S.L.P(C).Nos.14033-  
14034 of 2017 dated 05.05.2017 to contend that since the Supreme 
Court had, in the appeal preferred against the order of the Division
Bench of this Court in
G.Rama Mohan Rao vs. The Government of  
Andhra Pradesh
, directed the petitioners therein to be continued in
service, they should also be granted a similar benefit, and be continued
in service till they attain the age of 60 years, notwithstanding the order of
the Division Bench in G.Rama Mohan Rao1.  This submission, urged on  
behalf of the respondent-writ petitioners, found favour with the Learned
Single Judges, and interim orders were passed directing the appellant
herein to continue them in service beyond the age of 58 years.
Sri A.K.Jayaprakash Rao, learned counsel for the appellant, would
submit that reliance placed by the respondent-writ petitioners on the
aforesaid orders of the Supreme Court is misplaced; the petitioners in the
S.L.Ps before the Supreme Court were all employees of the A.P.State
Tribal Welfare Residential Educational Institutions Society (APSTWREIS)
(Gurukulam); the interim order passed by the Supreme Court was 
restricted only to employees of the said Society; such an interim order
does not enure to the benefit of employees of any of the other IX and X
Schedule institutions; even otherwise, the APSFC stands on a different
footing from that of all other IX and X Schedule institutions, in as much
as
Section 70
of the A.P. Reorganisation Act, 2014 (hereinafter called the
2014 Central Act) makes special provisions for the APSFC; the
appellant-Corporation is governed by statutory regulations which
stipulate the age of superannuation, for all employees of the APSFC,  as
58 years; as the process of re-organisation of the APSFC has not yet been
approved by the Central Government, the APSFC continues to remain a  
single entity wherein employees working in both the States are employed;
increase in the age of superannuation, prescribed by the Andhra Pradesh
Public Employment (Regulation of Age of Superannuation) (Amendment)   
Act, 2014 (the 2014 State Act for short), has no application to the
APSFC more so as its employees, working within the territorial limits of
the State of Telangana, are required to retire on attaining the age of
superannuation of 58 years; the subject matter of these writ petitions are
squarely covered by the Division Bench Judgment of this Court in
G.Rama Mohan Rao1; and, in the absence of the said order being 
suspended by the Supreme Court, the Learned Single Judges had erred  
in granting the respondent-writ petitioners the interim relief sought for
by them.
On the other hand Sri L.Ravi Chander, learned Senior Counsel
appearing on behalf of the respondent-writ petitioners, would submit
that the word respondent-institutions, in the interlocutory order of the
Supreme Court dated 05.05.2017, can only mean all IX and X Schedule 
institutions; the said order of the Supreme Court precludes the
respondent-writ petitioners from approaching the Supreme Court; in the
light of the interim order passed by the Supreme Court, the Learned
Single Judges were justified in granting a similar interim relief to the
respondent-writ petitioners; and while a writ appeal may lie against an
ad-interim order, the present cases are not such where this Court should
interfere; the appellant should be relegated to the remedy of filing a
petition to vacate the interim orders passed by the Learned Single
Judges; and, in view of
Sections 39(1)
&(2) and
Section 45
of the State
Financial Corporations Act, 1951 (the 1951 Act for short), the directions
given by the State Government are binding on the APSFC.  Learned 
Senior Counsel would also place reliance on Section 48-A of the 1951
Act.
Both Sri A.K.Jayaprakash Rao, learned counsel for the appellant,
and Sri L.Ravi Chandar, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of
the respondent-writ petitioners, would agree that the petitioners before
the Supreme Court, in whose favour certain interlocutory orders were
passed, were all employees of the A.P. State Tribal Welfare Residential
Educational Institutions Society (APSTWREIS) (Gurukulam) which is a X 
Schedule institution. As reliance was placed by the respondent-writ
petitioners, before the Learned Single Judges, on the interlocutory orders
passed by the Supreme Court, it is necessary to refer, in brief, to the said
orders.
On its jurisdiction being invoked by employees of Gurukulam, the
Supreme Court, in its order in S.L.P(C).No.13623 of 2017 dated
27.04.2017, noted the submission, urged on behalf of the petitioners by
the learned Senior Counsel, that, in Government and Government Aided 
Private Institutions, the retirement age was 60 years; the A.P. State Tribal
Welfare Residential Educational Institutions Society (Gurukulam) was a
wholly owned Government Society; the teachers in the said Society
cannot be discriminated; the High Court had given a period of four weeks
to the Government for taking a decision in the case of those institutions
where the retirement age has not yet been enhanced to 60 years;
whereas, in the case of Gurukulam, a decision had already been taken,
and what was required was only the formal expression of the decision;
and in the above circumstances, until further orders, the superannuation
in the case of those teachers, on attaining the age of 58 years, in the
Gurukulam shall be deferred.
Later some other employees invoked the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court in S.L.P (C).Nos.14033-14034 of 2017 dated 05.05.2017.  
The Supreme Court took note of the submission of the learned counsel,
appearing on behalf of the petitioner-employees therein, that they were
similarly situated persons as those in S.L.P(C). No.13623 of 2017, and
they were also working under the institutions promoted by the State
Government.  In the light of these submissions, the Supreme Court
directed that, until further orders, the superannuation, in the case of
employees on attaining the age of 58 years in the respondent-
institutions, shall be deferred.  The Supreme Court observed that it was
needless to state that, in case any employee had retired only on the
ground of attaining the age of 58 years, such employees shall be re-
instated and continued in service until further orders but, in no case,
beyond 60 years; this order would apply to all similarly situated
employees under the respondent-institutions whether they were the
petitioners before the Supreme Court or not; and, therefore, those
similarly situated persons need not travel to the Supreme Court.
S.L.P(c).Nos.14033-14034 of 2017 were directed to be tagged along with
S.L.P(C).No.13623 of 2017.
It is necessary to note that in G.Rama Mohan Rao1, aggrieved by
which employees of Gurukulam had filed SLP (C) No.13623 of 2017 and  
SLP(C) Nos.14033 & 14034 of 2017 before the Supreme Court, a Division 
Bench of this Court observed:
..It is contended, on behalf of the petitioners, that the new
societies i.e. the A.P. Residential Educational Institutions Society
(A.P.R.E.I.S) and the A.P. Social Welfare Residential Educational
Institutions Society (A.P.S.W.R.E.I.S) for the State of Andhra Pradesh,
and new societies i.e the Telangana Residential Educational
Institutional Society and the Telangana Social Welfare Residential
Educational Institutions Society for the State of Telangana, were
brought into existence after registration under the
Societies
Registration Act
; once new societies are formed, with the area of
operations restricted to the territorial limits of the Successor State of
Andhra Pradesh which are, presently, fully funded by the Successor
State of Andhra Pradesh, the Government of Andhra Pradesh is 
estopped from contending that it has no legislative competence in
respect of these Societies; even without taking into consideration the
spirit of Section 78A of the AP Education Act, 1982 and without
considering any of the special circumstances which led to extension of
the benefit of the enhanced age of superannuation to employees of
APREIS, APSWREIS and APTWREIS, G.O.Ms.No.112 was issued by the          
Government purporting to cover even these societies; the schools run
by the APREIS and the APSWREIS are spread across the entire    
erstwhile composite State of Andhra Pradesh unlike other Institutions/
Centres mentioned in Schedule-X that are exclusively located in either
one of the successor States of Andhra Pradesh or Telangana; though 
the 2014 Central Act does not provide for formation of new Societies for
the respective successor States, the division of the then existing
Societies was proposed and approved by the erstwhile Government of 
Andhra Pradesh, vide respective Government Orders issued in this
regard prior to the Appointed Day itself, taking recourse to the
provisions of the
Societies Registration Act
; APREIS, APSWREIS and  
APTWREIS are provided 100% grant-in-aid by the State Government;  
employees working in private educational institutions have been
extended the benefit of the enhanced age of superannuation under
Section 78(A) i.e., 60 years; denying similar treatment to institutions
belonging to the above societies, which answer the definition of
Section
18
of the A.P. Education Act, results in discrimination, and is in
violation of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India; the
Andhra Pradesh
Education Act, 1982
contemplates taking over all schools run by these
Societies, if necessary in public interest, through respective
Government Orders; and the benefit of the enhanced age of
superannuation should be extended to employees of the Societies, more 
particularly in the light of the provisions of the
Andhra Pradesh
Education Act
.
Section 78-A
of the Andhra Pradesh Education Act, 1982 was
amended by the Andhra Pradesh Education (Amendment) Act, 2014     
(Act No.1 of 2015) which was published in the A.P. Gazette on
03.01.2015 and
Section 78-A (1)
was substituted.  The amended
Section 78-A(1)
and its proviso stipulate that every teacher or member
of the non-teaching staff, employed in any aided private educational
institution, shall retire from service on the afternoon of the last day of
the month in which he attains the age of sixty years.  Under the proviso
thereto, every teacher or member of the non-teaching staff employed in
any aided private educational institution, who retired from service on
attaining the age of fifty eight years on and from 02.06.2014, till the
date of publication of the Andhra Pradesh Education (Amendment) Act,
2014, shall be re-inducted into the service/post as such with effect
from the date of publication of the said Act.  Under the second proviso
thereto, the said interregnum period, from 02.06.2014 till the date of
publication of the Andhra Pradesh Education (Amendment) Act, 2014, 
shall be treated in such manner as may be prescribed.    In the
explanation to
Section 78-A
the words fifty eight years or sixty years as
the case may be were substituted by the words sixty years.
While employees working in Government educational
institutions, and employees in aided private educational
institutions, have been extended the benefit of the age of
retirement as 60 years, employees of societies, wholly owned by
the Government and which run these educational institutions,
continue to retire from service on their attaining the age of 58
years.  As employees of these Societies are not government
employees, the provisions of the 1984 Act, as amended by the
2014 State Act, are not applicable to them.  As employees working
in aided private educational institutions have now been extended
the benefit of the enhanced age of superannuation of 60 years, in
terms of the amended
Section 78-A
of the A.P. Education Act, the
State Government is obligated to consider whether or not a similar
benefit should be extended to the employees of its wholly owned
Societies which also administer educational institutions in the
State of Andhra Pradesh.  That does not, however, justify a
mandamus being issued to the State Government to enhance the   
age of superannuation of employees in all these societies to 60
years as these are matters for the State Government to decide
taking various factors into consideration.  In the exercise of its
jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India, this
Court would not undertake the exercise of determining the age of
superannuation of employees of these societies on a comparative
evaluation of their functions vis--vis employees of Government
educational institutions or employees of aided private educational
institutions.  Suffice it to hold that, as employees working in
Government educational institutions and employees working in
aided private educational institutions in the present State of A.P
have been extended the benefit of the age of superannuation of 60
years, the State Government shall consider the claim of employees,
of its wholly owned Societies running educational institutions, for
being extended the similar benefit of the enhanced age of
superannuation of 60 years...
(emphasis supplied.
After noting that employees of Government educational institutions
and employees of aided private educational institutions were continued
till 60 years, and employees of the aforesaid educational societies were
not, the  Division Bench, in G. Ramamohan Rao1, had directed the State
Government to consider the claim of employees, of its wholly owned
societies running educational institutions, for being extended a similar
benefit of the enhanced age of superannuation of 60 years, holding that it
would not issue a mandamus under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
India in this regard.
The Supreme Court in its order dated 05.05.2007, after noting that
similarly placed employees in Government educational institutions and
in Government aided private educational institutions were continued till
60 years, extended the benefit, of continuing in service till the age of 60
years, to teachers of the aforementioned societies also.  Thereafter, the
Supreme Court extended the interim order to all employees of the
aforesaid educational societies irrespective of whether or not they had
approached the Supreme Court.
The petitioners in the S.L.Ps before the Supreme Court are all,
admittedly, employees of the A.P. State Tribal Welfare Residential
Educational Institutions Society (APSTWREIS) (Gurukulam).  As noted  
hereinabove, employees of the A.P. Residential Educational Institutions
Society (APREIS) and the A.P. Social Welfare Residential Educational
Institutions Society (APSWREIS) and the A.P. State Tribal Welfare
Residential Educational Institutions Society (APSTWREIS) had invoked 
the jurisdiction of this Court, basing their claim mainly on
Section 78A
of
the A.P. Education Act, 1982, which extended the age of superannuation
of 60 years even to the employees working in private aided educational
institutions.   The cases of the employees of all these three societies was
considered together by the Division Bench, in G.Rama Mohan Rao1, and  
the aforesaid observations were made in the context of all the three
societies.
Observations of Courts are neither to be read as Euclids theorems
nor as provisions of a Statute, and that too taken out of their context.
(
Amar Nath Om Prakash v. State of Punjab
;
CCE v. Alnoori Tobacco 
Products
; London Graving Dock Co. Ltd. v. Horton ; Home Office v.
Dorset Yacht Co. ; Shepherd Homes Ltd. v. Sandham (No.2) ; British
Railways Board v. Herrington ).  The observations must be read in the
context in which they appear to have been stated.  Judges interpret the
words of statutes. Their words are not to be interpreted as statutes.
Circumstantial flexibility, one additional or different fact may make a
world of difference between conclusions in two cases.
(
Bharat Petroleum
Corporation Ltd v. N.R. Vairamani
; The State of A.P. v. M/s Seven
Hills Constructions ). The words respondent-institutions, in the
interim order of the Supreme Court, can only be understood as the
respondents in Special Leave Petitions.  Even if the institutions are held
to have been referred therein in the plurality, they would only mean the
APREIS and APSWREIS, besides APTWREIS, and not employees of other        
public sector undertakings who were, admittedly, not the petitioners in
the SLPs filed before the Supreme Court. The interim relief granted by the
Supreme Court to employees of the aforesaid educational societies
cannot, therefore, be extended to employees of other ninth and tenth
schedule institutions.
Even otherwise, the APSFC stands on a different footing as
compared to the others institutions listed in Schedules-IX and X to the
2014 Central Act.
Section 70
of the 2014 Central Act is a special
provision relating to the APSFC.
Section 70(1)
requires APSFC, on and
from the appointed day, to continue to function in those areas in respect
of which it was functioning immediately before that day, subject to the
provisions of
Section 70
and to such directions as may be issued by the
Central Government.
Section 70(3)
provides that, notwithstanding
anything contained in
Section 70(1)
and (2), the Board of Directors of the
APSFC may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, and 
shall, if so required by the Central Government, convene at any time,
after the appointed day, a meeting for the consideration of a scheme for
the reconstitution or re-organization or dissolution, as the case may be,
of the Corporation, including proposals regarding the formation of new
Corporations, and the transfer thereto of the assets, rights and liabilities
of the existing Corporation.
Section 70(3)
further provides that if such a
scheme is approved at the general meeting, by a resolution passed by a
majority of the shareholders, the scheme shall be submitted to the
Central Government for its sanction.
Section 70(4)
stipulates that, if the
scheme is sanctioned by the Central Government either with or without
modifications, the Central Government shall certify the scheme and,
upon such certification, the scheme shall, notwithstanding anything to
the contrary contained in any law for the time being in force, be binding
on the Corporations affected by the scheme as well as the shareholders
and creditors.
Section 70(6)
stipulates that nothing in
Sections 70(1)
&
(2) shall be construed as preventing the Governments of Andhra Pradesh
and Telangana from constituting, at any time on or after the appointed
day, a State Financial Corporation for that State under the
State
Financial Corporations Act, 1951
.
As is evident from
Section 70(3)
, the Board of Directors of the
APSFC are empowered to formulate a scheme, among others, for the   
dissolution of the APSFC, for formation of a new corporation, and the
transfer of the assets, rights and liabilities of the existing Corporation to
the newly formed Corporations.
Section 70
contains various safeguards
and requires such a scheme not only to be approved by a majority of the
shareholders of the Corporation, but also for its approval by the Central
Government.  It is only after the Central Government sanctions the
scheme, approved by the Board of Directors of the APSFC, can the APSFC   
be said to have been reconstituted or reorganised.  It is only thereafter
would two separate State Financial Corporations come into existence -
one for each of the States of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh, and it is
only then can the employees of the APSFC be finally allotted between the
State Financial Corporations of both the States.  It is not in dispute that
the Central Government has not sanctioned the scheme presented to it by
the APSFC; and, consequently, the said Corporation cannot be said to
have been reconstituted or re-organised in accordance with the provisions
of
Section 70
of the 2014 Central Act.
Section 3
of the 1951 Act relates to establishment of State
Financial Corporations and, under Sub-section (1) thereof, the State
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a
Financial Corporation for the State under such name as may be specified
in the notification.
Section 3(2)
of the 1951 Act stipulates that the
Financial Corporation shall be a body corporate by the name notified
under sub-section (1), having perpetual succession and a common seal,
with power, subject to the provisions of the Act, to acquire, hold and
dispose of property and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
Section
48
of the 1951 Act confers power on the Board of Directors of the State
Financial Corporation to make Regulations and, under sub-section (1)
thereof, the Board, after consultation with the Small Industries Bank and
with the previous sanction of the State Government, may make
regulations, not inconsistent with the 1951 Act and the rules made
thereunder, to provide for all matters which are necessary or expedient
for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the 1951 Act.
In the exercise of the powers conferred under
Section 48
of the Act,
the Board of Directors of the APSFC framed the A.P. State Financial
Corporation Staff Regulations, 1960.
Regulation 20
thereof relates to
superannuation and retirement and, thereunder, every employee shall
retire on attaining the age of 58 years provided that the Board may,
where it appears desirable in the interests of the Corporation, extend the
period of service of such an employee for such a period as it may
determine so, however, that, in no case, shall an employee serve beyond
the age of 60 years. These Staff Regulations, which are statutory in
character, continue to remain in force as on date, and every employee of
the APSFC is bound, in accordance with
Regulation 20
thereof, to retire
on attaining the age of superannuation of 58 years.  The discretion
conferred on the Board, to extend the period of service of employees, is in
specific cases and where it appears desirable to the Board in the interest
of the Corporation.  The statutory regulations prescribe the age of
superannuation, for all employees of the APSFC, as 58 years and, in
terms thereof, the respondent-writ petitioners were retired from service on
attaining the age of superannuation of 58 years.
Section 39(1)
of the 1951 Act requires the Board of the APSFC, in
the discharge of its functions, to be guided by such instructions on
questions of policy as may be given to it by the State Government in
consultation with, and after obtaining the advice of, the Small Industries
Bank. It is not shown to us that instructions, if any, issued by the
Government of A.P. to the Board of Directors of APSFC were after
consultation with, and after obtaining the advice of, the Small Industries
Bank.   Under
Section 39(2)
of the 1951 Act, if any dispute arises
between the State Government and the Board as to whether a question is 
or is not a question of policy, the decision of the State Government shall
be final. Even if it is presumed that the instructions issued by the
Government of A.P to the APSFC is on a question of policy, the Board of
Directors of APSFC are bound by such instructions only if they were
issued by the State Government after consultation with, and after
obtaining the advice of, the Small Industries Bank. Reliance placed on
Sections 39(1)
and (2) of the 1951 Act is, therefore, of no avail.
Section 45
of the 1951 Act relates to liquidation of Financial
Corporations and, thereunder, no provision of law relating to the winding
up of companies or corporations shall apply to the Financial Corporation,
and the Financial Corporation shall not be placed in liquidation, save by
order of the State Government and in such manner as it may direct. The
APSFC, existing as on the appointed date ie. 02.06.2014, was formed by
the erstwhile State of Andhra Pradesh, and its bifurcation between both
the States of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh is governed by the
provisions of the 2014 Central Act which, as noted hereinabove,
prescribes in
Section 70
thereof a detailed process for the reconstitution
or reorganisation of the APSFC.   It is nobodys case that the APSFC is
sought to be wound up, in which event alone would
Section 45
of the
1951 Act obligate the State Government to pass an order in this regard.
Section 48A
of the Act requires every Regulation made under
Section 48
to be laid before the State Legislature.  No plea that the 1960 Regulations
were not placed before the State Legislature has even been taken in the
affidavits filed in support of the writ petitions.
The only other contention, which necessitates examination, is that
this Court should not entertain an appeal against an ad-interim order,
and the appellant should be relegated to the remedy of filing a petition to
vacate stay.   On the question of maintainability of an appeal, under
Clause 15 of the Letters Patent, it is relevant to note that, in
Bharat
Cooking Coal Limited v. Dev PL(JV), Dhanbad
, the challenge before
the Division Bench of the Jharkhand High Court was to an interim order
passed by the Learned Single Judge granting status quo.
On an
objection being raised to the maintainability of the appeal, the Division
Bench of the Jharkhand High Court, relying on the judgment of the
Supreme Court in
Midnapore Peoples Co-op. Bank Limited v. Chunilal 
Nanda
, held that it is only against routine order or orders which may
cause some inconvenience or some prejudice to a party, but which do not
finally determine the rights and obligations of the parties, that a Letters
Patent Appeal is not maintainable; and the interlocutory order under
appeal, which caused gross injustice to a party and which deprived him
of a valuable right, should be treated as a judgment within the meaning
of the Letters Patent.
In
Union of India v. Government of Tamilnadu
, the question
which arose for consideration before the Division bench of the Madras
High Court was whether an appeal, under Clause 15 of the Letters
Patent, would lie against an interim order of injunction passed by the
learned Single Judge.
Relying on the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Shah Babulal Khimji v. Jayaben D.Kania
, the Division bench of the
Madras High Court observed:
..In reply, the learned Advocate General submitted that the
policy decision taken by the Central Government can be challenged if it is
in violation of the provisions of the Constitution, statutory enactment and
against public interest or does not sub-serve the public interest. He
further submitted that under the dual pricing policy, there is no
restriction imposed on any of the bulk consumers to get high speed diesel
from the retail outlets operated by the petro dealers, and the effect of the
impugned order passed by the learned single Judge is only to provide a
single place for the supply of high speed diesel required for operating the
buses. According to the learned Advocate General, if the impugned order
had not been passed, the buses of the State Transport Undertakings
would have to go to the retail outlets for getting their tanks filled up, for
which the State would have paid only concessional rate payable to high
speed diesel, as there is no such prohibition in the policy. Thus, neither
the Union of India nor the oil marketing companies are suffering any
losses on account of the interim injunction granted by the learned single
Judge. He further submitted that the interim injunction was granted
only till 12th April, 2013, and before the learned single Judge, learned
standing counsel appearing for the Union of India did not raise any
such plea, as has been raised in the present appeal. It is always open
to the Union of India to move an application for vacating the exparte
order of interim injunction passed by the learned single Judge, and all
the pleas raised herein by the appellant shall be considered by the
learned single Judge at the time of passing final orders on the
application filed for grant of interim relief or finally deciding the
main writ petition. He further submitted that it is the usual practice of
this Court not to assign any reasons while granting interim relief by
passing an order of interim injunction at the initial stage, which practice
has been followed by the learned single Judge in this case also. According
to him, after exchange of affidavits, this Court considers all the pleas
raised by the respective parties while passing order on the miscellaneous
application, and therefore, the impugned order passed by the learned
single Judge does not call for any interference.
Mr.M.Ravindran, learned senior counsel appearing for the Oil
Marketing Companies, submitted that the learned single Judge ought
not to have granted an order of temporary injunction where a policy
decision is under challenge. The effect of grant of temporary injunction
has a cascading effect and the oil marketing companies are put to loss of
approximately Rs.424 crores daily, as other bulk consumers have also
approached the other High Courts for grant of interim injunction. He has
relied upon a decision of the Honble Supreme Court in
Bhavesh D.Parish
vs. Union of India
reported in 2000 (5) SCC 471.
In the present case, the interim order passed by the learned single Judge,
though does not finally decide a issue, but materially and directly affects the
appellant, as the Oil Marketing Companies, which supply diesel to the first
respondent herein, would be required to supply diesel at the rate at which they are
supplying to the retail consumers thereby causing daily loss to the Oil Marketing
Companies running into several crores of rupees, and thus burdening the appellant
in grant of subsidy. The view, which we are taking, is in lines with the principles
laid down by
the Honble Supreme Court in
Shah Babulal Khimji vs. Jayaben
D.Kania and another
(supra) (which has been followed by the Honble Supreme 
Court in the case of
Midnapore Peoples  Coop.Bank Ltd.
, (supra), wherein the
Honble Supreme Court, while considering the scope of Clause 15 of the Letters
Patent had held that every interlocutory order cannot be regarded as a judgment,
but only those orders would be judgments, which decide matters of moment or
affect vital and valuable rights of the parties and which work serious injustice to
the party concerned.
Thus, the appeal preferred under Clause 15 of the Letters
Patent by the appellant is maintainable..  (emphasis supplied)
      In W.A.No.1080 of 2016 and W.P.No.27840 of 2016 dated 
27.10.2016, and in W.A.Nos.231 and 232 of 2017 dated 01.03.2017,  
Division Benches of this Court, following the judgments of the Supreme
Court in Shah Babulal Khimji13, and Midnapore Peoples Co-op. Bank  
Limited11, the judgment of the Division Bench of the Madras High Court
in
Union of India v. Government of Tamilnadu12
, and the judgment of
the Division bench of the Jharkhand High Court in Bharat Cooking
Coal Limited10, held that interlocutory orders, which cause grave
injustice to a party and deprive him of a valuable right, should be treated
as a judgment within the meaning of Clause 15 of the Letters Patent;
even if an order does not finally decide an issue, but materially and
directly affects the appellant, it can be regarded as a judgment under
Clause 15 of the Letters Patent; and a decision on matters of moment,
which affect vital and valuable rights of the parties and which work
serious injustice to the party concerned, can always be questioned in
proceedings under Clause 15 of the Letters Patent.
The law
laid down, in
the aforesaid judgments, is that, even where
the interim order passed by the learned Single Judge does not finally
decide an issue, but materially and directly affects the appellant, it can be
regarded as a judgment under Clause 15 of the Letters Patent as it affects
the vital and valuable rights of the parties and causes serious injustice to
them.   The order under appeal, whereby the appellants have been
directed to continue the respondent-writ petitioners beyond the
statutorily prescribed age of superannuation of 58 years, would
undoubtedly cause substantial prejudice to the appellant as they are
required to continue, in the services of the Corporation, even those
employees who have retired from service. We see no reason, therefore, to
non-suit the appellant on this ground.
Viewed from any angle, the Learned Single Judges have erred in
granting the ad interim orders under appeal relying on an interim order
of the Supreme Court which has no application to Corporations/
Companies/Societies, in the Ninth and Tenth Schedules of the 2014
Central Act, other than APREIS, APSWREIS and APSTWREIS.  The orders      
under appeal are, accordingly, set aside and the Writ Appeals are allowed.
Miscellaneous Petitions pending, if any, shall stand disposed of.  There
shall be no order as to costs.
________________________________     
(RAMESH RANGANATHAN, ACJ)        
__________________________    
(T.RAJANI, J)
07th June, 2017