[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
The Chief General Manager, Hpcl, ... vs The General Secretary, Hpcl Employees ... on 27 March, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 52
Author:
M.Seetharama Murti
Bench:
M.Seetharama Murti
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.SEETHARAMA MURTI          

Writ Petition No.4686 of 2006

27-03-2017 

The Chief General Manager, HPCL, Visakha Refinery, Visakhapatnam .. Petitioner (s)

The General Secretary, HPCL Employees Union (Visakha Refinery) (CITU), Visakhapatnam.. Respondent (s)   

Counsel for petitioner: Sri Dr.P.B.Vijaya Kumar

Counsel for respondents : Sri A.Satya Prasad, learned senior counsel representing Sri Prakash Buddarapu

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred:

2011 (5) ALD 41 
1997 (6) ALD 530 (db)
1976 Andhra Weekly Reporter 406# 1975 Law Suit (AP) 36   

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE M.SEETHARAMA MURTI           

Writ Petition No.4686 of 2006

ORDER:
This writ petition, under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India, by the
Chief General Manager, HPCL, Visakha Refinery (hereinafter, writ
petitioner) filed against the General Secretary, HPCL Employees Union
(Visakha Refinery) (CITU) (hereinafter, respondent) is directed against the
Award, dated 09.05.2005, of the learned Chairman, Central Government 
Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Hyderabad, passed in I.D.No.170 of
2002.
2.      I have heard the submissions of Sri Dr.P.B.Vijay Kumar, learned
counsel appearing for the writ petitioner and of Sri A.Satya Prasad, learned
senior counsel representing Sri Prakash Buddarapu, learned counsel
appearing for the respondent.
3.      The facts, which are necessary to be stated as a prelude to this order,
in brief, are as follows:
A major fire accident took place in the premises of HPCL, Visakha
Refinery, on 14.9.1997.  In the said accident, many lives were lost and
extensive damage in crores of rupees occurred to the units of the Refinery
and its buildings.  Houses in the vicinity were also damaged due to
explosions.  The unit was shut down, for disaster management, i.e., for
repairs, restructuring and installation of new machinery in place of the
damaged ones etcetera.  Production in the refinery was halted upto
February, 1998.  About 189 employees approached the writ petitioner, on
01.12.1997, and asked for provision of basic amenities such as toilets, water,
canteen, shelter etcetera.  According to the said employees instead of
listening to their grievances and providing the amenities, the management of
the Refinery displayed, a letter, dated 01.12.1997, on the Notice Board,
deducting the wages of the said employees for 9 days (1+8 days). According
to the writ petitioner, the said workmen of the Refinery proceeded to the
Project office instead of reporting to duty at their respective work places and
that they crowded at the reception and corridor restricting the inward and
outward movements of the officers and also held in confinement, the
Executive Director, Visakha Refinery, General Manager (Projects), General
Manager (Operations) and other officials and that they interrupted the works
to be attended to by the officers and other staff of the Refinery and they
resorted to certain sudden illegal acts by not attending at their respective
work places and that their concerted acts amounted to illegal strike.  Thus,
both parties justify their respective stands and actions.  The respondent
Union approached the Assistant Commissioner of Labour (C) and submitted  
the grievances of the said employees.  Conciliation proceedings were called
for.  The management of the writ petitioner did not attend the conciliation
proceedings.  On failure of the conciliation, the matter was referred to the
Ministry of Labour, Government of India.  The respondent filed a claim
application.  The same was resisted by the writ petitioner.  The learned
Chairman of the Tribunal answered the reference as follows:
Accordingly, the reference is answered as follows:
The deduction of one-day wage of 109 employees is legal and
justified.  However, the 109 workmen are entitled for 8 days
wages which was deducted.  In the circumstances the 
Respondent is directed to pay the 109 workmen 8 days wages  
out of the 9 days wages deducted within 30 days from the date
of publication of this award failing which they are entitled for
the said amount with 6 percent simple interest per annum.
Aggrieved thereof, the writ petitioner is before this Court.
4.      The case of the writ petitioner and the submissions made on its
behalf, in brief, are as follows:
On 14.09.1997, a fire holocaust occurred in the premises of the
Refinery.  Seventeen buildings including Administrative building, Canteen,
Dispensary, Laboratory, Yard Office, Training Institute, LPG Control Room,
Workshop, CISF building at the main entrance and some other non- 
production buildings were destroyed.  No production unit building was
destroyed in the fire accident.  Therefore, the services of all the employees
were required for utilization and they were required to be present every day
as per revised production schedule.  The writ petitioner did not lay-off its
workmen.  A letter, dated 17.9.1997, was addressed to the General Secretary
of Petroleum Workers Union, the recognized Union.  The writ petitioner
notified the reporting hours and place etcetera, with effect from 18.9.1997.
The said notification was issued after due discussions with the said
recognized union.  All the employees were paid salaries during the said
period as if they were present and worked.  The respondent Union was
registered only on 02.07.1998 and the said union was not in existence when
the fire broke out destroying the buildings etcetera.  On 01.12.1997, around
150 workmen of the Refinery gathered at the gate of the Additional Tankage
Project area of the Refinery and they were addressed by the President of the
Petroleum Workers Union; and thereafter, they proceeded to the Project
office instead of reporting to duty at their respective work places.  They
crowded at the reception and corridor restricting the inward and outward
movements of the officers and also held in confinement, the Executive
Director, Visakha Refinery, General Manager (Projects), General Manager
(Operations) and other officials.  They interrupted the works to be attended
to by the officers and other staff of the Refinery.  Thus, they resorted to
sudden illegal acts by not attending to work at their respective work places.
Their concerted acts amounted to illegal strike.  By a letter, dated
01.12.1997, it was brought to the notice of the employees that petroleum
industry is a controlled industry and comes under the
Essential Services
Maintenance Act
(ESMA) and they were advised to report to duties
immediately and were informed that failing which appropriate action besides
deduction of days wages and penal deduction of 8 days wages will be made.
The employees did not call off the illegal strike.  As there was no proper
cause shown by the employees for resorting to strike, the management of
the writ petitioner ordered for deduction of 9 days wages from the salaries of
all the employees, who were involved in it.  Against the said order, the
respondent Union, which came into existence on 02.07.1998, made an  
application before the Assistant Commissioner of Labour (Central),
Visakhapatnam, on 25.11.1999 after a lapse of almost two years.  A detailed
counter was filed by the writ petitioner.  After the conciliation failed, by the
Award impugned, the Labour Court erroneously held that deduction of one
day wage of 109 employees is legal and justified and that the workmen are
entitled for 8 days wages which were deducted, and further directed the writ
petitioner to pay to the 109 workmen, 8 days wages out of the 9 days wages
deducted within 30 days from the date of publication of the award and failing
which the workmen are entitled for the said amount with interest at 6% per
annum simple.  The said Award is illegal, arbitrary and unsustainable.  The
(109) employees involved in the illegal strike do not hail from the affected
areas.  They caused inconvenience to superiors and other co-workers in
performing their duties.  The Tribunal also held that the workers behaved
indecently and used abusive language against the superiors.  The Tribunal
ought to have noted that the respondent union has no proper cause for
calling for a strike and that the industrial dispute raised by the union is
devoid of merit.  When the Tribunal itself recorded findings favourable to the
writ petitioner, it ought to have held that the punishment imposed on the
employees is correct and ought not to have interfered with the penalty
imposed and ought not to have passed the impugned award and ought to  
have dismissed the I.D., by passing a Nil award.
5.      Per contra, the case of the respondent-Union and the submissions
made on its behalf, in brief, are as follows:
A fire holocaust occurred in Visakha Refinery is true.  A large number
of buildings, that is, seventeen buildings and some other non-production
buildings were destroyed in the fire as stated by the petitioner is correct.  No
production unit was destroyed in the fire accident is incorrect.  Fluidized
Catalytic Cracking Unit, Power Plant-I, De-mineralized Water Plant and LPG
spheres were also destroyed.  The said units are production units.  The
respondent union was registered on 02.07.1998 is true.  Only hundred (100)
workmen gathered on that day at Additional Tankage Project Area and 
thereafter proceeded to the Project Office to represent their grievance.  They
proceeded to the Project Office instead of reporting to duty at their
respective work places is incorrect, because there is no specific job assigned
to the workmen during that period.  The allegations that the said workmen
restricted inward and outward movements of the officers and also held in
confinement, the Executive Director, Visakha Refinery, General Manager
(Projects), General Manager (Operations) and interrupted the works to be
attended to by the said officers and other staff are absolutely incorrect.  The
workmen never resorted to any illegal strike.  The writ petitioner placed a
letter, dated 01.12.1997, on the Notice Board, at the evening hours, stating
that the Petroleum Industry is a controlled industry and also falls under the
Essential Services Maintenance Act
and advised the employees to report to
duties immediately and that appropriate action will be taken besides
deduction of days wages and penal deduction of eight days wages will be
made on failure to attend to duties.  This action of the writ petitioner is
totally uncalled for, as the workmen did not abstain from work and did not
call for or participated in any strike.  The allegations that the employees did
not call off the illegal strike and there is no proper cause shown by the
employees for resorting to strike and, therefore, the petitioner management
has rightly ordered deduction of nine days wages from the salaries of the
employees, who were involved in such strike, are absolutely false.  There is
no strike either legal or illegal in which the employees participated.  In the
affidavit, it is stated that about 150 workmen gathered, whereas action was
initiated against 189 employees.  Thus, the averments in the case of the
petitioner are self contradictory and show that there is no basis for the
action taken by the management of the Refinery.  Such action cannot be
taken without following due process of law.  A representation, dated
07.10.1998, was made to pay the wages.  As there was no response from the  
management, inspite of persuasions, an application was submitted to the
Assistant Commissioner of Labour (Central), Visakhapantam.  Instead of
implementing the award, the writ petition is filed with untenable grounds.
The writ petition may be dismissed.
6.      I have noted the pleadings and the submissions made in line with the
pleadings of the parties.  I have perused the material record.
7.      Coming to the first contention that the reference is bad, the learned
counsel for the writ petitioner fairly conceded that in view of the settled
legal position, the said contention is not pressed and need not be decided.
8.      Now, the simple questions that fall for determination are:
(i)     Whether the action of the management of the writ
petitioner/Refinery against 109 workmen in deducting 9
(1+8) days wages in the wage period of December 1997 is 
legal or justified?
(ii)    To what relief?
9.      In the light of the facts and submissions, I have examined, in detail,
the factual matrix and the evidence borne out by the record.  A major fire
incident/accident occurred in the Refinery, on 14.9.1997, and that many lives
were lost and extensive damage in crores of rupees occurred to the units of
the Refinery and its buildings; and, that houses in the vicinity were also
damaged due to explosions is undisputed and admitted.  The unit was shut
down, for disaster management.  Production in the refinery was halted upto
February, 1998.  The writ petitioner did not lay-off its workmen and paid full
salary for the period, even though there is no production for six months on
account of shut-down.  As admittedly some of the production units were not
affected and as the services of all the employees were required for
utilization, they were required to be present every day as per revised
production schedule.  The writ petitioner notified the reporting hours and
place of reporting etcetera with effect from 18.9.1997.  The said notification
was issued after due discussions with the recognized union.  There is a
recognized Visakha Refinery Workers Union and in that union there are 750
to 800 workers, is not in dispute.  The respondent Union was not in existence
as on the date of the fire accident, that is, 14.9.1997, and it was registered
on 02.07.1998.  On 01.12.1997, a number of employees/workmen gathered at   
the gate of Additional Tankage Project area of the Refinery and later, they
proceeded to the Project Office is not in dispute.
9.1     The workmen of the respondent Union say that they went there to
express their grievances and that they demanded basic amenities such as 
toilets, water, canteen, shelter etcetera, which the management failed to
provide, and that the officers of the management of the Refinery refused to
listen to their grievances and harassed the employees/workmen who 
gathered there and who resorted to peaceful protest and that the
management illegally and unjustly deducted nine days wages.  They also
contend that the allegation of the management that they resorted to illegal
strike and that they proceeded to project office without attending to the
respective works at the respective workplaces in the unaffected areas is
incorrect and that in-fact no jobs were assigned to the said workmen.
9.2     Per contra, the writ petitioner submits that the employees, whose
wages were deducted, crowded at the reception and corridor and restricted
the inward and outward movements of the officers and also held in
confinement, the Executive Director, Visakha Refinery, General Manager
(Projects), General Manager (Operations) and other officials and that the
workmen interrupted the works to be attended to by the officers and other
staff of the Refinery and that the said workmen resorted to sudden illegal
acts by not attending to works at their respective work places, which were
unaffected, and that their concerted acts amounted to illegal strike.  It is
undisputed that by a letter, dated 01.12.1997, it was brought to the notice of
the employees that petroleum industry is a controlled industry and comes
under the
Essential Services Maintenance Act
and that they were advised to
report to duties immediately and that they were also informed that on failure
to attend to work, appropriate action will be taken and that penal deduction
of 8 days wages will be made besides deduction of days wages.   It is the
further case of the writ petitioner that the said employees did not call off the
illegal strike and that as no proper cause was shown by the employees for
resorting to strike, the management of the writ petitioner ordered for
deduction of 9 days wages from the salaries of all the employees, who were
involved in it.
10.     It is an admitted fact and is borne out by the evidence brought on
record before the Tribunal that 109 workers, whose wages were deducted
were working in the unaffected units and that in those units there are Dining
Halls, drinking water and toilet facilities.   There was no canteen facility as
the canteen was completely destroyed.  It is also undisputed that a contract
was given to an outsider to supply food inside the refinery premises to the
willing workers; and a sum of Rs.30/- was originally fixed to be paid to those
workers who are not using the said facility.  The said amount was later
increased to Rs.40/-.  It is also brought out in the evidence of the witness
examined on behalf of the Union that, on 01.12.1997, many workers went to
the office of the Executive Director and they were informed that the meeting
should not be disturbed and that they have not taken permission.  But, the
said witness stated that he does not know as to what had happened as he did
not accompany the other workmen.  Another witness who was examined as    
WW2 stated that the workers went to demand shelter, water, toilets and
canteen facilities; but, the officers of the petitioner Refinery refused to listen
to their grievances.  But, he agreed that there are drinking water and toilet
facilities in the unaffected areas.  He admitted that about 100 employees
went to the office of the Executive Director and they all gathered at the
office of the Executive Director during the working hours.  The witnesses
examined on behalf of the management supported the case of the 
management.   The learned Chairman of the Tribunal also refereed to the
evidence of MW3, Md. Moiz Ali Tankiwala, which reflects the following
aspects:  All the amenities were provided to the workers working in the
unaffected areas.  Despite the said fact, on 01.12.1997, when he was sitting
in a meeting with the other officers, the workmen gheraoed the office for 5
hours preventing exit and entry including his exit.  They used abusive
language, raised slogans and threatened for about 5 hours.  Immediately
thereafter, Ex.M12, notice dated 01.12.1997, was displayed.  Hence, 9 days
wages of these 109 workmen were deducted.  In the cross examination, he 
denied that his office was not gheraoed nor any offensive language was used.
He denied that under the standing orders, they are not supposed to deduct
the wages of the workmen.  He admitted that it is correct to say that they
had not issued individual notices to the workers and that a general notice
was put on all notice boards and that it is true that 8 days wages were
deducted as penalty and that it is not correct to say that under Standing
Orders 25, no penalty can be imposed.
11.     The learned Chairman of the Tribunal also observed in the Award as
follows:
It is quite possible that for some grievances or apprehending
grievances the mob shouted and misbehaved.  I am of the
opinion that the deduction of one-day wage is amply justified
but deducting days wages of 109 workmen could not have been  
done without giving them any opportunity to explain.
Thus, not only the evidence brought on record but also the findings
recorded by the Chairman of the Tribunal, would lay bare that 109 employees
gathered at the Project Office instead of reporting to duty though they are
not working in affected areas and their units are provided with all facilities
like water and toilet facilities except canteen facility.  It is also borne out by
record that as the canteen was destroyed, food was outsourced from an
outside supplier for being supplied in the refinery premises and that workers,
who were not availing that facility were initially paid Rs.30/- and later the
same was increased to Rs.40/-.  The evidence also lays bare that despite the
said facts and the fact that large number of members of the recognized union
did not raise any dispute, these (109) workmen gheraoed the office and
prevented exit and entry including that of MW3 and used abusive language,
shouted slogans and misbehaved with superiors.  Even though the Refinery
was largely affected by a major fire accident, many lives were lost and
properties not only of the refinery but also that of the others were gutted in
fire and were damaged due to explosions, the Management did not layoff its
workmen and paid full wages for the period during which the refinery was
shut down for disaster management.  The writ petitioner indeed informed
the workers that they were required to be present every day as per revised
production schedule and also notified the places of work, as some of the
production units were unaffected.   The recognized Union with large number
of workers as its members, very rightly, did not raise any objection and
acted in a responsible manner.  However, these 109 workmen were not 
mindful of the grave situation, which the refinery in which they are working
was facing.  Ignoring the welfare of the Refinery, which is providing them an
opportunity to work & serve and eke out livelihood, they resorted to, to say
the least, irresponsible acts at a time when they were expected to extend
utmost co-operation to the management.  The workmen gheraoed the office 
and threatened and used abusive language against the officers and behaved
indecently at the project office, being quite aware that all the facilities are
available in the unaffected areas and that an alternate canteen facility was
also provided by outsourcing, since the canteen was destroyed in fire.  In the
scenario of changed organizational culture from the traditional pattern of
hierarchical structure to participative management and empowerment, the
workers are required to be responsible and mindful of the fact that the health
of the Industry/Factory, which contributes to National Wealth and provides
their bread and butter, is paramount and that the workers cannot adopt an
attitude like come what may we want our pound of flesh.  In the facts and
circumstances of the case there is no justification for illegal acts and the
concerted acts of striking work at a crucial period when the refinerys
position was precarious.  In fact the Tribunal also found that the acts
indulged in and the strike resorted to by the workmen deserved wage cut,
but, held that the deduction of one-day wage of 109 employees is legal and
justified, but, assigned no reasons for coming to a conclusion that penalty of 8 day
wage cut need not be imposed.  Having regard to the grim and gloomy situation
in the refinery and the untimely unwarranted acts of the workmen, this Court
finds that there is no place for mercy or generosity.  On the above analysis,
this Court is of the considered view that the management was justified in
imposing penalty of deducting (1+8) days wages.
12.     Before concluding, it is necessary to refer to the facts and ratios in the
following decisions:
Singareni Collieries Works Union, Kothagudem, Khammam District v.
Singareni Collieries Co. Ltd, Kothagudem, Khammam District  was relied
upon by the learned counsel for the respondent Union.  The facts of the case
show that a recognized Trade Union issued a notice for one day token strike
along with employees of Public Sector Undertakings, Banks etc., for redressal
of demands of working classes in the entire Country.  The main ground of
attack was that the authority who issued the order has no jurisdiction to
invoke
Section 9(2)
of Payment of Wages Act, 1936, which deals with
deduction of wages for absence from duty.   This Court held that the said
Section has no application to the facts of that case as the employees were
admittedly drawing wages more than Rs.6,500/- per month.  In the case on
hand, no such contentions are raised on behalf of the workman.
Further, to
meet this contention, the learned counsel for the writ petitioner-refinery
relied upon the decision in
Divisional Secretary, APSRTC, National Mazdoor
Union, Sangareddy v. APSRTC
.  In this decision, the facts show that 69
conductors and 71 drivers who are members of the Union went on strike for
two days in protest against an assault of employees of a Depot by some
antisocial elements and, therefore, an order was passed for recovering eight
days wages from the said conductors and drivers as their explanation was
found unsatisfactory.  This Court, while holding that the Corporation was
justified in imposing penal wage cut for 8 days, as stoppage of work caused
great inconvenience to the public, held inter alia that even if provisions of
Payments of Wages Act
have no application to the members of the  
petitioners-Union, still the authority, who passed the order, imposing penal
wage cut has got right and jurisdiction to impose such penalty.
Turning to
the decision in
D.Balaiah v. The Secretary, Indian Detonators Ltd,
Kukatpalli, Hyderabad
relied upon by learned counsel for both the sides, it
is to be noted that the issue is as to whether a notice ought to have been
given to each individual employee before the penal wage cut was imposed.
In this cited decision, the facts disclose that a general notice was displayed
on the notice board but, individual notices were not given to the workmen.
This Court held that while it is true that notice should be given, it is not
necessary it should be given in any particular form nor is it necessary that it
should be sent individually.  This Court also held that a general notice is
sufficient so long as the workers concerned were made aware of the
proposed deduction.  In the case on hand, a general notice was displayed on
all the notice boards is undisputed.
The decision in
The Depot Manager,
APSRTC, Khammam v. The Addl
. Industrial Tribunal-cum-Addl. Labour   
Court, Hyderabad & Another  is relied upon by the learned counsel for the
petitioner in support of the contention that in a case of this nature where
the issue is not one of termination or dismissal or removal of the employee,
the Tribunal has no jurisdiction under Section 11-A to alter the penal wage
cut as
Section 11-A
of the I.D. Act, 1947, has no application.
The decision in
Zonal Manager, Bank of India, Chennai v. General Secretary, Bank of India
Staff Union, Chennai & Another  is relied upon in support of the contention
that when once the Tribunal found that the acts of the workmen are illegal
and that their acts striking work are also illegal, the Tribunal ought to have
held that the management is justified in imposing penal wage cut for 8 days
also besides deduction of wage for one day, in view of the facts and
circumstances peculiar to the case.
13.     On careful analysis of the legal position obtaining and the finding
supported by reasons recorded supra, this Court finds that the Tribunal ought
not to have interfered with the penalty of 8 days penal wage cut, as such
imposition is just and fair in the facts and circumstances of the case and as
the management of the writ petitioner-refinery company cannot be faulted
for doing so.   Viewed thus, this Court finds that the writ petition shall
succeed.
14.     In the result, the Writ Petition is allowed and the Award impugned of
the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Hyderabad in
I.D.No.170 of 2002 insofar as it set aside the penal wage cut of eight days and
directed the management to refund the same to the workmen with interest,
if not paid within the stipulated time, is set aside and the said penalty is
restored.
No costs.
Pending miscellaneous petitions, if any, shall stand closed.
_____________________    
M. SEETHARAMA MURTI, J      
27th March, 2017