[Cites
8
, Cited by
3
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Prahallad Rathod vs K.Vittal And Another on 27 February, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 43
Author:
T.Rajani
Bench:
T.Rajani
THE HONBLE JUSTICE SMT. T.RAJANI      

MACMA. No.287 of 2008   

27-02-2017 

Prahallad Rathod ...Appellant

K.Vittal and another ...Respondents

Counsel for Appellant: Sri K.M.Mahender Reddy 

Counsel for 1st Respondent: Sri S.Surender Reddy 
Counsel for 2nd Respondent: Sri K.Krishna Kumar Reddy  

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    


? Cases referred
1. (2008) 7 Supreme Court Cases 613  
2. LAWS (KAR)-2011-10-9   
3. 2006 Law Suit (Guj) 550
4. (2009) 6 SCC 121 
5. 2007 ACJ 830 

THE HONOURABLE JUSTICE SMT. T.RAJANI         

MACMA. No.287 of 2008   

JUDGMENT:
The appellant herein is the petitioner in O.P. No.633 of 2004 on the
file of the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal (District Judge),
at Nizamabad. He preferred the present appeal assailing the award of the
Tribunal, importantly on the ground that the Tribunal failed to award the
medical expenditure as incurred by the appellant, which is to an extent
of Rs.23,920/- on the ground that as per the provision of 163-
A of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
(for short the Act) only Rs.15,000/- can be
awarded towards medical expenses.  The appeal is also on the grounds 
that the Tribunal did not consider the fracture injuries and did not
appreciate that huge expenditure would be incurred for the treatment of
the same.
In the foremost, the observation of the Tribunal that under
Section
163-A
of the Act medical expenses only to an extent of Rs.15,000/- can
be granted, can be met with, with the help of rulings furnished by the
counsel for the appellant and the other rulings. The ruling in the case of
SAPNA Vs. UNITED INDIA INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED AND             
ANOTHER
is to the effect that deviation from Second Schedule can be
made in appropriate cases.  The said aspect is dealt with under para 11
of the judgment, which runs as follows:
It is now a well-settled
principle of law that the payment of
compensation on the basis of
structured formula as provided for
under the Second Schedule should  
not ordinarily be deviated from.
Section 168
of the Motor Vehicles
Act lays down the guidelines for
determination of the amount of
compensation in terms of
Section
166
thereof.  Deviation from the
structured formula, however, as has
been held by this Court may be
resorted to in exceptional cases.
Furthermore, the amount of
compensation should be just and 
fair in the facts and circumstances
of each case.
Ruling of the Honble High Court of Karnataka reported in the case
of REGIONAL MANAGER NEW INDIA ASSURANCE CO.LTD Vs. VIJAY              
BALSHIRAM WALUNJ  relied upon the first mentioned ruling in order to 
deviate from the
Second Schedule of the Act
.
The ruling of Honble High
Court of Gujarath reported in the case of
JAVATIBEN BHUPSINHIJI Vs.  
NARPATSINH BHUPSINHJI
is also relied upon.  Apart from the above   
rulings, the following rulings also can be taken support of with regard to
the second schedule being applied to the cases beyond the income of
Rs.40,000/-.
The decision of the Supreme Court in
SARLA VERMA Vs.   
DELHI TRANSPORT CORPORATION
explains the same in the following       
words:
The Second Schedule contains a Table prescribing the
compensation to be awarded with reference to the age and income 
of the deceased. It specifies the amount of compensation to be
awarded with reference to the annual income range of Rs.3,000/-
to Rs.40,000/-. It does not specify the quantum of compensation
in case the annual income of the deceased is more than
Rs.40,000/-. But it provides the multiplier to be applied with
reference to the age of the deceased. The table starts with a
multiplier of 15, goes upto 18, and then steadily comes down to 5.
It also provides the standard deduction as one-third on account of
personal living expenses of the deceased. Therefore, where the
application is under
section 163A
of the Act, it is possible to
calculate the compensation on the structured formula basis, even
where compensation is not specified with reference to the annual
income of the deceased, or is more than Rs.40,000/-.
The decision of this High Court in
P. ANNAMMA v. 
N.N.A.PATRICK
can further be taken help of, wherein it was held in
paras 21 and 22 as hereunder:-
21. Therefore, it is clear that the multiplier method is the
legally well established method in granting compensation and
the Table given under the Second Schedule appended to the Act 
can be taken for guidance for applying the multiplier for claim
petitions under
section 166
of the Act, even for those whose
annual income exceeds Rs.40,000/- per annum. Further, a 
learned single Judge of this court in
K. Matura Bai v. A. Shiva
Nageswar Rao
, 2006 ACJ 1341= 2004 (4) ALT 304, considering   
the structured formula given in Bhagwan Das case, 1987 ACJ 
1052 (AP), in the light of various judgments of the Supreme
Court and the High Courts, held as here under:
18Be it the case of assessment of compensation under
section 163-A or assessment of the compensation under
section 
166
, the multiplier in the structured formula as given in the
Second Schedule appended to the Act being the statutory 
provision shall have to be followed. A fortiori the multiplier Table
as given in Bhagwan Das case, 1987 ACJ 1052 (AP), having not  
been updated so far, there is no option for the Tribunal except to
follow the statutory multiplier as given in the structured formula.
Deviation is permissible from these multipliers as held by the
judgments of the Apex Court only in proper cases and under
compelling circumstances. The legal position thus appears to be
obvious from the concatenation of the cases discussed
hereinabove.
The above legal position makes it clear that a deviation from the
Second Schedule can be made in appropriate cases.  Law got settled by 
now, that the Second schedule is a guiding calculation and not a formula
which intends to deprive the victims of motor accidents of their legitimate
compensation, by import of a construction that the figures specified
therein prescribe an upper limit.
In this case, the appellant sustained five fracture injuries all of
which are on the legs and in that background the medical expenditure
incurred by the appellant, which is Rs.23,920/- seems to be very
reasonable.  Hence, the said amount can be awarded towards medical  
expenditure incurred by the appellant.
With regard to the amounts awarded under the other heads this
Court finds that they are also on the low side.  The Tribunal awarded
Rs.5,000/- towards each of the fracture injuries, which can be enhanced
to Rs.10,000/- towards each of the fracture injuries.
The Tribunal did not award compensation under any other heads.  In the
light of the fact that the appellant sustained fractures to both the legs,
this Court is of the opinion that he might have required special
transportation while going to and from the hospitals.  Hence Rs.15,000/-
can be awarded under the head of transportation and incidental
expenditure.
The Tribunal discussed the evidence of P.W.2, who spoke about
the disability sustained by the appellant but did not give any finding on
the said aspect.  A reading of the evidence of the P.W.2 would show that
the nature of the disability is not stated by him.  He only stated that the
appellant sustained permanent partial disability, without specifying the
nature of such disability.  However, the evidence of P.W.3, which is that
of the Doctor, who treated the appellant shows that a surgery was
conducted for removal of fixture and that the injuries were not
completely healed by the date of discharge.  He also stated that
movements of both the knees of the appellant are restricted due to which
he cannot sit, squat and walk without crutches.  The disability certificate
is marked as C-3 and C-4 is the discharge card issued by Sri Guru
Govind Singh Ji Memorial Hospital, Nanded.  Hence, it can be said that
the nature of the disability as stated by P.W.3 would result in loss of
future amenities of life for which Rs.30,000/- can be awarded.
The income of the appellant as stated by him is Rs.3,000/- per month
which he was earning by selling vegetables.  The said income seems to be
not exaggerated and can be accepted.  The nature of the injuries would
suggest that the appellant might have been on treatment rest and
recovery for a total period of three months and considering the same
Rs.9,000/- is awarded under the head of loss of earnings during the
period of treatment rest and recovery.  The disability would also result in
loss of future income to the appellant if his nature of work involves
sitting, squatting and walking.  P.W.1 did not elaborate on the nature of
his work except simply stating that he sells vegetables.  Hence, this
Court is unable to assess the loss of future income in exact terms.
But having accepted that there is some disability which resulted in
restriction of movements of both knees, this Court is inclined to award a
lumpsum amount towards loss of future income which can be  
Rs.50,000/-.  Hence, in all an amount of Rs.1,77,920/- rounded off to
Rs.1,78,000/- is awarded.  To that extent the appeal is allowed and the
award of the Tribunal stands modified.
In view of the above, this appeal is partly allowed.  As a sequel
miscellaneous petitions, if any, stands closed.  There shall be no order as
to costs.
________________________    
JUSTICE SMT. T.RAJANI    
Date: 27-02-2017