[Cites
14
, Cited by
5
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Aravind Choudhary vs 1.The State Of Telangana Through Its ... on 8 March, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 42
Bench:
Suresh Kumar Kait
,
U Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT AND THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U DURGA PRASAD RAO                 

WRIT PETITION No.31313 OF 2016    

08-03-2017 

Aravind Choudhary  Petitioner 


1.The State of Telangana through its Principal Secretary Home Department,
Secretariat, Hyderabad and another. ...Respondents

Counsel for the Petitioner: Sri B. Vijaysen Reddy

Counsel for the Respondents: G.P. for Home 

<Gist :

>Head Note : 

? Cases referred :1. (2007) 15 Supreme Court Cases 208 
                  2. (2015) 12 Supreme Court Cases 127
                  3. (1975) 3 SCC 198
                  4. (1972) 2 SCC 550
                  5. (1973) 4 SCC 76
                  6. (1973) 1 SCC 301
                  7. (1999) 8 SCC 473
                  8. (1974) 4 SCC 573

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT          
AND  
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO           

WRIT PETITION No.31313 OF 2016    
JUDGMENT:
(Oral)  
            (Per the Honble Sri Justice Suresh Kumar Kait)
        Vide the present petition, the petitioner has challenged the
order dated 27.08.2016 whereby the detenu has been detained in
prison by the second respondent, as being illegal, arbitrary and
violative of
Articles 21
and
22
of the Constitution of India and
consequently the second respondent be directed to release the
detenu forthwith.
2.  Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner
submits that while passing the detention order, the second
respondent has taken into consideration 6 crimes, which are
mentioned in detention order dated 27.08.2016 and in the grounds
of detention.  The detenu was taken into custody on 10.07.2016.
3.  He further submits that in first 4 cases, bail has already
been granted by the concerned Court.  However, the detenu has
not furnished the surety.  Therefore, there is no likelihood of
releasing the detenu from the judicial custody.  He further submits
that in 5th case i.e., in Crime No.181 of 2016 for the offence
punishable under
Sections 406
,
420
and
506
IPC read with 34 of
IPC
registered at Ramgopalapeta Police station, Hyderabad, the
detenu has moved a bail application, however, till date, no order
has been passed in the said application.  Moreover, in 6th case i.e.,
in Crime No.206 of 2016 for the offence punishable under
Sections
420
and
406
IPC, registered at Bahadurpura Police Station,
Hyderabad, the detenu has not even moved a bail petition.
Therefore, there was no imminent possibility of the detenu to come
out from the judicial custody.  Thus, there was no ground before
the second respondent to detain the detenu by passing order dated
27.08.2016.
4.  To strengthen his argument, learned counsel for the
petitioner has relied upon a decision reported in Sayed Abulala
Versus Union of India and others , whereby the Honble
Supreme Court held that proper application of mind on the part of
the detaining authority must, therefore, be borne out from the order
of detention. In cases where the detenu is in custody, the detaining
authority not only should be aware of the said fact but there should
be some material on record to justify that he may be released on bail
having regard to the restriction imposed on the power of the court as
it may not arrive at the conclusion that there existed reasonable
grounds for believing that he was not guilty of such offence and that
the detenu could not indulge in similar activity, if set a liberty.
It is further held that the detaining authority furthermore is
required to bear in mind that there exists a distinction between the
likelihood of his moving an application for bail and likelihood to
be released on bail.  While arriving at his subjective satisfaction
that there is likelihood of the detenu being released on bail,
recording of the satisfaction on the part of the detaining authority
that merely because an application for grant of bail had been filed,
would not be enough.
5.  Learned counsel further relied upon a decision of Division
Bench of this Court decided in W.P.No.23400 of 2015 dated 
21.12.2015,  whereby held that the inference, of imminent
possibility of the detenu coming out on bail, should be drawn from
the material available on record.  In the absence of such material on
record, the mere ipse dixit  of the detaining authority is not sufficient
to sustain the order of detention.  Before passing a detention order,
in respect of the person, who is in jail, the concerned authority must
reach the satisfaction on the basis of cogent material, that there is a
real possibility of the detenu being released on bail and further, if
released on bail, the material on record reveals that he will indulge
in prejudicial activities necessitating his preventive detention.
6.  Learned counsel further submits that the detaining
authority has referred 6 cases, however in 4 cases, the bail order
has been passed by the concerned Court, however the detenu has  
not furnished the surety.  Therefore, there is no likelihood of
detenu being released.  In 6th case i.e., in Crime No.206 of 2016 as
noted above, the detenu has not even moved an application,
therefore there is no possibility of his being released from the
judicial custody.
7.  Learned counsel for the petitioner further submits that
the detenu is in the business from the last 10 years and he has
taken lot of garments in the course of business from the different
merchants.  Therefore, the activities of the detenu cannot be
termed as detrimental to the public order.  In the aforesaid cases,
there are only six complainants, therefore there is no detriment to
the public order.
8.  On the other hand, learned Government Pleader
appearing on behalf of the respondents submits that the detenu
has been indulging in a series of cheating cases in the limits of
Hyderabad City Police Commissionerate and also in the limits of
different police stations of other States.  Hence, he is a Goonda
as defined in Clause (g) of Section 2 of the Telangana Prevention of
Dangerous Activities of Boot-Leggers Decoits, Drug-Offenders,
Goondas, Immoral Traffic Offenders and Land Grabbers Act, 1986.
9.  Learned Government Pleader further submits, in the
detention order, it is specifically mentioned that as the detenu has
already moved bail petitions in Crime Nos.160 of 2016, 277 of
2014 and 279 of 2014 registered with Charminar Police Station, in
Crime No.36 of 2015 of Central Crime Station, the Detective
Department, Hyderabad and in Crime No.181 of 2016 registered 
with Ramgopalapet police station and bail was granted to the
detenu by the concerned Magistrate in first 4 cases mentioned
above, there is every likelihood of bail being granted to him in
Crime No.181 of 2016 of Ramgopalpet police station also.
10.  It is further argued that the detenu may also move a bail
petition in Crime No.206 of 2016 of Bhadurpura police station and
there is every likelihood of his release from judicial custody soon.
On his release, there is likelihood of his being indulging in similar
prejudicial activities which are detrimental to public order, unless
he is prevented from doing so by appropriate order of detention.
11.  Heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioner and learned Government Pleader appearing on behalf of
the respondents.
12.
In case of State of Tamil Nadu through Secretary to
Government, Public (Law and Order-F) and another Versus 
Nabila and another , the Honble Supreme Court referred the
Constitution Bench judgment in
Haradhan Saha v. State of West 
Bengal
, wherein held that the power of preventive detention is
qualitatively different from punitive detention.  The power of
preventive detention is a precautionary power exercised in
reasonable anticipation. It may or may not relate to an offence.  It is
not a parallel proceeding.  It does not overlap with prosecution event
if it relies on certain facts for which prosecution may be launched or
may have been launched.  An order of preventive detention may be
made with or without prosecution.  An order of preventive detention
may be made with or without prosecution and in anticipation or after
discharge or even acquittal.  The pendency of prosecution is no bar
to an order of preventive detention.
13.  The Honble Supreme Court in the above cited cases has
further referred the decision rendered in
Borjahan Gorey v. State
of West Bengal
,
Ashim Kumar Ray v. State of West Bengal
,
Abdul Aziz v. District Magistrate
,
Burdwan  and Ahamed
Nassar v. State of Tamil Nadu
.
14.  In afore cited cases, the Honble Supreme Court has laid
down the principles to be followed as to whether detention order is
valid or not.
15.  The decision reported in
Biram Chand v. State of U.P.
,
which is rendered by Division Bench of the Supreme Court, is
contrary to the decisions of three judges.  The principles laid down
are as inter alia,  First, merely because a detenu is liable to be tried
in a criminal Court for the commission of a criminal offence or to be
proceeded against for preventing him from committing offences dealt
with in Chapter VIII of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
would not by
itself debar the Government from taking action for his detention
under the Act.  Second, the fact that the Police arrests a person and
later on enlarges him on bail and initiates steps to prosecute him
under the
Code of Criminal Procedure
and even lodges a first
information report may be no bar against the District Magistrate
issuing an order under the preventive detention.  Third, where the
concerned person is actually in jail custody at the time when an
order of detention is passed against him and is not likely to be
released for a fair length of time, it may be possible to contend that
there could be no satisfaction on the part of the detaining authority
as to the likelihood of such a person indulging in activities which
would jeopardize the security of the State or the public order.
Fourth, the mere circumstance that a detention order is passed
during the pendency of the prosecution will not violate the order.
Fifth, the order of detention is a precautionary measure.  It is based
on a reasonable prognosis of the future behaviour of a person based
on his past conduct in the light of the surrounding circumstances.
16.  The detaining authority is duty bound to come to his
own satisfaction based on the contents of the bail application
keeping in mind the circumstances that there is likelihood of the
detenu being released on bail.  Merely because no bail application
was then pending is no premise to hold that there was no
likelihood of his being released on bail.  The words likely to be
released connote chances of being bailed out, in case there be
pending bail application or in case if it is moved in future is
decided.  The word likely shows it can be either way.  So without
taking any such risk in the facts or circumstances of each case,
the type of crime to be dealt with under criminal law, including
contents of bail application, each separately and compositely, all
would constitute to be relevant material for arriving at any
conclusion.
17.  In the present case, all 6 cases are registered against
detenu for the offences punishable under
Sections 406
,
420
IPC.
Some of the cases as mentioned in the detention order, case under
Section 506
,
120-B
read with 34
IPC
is also registered in addition
to offences under
Section 406
&
420
IPC.
18.  It is an admitted case that in first 4 cases, the detenu
has already been released on bail, however, deliberately the detenu
has not furnished the sureties.  If the detenu come forward and
furnish sureties, certainly he would be released on bail.
19.  In 5th case i.e., in Crime No.181 of 2016, a bail
application has been moved by the detenu on 09.08.2016.   But we
failed to understand as to why order has not been passed by the
concerned Court till date.  It seems that the detenu has not
pursued that application due to the reasons best known to him.
The said application may have been dismissed in default or the
concerned Court is adjourning the matter at request of the detenu.
20.  As the 6th case is concerned i.e., Crime No.206 of 2016,
admittedly the detenu has not moved bail application, but the said
case is also registered for the offence punishable under
Section
406
and
420
IPC.  In other 4 cases of a similar nature, the detenu
has already been released on bail.  Therefore, there is every
likelihood of releasing him on bail in 5th & 6th crime also.
21.  The detenu and his associates including his wife have
hatched criminal conspiracy to cheat the innocent textile business
people in Hyderabad and other cities in India, under the guise of
textile business, to make easy money and to lead lavish life.  As per
criminal conspiracy hatched by the detenu and his associates, they
approached the textile business people in Hyderabad and other
cities misrepresenting that the detenu and his associates are
agents for textile business people of Chennai and used to supply
textile material on commission basis.   On some occasions, the
detenu posed as an owner of textile shop in Chennai of Tamil Nadu
State.  The innocent proprietors of textile shops fell prey to detenu
inducement to supply textile material including synthetic and
cotton sarees on credit basis.  After receiving the material at
cheaper rates they absconded and, thereby the detenu and his
associates have cheated the textile businessmen to the amounts 
exceeding of Rs.13 crores.
22.  If the detenu is released on bail, there is every likelihood
of his indulging in similar prejudicial activities, which are
detrimental to public order.  The detenu and his associates
cheated so many textile businessmen as noted above, due to which 
there is  a fear and panic in the business community at large that
they may cheat others.  Thus, they disturbed the public order.
Therefore, keeping their activities into, the detention order dated
27.8.2016 has been passed, so that, the detenu would not be able
to indulge in similar activities.
23.  We have perused the order and grounds of the
detention.  We are satisfied that the detaining authority after
considering the activities and crimes, registered against the detenu
and his associates, has applied its mind and thereafter passed
detention order.
24.  In view of the above discussion, we find no perversity or
illegality in the detention order dated 27.08.2016 passed by the
second respondent.
25.  Finding no merit in the instant petition and the same is
accordingly dismissed.  There shall be no order as to costs.
Miscellaneous Petitions, if any pending, shall stand closed.
___________________________________      
JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT.
__________________________________      
JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO.
Date : 08-03-2017