[Cites
11
, Cited by
2
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
The Superintendent Engineer, ... vs P. Ramaiah And Three Others on 30 August, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 33
Bench:
Suresh Kumar Kait
,
U.Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT AND  THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO                      

C.M.A.No.293 of 2007 

30-08-2017 

The Superintendent Engineer, Irrigation Circle, Eluru.  Appellant 

P. Ramaiah  and three others. . Respondents  

Counsel for Appellant :  A.G.P attached to the office of
                          AG (AP)
Counsel for Respondent No.1  : Sri V. Prasad Rao

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1) (1993) 2 SCC 507 
2) 2016 (6) ALT 7 (SC)
3) AIR 2007 SC 509 
4) 2014 (4) Arb.L.R.1 (SC)
5)(1973) ILR 1 Mad 364 = MANU/TN/0736/1972    
6) AIR 1967 SC 1753   =   MANU/SC/0050/1967   
7) AIR 1980 SC 1285 

HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT         
AND  
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U.DURGA PRASAD RAO          
C.M.A No.293 of 2007 
JUDGMENT:
(Per Honble Sri Justice U.Durga Prasad Rao)   
        Challenge in this CMA is the order dated 11.07.2006 in
Arbitration O.P.No.885 of 2004 whereunder the learned Principal
District Judge, West Godavari at Eluru dismissed the petition filed by
the petitioner under Sections 34 and 2(a)(ii) and b(i) of the
Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996
(for short
Arbitration Act
).
2)      The petitioners case is thus:
a)      The contract for the execution of construction of
Madavayyapalem outfall Sluice at KM 74.00 of Vashista Godavari 
Right Bank in West Godavari District, was awarded to the 1st
respondent vide S.Es Agreement No.SE/99-2000 dated 18.08.1999.
The work was funded by World Bank. As per the terms of Agreement,  
the work has to be completed within 8 months i.e. by 17.04.2000 and it
was a time bound program. During the execution of the work, some 
deviations took place as per the suggestions of the World Bank team.
The 1st respondent applied for extension of time and the same was
extended from time to time. The first extension was dated 30.06.2001
without Liquidated Damages (LD); second extension was dated  
30.09.2001 without LD and third and final extension was granted on
31.01.2012 without LD. The 1st respondent specifically agreed to
complete the work for the amount mentioned in the first agreement
dated 18.08.1999 and supplemental agreement dated 18.12.2000.  In 
fact the 1st respondent completed the work and received the final bill on
28.08.2002 without any protest and contract came to an end by
28.02.2002 itself. The 1st respondent has also signed the release and
discharge certificate and voluntarily accepted the payment made by the
Government towards full settlement of the claim without any protest.
He has also taken away the EMD and security deposit and also 
encashed the bank guarantees. Having thus received the final bill, the 1st
respondent is estopped from making any further claims.
b)      While-so, the O.F. was originally conceived with casurina piles
100 MM dia, estimated accordingly and included in the bill of quantities
and tenders settled. During September, 1999 designing consultants (CE
S (I)) of World Bank have inspected the site and given some
suggestions regarding foundation treatment with RCC piles, increasing
of length of RCC barrel and reduction in the length of D/S wings and
some design aspects. Accordingly, revised drawings were prepared in
the office of Chief Engineer, Central Design Organization and
communicated.  Basing on the revised drawings, the 1st respondent
quoted his rates for Rs.189 lakhs.  However, the Chief Engineer, Major
Irrigation approved for 400 MM and 300 MM dia at the rate of
Rs.683.30 RMT and Rs.384.60 RMT respectively.
c)      With regard to fixation of rates for drilling of bore holes of 400
MM dia, there arose a dispute between department and contractor. As 
per the terms of contract, the contractor referred the matter to Technical
Expert by letter dated 04.01.2001 and requested to adopt the rate
derived from the data approved in the case of some other work
(Nakkala outfall sluice). The Technical Expert by letter dated
18.12.2002 arrived at a decision in favour of the 1st respondent by
recommending the rate derived from the rate adopted in respect of
Nakkala outfall sluice. However, the Superintending Engineer,
Irrigation Circle, Eluru informed 1st respondent vide letter dated
10.01.2003 that the rate recommended by the Technical Expert was not 
acceptable to the department and therefore, as per the contract, the
matter need to be referred to arbitration and instructed the 1st
respondent to suggest his arbitrator. The 1st respondent suggested Dr.
P.Karunakar Rao as his arbitrator as per clause 25-3(A) of the contract.
Then, the Institute of Engineers of India, Hyderabad appointed Sri
A.S.Murthy, Chief Engineer (Retd.) as presiding arbitrator who in turn
appointed Sri S.M.A.A. Jinnaah, Chief Engineer (Retd.) as third
arbitrator. The Arbitral Tribunal issued a notice to the petitioner to
attend the proceedings. Thereupon, the petitioner reported to the
Arbitral Tribunal that it had no pecuniary jurisdiction to entertain the
matter in view of G.O.Ms.No.20 I&CAD (PW) dated 31.01.1989 which   
ordains that the claim beyond Rs.50,000/- shall be decided by a Civil
Court of competent jurisdiction by way of regular suit and not by way
of arbitration. However, the Arbitral Tribunal without considering the
objection raised by the petitioner passed an award dated 28.09.2004 in
favour of 1st respondent for Rs.20.78 lakhs in respect of several claims
made by him which were not made before the Technical Expert.
d)      Aggrieved, the petitioner filed Arbitration O.P.No.885 of 2004 in
the Court of District Judge, West Godavari at Eluru challenging the
arbitration proceedings. The Tribunal, however, erroneously dismissed
the OP without considering the valid points raised by the petitioner and
confirmed the award of the Technical Expert.
Hence the CMA.
3)      Heard arguments of learned Assistant Government Pleader  
attached to the office of Advocate General (AP) and Sri V.Prasad Rao,
learned counsel for 1st respondent.
4a)     Severely castigating the order of Court below, learned AGP firstly
argued that Arbitral Tribunal committed grave mistake in holding that
the dispute could be referred to arbitration as per the terms of contract,
despite the G.O.Ms.No.20 I&CAD(PW) Department dated 31.01.1989     
held that when the claim exceeds Rs.50,000/- the matter could be settled
only by a Civil Court of competent jurisdiction and not by arbitration.
Though the GO was not incorporated in the contract, still its efficacy
and applicability, being the executive order of the Government, should
not have been ignored by the Tribunal and Court. He argued, the
existence of GO and its operational sphere over the subject contract
was brought to the notice of Arbitral Tribunal sufficiently ahead of
commencement of proceedings. Despite, the Arbitral Tribunal set
petitionerdepartment ex-parte and passed the award.  Hence, the 
award is void and nonest in the eye of law for lack of jurisdiction. He
placed reliance on the judgments of the Apex Court reported in
Hiranjilal Shrilal Goenka vs. Jasjit Singh
and
Velugubanti Haribabu
vs. Parvathini Narasimha Rao
.
b)      Nextly, he would argue assuming the Arbitral Tribunal had
jurisdiction, still its award suffers from vice of exceeding the scope of
arbitral reference. In expatiation, learned AGP would submit, the 1st
respondent approached the Technical Expert only on one issue i.e. with
regard to the rate variation in drilling bore holes and the Technical
Expert fixed the rate at Rs.937/-.  Except it, neither the 1st respondent
put-forth nor the Technical Expert did admit and adjudicate any other
claim as is evident from the Technical Experts report dated
18.12.2002. Further, the 1st respondent did not express any grievance
against the report of the Technical Expert. It was only the Department
being aggrieved by the report, wrote a letter to 1st respondent informing
that it was proposing to move the arbitration and asked the 1st
respondent to choose his arbitrator, though arbitration is against the
spirit of G.O.Ms.No.20. In that back drop, the only issue before the
Arbitral Tribunal could be whether the rate arrived at by the Technical
Expert was technically correct. Having gone through the Technical
Experts report, Arbitral Tribunal should have well understood the
scope of the reference and ought to have decided accordingly, despite
the absence of petitioner before them. However, surprisingly the 1st
respondent put-froth many more claims before the Tribunal and the
Tribunal coolily entertained them and adjudicated and passed award.
Learned AGP would thus submit the award in respect of claims 1 to 3
is totally uncalled for and beyond the scope of arbitration. He would
submit that the 1st respondent specifically agreed to complete the work
for the amounts mentioned in the first agreement dated 18.08.1999 and
supplemental agreement dated 18.12.2000 and accordingly completed   
the work and received the final bill on 28.02.2002 without any
insinuation of protest and thus, the contract came to an end by
28.02.2002 itself.  Further, he also signed the release and discharge
certificate and accepted the payments made by the Government towards  
full settlement of his claim.  He also received his EMD and Security
Deposit and encashed bank guarantees. In that view, putting forth
additional claims before Arbitral Tribunal would tantamount to
novation on the part of 1st respondent and admitting those claims and
adjudicating would amount to acting beyond the scope of arbitration
and thus the award is hit by
Section 34(2)(iv)
of Arbitration Act.
In this
context, he relied upon the judgment of the Apex Court in
Ramnath
International Construction vs. Union of India
.
c)      Nextly, learned AGP criticized the award in respect of claim No.4
as highly exorbitant and unjust.  He also impugned the Tribunal
awarding interest at 12% p.a.
d)      Finally, he argued that one of the arbitrators did not sign the
award and thereby also the award is not a valid one in the eye of law.
He thus prayed to allow the appeal.
5a)     Per contra, while supporting the award, learned counsel for 1st
respondent would firstly argue that G.O.Ms.No.20 is only a qualified
one but not an unconditional order, in the sense, the G.O. would apply
only when nothing contrary is provided in the contract. In the contract
it is specifically mentioned that whichever party is aggrieved by the
opinion of the Technical Expert can approach the Arbitration Tribunal.
The procedure is prescribed in the Agreement itself. He emphasized that
nowhere in the contract, G.O.Ms.No.20 was referred. Therefore, the
Tribunal rightly ignored the objection of the petitioner and adjudicated
the claims put-forth by the 1st respondent.
b)      Secondly, justifying the claims made before the Tribunal, he
would argue that even before the Technical Expert, apart from
questioning the rates regarding drilling of bores, the 1st respondent also
claimed that supplemental agreement was signed by him under duress  
and therefore the rates mentioned therein are not agreeable to him. The
claim was made long before he received the amount. Thus, the claims 1
to 3 put-forth by him before the Tribunal are incidental and ancillary to
the main contract and the Tribunal passed a just award in respect of
those claims and also awarded interest at 12% p.a. which is quite
reasonable. He would thus submit that award suffers no perversity and
hence unassailable. On this aspect he relied on the judgment of the
Apex Court in
Swan Gold Mining Limited vs. Hindustan Copper 
Limited
.
6)      The points for determination in this CMA are:
1)      Whether the award of Arbitral Tribunal is void and nonest
for lack of jurisdiction?
2)      If point No.1 is held negative, whether the award passed by
the Arbitral Tribunal is hit by
section 34(2)(iv)
of Arbitration
Act?
3)      Whether the rate of interest granted is exorbitant and
unsustainable?
4)      Whether the award is invalid for non-subscribing signature
by one of the arbitrators?
5)      To what relief?
7)  POINT No.1: Admittedly, the petitioner and 1st respondent entered
into contract on 18.08.1999. Condition Nos.24 and 25 of General
Conditions of Contract and Condition No.25.3 of Special Conditions of
Contract are germane for deciding point No.1. Hence, they are extracted
hereunder:
Conditions of Contract (General)
24. Disputes:
24.1           If the contractor believes that a decision taken by the
Engineer was either outside the authority given to the Engineer
by the Contract or that the decision was wrongly taken, the
decision shall be referred to the Technical Expert within 14 days
of the notification of the Engineers decision.
25. Procedure for Disputes:
25.1               The Technical Expert shall give a decision in writing
                  within 28 days of receipt of a notification of a dispute.
25.2.                    The Technical Expert shall be paid daily at the rebate
specified in the Contract Data together with reimbursable
expenses of the types specified in the Contract Data and the
cost shall be divided equally between the Employer and the
Contractor, whatever decision is reached by the Technical
Expert. Either party may refer a decision of the Technical
Expert to an Arbitrator within 28 days of the Technical Experts
written decision. If neither party refers the dispute to arbitration
within the above 28 days, the Technical Experts decision will
be final and binding.
25.3.         The arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with the
               arbitration procedure stated in the Special Conditions of
               Contract.
Special Conditions of Contract
Extract 25.3 (a)
           In case of Dispute of difference arising between the
Employer and a domestic contractor relating to any matter
arising out of or connected with the agreement, such disputes or
differences shall be settled in accordance with the
Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996
. The arbitral tribunal shall consists
of 3 arbitrators one each to be appointed by the Employer and
the Contractor. The third Arbitrator shall be chosen by the two
Arbitrators so appointed by the Parties and shall act as Presiding
Arbitrator. In case of failure of the two arbitrators appointed by
the parties to reach upon a consensus within a period of 30 days
from the appointment of the arbitrator appointed subsequently,
the Presiding Arbitrator shall be appointed by the President of
the Institution of Engineers (India).
8)      The above conditions would show that the party aggrieved by the
decision of the Technical Expert may approach the arbitrator within 28
days of
the said decision
and the procedure is laid down as stated
supra. Thus, admittedly, the contract contains an arbitration clause. It
is also an admitted fact there is no reference about G.O.Ms.No.20 in the
contract. At this juncture, it is relevant to extract G.O.Ms.No.20 here.
(G.O.Ms.No.20, Irrigation & CAD (PW) Department dated 31.01.1989)  
Order:-   x  x  x  x  x
        Except as otherwise provided in the contract, all disputes and differences
arising out of or relating to the contract shall be referred to adjudication as
follows:
(1) (i)   Settlement of all claims upto Rs.50,000/- in value and below by
             way of arbitration to be referred as follows:-
(a)    Claims upto Rs.10,000/-           Superintending Engineer of another
                                                              Circle, in the same Department.
(b)    Claims above, Rs.10,000/-        Another Chief Engineer of the
            and upto Rs.50,000/-                 same Department.
The arbitration proceedings will be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of the
Arbitration Act
, to be prepared from time to time.  The
Arbitrator shall invariably give reasons in the award.
(ii)    Settlement of all claims above Rs.50,000/- in value: - All claims
above Rs.50,000/- in value shall be decided by a Civil Court of competent
jurisdiction by way of a regular suit and not by arbitration.
9)      The pith and substance of the contention of AGP is that GO is
equivalent to law and therefore despite the same being not mentioned in
the contract, the parties are expected to know its existence and act upon
accordingly. Hence, the arbitration clause in the contract cannot prevail
over G.O. and consequently the arbitration proceedings are void ab
initio for lack of jurisdiction.
10)     We are unable to subscribe our countenance to the argument of
learned AGP. The executive fiats of a State Government issued in terms
of
Article 162
of Constitution for meeting various administrative
exigencies cannot be equated with law and have no force of statute
passed by the Legislature. It must also be noted that unless such
executive orders are issued on the matrix of some statute, they cannot
have force of law. Therefore, unless such executive orders i.e. G.Os are
specifically mentioned in the contracts, they will not govern the contract
but only the terms will govern and bind the parties. That the executive
orders have no force of law has been expounded by the Constitutional
Courts many a times.
11)     In State of Tamil Nadu vs. Savari Cruz , the High Court of
Madras was considering the validity of the argument that the Madras
Educational Rules had the force of law being issued under
Article 162
of Constitution of India.
Negativing such argument, Madras High Court
quoted the judgment of the Apex Court in
Fernandez vs. State of
Mysore
wherein it was observed thus:
Para-17:
Article 162
provides that subject to the
provisions of Constitution, the executive power of a State
shall extend to the matters with respect to which the
Legislature of the State has power to make laws.
The Executive power of a State shall extend to the matters
with respect to which the Legislature of the State has power
to make laws.
This Article in our opinion merely indicates the scope of the
executive power of a State; it does not confer any power on
the State Government to issue rules thereunder. As a matter
of fact, wherever the Constitution envisages the issue of
rules, it has so provided in specific terms...Of course under
such executive power, the State can give administrative
instructions to its servants how to act under certain
circumstances; but that will not make such instructions
statutory rules which are justifiable under certain
circumstances. In order that such executive instructions have
the force of statutory rules, it must be shown that they have
been issued either under the authority conferred in the State
Government by some statute or under some provisions of the 
Constitution providing therefore. (Emphasis supplied) It is
not in dispute that there is no statute which confers any
authority on the State Government to issue rules in matters
with which the Code is concerned; nor has any provision of
the Constitution been pointed out to us under which these
instructions can be issued as statutory rules except Article
162. But as we have already indicated,
Article 162
does not
confer any authority on the State Government to issue
statutory rules.
Relying on these observations, we reject the contention that
the rules, upon the violation of which the impugned G.O., is
said to be founded, can be said to be rules framed under
Article 162
of the Constitution.
The High Court ultimately held thus:
Para-18Under our Constitution, the power to legislate
belongs exclusively to the Legislature, and under certain
circumstances to the President. The executive can have no
power to frame rules having the force of law unless such
power is delegated to it under the Constitution, or under an
Act passed by the Legislature. Where there is no such power,
the instructions issued by the Executive cannot have the
force of law.
12)     G.O.Ms.No.20 is concerned, it barely lays a policy to the
Irrigation and CAD (PW) Department of the Government that all the
claims above Rs.50,000/- in value shall be decided by a Civil Court of
competent jurisdiction by way of a regular suit and not by arbitration.
Learned AGP has not shown any statutory scaffold at the substratum 
of the G.O. to extend the force of law to it.
13)     Admittedly, the G.O. was not referred to in the contract and on
the other hand, option was given to the parties that they can approach
Arbitration Tribunal in the event of their dissatisfied with the decision
of the Technical Expert. Moreover, the GO itself starts with the clause
except as otherwise provided in the contract indicating that sometimes
the contract as in the present instance may be provided with arbitration
clause than referring the parties to Civil Court irrespective of the value
of the dispute. Therefore, the appellantdepartment is estopped from
contending contrary to the terms of contract by doctrine of Promissory
Estoppel.
14)     The applicability of this doctrine was explained in
Jit Ram Shiv
Kumar vs. State of Haryana
as under:
Para-39: The scope of the plea of doctrine of promissory
estoppel against the Government may be summed up as    
follows:
(1)     The plea of promissory estoppel is not available against
the exercise of the legislative functions of the State.
(2)     The doctrine cannot be invoked for preventing the
Government from discharging its functions under the law.
(3)     When the officer of the Government acts outside the scope
of his authority, the plea of promissory estoppel is not
available. The doctrine of ultra vires will come into operation
and the Government cannot be held bound by the authorized 
acts of its officers.
(4)      When the officer acts within the scope of his authority
under a scheme and enters into an agreement and makes a   
representation and a person acting on that representation puts
himself in a disadvantageous position, the Court is entitled to
require the officer to act according to the scheme and the
agreement or representation. The Officer cannot arbitrarily
act on his mere whim and ignore his promise on some 
undefined and undisclosed grounds of necessity or change the
conditions to the prejudice of the person who had acted upon
such representation and put himself in a disadvantageous
position.
(5)     The officer would be justified in changing the terms of the
agreement to the prejudice of the other party on special
considerations such as difficult foreign exchange position or
other matters which have a bearing on general interest of the
State.
15)     The act of the appellant squarely falls under ground No.4 and
hence the doctrine applies. To sum up, the award of the Tribunal do not
suffer lack of jurisdiction as argued by the appellant. The cited
decisions have no application. This point is accordingly answered
against the appellant.
16)  POINT Nos.2 & 3: The contention of appellant is that the only
issue before the Arbitral Tribunal was whether the decision of Technical
Expert was correct or not. But the Tribunal unduly permitted the 1st
respondent to make claim Nos. 1 to 3, which were not made before the
Technical Expert and passed the award, which, in respect of claims 1 to
3, is out of scope of arbitration.
a)      It was argued on behalf of 1st respondent that not only the rates
for drilling bores, the 1st respondent also questioned the supplemental
agreement on the ground that he was made to sign under duress and 
rates mentioned therein were not agreeable to him.
b)      On perusal of the record, we find force in the contention of AGP.
As can be seen from the letter No.CRR/TEL/54 dated 04.01.2001  
addressed by the 1st respondent to the then Technical Expert 
Dr.P.Seethapathi Rao, he made prayers (a) to (d) therein which mainly
relate to rate of boring work of concrete piles. The Technical Expert
considered various aspects and fixed the rate Rs.937/- per RM for
boring operation of 400 MM dia pile excluding the cost of RCC item to
fill up the bore.
17a)    The 1st respondent did not specifically put-forth claims 1 to 3
before the Technical Expert. Claim No.1 relates to compensation
towards loss allegedly sustained by 1st respondent due to sudden
stoppage of the work i.e. due to desertion of labour from the site with
the advances received. The Tribunal, on the observation that the 1st
respondent paid advance amount of Rs.37,000/- for skilled labour and
masons, allowed the claim to that extent.
b)      The second claim relates to loss due to overhead charges. The
Tribunal observed that the period of prolongation of the work was
about 20 months from 18.04.2000 to 31.12.2001 and the delay cannot 
be attributed to the 1st respondent. The Tribunal further observed
during the said prolonged period 1st respondent incurred overhead
charges on technical staff and other ministerial staff and awarded
Rs.4,60,000/-.
c)      The third claim is in respect of rise in cost of materials, labour
and mobilization charges during the extended period of contract. The
Tribunal though noted the objection of the department that the
contractor signed the supplemental agreement with the rates mentioned
thereon and therefore he was not entitled to seek for enhanced rates,
however overruled the objection on the observation that the contractor
claimed that he signed the agreement under duress and further, due to
prolongation of the contract period there was increase in the prices,
awarded Rs.5,45,785/-.
d)      The award under the above three claims is factually and legally
not sustainable, for the reason that the 1st respondent admittedly
received the amounts on completion of the work without any protest.  It
appears, he has also withdrawn the EMD and bank guarantees.  He has  
not placed on record that he received the amounts only under protest
and still he is entitled to extra amount as mentioned in claims 1 to 3.
Most importantly, the 1st respondent did not specifically put-forth the
claims 1 to 3 before the technical expert. His only claim before the
technical expert was regarding the fixation of rate for drilling the bores.
Though he claimed that he signed on the supplementary contract under 
duress, he did not adduce any plausible evidence in that regard.  It is
interesting to note that it was the petitioner who initiated the arbitration
proceedings having been aggrieved by the decision of the technical
expert and not by the 1st respondent.  He was not even aggrieved by the
decision of technical expert.
e)       In all the above circumstances, we firmly believe that the only
issue that could be factually and legally adjudicated by the arbitral
Tribunal is regarding the correctness of the decision of the technical
expert. However, the Tribunal entertained claims 1 to 3 on the ground
that there was a compensation clause in the contract. In our view, said
clause is not available to the 1st respondent when he signed the
supplementary contract and time was extended thrice on his request
without LD. Moreover, he received the amounts without registering
express protest.  So the claims 1 to 3 in the award are hit by 34(2)(iv)
of the
Arbitration Act
.  The decision in
Swan Gold Mining Limiteds
case (4 supra) cited by the respondent is of no avail to him.
Sofaras the
decision in
Ramnath International Constructions
case (3 supra) cited
by the AGP is concerned, the same is also not applicable as it factually
differs.
f)      Sofaras claim No.4 is concerned, the technical expert has given
cogent reason as to why the rate adopted by the R & B at Nellore
cannot be accepted to the present work. He mentioned that the present
work was nearer to the mouth of the sea, where Vashista Godavari arm
was joining and the soil was very slushy and boring operations in such
soils was very difficult compared to the R & B works taken at Nellore.
Thus the technical expert adopted the rate approved and adopted in
Nakkala outfall sluice which was taken up for similar work in the
vicinity under the same circle and in the same period. The Arbitrators
also approved the same and we find no illegality or perversity in the
adjudication thereof.
g)      As the rate of interest is concerned, following the 12% interest
rate mentioned in clause 43.1 of the contract for the delayed payments,
the Tribunal awarded the said rate.  We find no fault and hereby
approve the same.  Thus points 2 and 3 are answered accordingly.
18)     POINT No.4: This point is concerned, it appears one of the
Arbitrators Sri S.M.A.A.Jinnah, did not sign the Award.  However, he
issued a letter dated 09.08.2004 stating that due to his family
compulsions, he was proceedings to USA and in order to avoid the
delay, the Award can be passed and signed and published by his 
colleagues in the Tribunal for which he was giving his unreserved
consent in accordance with
Sec.31(1)
and (2) of the
Arbitration Act
.
Section 31
of the Arbitration Act reads thus:
Section 31Form and contents of arbitral award:
(1)     An arbitral award shall be made in writing and shall be
signed by the members of the arbitral tribunal.
(2)     For the purposes of sub-section (1) in arbitral proceedings
with more than one arbitrator the signatures of the majority of all
the members of the arbitral tribunal shall be sufficient so long as
the reason for any omitted signature is stated.
(3)     xx xx  
(4)     xx xx  
(5)     xx xx  
(6)     xx xx  
(7)     xx xx  
(8)     xx xx
In view of the above express provision, it does not lie in the
mouth of the petitioner to contend about the validity of the Award.
19)     POINT No.5: In view of the above findings, this CMA is partly
allowed by modifying the order in Arbitration O.P.No.885 of 2004 of
the District Judge, West Godavari and ordered as follows:
a)      The Arbitration Award dated 28.09.2004 in so far as claim no.4
for a sum of Rs.10,35,788/- with interest @ 12% per annum
from 46th day of Award till realization is hereby confirmed and
the Award in respect of claims 1 to 3 is set aside.
b)      No costs in the appeal.
As a sequel, miscellaneous applications pending, if any, shall
stand closed.
________________________    
SURESH KUMAR KAIT, J     
_________________________    
U. DURGA PRASAD RAO, J      
Date: 30.08.2017