[Cites
15
, Cited by
8
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Sama Aruna vs 1.The State Of Telangana Rep By ... on 22 March, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 HYD 91
Bench:
Suresh Kumar Kait
,
U Durga Prasad Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT AND THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U DURGA PRASAD RAO                  

WRIT PETITION No.43671 OF 2016    

22-03-2017 

Sama Aruna     Petitioner       

1.The State of Telangana rep by Secretary Home Department, Secretariat,
Hyderabad and another....Respondents  

Counsel for the Petitioner : M/s Bhardwaj Associates

Counsel for the Respondents: G.P. for Home 

<Gist :

>Head Note : 

? Cases referred  :

1.  2016 (3) ALT 519 (D.B)
2.1970 (1) Supreme Court Cases 98  
3.(1966) 1 SCR 709 
4.(1986) 4 Supreme Court Cases 407  


THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT          
AND  
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO           
WRIT PETITION No. 43671 OF 2016    
ORDER:
(Per the Honble Sri Justice Suresh Kumar Kait)
        Vide the present petition, the petitioner has challenged the
detention order dated 23.11.2016 issued by the second respondent
and the same has been confirmed by the first respondent under
the provisions of the Telangana Prevention of Dangerous Activities
of Boot-Leggers, Decoits, Drug-Offenders, Goondas, Immoral 
Traffic Offenders and Land Grabbers Act, 1986 (for short the Act,
1986) and consequently to direct the respondents to release/set
free her husband i.e., Sama Sanjeev Reddy.
2.  In the affidavit filed in support of the present petition, the
petitioner states that her husband Sama Sanjeev Reddy 
(hereinafter referred to as detenu) was falsely implicated in the
following offences:
a)      Crime No.554 of 2013 of Ibrahimpatnam Police Station
for the offences under
Sections 447
,
427
,
506
IPC (arrested on
11.11.2016)
b)      Crime No.8 of 2014 of Adibhatla Police Station for the
offences under Section 447 and 427 of IPC
c)      Crime No.361 of 2016 of Pahadi Sharief Police Station
for the offences under
Section 363
,
384
,
420
,
120B
of IPC and
Section 4
of the A.P. Land Grabbing Act and
Section 25(1b)
of the
Arms Act.
d)      Crime No.362 of 2016 of Pahadi Sharief Police Station
for the same offences as shown above.
e)      Crime No.367 of 2016 of Pahadi Sharief Police Station
for the same offences as stated above.
f)      Crime No.221 of 2016 of Adibhatla Police station for
the offences under Sections 419, 420, 468, 363, 452, 323, 342,
386, 506 r/w
Section 120B
of IPC and
Section 25(1) (b)
of the Arms
Act and
Section 4
of the A.P. Land Grabbing Act.
3.  The 4 out of 6 cases are concerning to the Gangster
Nayeemuddin @ Nayeem.  The grounds of detention would disclose   
that the second respondent has not applied his mind and
erroneously invoked the provisions of the Act 1986.  It would also
disclose that there is no basis for imposing preventive detention on
the detenu since the alleged involvement of the detenu is yet to be
proved in the criminal Court and that even the allegations in the
said crimes do not amount to committing breach of public order.
4.  Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner
submits that it is well settled law that imposition of preventive
detention is very harsh and unconstitutional, unless there is a
brazen conduct, which affects the tempo of public life.  The said
fact is missing in the present case.  Thus, the preventive detention
is exfacie illegal.  Collusion with Gangster Nayeem and involvement
in some sale transactions does not warrant imposition of
preventive detention.  When there are criminal cases for regular
offences, preventive detention cannot be resorted to.  The grounds
of detention are not falling into the arena of public order.
5.  Learned counsel further submits that the 4 cases relied
upon out of 6 cases mentioned above are all old cases, however the
same are registered in the year 2016.  The detenu has been
detained by the detaining authority on the ground that the detenu
has been involved in the offences of criminal conspiracy, cheating,
kidnapping, extortion, criminal trespass and damaging landed
property and threatening the owners of lands with dire
consequences in order to grab their landed properties etc., Thus,
the detenu has repeatedly committed crimes by creating constant
fear and panic among the poor and innocent agriculturists in the
limits of Adibhatla and Pahadi Sharief Police Station and caused a
feeling of insecurity to their agricultural landed properties.  Due to
which, large sections of people are adversely affected by his
unlawful activities.  The detenu being the active member in the
gang of most dangerous and notorious gangster Nayeemuddin @    
Nayeem (who died in an exchange of fire on 08.08.2016 in the
limits of shadnagar) has been indulging in unlawful activities of
committing offences as noted above, which is prejudicial to the
maintenance of public order.
6.  Learned counsel further submits that all the offences are
related to the year 2013-2014.  However, no alleged crime has been
committed by the detenu.  Therefore, the detaining authority ought
not to have come to the conclusion that the detenu is prejudicial to
the public order.  Thus, the detention order passed by the
detaining authority is arbitrary and illegal, which deserves to be
quashed.
7.  To strengthen his arguments, learned counsel has relied
upon a case reported in
Samala Dhana Laxmi v. State of
Telangana
rep. by its Secretary, Revenue Department and 
others , whereby the meaning of the words maintenance of
public order has been discussed that in the context of special
laws entailing detention of persons without a trial on the pure
subjective determination of the Executive, is confined to graver
episodes not involving cases of law and order, which are not
disturbances of public tranquility but of ordre publique.
The test to be adopted, in determining whether an act affects
law and order or public order, is: does it lead to disturbance of the
current life of the community so as to amount to disturbance of the
public order or does it affect merely an individual leaving tranquility
of the society undisturbed?  Public order embraces more of the
community than law and order.  Public order is the even tempo of
the life of the community taking the country as a whole or even of
specified locality.  Disturbance of public order is to be distinguished
from acts directed against individuals which do not disturb the
Society to the extent of causing a general disturbance of public
tranquility.
It is further held that acts similar in nature, but committed in
different contexts and circumstances, might cause different
reactions.  In one case, it might affect specific individuals only and,
therefore, touch the problem of law and order only, while in another
it might affect the public order.  Thus, the State is at the centre and
society surrounds it.  The acts become graver as we journey from the
periphery of the largest circle towards the centre.  For expounding
the phrase maintenance of public order, one has to imagine three
concentric circles : Law and order represents the largest circle within
which is the next circle representing public and the smallest circle
represents the security of the State.  All cases of disturbances of
public tranquility fall in the largest circle but some of them are
outside public order for the purpose of the phrase maintenance of
public order.  Every infraction of the law must necessarily affect the
order, but an act affecting law and order may not necessarily also
affect the public order. The true test is not the kind, but the
potentiality of the act in question.
Stray and unorganized crimes of theft and assault are not
matters of public order since they do not tend to affect the even flow
of public life.
8.  Learned counsel further submits that the cases relied
upon by the detaining authority, are if believed, may be the
problem of law and order, however, the said cases are not in any
sense disturb the public order.  Moreover, the detention order is
passed on 23.11.2016 and approved by the State of Telangana vide
its order dated 01.12.2016, whereas, there is no proximity with the
date of detention order.  All the offences as mentioned in 4 cases
are from the year 2007 to 2016.  At present, there is no imminent
danger to the public order.  Therefore, the detention order is
arbitrary and illegal, which deserves to be set aside.
9.  On the other hand, learned Government Pleader
appearing on behalf of the respondents submits that the detenu
has committed as many as 4 cases of criminal conspiracy, 
cheating, kidnapping and extortion in the limits of Pahadi Sharief
Police Station and Adibhatla Police Station of Rachakonda
Commissionerate.  The detention of the detenu is essentially
required as his presence creates sense of insecurity in the minds of    
public and poses threat to maintenance of peace and public
tranquility in the society, which are prejudicial to the maintenance
of public order.  The detenu is a notorious criminal and one of the
gang members of most dangerous and notorious Gangster Nayeem.    
The detenu is habitual offender and member of notorious gangster
Nayeem, indulged in heinous crimes, such as kidnapping, 
extortion, threatening the innocent people at the point of swords,
sickles and fire arms to grab their landed properties.  Due to the
activities of aforesaid gang, there is feeling of insecurity among the
general public and landlords residing in the limits of Rachakonda
commisssionerate.  Nayeem was the Gangster, and the detenu is  
one of his members.  Their activities have been creating terror in
the minds of people as by taking the name of gangster Nayeem, his
members have threatening the poor farmers with dire
consequences.  Their modus operandi was and is to grab the 
properties of the poor farmers.
10.  Learned Government Pleader further submits that there
are 174 crimes registered against Nayeem and his associates.  One 
lakh square yards of land apart from agricultural land has been
grabbed during the lifetime of Nayeem.  His terror in the society
was so high that during his lifetime, no complaint was made by
any of the victim due to fear that the said gang may destroy their
life and properties.  Subsequent to his death on 08.08.2016, the
complainant came forward, and only thereafter, one after another
cases were registered against Nayeem, individually and his
associates.  Thus, the detenu was the member of the said gang
involved in 4 cases noted above which were relied upon while
passing the detention order.  Thus, the detenu is also dangerous to
the public order.
11.  Heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioner and the learned Government Pleader appearing on behalf
of the respondents.  Also perused the material available on record.
12.  On a perusal of the record, it is established that during
the year 2013, the detenu has been involved in cases of criminal
trespass, damage and abusing in most filthy language, therefore
Crime No.554 of 2013 for the offences punishable under
Sections
447
,
427
and
506
IPC of Ibrahimpatnam police station, was
registered on the ground that the detenu along with five accused
criminally trespassed into the agricultural land of Ac 8.01 guntas
in Sy No.289 situated at Adibhatla village, Ibrahimpatnam Mandal,
and removed crop (tomato crop).  Also abused the complainant and 
others, who were attending their agricultural works and threatened
them with dire consequences.  Thereafter, from the year 2014 to
2016, he has committed similar offences, which are mentioned in
the grounds of detention. During the period 2013-2016, the detenu
along with his associates, created fear and panic in the minds of
poor farmers that any of the farmers may be targeted and property
would be grabbed by using of modus operandi of compelling the
farmers to transfer their agricultural lands in favour of the persons
of their choice.  The detenu and his associates created constant
fear and panic among the poor and innocent agriculturists.  Thus,
the detaining authority declared the detenu as per clause (g) of
Section 2
of the Act 1986 as goonda.
13.
Section 2 (g)
of the Act, 1986 defines 'Goonda' as
follows:
'        'goonda' means a person, who either by himself or as a
member of or leader of a gang, habitually commits, or attempts to
commit or abets the commission of offences punishable under 
Chapter XVI or Chapter XVII or Chapter XXII of the
Indian Penal
Code
."
14.  The detenu being the active member of most dangerous
and notorious gangster Nayeemuddin @ Nayeem has been     
indulging in unlawful activities of committing offences of criminal
conspiracy, cheating,  kidnapping, extortion and land grabbing,
criminal trespass, criminal intimidation, threatening with dire
consequences and damaging agricultural crops, kadies etc.,  Thus,
the detenu being the member of Nayeem gang, has created fear 
and panic in the minds of innocent and poor agricultural families,
who are eaking out their livelihood by doing agriculture, and
thereby, disturbing the public order and tranquility in the area.
Thus, their unlawful activities have caused a feeling of insecurity
to their properties.  The detenu has been persistently indulging in
the activities mentioned in the detention order despite the cases
being registered on earlier occasions.  Thus, it establishes that the
detenu is a habitual offender and his activities fall within the ambit
of
Section 2 (g)
of the Act 1986.
15.  In a case reported in Arun Ghosh Versus State of West
Bengal , wherein it was observed that an act by itself is not
determinant of its own gravity.  In its quality it may not differ from
another but in its potentiality it may be very different.  Take the
case of assault on girls.  A guest at a hotel may kiss or make
advances to half a dozen chamber maids.  He may annoy them and   
also the management but he does not cause disturbance of public 
order.  He may even have a fracas with the friends of one of the
girls but even then it would be a case of breach of law and order
only.  Take another case of a man who molests women in lonely 
place.  As a result of his activities girls going to colleges and
schools are in constant danger and fear.  Women going for their
ordinary business are afraid of being waylaid and assaulted.  The
activity of this man in its essential quality is not different from the
act of the other man but in its potentiality and in its affect upon
the public tranquility there is a vast difference.  The act of the man
who molests the girls in lonely places causes a disturbance in the
even tempo of living which is the first requirement of public order.
He disturbs the society and the community.  His act makes all the
women apprehensive of their honour and he can be said to be
causing disturbance of public order and not merely committing
individual actions which may be taken note of by the criminal
prosecution agencies.
The Honble Supreme Court further observed in the afore
cited case while referring
Dr Ram Maohar Lohia v. State of
Bihar
s case, that how similar acts in different contexts affect
differently law and order on the one hand and public order on the
other.  It is always a question of degree of the harm and its affect
upon the community.  The question to ask is: Does it lead to
disturbance of the current of life of the community so as to amount
a disturbance of the public order or does it affect merely an
individual leaving the tranquility of the society undisturbed?  This
question has to be faced in every case on facts.  There is no
formula by which one case can be distinguished from another.
In case of Raj Kumar Singh Versus State of Bihar and
others , the Honble Supreme Court has held that preventive
detention for the social protection of community is necessary.
Anti-social elements creating havoc have to be taken care of by
law.  Lawless multitude bring democracy and constitution
disrepute.  Bad facts bring hard laws.  But these should be
properly and legally applied.  It should be so construed that it does
not endanger social defence or the defence of the community, at
the same time does not infringe the liberties of the citizen.
16.  A person who has been habitually engaging himself in
unlawful acts of committing kidnapping, cheating and extortion,
which create a sense of insecurity in the minds of public and pose
threat to maintenance of peace and public tranquility in the
society, such are obviously prejudicial to the maintenance of public
order.  If such person is not curbed, he will continue to do the
same activities.
17.  Therefore, keeping in view the involvement of the detenu
in various cases and his association with notorious gangster
Nayeem, and his indulgence in heinous crimes as mentioned  
above, causing fear and insecurity among the general public and
landlords, the authorities have rightly passed the detention order.
18.  The justification for passing the detention order was
that out of 4 cases registered against the detenu, he filed bail
petitions in 3 cases, and was released on bail.  In Crime No.221 of
2016 of Adibhatla police Station, his arrest was regularized by
filing PT warrants.  There was every likelihood that he might resort
to similar offences of Kidnapping, cheating and extortion by
threatening innocent people, which affect the public order
adversely.
19.  In view of the above discussion, we are of the considered
opinion that the detaining authority had good grounds to detain
the detenu.  There are no merits in the instant petition.
20.  Accordingly, the Writ Petition is dismissed.
       Miscellaneous petitions, if any pending, shall stand
closed.
___________________________________      
JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT.
____________________________     
JUSTICE U. DURGA PRASAD RAO.
Date : 22-03-2017