[Cites
5
, Cited by
2
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Panguluri Srinivasa Rao @ Srinu vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh, Rep. By Its ... on 4 September, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 (NOC) 189 (HYD.)
Author:
A. Ramalingeswara Rao
Bench:
A. Ramalingeswara Rao
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A. RAMALINGESWARA RAO            

Writ Petition Nos.28503 of 2017 and batch

04-09-2017 

Panguluri Srinivasa Rao @ Srinu . Petitioner

The State of Andhra Pradesh, rep. by its Principal Secretary, Registration and Stamps Department, Secretariat Building, Vela
. Respondents  

Counsel for the Petitioners :   Sri I. Koti Reddy

Counsel for the Respondents:  GP for Cooperation
                               GP for Assignment

<Gist :

>Head Note : 

? Cases referred:


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A. RAMALINGESWARA RAO            

Writ Petition Nos.28503 and 29037 of 2017

Common Order:
These two Writ Petitions are being disposed of by this common
order, as they arise out of  the same cause of action.
W.P.No.28503 of 2017 was filed by the Executive Member of 
Vagdevi Educational Society, whereas W.P.No.29037 of 2017 was filed by 
the President and Secretary of said Society against the same respondents.
The undisputed facts are that one Vagdevi Educational Society was
registered under the
Andhra Pradesh Societies Registration Act, 2001
(for
short the Act) and there are 18 members including the petitioners and
respondents 3 to 5.  It appears that a general body meeting was
convened on 17.01.2016, wherein a decision was taken to conduct 
elections to the Executive Committee in the month of February 2016.  The
said decision was a unanimous decision. A notice was issued on 
02.02.2016 to all the members directing them to be present in the
general body meeting to be held on 17.02.2016 for election of the
Executive Committee.  The petitioners state that in the said general body
meeting all the 18 members attended and passed a unanimous resolution  
reelecting the Executive Committee.  A copy of the resolution and other
documents were sent to the second respondent.  The second respondent  
appears to have not taken any action thereon, but raised some
objections.  In view of the objections, it appears that another requisition
was sent to all the members on 21.11.2016 informing that a general body
meeting would be convened on 05.12.2016.  The said notices were sent 
by registered post.  The respondents 3 to 5 and six (6) other members
did not attend the meeting held on 05.12.2016.  The agenda for the
meeting was to file a copy of the resolution dated 17.02.2016 and other
documents to the second respondent.  Since there was no quorum, the  
meeting was postponed to 06.12.2016, on which date also only nine (9)
members out of eighteen (18) members were present.  The nine (9)
members who were present passed the resolution unanimously.  Pursuant  
to the said resolution, the required documents were given to the second
respondent and, when the second respondent did not take any action,
W.P.No.3573 of 2017 was filed by the Society represented by the
President. This Court disposed of the same on 07.02.2017 directing the
second respondent to receive the list furnished by the petitioner Society
and acknowledge the same as per
Section 9
of the Act within a period of
two weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of the order.  Against the
said order, an appeal was filed by the dissenting (non-attended) members
by taking leave of the Court in W.A.No.1052 of 2017 and a Division Bench
of this Court set aside the order and allowed the Writ Appeal.  It appears
that the President and Secretary of the Society filed a review application
in WAMP No.2189 of 2017 and the same is pending.
In the meanwhile, it appears that the respondents 3 to 5 submitted
another resolution to the second respondent alleged to have been passed
on 06.12.2016 indicating that a new Executive Committee was elected.
Alleging forgery of the signature of the petitioner, the petitioner filed
W.P.No.28503 of 2017.  It appears that the second respondent
acknowledged the communication received by him from the respondents 3  
to 5 pursuant to an alleged resolution passed on 06.12.2016.  The
petitioners in W.P.29037 of 2017 state that the respondents 3 to 5 and
others have no right to convene a general body meeting because no
requisition was given by the Secretary of the Society and they have no
right to move the no confidence motion against the petitioners and other
office bearers.  Even otherwise also the alleged meeting said to have been
convened on 06.12.2016 only with nine (9) members out of eighteen (18)
members is devoid of quorum, as 2/3rd members are required for holding a
general body meeting.  However, since the second respondent 
acknowledged the resolution dated 06.12.2016 submitted by the 
respondents 3 to 5 by his certificate dated 22.08.2017 the same is
challenged in W.P.No.29037 of 2017.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the required
quorum for  holding a general body meeting is 2/3rd members and in the
absence of requisite quorum the respondents 3 to 5 could not have held a
meeting and any resolution passed in such a meeting is invalid in law.  He
further submits that in view of the same, the second respondent should
not have acknowledged any intimation pursuant to such resolution.  But,
the learned counsel for the petitioners forgot the fact that the postponed
meeting conducted by the petitioner and seven (7) other members on
06.12.2016 also suffers from the same irregularity.  Be that as it may, the
point involved in the present Writ Petitions is not with regard to validity
of the resolution but with regard to maintainability of Writ Petition.
Learned counsel for the petitioners, by relying on
Section 8
of the
Act, submitted that since the resolution was contrary to the provisions of
the Act, the second respondent should not have accepted the same.  This
argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners is based on total
misconception, as
Section 8
of the Act deals with amendment of
memorandum and bye-laws in respect of the matters specified therein.
Section 8
of the Act reads as follows:
8. Amendment of memorandum and Bye-laws: - (1)   
By a "Special Resolution" a society may alter the provisions of the
memorandum with respect to,-
(a)     change of objectives of the society;
        (b)     to amalgamate itself with any other society; or
        (c)     to divide itself into two or more societies,

       (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and the
conditions contained in its memorandum, a society may, by an 
ordinary resolution passed by not less than 1/2 (half) of the
members present and voting alter its bye-laws.
(3) Any alteration of the memorandum of the society shall
not be valid unless such alteration is registered under this Act.
(4) If any alteration of the memorandum is filed with the
Registrar and if they are not contrary to the provisions of this Act,
he shall register the same and shall certify the registration of such
alteration under his hand and seal within thirty days from the date
of receipt of the resolution. The certificate shall be conclusive
evidence that all the requirements of this Act with respect to the
alteration and the certification thereof have been complied with
and henceforth the memorandum as so altered shall be the 
memorandum of the society.
(5) Every alteration in the bye-laws of the society should
be sent to the Registrar and he shall take it on record if it is not
contrary to the provisions of this Act.
Hence, a reading of the above provision makes it clear that the said
Section is not applicable in the facts of the present case as only the
intimation with regard to elected body is involved and there is no
amendment to memorandum of the society or its bye laws.
What remains and argued in the earlier round of litigation is
application of
Section 9
of the Act and it reads as follows:
9.      Filing of annual list: - Every year the society shall,
within fifteen days from the date on which the General Body meeting
was held, furnish a list to the Registrar of Societies which shall contain
the names and addresses of the members of the Managing Committee    
and Officers entrusted with the management of the affairs of the
Society.
A reading of the above provision makes it clear that it is only an
intimation that has to be given by the Society and the Registrar has no
role except to keep the said intimation in his record.  No adjudication is
involved.  In view of the same, the action of the second respondent in
receiving the communication from the respondents 3 to 5 can only be
stated to be purely ministerial in nature.  Probably, in view of such a
situation, learned counsel, now tried to place the present situation under
Section 8
of the Act contrary to earlier stand and it is totally inapplicable
to the preset case.
This type of cases are coming to this court quite often
misconstruing the role of the Registrar under
Section 9
of the Act. If the
petitioners have any grievance against the respondents 3 to 5, it is for
the petitioners to invoke
Section 23
of the Act and settle their disputes.
The dispute would be purely private in nature and no public law element is
involved.  They cannot invoke the jurisdiction of this Court under
Article
226
of the Constitution of India and invite a decision of this Court.
Hence, I am of the opinion that these are not fit cases for admission and
are liable to be dismissed at the admission stage.
The Writ Petitions are, accordingly, dismissed at the admission
stage.  There shall be no order as to costs.
As a sequel thereto, the miscellaneous petitions, if any, pending in
these Writ Petitions shall stand closed.
____________________________     
A.RAMALINGESWARA RAO, J        
Date:   04th September, 2017