[Cites
23
, Cited by
1
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Mrs. Lalitha Christian, Widow Of Late ... vs The Government Of Andhra Pradesh, ... on 22 February, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 (NOC) 765 (HYD.)
Author:
M.S. Ramachandra Rao
Bench:
M.S. Ramachandra Rao
THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE M.S. RAMACHANDRA RAO               

WP.No.26132 of 2011  

22-02-2017 

Mrs. Lalitha Christian, Widow of Late Dr. Jaipal J. Christian, Aged about : 74
years, Occ : Household and others ...Petitioners

The Government of Andhra Pradesh, Represented by its Principal Secretary,
Revenue Department, Secretariat, Hyderabad, and others ...Respondents 

Counsel for petitioners :Sri D. Prakash Reddy, Senior Counsel
                           appearing for Sri P. Laxma Reddy.

Counsel for respondents :Sri B. Mahender Reddy, Special 
                          Government Pleader for Revenue.

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

!Counsel for petitioners :Sri D. Prakash Reddy, Senior Counsel
                          appearing for Sri P. Laxma Reddy.

^Counsel for respondents :Sri B. Mahender Reddy, Special 
                          Government Pleader for Revenue.

? Cases referred

1.1988 (2) ALT 6
2.2011 (1) ALD 103 [D.B.]
3.1995 (6) SCC 213 
4.1999 (8) SCC 16 
5.2007 (6) ALD 348 (F.B.)
6.2007 (8) SCC 254 
7.AIR 1952 SC 16 
8.1978 (1) SCC 405 
9.dt.11.04.2011 in W.A.No.1770 of 2001 [MANU/AP/0216/2011]   
10.2002 (5) ALD 532 (DB) 
11.2010 (6) ALD 207 
12.2009 (1) ALD 248 

THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE M.S. RAMACHANDRA RAO               

WP.No.26132 of 2011  

ORDER:
This Writ Petition has been filed challenging the orders
dt.31.12.2010 of the 2nd respondent (the Joint Collector, Medak at
Saga Reddy) in Case No.F3/7799/2006-F3/42/ROR/06 confirming the   
order dt.15.07.2006 in Case No.A3/1734/2006 of the 3rd respondent
(The Revenue Divisional Officer, Sangareddy, Medak district),
canceling the pattedar pass books of petitioners.
2.      The petitioners are legal heirs of Dr.E.B. Christian alias
Dr. Naidu.
3.      It is not in dispute that a registered sale deed was executed in
favour of Dr. Naidu on 7th Ahaban 1345 Fasli [7th September, 1935
A.D.] in respect of Acs.34.23 guntas in Survey No.326 and Acs.25.00
guntas in Survey No.310 situated at Khasba Akhali, now known as 
Zaheerabad.
4.      Alleging that under a Will dt.09.03.1960 executed by the said
Dr. Naidu, they inherited the property, the petitioners applied to the 4th
respondent for issuance of pattedar pass book and title deed under the
A.P. Rights in Land and Pattedar Passbooks Act,1971 (for short, the
Act).
5.      The then Tahsildar, Zaheerabad Mandal, Medak district (the 4th
respondent) issued pattedar pass books and title deeds to petitioners in
2004 vide orders dt.15.10.2004 bearing Nos.262439 to 262441.
6.      One year eight months later, the then Mandal Revenue Officer,
Zaheerabad addressed a letter No.D/10260/05 on 12.06.2006 to the 3rd
respondent that as per directions of the District Collector, Medak, he
enquired the matter after assuming charge as Mandal Revenue 
Officer, Zaheerabad and found glaring mistakes committed by his
predecessor; that petitioners played fraud upon the office of the
Mandal Revenue Officer, produced forged documents, and without 
producing relevant records to show that they are connected or
concerned with Dr. Naidu, obtained pattedar pass books and title
deeds by misrepresentation; that this fraud was detected on
10.06.2006; and therefore, he was filing an appeal under the Act
before the 3rd respondent under sub-Rule (2) of Rule 21 of the Rules
framed under the Act to cancel the mutation affected in the name of
petitioners; that the said report be treated as an appeal against the
orders passed by the then Mandal Revenue Officer, Zaheeerabad on 
15.10.2004; and that the said Appeal is filed within time from the date
of detection of fraud and mistake.
7.      On receipt of this report from the 4th respondent, the 3rd
respondent treated it as an appeal under Rule 21 (2) and issued notices
to petitioners directing them to show on what basis they were
claiming the properties in question when the lands were recorded in
the name of Dr. Naidu as pattedar and possessor in the Revenue
Records.
8.      Reply was filed to the said show-cause notice on 21.06.2006 by
petitioners stating that Dr. Naidu was also called Dr. E.B. Christian
and he had purchased the land from the Nizam Government in 1935  
and was in possession since then.  They questioned on what basis the
Government was claiming the property when petitioners have become  
absolute owners and heirs and even by virtue of adverse possession.
They relied on the Will dt.09.03.1960 executed by Dr. E.B. Christian
alias Dr.Naidu bequeathing the property to them.
9.      The counsel appearing for petitioners contended that the
petitioners did not play any fraud on the office of the Mandal Revenue
Officer, Zaheerabad to obtain the pattedar pass book and title deeds as
alleged, and that there was no documentary evidence to show that the
land belongs to the Government since the petitioners were in
possession for a very long time.  He stated that the then Mandal
Revenue Officer, Zaheerabad after going through the records and
scrutiny and verification issued the pattedar pass book and title deed
to the petitioners and relied upon the Pahanies for the period 1960-61
to 2000-01, and sought dismissal of the appeal.
10.     By order dt.15.07.2006, the 3rd respondent allowed the appeal,
and set aside the orders passed by the Mandal Revenue Officer,
\Zaheerabad on 15.10.2004 as well as the Pattedar Pass Book and title
deeds issued to petitioners by canceling them.
11.     The 3rd respondent held that the Vasool Baqui and the Sethwar
showed that the subject land was Government land; that the Vasool
Baqui is a crucial document to know classification of land, title and
ownership; that the petitioners had not produced any documents in
support of their plea that the land was purchased in 1935 from the
Nizam Government; and that though the Khasra Pahani for the year 
1954-55 showed the name of Dr. Naidu, as per a decision of this
Court reported in S.A. Gyan Purshant Rao (died) and others v.
Smt. Vijayamma , entries in Khasra Pahani do not create any title
and that petitioners failed to establish their title over the subject land
by providing evidence. He held that petitioners failed to establish that
Dr. Naidu and Dr. E.B. Christian are one and the same person; that
probate of a Will is mandatory as per the decision of this Court in S.A.
Gyan Purshant Rao (1 supra); and since the petitioners did not get
the Will probated for more than 40 years before the competent
authority, the Will had no legal sanctity. He therefore, concluded that
the Will on which the petitioners placed reliance was an invented
document and cannot be believed.  He further held that the Mandal
Revenue Officer, Zaheerabad, who granted pattedar pass book and 
title deed to petitioners in 2004 did not give any speaking order and
did not mention as to how the petitioners are entitled to pattedar pass
books and title deeds over the land and that the said official should
have insisted on a legal heir certificate issued by a Court of Law in
support of claim of petitioners and he could not have relied upon a
family member certificate issued by the Mandal Revenue Officer,
Musheerabad, Hyderabad, showing that petitioners are family
members of Late John Jaipal Christian, S/o.E.B. Christian,
particularly when there was a dispute whether Dr.Naidu was also
known as Dr. E.B. Christian, and that the said certificate itself stated
that it was for the purpose of settlement of Bank accounts only and
would not apply for claims to property.
12.     Assailing the same, the petitioners preferred a Revision before
the 2nd respondent invoking Section 9 of the Act.  The 2nd respondent
by order dt.31.12.2010 dismissed the Revision.  He stated that 3rd
respondent had elaborately discussed the merits and de-merits of the
case and extracted the contents of the order of the 3rd respondent.  He
held that he did not find any merit in the Revision since there was no
documentary evidence in support of the petitioners contention
contrary to the findings of the 3rd respondent.
13.     Challenging the same, the present Writ Petition is filed.
14.     On 19.09.2011, in WP.No.32245 of 2011, this Court directed
status quo as on that day with regard to possession shall be maintained
until further orders, and that the petitioners shall not alienate or create
any third party interests or change the nature of the land.
15.     WVMP.No.2088 of 2012 was filed by respondents to vacate the  
said order, but the said application was dismissed on 22.10.2013.
CONTENTIONS OF COUNSEL FOR PETITIONERS
16.     Sri D. Prakash Reddy, Senior Counsel appearing for Sri
P. Laxma Reddy, counsel for petitioners, contended that:
(i)     the Mandal Revenue Officer, Zaheerabad (the 4th respondent)
who is himself a statutory authority could not have maintained any
appeal against his predecessors decision rendered on 15.10.2004
before the 3rd respondent in view of the Division Bench judgment of
this Court in Joint Collector, Ranga Reddy District, Hyderabad
and others v. P.V. Narasimha Rao and others ;
(ii)    it was not open to the respondent nos.3 and 4 to go into the
validity of the Will on the basis of which the petitioners had obtained
pattedar pass books and title deeds on 15.10.2004, since powers of a
Civil Court were not conferred on respondent nos.3 and 4;
(iii)  that allegation of forgery was the basis of the report
dt.12.06.2006 made by 4th respondent to 3rd respondent which 
triggered action against petitioners, but neither the 3rd respondent nor
the 4th respondent could establish that the Will produced by petitioners
was a forged one;
(iv)    that, in any event, the title of the Government to the property
could not have been gone into by respondent nos.2 to 4 since the basis
of such a plea was not made anywhere in the impugned orders;
(v)     that since no third party had questioned the mutation in the
name of petitioners or issuance of pattedar pass books and title deeds
to them, the respondent nos.2 to 4 had no jurisdiction to state that the
subject land was Government land;
(vi)  that there was an amendment to
Section 213
of the Indian
Succession Act, 1925 and sub-Section (2) thereof categorically stated
that sub-Section (1){which required a probate to be obtained in regard
to a Will} was not to apply to Indian Christians; that this amendment
was made in the year 2002 by the
Indian Succession (Amendment)   
Act, 2002
; and therefore, the 3rd respondent fell in error in holding
that a probate for a Will was mandatory.  According to him, in view of
this amendment to
Section 213
, the judgment in S.A. Gyan Purshant  
Rao (1 supra) would not apply;
(vii)   that the appeal under sub-Rule (2) of Rule 21, even if it could
be entertained, ought to have been filed within a period of (60) days
from the date, i.e., 15.10.2004 when the then Mandal Revenue Officer
mutated the names of petitioners and granted pattedar pass books and
title deeds to them; and without there being even an application for
condonation of delay of one year eight months, the 3rd respondent
entertained the report of the 4th respondent as an appeal and passed his
orders, which therefore cannot be sustained; and
(viii) that proceedings under the Act are summary in nature and
questions of title cannot be decided in proceedings under the said Act,
and if the respondents feel that the above land is Government land
they must approach the competent Court of Law for declaration of the
title of the Government and recover possession thereof from the
petitioners.
CONTENTIONS OF SPECIAL GOVERNMENT PLEADER FOR                
RESPONDENTS
17.     Sri B. Mahender Reddy, Special Government Pleader,  
appearing for respondents, however refuted the above contentions.
18.       He contended that :
(i)     though the lands originally belong to Dr. Naidu as per Revenue
Record, on his death intestate they would automatically vest in the
State under the Andhra Pradesh Escheats and Bona Vacantia Act,   
1974, and therefore, the respondent nos.3 and 4 were entitled to hold
that in the absence of the Will, the land of Dr. Naidu vested in the
Government and it had title to it;
(ii)    the Will produced by petitioners was not proved by examining
an attesting witness as required under
Section 68
of the Evidence Act,
1872 and
Section 63(c)
of Indian Succession Act, 1925, and placed
reliance on Kashibai W/o Lachiram and another v. Parwatibai
W/o. Lachiram and others  in support of the said proposition;
(iii)   setting aside the order of 4th respondent and the 3rd respondent
would result in the revival of the illegal order dt.15.10.2004 of the
then Mandal Revenue Officer, Zaheerabad, and in such 
circumstances, this Court should refrain from granting any relief to
petitioner as held in
Maharaja Chintamani Saran Nath Shahdeo v.
State of Bihar and others
;
(iv)    before the then Mandal Revenue Officer, Zaheerabad issued
pattedar pass books and title deeds to petitioners, notice ought to have
been issued to the State Government also as required by sub-Section
(3) of
Section 5
of the Act read with Rules 19 & 5 (2) of the Rules,
and this also vitiated the proceedings dt.15.10.2004 of the then
Mandal Revenue Officer, Zaheerabad.  He relied in this regard on the
judgment in
Chinnam Pandurangam v. Mandal Revenue Officer,   
Serilingampally Mandal, Ranga Reddy District and others
.
REPLY SUBMISSIONS OF COUNSEL FOR PETITIONERS
19.     Sri D. Prakash Reddy, appearing for petitioners, in his reply
submissions, contended that the contention of the Special Government
Pleader that there is automatic vesting of the property of the deceased
Dr. Naidu in the Government under the proceedings of the
Andhra
Pradesh Escheats and Bona Vacantia Act, 1974
is without any basis. 
He contended that in view of
Section 7
and
8
of the said Act there has
to be an enquiry relating to the property being escheat; that after such
enquiry, the local officer should be satisfied about it being escheat
property and that it was in possession of a person who had no
authority to claim it, and if any person resists to surrender such
possession on demand, after obtaining sanction of competent
authority, the local officer should file a suit in a Court for declaration
of the Governments right to the property and for recovery of
possession; and only after the Court granted such declaration, the
property would escheat to the Government.
20.       He also placed reliance on a proceeding in File
No.A1/1451/50 dt.04.06.1950 issued by the Special Inspector for
Enquiry, Ownership Rights, Zaheerabad Taluqa, Zaheerabad (V), 
Medak District wherein a finding was recorded by the said Officer
that Dr. E.B. Christian was originally a Hindu with the name
Dr.Venkata Krishnama Naidu; that he converted himself into
Christianity and was thereafter known as Dr.E.B. Christian though the
villages still called him as Dr. Naidu.  In those proceedings, the
counsel contended that the subject land was found to be the private
land of Dr. E.B. Christian and patta was confirmed in his favour.
21.     From the contentions raised by the parties, the following issues
arise for consideration :
(a)     Whether the 4th respondents report should have been
entertained as an appeal by the 3rd respondent even
though it was filed one year eight months after the order
dt.10.08.2014 was passed by the predecessor of the 4th
respondent ?
(b)     Whether the land in questioned escheated to the
Government under the provisions of the
Andhra Pradesh 
Escheats and Bona Vacantia Act, 1974
?
(c)     Whether the Will executed by a Christian required a
probate ? and
(d)     To what relief ?
Point (a) :
22.     The admitted facts show that the predecessor of the 4th
respondent on 15.10.2004, on the basis of a Will dt.09.03.1960
executed by Dr. E.B. Christian, mutated the names of the petitioners
in the Revenue Record and issued pattedar pass books and title deeds
to them.
23.      Under sub-Section (3) of Section 5 of the Pattedar Pass Books
Act, 1971, the 4th respondent was competent to do so.  This is not
disputed by the Special Government Pleader.
24.     The 4th respondent who was the successor to his predecessor is 
a statutory authority under the Act. He had given a report
dt.12.06.2006 to the 3rd respondent alleging that forged documents
were produced by petitioners, fraud was played upon his predecessor
and without producing records to show that petitioners are connected
with Dr. Naidu, the petitioners obtained pattedar pass books and title
deeds by way of misrepresentation, and he detected the fraud on
10.06.2006.
25.     It is pertinent to note that no third party had questioned the
mutation made in favour of petitioners on 15.10.2004 by the
predecessor of the 4th respondent.
26.      Also, it was not the case of 4th respondent that the land is
Government land, or that the land had escheated to the Government
under the provisions of the
Andhra Pradesh Escheats and Bona 
Vacantia Act, 1974
.  (This plea is raised in the arguments for the first
time by the Special government Pleader without any pleading in the
counter-affidavit.)
27.     The question is whether the 4th respondent, being a statutory
authority, whose predecessor had granted mutation to petitioners on
15.10.2004, could himself file a report to 3rd respondent and ask him
to treat it as an appeal under Rule 21(2) of the Rules framed under the
Act.  In fact, the 4th respondent was assailing the orders dt.15.10.2004
passed by his predecessor, who, in the capacity of a statutory
authority, had passed the order dt.15.10.2004.
28.     A Division Bench of this Court in P.V. Narasimha Rao and
others (2 supra) held that authorities under a statute are not entitled to
challenge orders passed under the Act and only the State, when its
rights are affected, can file an appeal or challenge the orders of
authorities passed under the Act.
This view was taken by the Division
Bench relying on the judgment of a Division Bench in
Mohtesham 
Mohd. Ismail v. Enforcement Directorate
, wherein the Supreme
Court, after considering the provisions of
Section 54
of the Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act, 1973, held as under:
16. An adjudicating authority exercises a quasi-judicial power
and discharges judicial functions. When its order had been set aside
by the Board, ordinarily in absence of any power to prefer an
appeal, it could not do so. The reasonings of the High Court that he
had general power, in our opinion, is fallacious. For the purpose of
exercising the functions of the Central Government, the officer
concerned must be specifically authorised. Only when an officer is
so specifically authorised, he can act on behalf of the Central
Government and not otherwise. Only because an officer has been 
appointed for the purpose of acting in terms of the provisions of the
Act, the same would not by itself entitle an officer to discharge all or
any of the functions of the Central Government. Even ordinarily a
quasi-judicial authority cannot prefer an appeal being aggrieved by
and dissatisfied with the judgment of the appellate authority whereby
and whereunder its judgment has been set aside. An adjudicating
authority, although an officer of the Central Government, should act
as an impartial tribunal. An adjudicating authority, therefore, in
absence of any power conferred upon it in this behalf by the Central
Government, could not prefer any appeal against the order passed
by the Appellate Board.(emphasis supplied)
29.     The above reasoning equally applies to the present case where
the 4th respondent, dissatisfied by his predecessors grant of pattadar
passbooks and title deeds to petitioners, filed the appeal before the 3rd
respondent.
30.     In the present case, it is not the case of respondents that the 4th
respondent was empowered by the State to file an appeal before the
3rd respondent.  No such authority from the State or its representative,
the District Collector, is referred to anywhere in the impugned
proceedings of either the 3rd respondent or the 4th respondent.
31.       Therefore, the principle
in
the above case
that authorities
under the statute cannot take up the case of the State and that a quasi
judicial authority, who decides a dispute on merits and passes the
orders, cannot be said to be an aggrieved party by its own orders,
would be attracted.
32.     Therefore, I hold that the 4th respondent could not have filed
any appeal in his personal capacity or any official capacity before the
3rd respondent challenging the orders of his predecessor.
Consequently, the 3rd respondent could not have treated it as an appeal
or could not have exercised any jurisdiction under the Act to set aside
the orders dt.15.10.2004 of the then Mandal Revenue Officer,
Zaheerabad, and the action of the 3rd respondent is therefore wholly
without jurisdiction.
33.     The Government Pleader however contended that since the  
order of the 3rd respondent has been confirmed by the 2nd respondent,
the 2nd respondents order ought to be treated as an order passed in
exercise of Suo motu Revision under
Section 9
of the Act against the
order dt.15.10.2004 of the Mandal Revenue Officer, Zaheerabad and
the said order cannot be interfered with.  This is equally without merit
for the reason that the 2nd respondent admittedly was approached by
the petitioners by filing a Revision under
Section 9
of the Act.
Therefore, the 2nd respondent cannot be said to have exercised any
Suo motu revisional power in the facts and circumstances of the case.
That apart, once the order of the 3rd respondent is held to be wholly
without jurisdiction, the order of the 2nd respondent confirming the
same has to be held to be erroneous and set aside.
34.     The contention of the Government Pleader that the order
dt.15.10.2004 of the 4th  respondent is contrary to law, and that the
said order would revive if the orders of respondent nos.2 and 3 are set
aside, and this cannot be permitted in view of the decision in
Maharaja Chintamani Saran Nath Shahdeo
(4 supra), is also 
without any merit.
35.
In the decision in
Maharaja Chintamani Saran Nath
Shahdeo
(4 supra), the Supreme Court held if setting aside an order
on the ground of lack of jurisdiction would result in the revival of an
illegal order, the order lacking jurisdiction should not be set aside.
The said principle has no application to the present case.
36.     As would be explained below, the order dt.15.10.2004 of the
then Mandal Revenue Officer, Zaheerabad cannot be said to be
contrary to law.
37.     The further contention of the learned Government Pleader that
notice should have been given by his predecessor before passing of
the order dt.15.10.2004 to the State Government, and that this is
mandated by sub-Section (3) of
Section 5
read with Rules 19 and sub-
Rule (2) of Rule 5, and that such procedure has been held to be
necessary in
Chinnam Pandurangam
(5 supra), is also without any 
merit.
38.     The orders passed by respondent nos.2 and 3 cannot be 
sustained by the learned Government Pleader by giving new reasons,
that too, raised for the first time in the arguments.
39.
In
Commissioner of Police v. Gordhandas Bhanji
, the
Supreme Court held that public orders, publicly made, in exercise of
statutory authority cannot be construed in the light of explanations
subsequently given by the officer making the order of what he meant,
or of what was in his mind, or what he intended to do. They have to be
construed objectively with reference to the language used in the order
itself.
40.
In
Mohinder Singh Gill v. Chief Election Commr
, the
Supreme Court reiterated:
8. ... ... when a statutory functionary makes an order based on
certain grounds, its validity must be judged by the reasons so
mentioned and cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape  
of affidavit or otherwise. Otherwise, an order bad in the beginning
may, by the time it comes to court on account of a challenge, get
validated by additional grounds later brought out. ... ... Orders are not
like old wine becoming better as they grow older.
41.     In the present case, no third party had approached the 4th
respondent complaining that he was deprived of an opportunity to
contest the amendment to the Record of Rights sought for by
petitioners.  Even the then Mandal Revenue Officer, Zaheeerabad
entertained no doubt about the right of petitioners to be substituted in
the place of Dr. Naidu.
42.      It is not in dispute that the Khasra Pahani for the year 1954-55
showed the name of Dr. Naidu.
43.     In Joint Collector, R.D.O., Chevella, v. Syed Ahmed Hasan
and others , a Division bench of this Court held that Khasra Pahani
is a Record of Right and entries therein shall be presumed to be
correct unless the contrary is shown.  It held that the Khasra Pahani
once prepared, is a Record of title and the same cannot be altered
without there being any proceedings issued by the competent
authority for the correction.
44.     Similar view has been taken in
Union of India v. Vasavi Co-
operative Housing Society Ltd.  that Khasra Pahani of 1954-55
was prepared as per the Record of Rights, regulations and the entries
therein have the force of  title by itself.
45.     This decision was followed in The Executive Officer, Sri
Bramaramba Mallikarjuna Swamy Temple v. Sai Krupa Homes     
rep. by Managing Partner, Sri Garavandulla Sambaiah S/o 
Lakshmaiah and Ors .
46.     So it cannot also be said that on 15.10.2004, when the then
Mandal Revenue Officer, Zaheerabad issued pattedar pass books and  
title deeds to the petitioners, he should have issued a notice to the
State Government anticipating the claim by the State Government for
title to the land.
47.     Moreover, in Sri Thripuravaram Krishna Reddy vs. The
Joint Collector and three Ors. , it was held that Revenue Divisional
Officer, being the appellate authority, is not empowered to exercise
his appellate jurisdiction unless a proper appeal in the prescribed form
with affixture of prescribed stamp is filed within the limitation period.
48.     In the present case the 4th respondent sent a report to the 3rd
respondent (Revenue Divisional Officer) and asked the latter to treat it
as an appeal, is thus a procedure unknown to law.
49.      It is nobodys case that the 3rd respondent had any powers of
Suo moto revision like the 2nd respondent.
50.      Therefore, on all these counts it has to be held that the very
filing of appeal by the 4th respondent before the 3rd respondent and its
entertainment by the 3rd respondent is wholly without jurisdiction and
so his orders are null and void, and the order of the 2nd respondent
confirming the same, is equally null and void.
51.     Therefore, Point (a) is answered in favour of petitioners and
against the respondents.
Point (b) :
52.     It is important to note that the contention that the subject land
had escheated to the Government on the death of Dr.Naidu, was not
the ground mentioned in the report dt.12.06.2006 sent by 4th
respondent to the 3rd respondent.
53.      This was also not the basis for the order of the 3rd respondent
or the order of the 2nd respondent.
54.     This contention was raised for the first time before this Court
by the Special Government Pleader to sustain the orders of the 3rd
respondent and 2nd respondent.  In fact, no such plea was taken in the
counter-affidavit filed by the respondents.  Therefore, I am firstly of
the opinion that the respondents cannot raise such a contention in this
Writ Petition in view of decisions in
Commr. Of Police
(7 supra) and
Mohinder Singh Gill
(8 supra).  Even otherwise, the said contention
has no merit.
55.      As per the
Andhra Pradesh Escheats and Bona Vacantia Act,  
1974
, the term escheat is defined in
Section 2 (ii)
as any property the
owner of which dies intestate, and without leaving a legal heir.  The
term bona vacantia is defined in
Section 2(i)
as including any
property, situated in the State of which there is no rightful owner.
56.       Though
Section 3
of the Act states that a property situated in a
State, which is vested in the State by escheat or lapse or as bona
vacantia for want of rightful owner shall belong to the Government,
the statute requires an enquiry under
Section 7
by a local officer on
receipt of information from any source that any property situated or
lying within his jurisdiction is of the nature of an escheat or a bona
vacantia.
57.       It further mandates that if he came to a conclusion that
property is of the nature of an escheat or bona vacantia, but it is in
possession of a person who has no authority to claim it and if such
person resists to surrender such possession on demand, under
Section 
8
of the said Act, he should obtain the sanction of a competent
authority and institute a suit in a Court for declaration of the
Governments right to the property and for recovery of possession of
such property.  Only after the Court declares that the property is an
escheat or bona vacantia, the local officer can obtain possession
thereof through the Court and manage it or dispose it of [Sub-Section
(2) of
Section 8
].
58.     In the present case, there has neither been an enquiry by the 4th
respondent that the land is escheat nor is there an attempt by him to
dispossess the petitioners before passing of the impugned order nor
has any suit been filed to declare that it is Governments property and
to recover its possession.
59.       On a presumption that the land is escheated to the
Government, a person cannot be dispossessed firstly and then forced
to establish his title in a Court of Law.  It is for the State to recover
possession by following the procedure prescribed in the Act from the
person in possession of it.  Therefore, the contention of the Special
Government Pleader that the Government is the owner of the land
because it escheated to the Government is without merit, since there is
no declaration from any Court under sub-Section (1) of
Section 8
of
the Andhra Pradesh Escheats and Bona Vacantia Act, 1974 to that  
effect, nor has possession of the said land been delivered to the
respondents by a Civil Court.
60.     Point (b) is answered accordingly against the respondents.
Point (c) :
61.     The basis of the order of the 3rd respondent is that a Will
executed by an Indian Christian (Dr.Naidu) required a probate and the
decision in S.A. Gyan Purshant Rao (1 supra) is relied upon for the
said proposition.  That decision was rendered after considering the
provisions of Section 57 and
Section 213(2)
of the Indian Succession
Act, 1925. This Court held that the Act requires a probate to be
obtained in respect of Wills executed by Indian Christians.
62.     But after this decision was rendered, there was an amendment
to sub-Section (2) of Section 213 by the
Indian Succession
(Amendment) Act, 2002
.  The effect of the amendment is that sub-
Section (1) of Section 213, which makes a probate necessary, was 
held by sub-Section (2) not to apply in the case of Wills of Indian
Christians also, which was not there earlier.  Therefore, it cannot be
said that in 2004 when the predecessor of 4th respondent accepted the
validity of the Will executed by Dr.Naidu, a probate was necessary.
Therefore, the contention of the Special Government Pleader that the
Will produced by petitioners was required to be probated under the
provisions of the
Indian Succession Act, 1925
, is equally without
merit.
63.     This point is answered accordingly against the respondents and
in favor of the petitioners.
Point (d):
64.     As stated above, the petitioners had produced a true copy of
File No.A1/1451/50 dt.04.06.1950 of the then Special Inspector for
Enquiry, Ownership Rights, Zaheerabad Taluq, Medak District in
support of the plea that Dr. Naidu, whose name was entered in the
Khasra Pahani for 1954-55, had converted as a Christian with the
name E.B. Christian.
65.       Though on 15.06.2016, this Court directed the Office of the
Advocate General to produce the record if any, in relation to the said
report, subsequent thereto no record is produced to doubt the said
document.  However, I am not expressing any final opinion on this
issue in view of my findings on Points (a) to (c) referred to above
since it is unnecessary to express any opinion thereon.
66.     Accordingly, the Writ Petition is allowed; and the order
dt.15.07.2016 of the 3rd respondent as confirmed by the order
dt.31.12.2010 of the 2nd respondent are both set aside as wholly
without jurisdiction; and the pattedar pass books and title deeds issued
to petitioners by the predecessor of the 4th respondent are declared as
valid.
67.     However, this will not preclude the 1st respondent from suing in
an appropriate Court for declaration of its title and recovery of
possession of the land from the petitioners, if it is so advised.
68.     The 1st respondent shall also pay costs of Rs.5,000/- to the
petitioners.
69.     As a sequel miscellaneous petitions pending if any in this Writ
Petition, shall stand closed.
__________________________________      
JUSTICE M.S.RAMACHANDRA RAO         
Date: 22-02-2017