[Cites
15
, Cited by
4
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Ms.Exotic Granites Exports vs State Of Telangana, Represented By Its ... on 27 January, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 HYDERABAD 72, (2017) 2 ANDHLD 513
Author:
A.V.Sesha Sai
Bench:
A.V.Sesha Sai
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A.V.SESHA SAI       

W.P.No.16298 of 2008  

27-01-2017 

Ms.Exotic Granites Exports....Petitioner

State of Telangana, represented by its Secretary, Industries and Commerce (MII)
Department, Secretariat Buildings, Hyderabad  and seven others. ...Respondents

Counsel for Petitioner::Sri T.Sreedhar.

Counsel for Respondents 1 to 3 and 5:GPs for Mines and Geology  
                             and Forests
Counsel for Respondent No.4 :Sri B.Narayana Reddy  

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? Cases referred
  AIR 1968 SC 718 
2 AIR 1970 SC 1273  
3 2016 SCC ON LINE TRI 14   
4 2014 (3) ALD 130 
5 2011 (5) ALD 335 AP 
6 2000 (1) ALD 658 
7 AIR 1987 AP 166  

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A.V.SESHA SAI       

W.P.Nos.16298/08 & 1234/09   

COMMON ORDER:
Since these two Writ Petitions are connected, this Court deems it
appropriate to dispose of these writ petitions by way of this common order.
For the sake of convenience, this Court deems it appropriate to refer to the
status of the parties as arrayed in W.P.No.16298 of 2008.
2.      W.P.16298 of 2008 is filed under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
India, for the following relief:
To issue writ order or direction more particularly one
in the nature of writ of mandamus declaring the proceedings
of the 1st respondent vide Memo No.5336/M.II(1)/2008-2
dated 11.7.2008 wherein according permission to the 5th
respondent to reject quarry lease application of petiitoner and
further according permission under Rule 12(5) (b) of
A.P.M.M.C.Rules, 1966 to the 5th respondent for overlooking
the priority and considering the application of 6th respondent
for grant of Quarry lease for quarrying black granite over an
extent of 4.916 hectares in Ingurthy Reserve Forest,
Warangal District as illegal, and arbitrary.
3.      W.P.No.1234 of 2009 is filed under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
India, for the following relief:
To issue writ, order or direction, more particularly in
the nature of Writ of Mandamus, declaring the grant of forest
clearance in favour of 3rd respondent by communication No.
4apb-100/2005-BAN/1748, dated 22-12-2006 as illegal, 
arbitrary and set aside the same; and (ii) direct the 1st
respondent to consider the proposals of the petitioner herein
for grant of forest clearance in respect of 4.90 hectares in
Compt. No. 1148 of Ingurthi Village (RF), K. Samudram
Mandal, Warangal Dist., under
Forest (Conservation) Act
.
4.      The facts and circumstances leading to the filing of the present writ
petition are as under:
5.      The petitioner herein submitted an application to the Assistant Director
of Mines and Geology, Warangal on 02.12.2002 for grant of black granite
quarry lease over an extent of 10 Hectares of forest land situated in
Compartment No.1148 of Ingurthi Reserve Forest Area of Kesamudram   
Mandal, Warangal district.  The said land is situated in Survey Nos.202 and
204/1. The said application was forwarded to the Divisional Forest Officer,
Warangal for necessary action under
Section 2
of the Forest (Conservation)
Act, 1980.  A joint survey was conducted by the Forest Department and
Mines Department on 16.12.2002.  The land available was found to be 4.916
Hectares.  Thereafter, revised application was submitted by the petitioner on
25.3.2003 to the said extent before the Assistant Director of Mines and
Geology and the same was forwarded to the Divisional Forest Officer,
Warangal and subsequently the same was processed to the Principal Chief 
Conservator of Forest-3rd respondent herein on 4.11.2003 under Rule 6(1) of
the Forest (Conservation) Rules, 2003.  Thereafter, vide letter bearing
No.723/For.I(1)2005-4 dated 27.6.2005, the 2nd respondent-State
Government made a request to the Chief Conservator of Forests (Central),
Government of India, requesting to obtain and communicate the approval of
Government of India for diversion of the applied forest area in favour of
petitioner herein for extraction of black granite. The  Government of India
vide letter bearing No.APB100/2005-BAN/489 dated 27.6.2006 accorded  
Stage-I approval in favour of the petitioner for diversion of 4.916 Hectares of
forest land for extraction of black granite in favour of the petitioner subject
to
the conditions stipulated therein.  In pursuance of the said approval, the
Divisional Forest Officer, Warangal, South Division, by virtue of proceedings
Rc.No.10244/2004/DM dated 31.7.2006 directed the petitioner herein to
deposit a sum of Rs.44,60,974/- towards the cost of afforestation, free
generation of safety zone area and for net present value of the forest area of
4.916 hectares.  In pursuance of the said proceedings, petitioner herein
deposited the amount indicated in the above said proceedings dated
31.7.2006 by way of demand draft and the petitioner also purchased 1.64
Hectares of land in Nagaram village and 4.31 Hectares of land in Katrapalli
village of Warangal district and registered the same in favour of the State
Government by way of sale deeds bearing document Nos.1016 and 1017 of   
2006 dated 2.8.2006. Subsequently, on 30.11.2006, the Principal Chief
Conservator of Forest, Hyderabad submitted a compliance report to the State
Government-2nd respondent herein.  Vide proceedings No.APB100/2005-   
BAN/124 dated 22.12.2006, the Government of India, Ministry of
Environment and Forests granted Stage-II approval in favour of petitioner
herein.  Subsequently, vide G.O.Ms.No.8, Environment, Forests, Science and 
Technology (FOR.I) Department dated 11.1.2007, the 2nd respondent-State 
Government accorded permission to the Principal Chief Conservator of
Forests, Hyderabad-3rd respondent herein for diversion of applied forest area.
On 31.7.2007, petitioner herein made a representation to the Director of
Mines and Geology, Hyderabad for grant of quarry lease.
6.      While the things being so, the 1st respondent-State Government, on
the request made by the Director of Mines and Geology, to prefer grant of
quarry lease in favour of A.P. Mineral Development Corporation Limited (6th
respondent herein) under Rule 12(5)(b) of A.P. Minor Mineral Concessions
Rules, 1960, directed the Mines and Geology Department to overlook the
prior applications and to grant quarry lease for black granite in favour of 6th
respondent-APMDC.   Thereafter, by way of G.O.Ms.No.135, Environment,   
Forests, Science and Technology (FOR.I) Department dated 4.12.2007,  
ordered cancellation of orders issued earlier in favour of petitioner herein
vide
G.O.Ms.No.8 dated 11.1.2007, while directing the Principal Conservator of
Forests to submit proposals under
Forest (Conservation) Act
for re-diversion
of the said area for extraction of black granite in favour of APMDC.  Assailing
the validity of the said memo dated 16.3.2007 and G.O.Ms.No.135 dated 
4.12.2007, petitioner herein filed W.P.No.7355 of 2007.  This Court, by way
of order dated 26.3.2008, quashed the said memo, while remanding the
matter to the authorities for fresh consideration, after giving notice and for
calling objections.
7.      Subsequently, the 1st respondent-State Government issued a show  
cause notice vide Memo No.5336/M.II(1)/2008-1 dated 14.5.2008, asking the
petitioner to show cause as to why the application of 6th respondent-APMDC
should not be preferred over the application of the petitioner.  In response to
the said show cause notice, the petitioner herein submitted its objections
dated 4.6.2008. Thereafter, the 1st respondent-State Government by virtue of
Memo bearing No.5336/M.II(1)/2008-2 dated 11.7.2008 accorded permission  
to the Director of Mines and Geology to reject the application of the petitioner
and to accord permission for overlooking priority and to consider the
application of the 6th respondent-APMDC under Rule 12(5)(b) of APMDC  
Rules, 1966.
8.      In the above background, pleading that the said order dated
11.7.2008 passed by the 1st respondent illegal, arbitrary, the present writ
petition came to be instituted.
9.      This Court while issuing rule nisi on 30.7.2008, granted interim stay of
all further proceedings pursuant to the impugned order, while making it clear
that the order shall not preclude processing of prior approval by the Ministry
of Environment and Forest under the provisions of
Forest (Conservation) Act,
1980
in favour of 6th respondent-Corporation.
10.     Responding to the rule nisi issued by this Court, counter affidavits
have been filed by the respondents, denying the averments and allegations
made in the affidavit filed in support of the writ petition and in the direction
of justifying the impugned action.
11.     Heard Sri T.Sreedhar, learned counsel for petitioner, learned
Government Pleaders for Mines and Geology and Forests for Respondents   
1 to 3 and 5, Sri B.Narayana Reddy, learned Assistant Solicitor General for
Respondent No.4 and learned Advocate General for Respondent No.6, apart  
from perusing the material available on record.
12.     It is contended by the learned counsel for petitioner that the
questioned order passed by the 1st respondent vide Memo No. 
5336/M.II(1)/2008-2 dated 11.7.2008  is highly erroneous, contrary to law
and violative of
Articles 14
and
19(1)(g)
of the Constitution of India.  It is
further submitted that since the Central Government already granted
approval in favour of the petitioner herein under
Section 2
of Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980, the very action of the 1st respondent in according
permission under Rule 12(5)(b) of A.P. Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 1966
is highly irregular and opposed to the very spirit and object of the provisions
of
Mines and Mineral Development and Regulation Act, 1957
, A.P. Minor 
Mineral Concession Rules, 1966 and
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980
and that
the action of the Respondents is a  patent contravention to Rule 6(3) of
Forest (Conservation) Rules.
13.     It is further submitted by the learned counsel that the application of
6th respondent is a subsequent one and the 6th respondent submitted its
application for quarry lease on 04.8.2003 and on 05.8.2003 and the said
application was returned on 03.6.2004 for re-submission and the
6th respondent represented the same with a delay of 274 days on 18.3.2005
and the said application ought not to have been processed as the same being
contrary to Rule 6(3)(a) and (f) of Forest (Conservation) Rules.  It is further
submitted that notwithstanding the said statutory bar, the 2nd respondent-
State Government forwarded the proposals to the Chief Conservator of
Forests, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Union of India on 26.3.2008.  It
is further submitted by the learned counsel that the impugned orders issued
by the 1st respondent vide Memo dated 11.7.2008 are in the nature of
reviewing the earlier orders issued vide G.O.Ms.No.8 dated 11.1.2007 and the
same is without jurisdiction in the absence of any power of review expressly
provided under the statute and the rules.
14.     It is further submitted by the learned counsel that there is no
clearance in favour of 6th respondent so far under
Section 2
of Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980 read with Rule 6(3)(a) and (b) of the Rules.  It is
further submitted by the learned counsel that the petitioner herein submitted
objections; to the show cause notice dated 14.5.2008 on 4.6.2008, but the 1st
respondent did not consider the contents of the said objections.  It is further
submitted by the learned counsel that when once No Objection Certificate is
issued in favour of one user agency, there is no question of Forest
Department considering and granting No Objection Certificate in favour of
another user agency for the same area or a part of it.  He further submitted
that the application made by the 6th respondent to the Central Government is
dated 14.8.2003 and the same was returned on 3.6.2004, but the 6th
respondent re-submitted the application on 18.3.2005 i.e. after 274 days
after its return.   The limitation for processing the application is 210 days as
per Rule 6(3)(a) of the Forest (Conservation) Rules.  Therefore, the
application of the 6th respondent is void application in the eye of law.
15.     It is further contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that
vide notification dated 17.03.2005 the Mineral Development Corporation
proposed for private participation, as such, the Corporation cannot claim any
exemption under
Section 2 (iii)
of the Forest Conservation Act, 1980.  It is
further submitted that the contention that the proposal was not forwarded
through the mines and Geological Development was neither pleaded in the
counter affidavit nor there is any material available on record to substantiate
the same.  It is further contended that the impugned action is unsustainable
in view of the provisions of
Section 115
of the Indian Evidence Act, which
deals with Promissory Estoppel.
In support of his submissions and contentions learned counsel for the
petitioner places reliance on the judgments of Honble Apex Court in
UNION OF INDIA (UOI) AND ORS. v. INDO-AFGHAN       
AGENCIES LTD
,
PATEL NARSHI THAKERSHI AND ORS. v. SHRI           
PRADYUMANSINGHJI ARJUNSINGHJI
, DHARAMPAL PREMCHAND                 
LIMITED v. UNION OF INDIA  and the Judgments of this Court in 
M/S. S.V.A. STEEL RE-ROLLING MILLS LTD. ETC. ETC. v. STATE OF        
KERALA AND ORS. ETC. ETC.
, KATTA RAMESH AND ANR. v. THE            
BRANCH MANAGER,
STATE BANK OF INDIA AND ORS.   and            
V. MURALI
v. GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH AND OTHERS .
16.     Per contra, the learned Special Government Pleader, appearing for the
Telangana State Mineral Development Corporation, contends emphatically 
that  there is no illegality nor there is any procedural lapses nor infirmity in
the impugned action, as such, the questioned action is not amenable for any
judicial review under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India.  It is further
argued by the learned Special Government Pleader that by way of
G.O.Ms.No.8, Environment, Frosts, Science and Technology (FOR.I)  
Department dated 11.1.2007, the State Government granted permission to 
the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests only for diversion of applied forest
area, but did not grant lease in favour of the petitioner to claim any sort of
vested right, as such, the contention of the learned counsel for the writ
petitioner that by way of G.O.Ms.No.135, Environment, Forests, Science and
Technology (FOR.I) Department dated 4.12.2007, the State Government  
illegally and unauthorisedly reviewed its earlier order vide G.O.Ms.No.8,
Environment, Forests, Science and Technology (FOR.I) Department dated  
11.1.2007 is neither sustainable nor tenable in the eye of law.  It is further
argued by the learned Special Government Pleader that the impugned action
does not amount to reviewing the approvals granted by the Union of India for
diversion of forest area vide orders dated 27.06.2006 and 22.12.2006.  It is
further submitted that the case of the petitioner does not attract the
provisions of
Section 115
of the Indian Evidence Act.  It is further contended
that vide  G.O.Ms.No.135, Environment, Forests, Science and Technology 
(FOR.I) Department dated 4.12.2007, the State Government only cancelled 
the permission for diversion of forest area and since the earlier orders,
granting approval are only administrative in nature, the State Government is
empowered to cancel the same as per
Section 21
of the General Clauses Act. 
It is further submitted that non-adherence to limitation as stipulated under
Rule 6 (3) of the Forest (Conservation) Rules, 2003 is not fatal and the said
stipulation is only directory in nature but not mandatory and on the said
ground the Telangana State Mineral Development Corporation cannot be non- 
suited.  It is further submitted that the petitioner herein cannot claim
legitimate expectation as the State Government never proposed to grant
lease in favour of the petitioner and did not pass any final order under
Section 2
of the Forest Conservation Act, 1980 and the petitioner never
invested anything subsequent to the approvals granted by the Union of India
under
Section 2
of the Forests Conservation Act, 1980; that the application of
the petitioner in W.P.No.16298 of 2008 was not forwarded through the Mines
and Geology Department of the State Government; that the respondents 
resorted to the impugned action in public interest and as per Rule 12 (5) (b)
of the A.P.Minor Mineral Concessions Rules, 1966; that in view of expiry of
the period of 10 years for which approval under
Section 2
of the Forest
Conservation Act was granted, the parties are required to make application
afresh. It is further submitted by the learned Government Pleader that no
approval in favour of the Mineral Development Corporation is necessary
under Section 2 of the Forests Conservator Act, since it is a Corporation.
The learned Special Government Pleader in support of his submissions
and contentions places reliance on G. RAGHAVA DAS AND ETC. ETC. VS.       
GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH AND ORS. And B.V. JOSHI VS.                
STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH AND ORS. .
17.     In the above backdrop, the issues that emerge for consideration and
which this Court is called upon to answer in the present writ petitions are:
1.      Whether the action of the State Government in cancelling the proposal
sent to the Government of India vide G.O.Ms.No.8, Environment,
Forests, Science and Technology (FOR.I) Department dated 11.1.2007  
for diversion of reserved forest area by way of the order vide
G.O.Ms.No.135, Environment, Forests, Science and Technology   
(FOR.I) Department dated 4.12.2007 is justified, authorised, legal,
valid and permissible and whether such action has legal sanctity?
2.      Whether the action of the State Government in sending the proposals
for diversion of forest area in favour of the Mineral Development
Corporation is in accordance with law or whether the same is barred
by limitation as stipulated under Rule 6 (3) of the Forests Conservation
Rules, 2003?
3.      Whether the action of the State government is contrary to the principle
of promissory estoppel and is opposed to the doctrine of legitimate
expectation?
4.      Whether the impugned action is in accordance with Rule 12 (5) (b) of
the A.P. Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 1966? 
Issues 1 and 3
18.     There is absolutely no controversy as regards the reality that the
application of the petitioner in W.P.No.16298 of 2008 is the first application.
Be it noted, that since the subject area is a forest area, the State Government
referred the matter for necessary approval under
Section 2
of the Forest
Conservation Act, 1980.  The said provision of law reads as under:
2. Restriction on the dereservation of forests or use
of forest land for non-forest purpose:- Notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force in a State, no State Government or other authority shall
make, except with the prior approval of the Central
Government, any order directing-
(i) that any reserved forest (within the meaning of the
expression reserved forest in any law for the time
being in force in that State) or any portion thereof, shall
cease to be reserved;
(ii) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be
used for any non-forest purpose;
(iii) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be
assigned by way of lease or otherwise to any private
person or to any authority, corporation, agency or any
other organisation not owned, managed or controlled
by Government;
(iv) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be
cleared of trees which have grown naturally in that land
or portion, for the purpose of using it for
reafforestation.]
      [Explanation.For the purposes of this section non-
forest purpose means the breaking up or clearing of any
forest land or portion thereof for
(a) the cultivation of tea, coffee, spices, rubber, palms,
oil-bearing plants, horticulture crops or medicinal
plants;
(b) any purpose other than reafforestation,
but does not include any work relating or ancillary to
conservation, development and management of forests and 
wild-life, namely, the establishment of check-posts, fire lines,
wireless communications and construction of fencing, bridges
and culverts, dams, waterholes, trench marks, boundary
marks, pipelines or other like purposes.]
19.     It is very much evident from a reading of the above provisions of law
that prior approval of the Central Government is mandatory and
indispensable before proceeding further with the consideration of the mining
lease application by the State Government.  In the instant case, the
respondent state government appositely sought such approval on the
application made by the petitioner.  The Union of India granted approval in
two stages viz., Stage One and Stage two.    For according such stage wise
approvals, the respondents directed the petitioner to comply with various
requirements such as deposit of Rs.44,60,974/- towards the cost of
afforestation and to register the alternative land in favour of the State
Government.  There is absolutely no dispute that the petitioner scrupulously
followed the said directions and acted accordingly by depositing the said
amount and by registering the land in favour of the State Government.
Thereafter only the Union of India granted second stage approval in favour of
the petitioner herein.  Thereafter, the application of the sixth respondent
came into picture and the State Government while cancelling G.O.Ms.No.8 
dated 11.01.2007 vide G.O.ms.No.135 dated 04.12.2007 directed the 
Principal Conservator of Forests to submit proposals under the
Forest
Conservation Act
for re-diversion of the subject area in favour of the Mineral
Development Corporation.  While referring to the said orders, it is the specific
contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that in view of the
approval already granted in favour of the petitioner by the Union of India, the
State Government has no power to send the proposal once again in favour of
the Mineral Development Corporation and the said action tantamounts to
reviewing its own decision and the said action has no legal sanctity.
20.     Resisting the said contention, it is the stand of the learned Special
Government Pleader that earlier orders are only administrative in nature and
as per the provisions of
Section 21
of the General Clauses Act, the impugned
action is permissible.  In this context, it may be appropriate to refer to the
provisions of
Section 21
of the General Clauses Act, 1897, which reads as
under:
21. Power to issue, to include power to add to, amend,
vary or rescind notifications, orders, rules or bye-laws:-
Where, by any 36 [Central Act] or Regulations a power to 37 [issue
notifications,] orders, rules or bye-laws is conferred, then that
power includes a power, exercisable in the like manner and subject
to the like sanction and conditions (if any), to add to, amend, vary
or rescind any 38 [notifications,] orders, rules or bye-laws so 39
[issued].
21.     There is no dispute on the legal principle that power to issue an
administrative order is inclusive of the power to cancel the same.  But, in the
instant case, the impugned action, by any stretch of imagination, cannot be
justified under the said provision of law.  In the present case, in discharge of
statutory function, the State Government secured the approval from the
Union of India in favour of the petitioner under
Section 2
of the Forest
Conservation Act, 1980.  G.O.Ms.No.8 dated 11.1.2007 is undoubtedly a 
consequence of and in furtherance of the said statutory function under the
A.P. Mineral Concession Rules, 1966.  It is a settled and well established
principle of law that the power of review cannot be exercised by the
authorities unless the same is expressly provided under the law.  The
contention of the learned Government Pleader that there is no final order
issued by the State Government under the provisions of
Section 2
of the
Forests Conservation Act cannot be sustained in the eye of law in view of the
clear language employed under the said provision of law, which confers
jurisdiction only on the Union of India to grant such approval.
22.
In this connection, it may be appropriate to refer to the judgments of
this Court and the Honble Apex Court in the case of
PATEL NARSHI 
THAKERSHI AND ORS
(supra 2) and V. MURALI (supra 6).
23.
In
PATEL NARSHI THAKERSHI AND ORS
(supra 2), the Honble       
Apex Court at paragraph No.4, held as follows:
4. The first question that we have to consider is whether Mr.
Mankodi had competence to quash the order made by the   
Saurashtra Government on October 22, 1956. It must be 
remembered that Mr. Mankodi was functioning as the delegate of
the State Government. The order passed by Mr. Mankodi, in law 
amounted to a review of the order made by Saurashtra
Government. It is well settled that the power to review is not an
inherent power. It must be conferred by law either specifically or
by necessary implication. No provision in the Act was brought to
our notice from which it could be gathered that the Government
had power to review its own order. If the Government had no
power to review its own order, it is obvious that its delegate could
not have reviewed its order. The question whether the
Government's order is correct or valid in law does not arise for
consideration in these proceedings so long as that order is not set
aside or declared void by a competent authority. Hence the same
cannot be ignored The Subordinate Tribunals have to carry out
that order. For this reason alone the order of Mr. Mankodi was
Liable to be set aside.
24.
In
V. MURALI
(supra 6),  this Court at  paragraph 12, held as follows:
12. The petitioner in WP No.9710 of 1992-thereafter preferred the
so called representation dated 28-11-1991 addressed to the
concerned Minister for Mines and Geology. The concerned Minister 
having entertained the representation reviewed the order passed
by the Government on 13-11-1991 and accordingly directed the
renewal of quarry lease in favour of the petitioner subject to
certain conditions. In my considered opinion, the orders dated
19-2-1992 suffer from incurable jurisdictional errors and legal
infirmities. The Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 1966 do not confer
any such jurisdiction upon the Government to review its own order.
There is no provision in the rules under which a review application
could have been preferred by an aggrieved person. The order
passed by the Government in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction
under Rule 35-A is final. It is entirely a different matter that even
an order passed under revision can be reopened if such an order
has been obtained by a person by playing fraud. Fraud vitiates
everything. But the Government under no circumstances can 
review its own order. The power to interfere with the order of the
Director, Deputy Director, Assistant Director is conferred upon the
Government by the statutory rules. That power of revision
conferred upon the Government can be exercised only in
accordance with rules. The power of the Government is regulated
and structured by statutory rules. Therefore, the order passed by
the Government in exercise of revisional jurisdictional cannot be
reviewed by the Government, as the said rules do not confer any
such power of review upon the Government.
25.     In the instant writ petition, it is not the case of the respondent
authorities that such power of review is expressly conferred on the State
Government either under the Act or the Rules.  Therefore, the very action of
issuance of G.O.Ms.No.135, dated 04.12.2007, asking the Principal Chief
Conservator of Forests to submit the proposal under
Forest Conservation Act,
1980
for re-diversion of the above said area for extraction of black granite in
favour of APMDC Limited, in the absence of any enabling provision of law, is
totally one without jurisdiction.  It is also significant to note that by asking
the said proposals to be sent in favour of the Mineral Development
Corporation, the State Government obviously sought the review of the
approval granted already by the Union of India in favour of the writ
petitioner.
Forests Conservation Act
or the Rules framed there-under do not
authorise the Central Government to reconsider and revoke the approvals
already granted.
26.     According to the learned counsel for the petitioner the impugned
action is contrary to the Principle of Promissory Estoppel and the doctrine of
legitimate expectation.  In this connection, it may be apt to refer to the
judgments cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
27.
In the case of
UNION OF INDIA (UOI) AND ORS.
(Supra 1),  the  
Honble Apex Court  at paragraphs 21 and 24, held as under:
21. This case is, in our judgment a clear authority that even
though the case does not fall within the terms of
s. 115
of the
Evidence Act, it is still open to a party who has acted on a
representation made by the Government to claim that the
Government shall be bound to carry out the promise made by 
it, even though the promise is not recorded in the form of a
formal contract as required by the Constitution.
24. Under our jurisprudence the Government is not exempt
from liability to carry out the representation made by it as to its
future conduct and it cannot on some undefined and
undisclosed ground of necessity or expediency fail to carry out
the promise solemnly made by it, nor claim to be the judge of
its own obligation to the citizen on an ex parte appraisement of
the circumstances in which the obligation has arisen. We agree
with the High Court that the impugned order passed by the
Textile Commissioner and confirmed by the Central Government 
imposing cut in the import entitlement by the respondents
should be set aside and quashed and that the Textile
Commissioner and the Joint Chief Controller of Imports and
Exports be directed to issue to the respondents import
certificates for the total amount equal to 100% of the f.o.b.
value of the goods exported by them, unless there is some
decision which falls within clause 10 of the Scheme in question.
28.     In the case of M/S. S.V.A. STEEL RE-ROLLING MILLS LTD. ETC.     
ETC. (Supra 4). the Honble Apex Court at paragraphs 30, 31 and 35 held
thus:
30. It is true that
Section 22B
of the Act enables the State
Government to regulate the supply, distribution and
consumption of electricity for the purpose of maintenance and
supply of equitable distribution of energy but in our opinion,
provisions of the said section are not much relevant for the
reason that in the instant case, the Respondent State had given
an assurance with regard to uninterrupted supply of electricity
and therefore, the Respondents ought to have made provision
for uninterrupted supply of electricity to the Appellants and
other similarly situated persons by regulating electricity supply
in a proper manner.
31. Framing such policies and doing the needful for its
implementation are administrative functions of the Respondent-
State and therefore, normally this Court would not like to
interfere with its policies but looking at the peculiar facts of the
case, where an assurance had been given for uninterrupted
supply of electricity, one would presume that the Respondent-
State must have made necessary arrangements to provide  
100% uninterrupted supply of electricity for 5 years to the new
units. If for any reason it was not possible to supply electricity
as assured, the Respondent-State ought to have extended the 
period of 5 years by the period during which assured electricity
was not supplied. By doing so, the Respondent-State could
have made an effort to fulfill its promise and satisfied the
persons who had acted on an assurance given by the State and 
set up their manufacturing units in the State of Kerala.
35. If an assurance was given to the Appellants and similarly
situated persons that they would be given 100% electricity
supply for five years, the Respondents can not wriggle out of
their liability by making a policy to the effect that the benefit by
way of incentive would be extended only if the electricity supply
was reduced to less than 50% on a particular day. A steel
industry, for example, which cannot function without electricity
or power in any other form, would be put to enormous
inconvenience and loss if the power supply is not continuous.
So as to reactivate or to restart the machines or to start the
process afresh, the industry has to spend something more then
what it would have spent if the supply or power namely,
electricity was uninterrupted. Stoppage of manufacturing
process would mean losses under several heads. The labour 
employed has to be paid even when the employer does not get 
work from the labour force. Very often, so as to bring a
required temperature for the purpose of carrying on certain
processes, more fuel is to be injected so as to attain the
condition which was prevailing prior to electricity supply being
disconnected. Moreover, there would be several overhead
expenses which one has to incur even if there is no production
or stoppage of manufacturing process.
29.     In the case of KATTA RAMESH AND ANR. (Supra 5), this Court at   
paragraph 8 held as under:
8. The law on doctrine of promissory estoppel is too well
settled.  Where a person makes a promise on the basis of which
another person acted and altered his position, the promissor
cannot be permitted to wriggle out of the promise so made to
the detriment of the promissee (See
Union of India v. Indo-
Afghan Agencies :
AIR 1968 SC 718, Motilal Padampat Sugar   
Mills Company, Ltd., v. State of U.P.
: (
1979) 2 SCC 409, D.C.M.
Ltd., v. Union of India
: (1996) 5 SCC 468, Pawan Alloys &
Casting (P) Ltd., v. U.P.S.E.B. : (1997) 7 SCC 251).
30.     In the case of DHARAMPAL PREMCHAND LIMITED (supra 3), the       
High Court of Tripura at paragraph 25, held as under:
25.
In
Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of Uttar
Pradesh and Ors.
, reported in : AIR 1979 SC 621, the apex
court while dwelling upon the doctrine of promissory estoppel
as the principle, evolved on equity to avoid injustice, has held
that it is neither in the realm of contract nor in the realm of
estoppel. The true principle of promissory estoppels seems to
be that where one party has by his words or conduct made to
the other a clear and unequivocal promise which is intended to
create legal relation or effect a legal relationship to arise in the
future, knowing or intending that it would be acted upon by the
other party to whom the promise as made and it is in fact so
acted upon by the other party, the promise would be binding on
the party making it and he would not be entitled to go back
upon it, it would be inequitable to allow him to do so having
regard to the positional change that had taken place between
the parties, and this would be so irrespective of whether there
is pre-existing relationship between the parties or not. The
doctrine of promissory estoppel need not be inhabitated by
same limitation as of estoppel in the strict sense of term. It is
an equitable principle evolved by the courts for doing justice
and there is no reason why it should be given only a limited
application by way of defence. There is no reason in logic or
principle why promissory estoppels should not be available as a
cause of action, if necessary to satisfy the equity. The apex
court has further elucidated the law as under:
"19. When we turn to the Indian law on the subject it
is heartening to find that in India not only has the
doctrine of promissory estoppel been adopted in its
fullness but it has been recognized as affording a
cause of action to the person to whom the promise is
made. The requirement of consideration has not been
allowed to stand in the way of enforcement of such
promise. The doctrine of promissory estoppel has also
been applied against the Government and the defence 
based on executive necessity has been categorically
negatived. It is remarkable that as far back as 1880,
long before the doctrine of promissory estoppel was
formulated by Denning, J., in England, A Division
Bench of two English Judges in the Calcutta High Court
applied the doctrine of promissory estoppel and
recognised a cause of action founded upon it in the
Ganges Manufacturing Co. v. Surajmuli and other :
(1880) ILR 5 Cal 669.
The doctrine of promissory
estoppel was also applied against the Government in a
case subsequently decided by the Bombay High Court   
in
Municipal Corporation of Bombay v. The, Secretary
of State
: (1905) ILR 29 Bom.
Issue No.2:
31.     The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the
State Government grossly erred in sending the proposal in favour of the
Mineral Development Corporation after expiry of time as stipulated under
Rule 6 (3) of the Forests Conservation Rules, 2003.  Opposing the said
contention, it is argued by the learned Special Government Pleader that the
inaction on the part of the State Government in sending the proposals, as per
the said Rule cannot be a ground for non-suiting the Mineral Development
Corporation.  In order to consider the said aspect, it may be appropriate to
refer to Rule 6 of the Forests Conservation Rules, 2003, which deals with the
submission of the proposals, seeking approval of the Central Government
under
Section 2
of the Act.  Rule 6 (3) (a) to (f) read as under:
6. Submission of the proposals seeking approval of the
Central Government under
section 2
of the Act.-
(3) (a) After having received the proposal, the State Government
or, the Union Territory Administration, as the case may be, shall
process and forward it to the Central Government within a period
of two hundred and ten days of the receipt of the proposal
including the transit period.
(b) The Nodal Officer of State Government or as the case
may be, the Union Territory Administration, after having
received the proposal under sub-rule (1) and on being
satisfied that the proposal is completed in all respects and
require prior approval under
Section 2
of the Act, shall send
the proposal to the concerned Divisional Forest Officer within
a period of 10 days of the receipt of the proposal :
Provided that on the determination regarding completeness
of the proposal or the expiry of the days, whichever is
earlier, the question of completeness or otherwise of the
proposal shall not be raised.
(c) If the Nodal Officer of the State Government or the Union
Territory Administration, as the case may be, find that the
proposal is incomplete, he shall return it within the period of
ten days as specified under clause (b), to the User Agency
and this time period shall not be counted for any future
reference.
(d) The Divisional Forest Officer or the Conservator of
Forests shall examine the factual details and feasibility of the
proposal, certify the maps, carry out site inspection and
enumeration of the trees and forward his findings in the
Format specified in this regard to the Nodal Officer within a
period of ninety days of the receipt of such proposal from
him.
(e) (i) The Nodal Officer, through the Principal Chief
Conservator of Forests, shall forward the proposal to the
State Government or the Union Territory Administration, as
the case may be, along with recommendations, within a 
period of thirty days of the receipt of such proposal from the
Divisional Forest Officer or the Conservator of Forests.
(ii) The State Government or the Union Territory
Administration, as the case may be shall forward the
complete proposal, along with its recommendations, to the
Regional Office or the Ministry of Environment and Forests,
Paryavaran Bhawan, CGO Complex, New Delhi- 100 003, as    
the case may be, in the specified Forms within a period of
sixty days of the receipt of the proposal from the Nodal
Officer.
Provided that all proposals involving clearing of naturally
grown trees on the forest land or a portion thereof for the
purpose of using it for reforestation shall be sent in the form
of Working Plan or Management Plan. Provided further that
the concerned State Government or as the case may be, the 
Union Territory Administration, shall simultaneously send the
intimation to the User Agency about forwarding of the
proposal, along with its recommendation, to the Regional
Office or the Ministry of Environment and Forests, as the
case may be.
(f) If the proposal, along with the recommendations, is not
received from the concerned State Government or the Union
Territory Administration, as the case may be, till fifteen days
of the expiry of the time limit as specified under clause (a),it
shall be construed that the concerned State Government or
as the case may be, the Union Territory Administration, has
rejected the proposal and the concerned State Government 
or the Union Territory Administration shall inform the User
Agency accordingly :
Provided that in case the State Government or the Union
Territory Administration, as the case may be, subsequently
forward the proposal, along with its recommendations, to the
Regional Office or the Ministry of Environment and Forests,
as the case may be the proposal shall not be considered by
the Central Government unless an explanation for the delay
to the satisfaction of the Central Government is furnished,
together with action taken against any individual held to be
responsible for the delay.
32.     The information available before this Court vividly reveals that the
Mineral Development Corporation submitted its application on 04.08.2003
and on 03.06.2004 the said application was returned with certain objections
and the Mineral Development Corporation represented its application on
18.03.2005 and the State Government forwarded the proposals to the Chief
Conservator of Forests.  But as per Rule 6 (3) of the above mentioned Rules
it is incumbent and obligatory that the application is required to be sent to
the Union of India within 210 days. Admittedly the same was sent beyond the
said statutory period.  No plausible explanation is forthcoming as to why the
said mandatory requirement was not adhered to.  It is a settled law that
when the law directs a particular aspect to be performed in a particular
manner, the same is required to be performed in accordance with the said
manner only and any deviation from the said mode and manner would render 
the entire exercise invalid.  Therefore issue No.2 is also answered in favour of
the petitioner and against the respondents.
Issue No.3:
33.     Yet another submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that
the impugned action is contrary to the principle of Promissory Estoppel  and
Doctrine of Legitimate Expectation.
Section 115
of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872 deals with Estoppel and it reads as under:
115 Estoppel. When one person has, by his declaration, 
act or omission, intentionally caused or permitted another
person to believe a thing to be true and to act upon such belief,
neither he nor his representative shall be allowed, in any suit or
proceeding between himself and such person or his
representative, to deny the truth of that thing. Illustration A
intentionally and falsely leads B to believe that certain land
belongs to A, and thereby induces B to buy and pay for it. The
land afterwards becomes the property of A, and A seeks to set
aside the sale on the ground that, at the time of the sale, he
had no title. He must not be allowed to prove his want of title.
34.     In the instant case, the respondents by their actions and conduct
made the petitioner to part with a sum of Rs.44,60,974/- and also made him
to purchase an extent of 1-64 hectares of land in Nagaram Village and 4-31
Hectares in Katrapally village and there is absolutely no dispute that the
petitioner registered the said land in favour of the State Government by way
of Sale Deeds bearing Doc.Nos.1016 and 1017 of 2006 dated 02.08.2006.  In 
this connection, it would be apt to refer to the judgments cited by the learned
counsel for the petitioner.  The principles
laid down in
the above judgments
are squarely applicable to the case on hand because in the present case also
the conduct of the respondents compelled and made the petitioner to pay the
amounts and to purchase the lands for afforestation.  Therefore, the
impugned action is contrary to the principle of Estoppel and the Doctrine of
Legitimate Expectation.  Therefore, the issue No.3 is also answered in favour
of the petitioner and against the respondents.
Issue NO.4:
35.     The contention of the learned Special Government Pleader that the
proposal of the petitioner was not sent through the Mines and Geology
Department in the State Government, as such, it was invalid proposal.  In this
connection, it may be appropriate to refer to the contents of the counter
deposed by the Deputy Conservator of Forests, Government of India,
Regional Office, Bangalore wherein it is stated that the Government of
Andhra Pradesh vide letter No.3137/FOR (2007-5 dated 26.03.2008 
forwarded the proposal for re-diversion of 4.916 Hectares of Forest land for
mining lease for approval.  Therefore, the said contention, in the considered
opinion of this Court, is highly unreasonable and cannot be approved having
regard to the facts and circumstances of the case.  Another significant aspect
which needs mention in this context is that the Mineral Development
Corporation vide notification dated 17.03.2005 invited applications for private
participation under the Joint Venture.  Therefore, the Mineral Development
Corporation is not entitled to claim under Rule 12 (5) (b) of the APMMC Rules
1966.  Once the private participation is invited the Mineral Development
Corporation cannot be treated specially for consideration on priority basis
under 12 (5) (b) of the aid Rules.  Therefore, issue No.4 is also answered in
favour of the petitioner and against the respondents.
36.     Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, the
Judgments cited by the learned Government Pleader would not render any 
assistance to the respondent authorities to support their case.
37.     For the aforesaid reasons, writ petition No.16298 of 2008 is allowed,
setting aside the proceedings of the 1st respondent vide Memo
No.5336/M.II(1)/2008-2, dated 11.7.2008, and consequently the respondents
are directed to consider the application of the petitioner for grant, as per
law.
As a consequence of this order and having regard to the reasons recorded
supra, W.P.No.1234 of 2009 is dismissed. No costs.
______________  
A.V.SESHA SAI, J  
Date:27.01.2017