[Cites
18
, Cited by
0
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Cement Corporation Of India Employees ... vs The Union Of India, Ministry Of Labour, ... on 7 February, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 (NOC) 756 (HYD.)
Author:
Challa Kodanda Ram
Bench:
Challa Kodanda Ram
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE CHALLA KODANDA RAM           

WRIT PETITION No.5487 OF 2007    

07-02-2017 

Cement Corporation of India Employees Union, Adilabad Cement  Factory,  
Adilabad, Andhra Pradesh (Now in Telangana State) ..... Petitioner.

The Union of India, Ministry of Labour, rep. by its Secretary, Sharama Shakthi
Bhavan, New Delhi and 5 others......Respondents

Counsel for the petitioner:  Sri K.R. Prabhakar

Counsel for respondents 1,2,5 & 6:Standing Counsel for Central
                                   Government
Counsel for the respondent No.3:G.P for Industries & Commerce. 
Counsel for the respondent No.4:Ms. V. Uma Devi. 

<Gist:

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1. 1997(5) ALT 696
2. (2005) 10 SCC 179 
3.(2003) 6 SCC 675 


THE HONBE SRI JUSTICE CHALLA KODANDA RAM           

WRIT PETITION No.5487 OF 2007    

ORDER:
The petitioner is an employees union of the employees who were
working with the 4th respondent (CCI) at its Adilabad Unit.     The brief
facts of the case are  that the 4th respondent Cement Corporation of India
is wholly owned  by the Central Government Company with 12 units 
situated at (1) Bokajan, 2) Rajban, 3) Thandoor, 4) Nayagoan, 5)
Adilabad, 6) Mandhar, 7) Kurkanta, 8) Akalthara, 9) Charkhi Dadri, 10)
Delhi, 11) Bhatinda, 12) Yerraguntla.   As the writ petition is concerned
in relation to the Adilabad Unit, necessary facts to that extent are only
being set out. As per the averments in the writ affidavit, the Adilabad
Unit has commenced the operation in September, 1992 with installed
capacity of 4.00 lakhs TPA.  As on the date of filing of the writ petition,
there were 98 workers in the said unit.  However, as on the date of
hearing of the writ petition as submitted by the learned senior counsel
for the petitioners, there were about 54 employees consisting of 52
employees, one executive and one supervisor.  The CCI was declared as a 
sick company within the meaning of
Section 2(o)
of the Sick Industrial
Companies Act, 1985 (SICA) (for short the Act) on 8.8.1996.  The
Industrial Financial Corporation of India (IFCI) was appointed as
operating agency under
Section 17(3)
of the Act for preparation of revival
scheme.  From time to time various draft schemes were submitted before
the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) (for short,
the BIFR) for rehabilitating the sick company, the CCI.   Finally by
order dated 28.07.2000, BIFR approved the rehabilitation scheme under
which  eight non operating units assets  were identified to be sold and to
rehabilitate 3 units  viz., 1) unit at Bokajan in North East, 2) Rajban in
Himachal Pradesh, 3) Thandur  in Andhra Pradesh now in Telangana. 
The order dated 28.07.2000 of the BIFR was challenged before the
Appellate Authority for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (AAIFR)
(for short the AAIFR) constituted under
Section 3(1)(b)
of the Act by the
petitioners union,  the Cement Sramic Sangh, ONGC  and M/s. K.C.P  
Limited.  The AAIFR by its order dated 17.11.2006 dismissed the appeals
of the Cement Sramic Sangh and the petitioners while giving certain
directions with respect to other appellants.  Challenging the order of the
BIFR dated 28.07.2000 as affirmed by the AAIFR by its order dated
17.11.2006, the present writ petition is filed.
Sri S. Ramachander Rao, learned Senior Counsel advanced the  
following propositions:
The action of the  respondents 1,2,4,5 and 6 in omitting
Adilabad unit of CCI from revival is illegal and
unconstitutional as it is vitiated by arbitrariness, lack of
bona fides and tainted with collateral considerations and is
utterly lacking in transparency apart from not being fair and
just and is openly violative of
Article 14
as being
discriminatory action.
The said action of respondents 1,2, and 4 i.e., in
mechanically and irrationally accepting the draft
rehabilitation scheme as revised at the instance of 4th
respondent, without application of mind and without
reasons, is utterly contrary to the doctrine of fairness,
application of mind and suffers from discriminatory
treatment and as such is utterly invalid in law apart from
being unconstitutional.
Respondents 5 and 6 did not even consider the Andhra 
Pradesh Governments  support, tax waiver and other
concessions for revival of Adilabad unit and totally ignored
the same and as such the impugned orders are liable to be
set aside as they are not only violative of principles of
natural justice, suffers from total non-application of mind
but also based on irrelevant material while  ignoring  the
relevant material and based on perverse findings.
Bokajan plant was declared by CCI itself as not viable for
revival but strangely it was included for revival and
expansion at a heavy cost for collateral considerations and
as such the same is partisan and invalid.
The action of the CCI, FIFR & AAIFR in not acting as per the
viability study reports submitted by the experts in that field,
such as Holtec, IFCI and Development Consultancy, is not
only illegal and discriminatory but also contrary to settled
principle of law with regard to sanctity of experts opinion.
The BIFR grievously erred in law in failing to implement its
own repeated findings and observations regarding viability
for revival of Adilabad unit and BIFR irrationally and without
application of mind accepted and acted on the revised Draft
Rehabilitation Scheme, which deliberately deleted Adilabad
unit for revival, at the instance of CCI, the litigant, without
even considering the valid Expert Opinion on the same.
Even in 2000, Government of India wanted revival of
Adilabad Unit and the action of failing to revive the same is
devoid of transparency and fairness in action.
The present action of 4th respondent in going for a bigger
plant in Andhra Pradesh without revival of Adilabad Unit is
arbitrary, irrational and is utterly devoid of bona fides apart
from illegal and discriminatory.
The Appellant Authority has neither applied its mind nor
has given any reasons in confirming the BIFR orders and its
order is a mere mechanical approval of original authoritys
order and hence the same is unsustainable in law.
It is the submissions of the learned senior counsel that the expert
body reports of Development Consultants Limited (for short, the DCL)
in 1997 and IFCI had identified the Adilabad unit as viable unit while
making adverse remarks in relation to Bokjan unit.   Even the Ministry of
Heavy Industry on 4.8.2000 directed a detailed report for revival of the
Adilabad unit while opining the other six units to be sold.  On
27.03.2001, Mr. F.A. Khan, Assistant General Manager, CCI reported 
that Bokjan and other three units are not viable units.  In August, 2005
in the Techno Economic Feasibility Report (TCFR) submitted by the
consultant appointed by the CCI, M/s.Holetec Consulting Private Limited
found Adilabad unit as viable unit for revival.  The Government of
Andhra Pradesh had also committed to extend the concessions to the  
tune of Rs.30.00 crores for revival of the Adilabad unit and the then
Central Minister himself designed to continue the Adilabad unit.  This
Court while admitting the writ petition granted the status quo order and
thereafter taking note of the above factors modified the status quo order
while allowing the Central Government to proceed with the proceedings
under the
I.D Act
restrained giving effect to the same.  In violation of the
orders of this Court, the respondents have proceeded with further.  The
draft rehabilitation scheme submitted by the  operating agency  on
5.12.2015 while noting in paras 1.9 to 1.17  of the scheme about the
earlier  rehabilitation plans of Adilabad unit erroneously  ignoring the
advantageous  of reviving the Adilabad unit circulated the draft scheme
with a proposal to close the Adilabad unit while providing for   revival of
Bokjan unit.  The same has been done on account of the pressure 
exerted by the Union Minister hailing from North East at relevant point of
time.   In approving the draft rehabilitation scheme, the BIFR  miserably
failed to  advert to  and deal with  the  various aspects of the
advantageous in rehabilitating  the Adilabad unit  as recommended by
the consultants viz., DCL, IFCI, Holetec and Government of Andhra
Pradesh apart from the assurances from the  Government of  Andhra 
Pradesh  now  Government of Telangana.  Like wise, the AAIFR also 
failed to consider and advert to the same.  Thus the orders suffer from
non consideration of the material on record violating the principles of
natural justice which vitiating the very decision making process affecting
the fundamental rights of the petitioners.   The orders also are vitiated
for not recording the reasons for not considering the recommendations of
the expert bodies.
Sri M. Surendera Rao, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf
of
Ms. V. Uma Devi
, learned counsel for the 4th respondent- CCI submits
that the Adilabad unit had stopped production in the year 1996 and on
27.3.2001 Government of India had decided to sell all units individually
or collectively.  However, efforts were made  from time to time  to explore
the possibility of  rehabilitating some of the units of the company  and
finally  the draft scheme  was circulated  in terms of the statutory
provisions  and after  taking into consideration of the  feasibility of
rehabilitating  of the company, the BIFR had approved the  drafts scheme
on 21.03.2006.  Learned counsel refutes the allegation that  the then
Union Minister from North East was involved in rehabilitating originally
identified unit in Bokjan unit from closure by drawing the specific
attention  to para No.1.13 of the scheme  that such decision was taken in
the year 2003 itself  whereas the union elections were held in 2004.  He
also refutes the allegations  that the letter dated 28.9.2004 of the
department of heavy industry is not reason  for rehabilitating  Bokjan
unit  as set out  in para 7.2.3 of the scheme.  By drawing attention of
this Court to para 44 of the writ affidavit wherein a reference was made
to W.P.No.1322 of 2006 (mistakenly mentioned as W.P.No.13221 of 2006)   
pending before the Delhi High Court, this Court granted initial status
quo order and now the said W.P was dismissed on 11.1.2008 along with  
two other writ petitions bearing W.P.No.4461 of 2007, 8295 of 2007.  The
Special Leave Petition challenging the orders of the Delhi High Court
were dismissed by the Supreme court vide its order dated 28.04.2008 in
S.L.P(C) No.10294 -10295 of 2008 as having no merits and thus the
orders of the Delhi  High Court attained finality.  As the present writ
petition is based on the Delhi High court writ petition as pleaded by the
petitioners themselves in para 44 of the writ affidavit, the present writ
petition is liable to be dismissed.  The plea of the petitioners itself
before this Court  based on the  orders of the writ petition pending
before the Delhi High court and in fact the orders passed by this
Court are only based on the  initial interim orders passed by the
Delhi High Court and on account of the dismissal of the writ
petition by the Delhi High Court, the present W.P to be dismissed.
He further submits that pursuant to the modification of the order dated
27.2.2008  Ministry of Labour and Employment, Government of India by
proceedings dated 14.07.2008  granted permission under
Section 25(o)
of
I.D. Act for closure of 7 units of the CCI  viz., 1) Mandhar, 2) Kurkunta,
3) Akaltara,. 4) Cherki Dadri, 5) Adilabad, 6) Nayagam and 7)
Delhi/Bhatinda Cement Grinding Unit.  The order of the G.O.I  was
upheld  in Civil W.P.No.9108 of 2008 by the Punjab and Haryana High
Court vide its order dated 23.10.2008 and  by the Indoor Bench of
Madhya Pradesh High Court in W.P.No.6582 of 2008 vide its order dated 
1.12.2008.  It is only in relation to Adilabad unit the CCI is unable to
proceed  incurring idle expenditure of about Rs.3.00 crores per annum.
Though as on 25.8.2008, there were 102 employees pending disposal of 
the writ petition many of the employees have accepted the VSS scheme  
and as on date only 54 employees are required to be settled.   Finally he
prays for dismissal of the writ petition submitting that the BIFR has
passed final orders after prolonged deliberations by following the
procedure as prescribed under the Act.
At the outset, it may be noted that  notwithstanding the pains
taking elaborately and persuasive argument of the learned senior counsel
in detail the sum and substance of the argument of the learned senior
counsel boils down to the effect  that leaving out Adilabad plant  for
rehabilitation and notwithstanding the considerable concession which
was extended by the State Government  and the agreed sacrifices from
various quarters  is an arbitrary decision and further even there was no
consideration of the  said aspect  by both the BIFR and Appellate Board;
that the decision to rehabilitate Bokjan Plant  in preference to the
Adilabad Plant is only for extraneous considerations and inasmuch as
there was no consideration of these aspects by the respective authorities,
the matter requires reconsideration and it is a case for remanding the
case for reconsideration by the Primary Authority itself. At the outset it
may be noted that it is not in dispute that the order of the appellate
authority was subject matter of challenge before a Division Bench of
Delhi High Court in W.P.(C) Nos.1322 of 2007, 4461 and 8295 of 2007
and the Delhi High Court had dismissed the writ petition by order dated
11.01.2008 and further the challenge to the same was also unsuccessful
before the Supreme Court on account of the dismissal of the S.L.P Nos.
10294-10295 of 2008 on 28.04.2008.  In para 4 of the Delhi High Court
judgment, it was recorded that the two unions of  Nayagaon Cement
Factory and Adilabad Cement Factory have filed their separate writ
petitions assailing the order dated 17.11.2006, passed by the AAIFR.
Third writ petition is filed by the Employees Union of Delhi Grinding
Unit.  This is how all the three writ petitions assailing the same order
were heard together and we proposed to decide the same by this common  
judgment.  From the above, it appears that the cause of the Adilabad
Unit as espoused in the present writ petition was also argued before the
Delhi High Court.  The Division Bench of the Delhi High Court after
elaborately referring to the scheme of the SICA in para 17 had held:
It was because of the aforesaid circumstances that
a conscious decision was taken by the Government of 
India to close down these unviable units.  The purpose,
therefore, sought to be achieved, is two-fold.  Not only to
get rid of the unviable units which are adding to
mounting losses, at the same time utilise the funds
generated from the sale of those units to make running
units viable.  With this process at least three units,
which are operational, have good chance to become 
profitable and because of this reason, the company will
revive and shall not be forced to wind up.  thus, even
though it may appear to be harsh to seven units, the
move is the only possible solution to save at least other
three units as the other alternative was to close all units
and wind up the company, which was a tentative opinion
formed by the BIFR on an earlier occasion.  If that
happens, in so far as the petitioners herein, viz., unions
of three units are concerned, they will face closure in
either case.
Notwithstanding the decision of the Division Bench of the Delhi
High Court, even if the present case is considered independently, at the
outset it may be noted that as on date there are only 52 workers, one
Executive and one Supervisor on the rolls of the company as against the
102 as on 25.2.2008.  The challenge is to the scheme is at the instance
of the workers.  When the draft scheme is circulated in terms of
Section
18
of the Act except submitting their objections, there is no alternative
workable scheme that was proposed either by the petitioners or by the
State Government.  It may also be noted that what is required to be
considered by the BIFR is the possibility of revival and rehabilitation of
the Sick Industrial Company as defined under
Section 2(o)
of the Act, but
not a Unit of the Sick company.  In other words, what is required to be
considered by the Board  is not the individual revival and rehabilitation
of individual units but the company as a whole.  In those circumstances,
the mere extension of certain  concessions by the State Government with
respect to an individual unit  and sacrifices that are made by the workers
with respect to their wages etc, though may be relevant cannot be the
sole basis to come to a conclusion that a particular sick company must
and should revive one of its units.
It may also be noted that the Adilabad unit which was started
some time in 1982 became a sick unit in the year 1996 and the
Government of Indias principal share holder had initially decided to
close and sell all the units and thereafter considering the various aspects
had come to a conscious decision to resurrect and rehabilitate three
units  and as one of the means of financing had decided to sell the other
units in the absence of valid reasons, cannot be found fault.  This Court
can also take judicial note of the fact that there are large technological
developments which are taken place in the Cement Industry and at any
rate if a new unit is to be established it would also be open for the
Government of India/Government of Talangana to proceed to do so.  But
the same need not be at the instance of and for the sake of 52 workers.
In the sanctioned scheme dated 3.5.2006, the BIFR had elaborately
considered at para 1.13 as to  why the Bokjan unit was required to be
rehabilitated and the BIFR had also considered the report of M/s.Holetec
Consulting Private Limited in para 7.2.  Aspects relating to the Bokjan
had specifically dealt in paras 7.2.3 and 10.3.  It is not necessary for this
Court once again to repeat what was in detail considered by the Division
Bench of the Delhi High Court with respect to the statutory scheme and
scope of
Sections 15
to
19
of the Act.  Further, there is no dispute with
respect to the specific contention that the permission granted by the
Government of India, Ministry of Labour and Employment under
Section 
25(o)
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the failure of the challenge
to the same  before the High Court of Punjab and Haryana and High
Court of Madhya Pradesh, Indoor Bench.  It may also be noted that there
is no challenge to the permission granted by the Government of India,
Ministry of Labour and Employment under
Section 25(o)
of the Act by
order dated 25/27.3.2008.
This Court is conscious of the scope of the interference under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India, with respect to the scheme
formulated and approved by the BIFR, which was held to be statutory in
nature.  A reference may be made to para 13 of the judgment of the Full
Bench of this Court in a case reported in
V.S.R Murthy and others vs.
Engineer In-Chief (Irrigation
) .
It may not be out of place to refer to the
caution expressed by the Supreme Court in the judgment referred in
International Finance Corporation and another vs. Bihar State
Industrial Development Corporation and others  with regard to
interference of the proceedings before the BIFR though in different
context, which reads as under:
Para 12 .............  It must be kept in mind that BIFR
has been statutorily conferred with special powers to
adjudicate upon the question of the revival of a
company and it has the necessary expertise at its
command for doing so.  If the Board has taken steps in
accordance with commercially advisable and legally
sustainable principles after considering the view of the
parties likely to be affected and in a manner which
may not be said to be irrational or perverse, the Court
should not interfere in the process.
In
Bombay Dyeing and Manufacturing Company  
Limited Vs. Bombay Environmental Action Group
, the Apex  
Court observed at paras 2, 314, 325 as under: 2. Whether any synthesis
between environmental aspects and building regulations vis--vis the
scheme floated by the Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (
for short BIFR) in terms of the provision of the Sick Industrial Companies
(Special Provisions ) Act, 1985 ( for short SICA herein is possible is the
core question involved in these appeals. 314. BIFR exercises its
jurisdiction under a statute; the objects where of are distinct and different
from a town planning scheme. BIFR is not a town planner. It is not a
development authority. It has nothing to do with the town planning or
development scheme or maintenance of ecological balance. BIFR was  
concerned only with the manner in which sick industrial undertaking
should be made to revive. Before passing the said order, it was required to
hear all concerned, namely, the management, the workmen, the financial
institutions, banks, etc., as also the operating agencies. It did so. 325. It
is
not in dispute that NTC was a sick company. As a sick company, it might
not have in a position to reopen any close mill at all. Reference to BIFR in
terms of
Section 16
of the Act evidently was made for the aforementioned
purpose. If the schemes sanctioned by BIFR are given effect to, at least
some of the NTC mills indisputably would be revived. SICA, we have
noticed hereinbefore, is a special statute. It was enacted by the Parliament
only with a view to meet the contingencies contemplated therein. The
validity or otherwise of the reference made by NTC to BIFR is not in
question. The writ petitioners did not question the validity of the statutory
schemes. No material has been brought before us to show even the 
workmen were in any way aggrieved thereby. Had they been so, they could 
have preferred an appeal before the BIFR. Even there does not exist any
material to show that at any point of time they had approached the High
Court in judicial review. The workmen were parties in the proceedings
before BIFR. Presumably BIFR made the said schemes after hearing of 
parties concerned including the workmen.
On 22.12.2016, when the matter came up under the caption for
pronouncement of judgment, learned Advocate General for the State of
Telangana appeared before this Court and made a request to defer
pronouncement on the ground that the State of Telangana was not made  
as a party respondent to the Writ Petition.   This Court sensitised the
learned Advocate General that though in the cause title, the State of
Andhra Pradesh was arrayed as a respondent, in view of the State
Reorganization Act, since the petitioner falls in the territorial jurisdiction
of the State of Telangana, it is to be construed automatically that the
State of Telangana is a party.  At the request of the learned Advocate
General, the matter was adjourned beyond Sankranti Vacation, 2017.
Today, when the matter has been listed under the same caption,
learned Special Government Pleader places before this Court an affidavit
sworn to by the Principal Secretary to Government, Information &
Technology Department holding Full Additional Charge of Principal
Secretary to Government and Commissioner of Industries Promotion, 
Industries and Commerce Department, Government of Telangana and   
requests that the same be taken on record.  No arguments as such have 
been advanced on behalf of the State of Telangana today. However,
acceding to the said request, the affidavit is taken on record.  In the said
affidavit, it has been stated as under:
It is submitted that the THEN State Government closed down
the Cement Corporation of India Limited, Adilabad District in the
year 1996 due to want of working capital.  Thereafter, a number of
representations were received from the local public as well as the
employees of the Cement Corporation of India Limited, Adilabad and
keeping in view of the same and after formation of State of
Telangana, the Telangana State Government intends to represent the
Union of India for the revival of the Cement Corporation of India
Limited, Adilabad District.  In the aforesaid circumstances, some
more time is required to persuade the matter with the Central
Government.
The above-quoted paragraph merely records that the State of
Telangana intends to represent to the Union of India seeking revival of
the Cement Corporation of India Limited, Adilabad District, considering
the number of representations received from the local public as well as
employees of the Cement Corporation of India Limited, Adilabad District.
Inasmuch as the learned Special Government Pleader requests this Court 
to deal with this aspect as well, it may be observed that the above-quoted
paragraph refers to revival of the Cement Corporation of India Limited,
Adilabad District.  The Cement Corporation of India Limited having a
number of units is different from the Cement Corporation of India
Limited, Adilabad District as there is no Company existing like Cement
Corporation of India Limited, Adilabad District in strict legal sense.
Probably, what the Principal Secretary means is Adilabad unit of Cement
Corporation of India Limited.
Inasmuch as the issue before the BIFR as well as the Appellate
Authority was the revival of the Cement Corporation of India Limited the
Sick Industrial Company with multiple units, the question of revival of
Adilabad Unit on stand alone basis does not arises.  However, it may not
be construed that if the State of Telangana or any other party interested
to rehabilitate or revive the Adilabad Unit, the same would have to be
strictly done in accordance with the scheme as approved by the BIFR
which aspect has already been dealt with in the preceding paragraphs.
In this context, it may also be noted that the letter dated
10.01.2017 addressed to Principal Secretary to Government,
Commissioner for Industrial Promotion & Mines, Industries & Commerce 
Department, Government of Telangana is placed on record by the learned
Standing Counsel for the CCI.  The learned counsel for the petitioner
objects for the said document to be brought on record.  The objection is
not sustainable as this letter, in fact, has no bearing on the facts or law
as considered by this Court in the preceding paragraphs. The sum and
substance of the said letter is that Union of India as of now is not
interested in rehabilitating the Adilabad Unit by itself, however, it gave
liberty to the State of Telangana or anybody interested to participate in
the tender process and purchase the assets and do whatever they desire
to do with respect to the unit.  In the facts and circumstances the letter
has no bearing on the decision arrived both on facts and law.
In the light of the above authoritative pronouncements referred
to supra and considering that the matter having been dealt with by the
Division Bench of the Delhi High Court and respectfully agreeing with the
same, this Court finds no merits in the writ petition and accordingly, the
writ petition is dismissed making it clear that the respondent-authorities
shall implement the scheme formulated with respect to the workers in
letter and sprit expeditiously. No order as to costs.
It may also be noted that by virtue of the SICA repeal Act, now there
is neither BIFR nor separate Forum is existing and all the pending
proceedings stand updated and now the aspect covered under earlier
SICA are required to be dealt with under the
Sick Industrial Companies
(Special Provisions) Repeal Act, 2003
(1 of 2004) notified on 28th
November, 2016 with effect from 01.12.2016 all things stand abated.  In
terms of the Repeal Act, the matters relating to any scheme under
implementation under Sub
Section 12
of
Section 18
of the Repealed
Enactment shall be deemed to be a sanctioned scheme are under   
implementation under
Section 24D
of the Companies Act, 1956 and shall 
be dealt with in accordance with the provisions contained in
Part-VIA of
the Companies Act, 1956
(1 of 1956).
Miscellaneous Petitions, if any, pending in this writ petition, shall
stand closed.
____________________________     
CHALLA KODANDA RAM,J       
Date:07.02.2017,