[Cites
1
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Foundation For Media Professionals vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir on 11 May, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 963, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 521
Author:
N.V. Ramana
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
,
R. Subhash Reddy
,
N.V. Ramana
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) ………. OF 2020
                                 (D. No. 10817 OF 2020)

FOUNDATION FOR MEDIA                                    … PETITIONER
PROFESSIONALS

                                        Versus

UNION TERRITORY OF JAMMU                               … RESPONDENTS
AND KASHMIR & ANR.
AND


                          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) ………. OF 2020
                                 (D. No. 10875 OF 2020)


SOAYIB QURESHI                                          … PETITIONER

                                        Versus

UNION TERRITORY OF JAMMU                               … RESPONDENT
AND KASHMIR
                                         AND


           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) ………. OF 2020
                  (D. No. 10904 OF 2020)
PRIVATE SCHOOLS ASSOCIATION              … PETITIONER
J AND K
                           Versus
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
THE UNION TERRITORY OF JAMMU                           … RESPONDENT
GEETA AHUJA
Date: 2020.05.11
13:07:37 IST
Reason:
AND KASHMIR
1
O R D E R
1.   Again, this Court is called upon to address a very important but a

     sensitive issue on national security and human rights, wherein we

     have to ensure that national security and human rights can be

     reasonably and defensibly balanced, a responsibility, that this

     Court takes with utmost seriousness.
2.   This Court, vide its earlier judgment dated 10.01.2020 in
Anuradha Bhasin v. Union of India
, (2020) SCC Online SC 25,

     gave certain directions regarding the imposition of restrictions on

     the internet in a proportionate manner. The aforesaid case had, in

     addition to the procedural rules, supplemented the requirements of

     having   timely   review   and   the   non­permanence   of   internet

     shutdown orders.
3.   The three Petitioners before us are aggrieved by the fact that

     Respondent No. 1 has restricted the mobile internet speed to 2G

     and have approached this Court seeking 4G mobile internet, and

     the quashing of the impugned orders restricting internet in the

     Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir.
2
4.   Broadly, the argument of the Petitioners is premised on the ground

     that in the existing COVID­19 situation, when there is a national

     lockdown, the restrictions imposed on the residents of the entire

     Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir impacts their right to

     health, right to education, right to business and right to freedom of

     speech and expression.
5.   They submit that access to internet acquires even more importance

     under the prevailing circumstances in the country, relating to the

     pandemic. The Petitioners contended that the fulfillment of the

     right to health is dependent on the availability of effective and

     speedy internet in order to access medical services and information

     on containment strategies. The denial of such critical information

     not only violates the peoples’ right to receive information, but is

     also a denial of their right to health. Furthermore, the Petitioners

     contend that restrictions on internet speed directly impacts the

     students of Jammu and Kashmir to exercise their right to

     education as they are unable to access to e­learning services such

     as online video classes, and other online educational content. This

     not   only   impacts     their   continuing   education,   but   also

     disadvantages the students of Jammu and Kashmir who are

     preparing for national/competitive exams. Petitioner in W.P. (C) D.
3
No. 10817 of 2020, has appended the affidavits of a journalist who

     collected testimonies of doctors, teachers, students, journalists,

     lawyers and business persons from the Union Territory, and of a

     technical expert narrating importance of 4G internet, to support

     the above submissions.
6.   Moreover, the Petitioners have argued that the actions of

     Respondent No. 1 are violative of the directions
laid down by
this

     Court in
Anuradha Bhasin
(supra) as well as the Temporary

     Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency or Public

     Safety) Rules, 2017 [“Telecom Suspension Rules”] as no Review

     Committee has been constituted by the Respondent No. 1. Further,

     the blanket orders passed by Respondent No. 1, indicates non­

     application of mind. Lastly, Respondent No. 1 has failed to provide

     any rational nexus between the restriction of the internet speed

     and national security. The Petitioners submitted that since the

     introduction of internet in the Union Territory of Jammu and

     Kashmir, the number of incidents relating to terrorism in the

     region have actually reduced. Lastly, the Petitioners pleaded in the

     alternative that if the Respondents apprehend the misuse of data

     services, then they could consider restricting the internet only in
4
certain problematic areas or providing 3G/4G internet to certain

     regions on a trial basis.
7.   The learned Attorney General preliminarily contended that Courts

     should not step into issues of national security which are best left

     to those in charge of policy making [refer to Zamora, (1916) 2 AC

     77 (PC)]. Further, the learned Attorney General relying on some

     judicial pronouncements submitted that the claims of fundamental

     rights have to be examined against the larger public interest of

     protecting the security of the State, wherein, while balancing the

     aforesaid conflicting rights, the security of the nation should

     triumph against the fundamental rights of the citizens. Moreover,

     in the prevailing circumstances wherein there is continuing

     insurgency in the region, the spreading of fake news to incite

     violence, etc., it would not be possible to provide full internet

     services to the region.
8.   Learned Solicitor General vehemently opposed the petitions and

     argued that the authorities have strictly complied with the

     directions passed by this Court on the previous occasion, and that

     the relevant authorities are cognizant of not only the changing

     circumstances but also the ground realities. The information
5
regarding COVID­19 available on various social media platforms,

government websites, applications developed by Respondent No. 2

for disseminating information can be easily downloaded over the

2G internet. Moreover, no restrictions exist over fixed line internet.

Advisories and documents relating to COVID­19 have already been

accessed by over 1 lakh health professionals in the Union Territory

of Jammu and Kashmir through fixed line internet. Further, to

ensure effective access to right to health, the Respondent No. 2 is

broadcasting information through various radio channels and

through satellite TV and local cable networks. 1.6 lakh pamphlets

and 90,000 posters in English, Urdu and Hindi are being

disseminated to the public. Wide publicity is also being given to

various helpline numbers which have been established for COVID­

19 related queries through print and electronic media. With respect

to the right to education of the students of Jammu and Kashmir,

lessons are being delivered on 16 DD channels at a national level,

and through the radio. The department has also undertaken the

distribution and delivery of textbooks, upto elementary level, to the

eligible students at their homes.
6
9.   The learned Solicitor General also highlighted the fact that over

     108 terrorist incidents have taken place in the recent past, between

     August 05, 2019 to April 25, 2020 in the Union Territory of Jammu

     and Kashmir. In view of the aforesaid fact, the learned Solicitor

     General submitted that the current situation in the Union Territory

     of Jammu and Kashmir is very grave and volatile, even referring to

     the recent terrorist activity in Kupwara District. The learned

     Solicitor General therefore submitted that the authorities have

     calibrated the restrictions based on the requirement so as to

     reduce the misuse of internet and that the measures adopted by

     the authorities are reasonable. He therefore prayed that the

     present petitions ought to be dismissed.
10. Before parting with the submissions of the parties, it may be stated

     that Respondent No. 1 submitted an additional note dated May 06,

     2020, after the hearing of the matter was concluded, wherein

     recent terrorist activities in the region, and the interest shown by

     the Pakistani military regarding the political developments in

     Kashmir, were highlighted. Petitioners in W.P. (C) D. No. 10817 of

     2020 and W.P. (C) D. No. 10875 of 2020 filed responses to the

     same on May 07, 2020 and May 06, 2020 respectively. Although

     the Petitioners have objected to the note filed by the Respondent
7
No. 1, taking into consideration the far­reaching consequences of

    the issues involved herein, we have considered the submissions of

    both parties.
11. Heard both the parties, and perused the documents placed before

    us.
12. At the outset, we have already laid down that the fundamental

    rights of citizens need to be balanced with national security

    concerns, when the situation so demands. This Court is cognizant

    of the importance of these matters for the national security

    concerns, and takes the same with utmost seriousness to ensure

    that citizens enjoy life and liberty to the greatest possible extent.

    National security concerns and human rights must be reasonably

    and defensibly adjusted with one another, in line with the

    constitutional principles. There is no doubt that the present

    situation calls for a delicate balancing, looking to the peculiar

    circumstances prevailing in the Union Territory of Jammu and

    Kashmir. Before considering the relief sought by the Petitioners, it

    is necessary to look at the steps taken by Respondent No. 1 after

    the pronouncement of the earlier judgment of this Court in
Anuradha Bhasin
(supra).
For, convenience, the table below
8
indicates the orders which have been passed since 10.01.2020

  (post
Anuradha Bhasin
(supra) judgment):
ORDER                            IMPLICATION
Home­03 (TSTS) of    For Kashmir, fixed line connectivity to
     2020            institutions managing essential services like
  14.01.2020         hospitals, after installation of firewalls and
                     whitelisting.
2G mobile internet to post­paid users to
                     access whitelisted sites in Jammu, Samba,
                     Kathua, Udhampur and Reasi.
No social media or VPNs.
Number of whitelisted sites: Not mentioned
Home­04 (TSTS) of    Fixed line connectivity to also be provided to
     2020            IT/software companies.
18.01.2020
                     2G mobile internet for postpaid users in all
                     districts of Jammu and Kupwara and
                     Bandipora in Kashmir for accessing white
                     listed sites.
Prepaid connections will be provided mobile
                     internet only after verification by TSPs as per
                     applicable norms
Home­05 (TSTS) of    Fixed line connectivity with MAC binding.
2020            Access only to whitelisted sites.
  24.01.2020
2G mobile internet restored in all districts of
                     J&K for postpaid and verified prepaid
                     customers but only whitelisted sites can be
                     accessed.
No social media or VPNs
Home­08 (TSTS) of    Restrictions mentioned in the Order dated
     2020            24.01.2020 will continue.
  31.01.2020
                     Number of whitelisted sites: 329
9
Home­ 09 (TSTS) of   Restrictions mentioned      in   Order   dated
      2020           31.01.2020 will continue.
   07.02.2020
                     Number of whitelisted sites: 481
Home­13 (TSTS) of    Fixed Line connectivity with MAC binding.
     2020            Access only to whitelisted sites.
  15.02.2020
2G mobile internet for postpaid and verified
                     prepaid customers but only whitelisted sites
                     can be accessed.
No social media or VPNs.
Home­16 (TSTS) of    Restrictions in Order dated 15.02.2020 will
     2020            continue to apply.
  24.02.2020
                     Number of whitelisted sites: 1674
Home­17 (TSTS) of    2G mobile internet for postpaid and verified
     2020            prepaid customers and access allowed to all
  04.03.2020         websites.
Fixed line connectivity with MAC binding to
                     access all sites.
Home­20 (TSTS) of    Restrictions in Order dated 04.03.2020 will
     2020            continue to apply.
  17.03.2020
Home­21 (TSTS) of    2G mobile internet for postpaid & verified
     2020            prepaid customers to access all websites.
  26.03.2020
Fixed line connectivity with MAC binding to
                     access all sites
Home­22 (TSTS) of    Restrictions in Order dated 26.03.2020 will
     2020            continue to apply.
03.04.2020
Home­28 (TSTS) of    2G mobile internet for postpaid customers &
     2020            verified prepaid customers to access all
  15.04.2020         websites.
Fixed line connectivity with MAC binding to
                     access all websites without any speed
                     restrictions.
10
Home­34 (TSTS) of       2G mobile internet for postpaid customers &
      2020               verified prepaid customers to access all
   27.04.2020            websites.
Fixed line connectivity with mac binding to
                         access all websites without any speed
                         restrictions.
13. The above measures taken by the Respondent No. 1 have to be

    seen in light of the circumstances already highlighted by the

    learned Solicitor General regarding the existing law and order and

    national security situations in the Union Territory, and the

    occurrence of incidents that affect the integrity of the nation. The

    learned Solicitor General stated that since 05.08.2019, around 108

    terrorist related incidents have taken place in Union Territory of

    Jammu and Kashmir, wherein 99 incidents were reported from the

    Kashmir province and 09 from Jammu province. In total, 30

    civilians have lost their lives and 114 civilians have been injured.

    Further, more than 20 security personnel have been martyred and

    54 security personnel have been injured. Moreover, 76 terrorists

    have been gunned down. These facts have not been rebutted by the

    Petitioners. This Court will have to consider the above in its

    analysis. It may be important to note that after this matter was

    reserved for orders, the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir
11
has   filed   another   note,   indicating    that   the   militancy   has

significantly increased in the recent times, in the following manner:
DATE            INCIDENT           DISTRICT     CONSEQUENCE
26.04.2020   Encounter at             Kulgam   01 person died
            Gudder Kulgam
27.04.2020   Encounter at  Kulgam                03 terrorists killed
             Lower Munda                         02 security force
           Qazigund Kulgam                       personnel injured
28.04.2020   Encounter at  Shopian               03 terrorists killed
               Melhoora                          02 security personnel
               Zainpora                          injured
                                                 01 civilian injured
29.04.2020      Grenade attack        Srinagar   04 CISF personnel
                   on police                     injured
                deployment at                    01 police personnel
                  Nowhatta                       injured
                   Srinagar
02.05.2020       Encounter at         Pulwama 02 terrorists killed
                 Dangarpora
02.05.2020       Encounter at         Kupwara 02 terrorists killed
                Najar Mohalla                 04 army personnel
                 Chanjimulla                  killed including two
                  Handwara                    senior officers
                                              01 Police SI killed
                                              01 SF personnel
                                              injured
02.05.2020  Grenade attack            Pulwama No damage caused
            upon CRPF at
           Tahab Pulwama
03.05.2020 Grenade attack Srinagar               No damage caused
             upon SFs at
              Nowshera
               Srinagar
04.05.2020 Firing attack on Kupwara              03 CRPF personnel
           CRPF at Wangam                        killed
               Karlgund                          01 Civilian killed
              Handwara                           01 CRPF personnel
               crossing                          injured
12
04.05.2020  Grenade attack Srinagar        01 CISF personnel
                   upon CISF                    injured
                 Bunker at Grid
                Station Wagoora
                Nowgam Srinagar
     05.05.2020 Grenade attack Budgam           01 CRPF personnel
                    on police                   injured
                 deployment at                  01 Police personnel
                  Pakharpora                    injured
                    Budgam                      04 civilians injured
Respondent No. 1 has also pointed to certain material, which

     indicate that cyber terrorism, is on the rise within the valley. The

     Respondent No. 1, has brought to the notice of this Court that the

     Pakistani Military in its “Green Book 2020” has called for an

     information warfare on Kashmir, after the revocation of special

     status of Jammu and Kashmir.
14. While it might be desirable and convenient to have better internet

     in the present circumstances, wherein there is a worldwide

     pandemic and a national lockdown. However, the fact that outside

     forces are trying to infiltrate the borders and destabilize the

     integrity of the nation, as well as cause incidents resulting in the

     death of innocent citizens and security forces every day cannot be

     ignored.
13
15. However, the authorities in the Union Territories of Jammu and

    Kashmir have selected the 2G speed to restrict the flow of

    information in order to prevent misuse of data by terrorists and

    their supporters to disturb the peace and tranquility of the Union

    Territory of Jammu and Kashmir.
16. In any case, we may note that the common thread in the impugned

    orders is that they have been passed for the entire Union Territory

    of Jammu and Kashmir.
In this regard, our observations in the
Anuradha Bhasin
(supra) may be of some relevance:
“The degree of restriction and the scope of the
              same, both territorially and temporally, must
              stand in relation to what is actually necessary
              to combat an emergent situation.”

    Although the present orders indicate that they have been passed

    for a limited period of time, the order does not provide any reasons

    to reflect that all the districts of the Union Territory of Jammu and

    Kashmir require the imposition of such restrictions. At the same

    time, we do recognize that the Union Territory of Jammu and

    Kashmir has been plagued with militancy, which is required to be

    taken into consideration. These competing considerations needs to

    calibrated in terms of our judgment in
Anuradha Bhasin
(supra).
14
17. One of the criteria for testing the proportionality of the orders is the

     territorial extent of the restrictions.
In view of the observations

     made in
Anuradha Bhasin
(supra), for meaningful enforcement of

     the spirit of the judgment, inter alia, the authorities are required to

     pass orders with respect to only those areas, where there is

     absolute necessity of such restrictions to be imposed, after

     satisfying the directions passed earlier.
18. In this regard, our attention is drawn to the fact that blanket

     orders have been passed for the entire territory rather than for

     specific affected areas.
19. A perusal of the submissions made before us and the material

     placed on record indicate that the submissions of the Petitioners,

     in normal circumstances, merit consideration. However, the

     compelling circumstances of cross border terrorism in the Union

     Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, at present, cannot be ignored.
20. Additionally, although the Petitioners have argued that the orders

     passed by Respondent No. 1 reveals non­application of mind,

     however, at the cost of repetition, it must be noted that the

     authorities have been taking steps towards easing of internet

     restrictions taking into account the prevailing circumstances. This
15
can be seen from the fact that initially only whitelisted websites

    were allowed, before internet access to all websites was provided on

    broadband, and finally to postpaid and verified prepaid mobile

    users as well, although at 2G speeds. Further, the various steps

    taken by Respondent No. 1 with respect to ensuring the

    fundamental rights of the people, in relation to the existing COVID­

    19 pandemic, must also be taken into account.
21. During the course of the arguments, the Respondent No. 2­ Union

    of India has submitted that continuous infiltration, foreign

    influence, violent extremism and issues of national integrity are

    prevalent in the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, which are

    serious issues.
22.
In
Anuradha Bhasin
(supra), this Court has alluded to the fact

    that modern terrorism is being propagated through the internet

    and by using technology in the following manner:
“39. Modern terrorism heavily relies on the
              internet. Operations on the internet do not
              require substantial expenditure and are not
              traceable easily. The internet is being used to
              support fallacious proxy wars by raising
              money,      recruiting      and       spreading
              propaganda/ideologies. The prevalence of the
              internet provides an easy inroad to young
              impressionable minds….”
16
23. At the same time, the Court is also cognizant of the concerns

    relating to the ongoing pandemic and the hardships that may be

    faced by the citizens. It may be noted that in the earlier judgment

    of
Anuradha Bhasin
(supra) this Court had directed that, under

    the usual course, every order passed under Rule 2(2) of the

    Telecom Suspension Rules restricting the internet is to be placed

    before a Review Committee which provides for adequate procedural

    and substantive safeguards to ensure that the imposed restrictions

    are narrowly tailored. However, we are of the view that since the

    issues involved affect the State, and the nation, the Review

    Committee which consists of only State level officers, may not be in

    a position to satisfactorily address all the issues raised. We,

    therefore, find it appropriate to constitute a Special Committee

    comprising of the following Secretaries at national, as well as State,

    level to look into the prevailing circumstances and immediately

    determine the necessity of the continuation of the restrictions in

    the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir:
a.   The Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs (Home Secretary),
              Government of India.
17
b.   The Secretary, Department of Communications, Ministry
              of Communications, Government of India.
c.   The Chief Secretary, Union Territory of Jammu and
              Kashmir


    The aforesaid Special Committee shall be headed by the Secretary,

    Ministry of Home Affairs (Home Secretary), Government of India.
24. The Special Committee is directed to examine the contentions of,

    and the material placed herein by, the Petitioners as well as the

    Respondents. The aforesaid Committee must also examine the

    appropriateness of the alternatives suggested by the Petitioners,

    regarding limiting the restrictions to those areas where it is

    necessary and the allowing of faster internet (3G or 4G) on a trial

    basis over certain geographical areas and advise the Respondent

    No. 1 regarding the same, in terms of our earlier directions.
25. The writ petitions are disposed of in the afore­stated terms.

    Pending applications, if any, shall also stand disposed of.     The

    Registry is directed to communicate this order, along with a copy of
18
the paperbooks of the present petitions, to the aforesaid Special

    Committee.
...............................J.
                                                        (N.V. RAMANA)



                                              ...............................J.
                                               (R. SUBHASH REDDY)



                                               …...........................J.
                                                           (B.R. GAVAI)

NEW DELHI;
MAY 11, 2020.
19