[Cites
1
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Alapati Jyotsna vs Union Of India on 26 May, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 572
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Dinesh Maheshwari
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
Writ Petition (Civil) No._____ of 2020 (Diary No.11011 of 2020)
         Alapati Jyotsna & Others vs. Union of India & Others
                                                                                                    1
                                                                               NON-REPORTABLE

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                             CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                     WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No.                  OF 2020
                                                (D.No.11011 of 2020)


                         Alapati Jyotsna & Others                                      …Petitioners

                                                          VERSUS

                         Union of India & Others                                      …Respondents




                                                     JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.     This Petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India seeks

                         appropriate orders directing the Respondents to conduct “single counselling”

                         for filling up seats in the Post Graduate Medical Courses leading to Degrees

                         and Diplomas and the seats in DNB (Diplomate of National Board) Courses.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MUKESH KUMAR
Date: 2020.05.26
15:34:59 IST
Reason:
Writ Petition (Civil) No._____ of 2020 (Diary No.11011 of 2020)
Alapati Jyotsna & Others vs. Union of India & Others
2
2.       On 01.11.2019, a Notification was issued and Information Bulletin was

        published for holding NEET-PG1 2020 examination. The relevant portions of

        the Information Bulletin are as under:-
“…
                   SCOPE OF NEET-PG 2020
                   NEET-PG 20202 shall be the single qualifying cum
                   ranking examination for admission to Post Graduate
                   MD/MS/Diploma Courses for the academic session
                   2020 which will include the following:
i. All India 50% quota seats (all States & UT’s)
                   ii. State quota seats. (including the UT’s)
                   iii. All Private Medical Colleges, Institutions &
                   Universities/ Deemed Universities all across the
                   country
                   iv.    Armed Forces Medical Services Institutions
                   v. DNB (Post MBBS) Courses.
                   …
                   …
3. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS, TERMS AND
                   CONDITIONS

                   3.1 NEET-PG 2020 is a qualifying-cum-ranking
                   examination for admission to MD/MS/Post Graduate
                   Diploma Courses of 2020 admission session. NEET-
                   PG 2020 will be conducted by National Board of
                   Examinations. Candidates may note that NBE has no
                   role regarding counselling and allotment of seats
                   except for DNB courses. NBE will not entertain any
                   queries regarding availability of seats, counselling and
                   allotment of seats other than for DNB Courses.
                   …..
…..
15. COUNSELLING FOR PG SEATS
1
National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (Post Graduate)
Writ Petition (Civil) No._____ of 2020 (Diary No.11011 of 2020)
Alapati Jyotsna & Others vs. Union of India & Others
3
The Merit Based Counselling for allotment of PG seats
                  shall be in accordance with gazette notification dated
                  31.07.2017. As per the Gazette notification:
“The Designated Authority for counselling for the 50%
                  All India Quota seats of the contributing States, as per
                  the existing scheme for Diploma and M.D./M.S.
                  courses shall be the Directorate General of Health
                  Services, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
                  Government of India. Further, the Directorate General
                  of Health Services, Ministry of Health and Family
                  Welfare, Government of India shall conduct
                  counselling for all post graduate courses (Diploma,
                  M.D./M.S.,D.M/M.Ch) in Medical Education
                  Institutions of the Central Government, Universities
                  established by an Act of Parliament and the Deemed
                  Universities.
The counselling for admission to Diploma and
                  M.D./M.S. in all Medical Educational Institutions in a
                  State/Union Territory, including, Medical Education
                  Institutions established by the State Government
                  University established by an Act of State/Union
                  Territory Legislature, Municipal Bodies Trust, Society,
                  Company or Minority institution shall be conducted by
                  the State/Union Territory Government.
The counselling authorities for allotment of various
                  types of seats to eligible and successful candidates is as
                  follows:
S. No. Types of                        Counselling
                          seats                           Authority
                   1.     All India 50% quota             Directorate
                          AFMS         and     ESI        General        of
                          Institutions     Medical        Health Services,
                          Educational Institutions        Ministry       of
                          of      Central   Govt.         Health & Family
                          Universities established        Welfare, Govt.
                          by an Act of Parliament         of          India
                          Deemed Universities.            Website:
                                                          www.mcc.nic.in
Writ Petition (Civil) No._____ of 2020 (Diary No.11011 of 2020)
Alapati Jyotsna & Others vs. Union of India & Others
4
2.       State quota seats in All      State
                            Medical Institutions in a     Government or
                            State and seats in            authority
                            institutions established      designated by
                            by       State     Govt.,     the       State
                            Universities established      Government.
by Act of State/Union
                            Territory     Legislature,
                            Municipal Bodies Trust,
                            Society, Company or
                            Minority Institutions.
Candidates are advised to regularly visit the website of
                  MCC, NBE & State Counselling Authorities for latest
                  updates. … …
17. NEET PG FOR DNB COURSES
                  The merit list of NEET-PG 2020 shall be utilized by
                  National Board of Examinations for admission to
                  various Post MBBS DNB courses. No separate DNB
                  CET shall be conducted.
…
                  17.3 ALLOTMENT OF SEATS
                  The allotment of seats will be done by NBE based on
                  NEET-PG 2020 marks and merit position.
NBE will publish a separate information bulletin for
                  admission to Post MBBS DNB courses.”
3.       The petitioners 1 to 4 appeared in the examination and secured ranks

      35057, 35071, 45906 and 39667 respectively. In the counselling undertaken

      by the Medical Counselling Committee, going by their ranks, the petitioners

      could not get Degree courses or courses of their choice. Their grievance is that

      it is only after the regular seats of Post Graduate Courses leading to Degree and

      Diploma are exhausted that the counselling for DNB courses is undertaken; and

      those who have secured any seat in courses leading to Degrees and Diplomas
Writ Petition (Civil) No._____ of 2020 (Diary No.11011 of 2020)
Alapati Jyotsna & Others vs. Union of India & Others
5
are disentitled to lay any claim for DNB courses. Their grievance as culled out

      in one of the grounds taken in the Writ Petition is as under:-
“V. Because the candidates like the petitioners are
                  being deprived of their choice of allotment as the
                  counselling for DNB seats is not being conducted by
                  the Medical Counselling Committee. The All India
                  quota consists of various kinds of seats including
                  payment seats and free seats. Suppose the petitioners
                  select a payment seat or a discipline about which they
                  are not keen, they cannot opt out and wait for
                  counselling by the National Board of Examinations for
                  DNB seats. They may or may not be allotted seat in
                  DNB courses. If the counselling is conducted through
                  a single stream for the DNB courses also, the
                  candidates will be free to opt for either a payment seat
                  of a seat in DNB courses. Now as they are not sure of
                  getting a seat in DNB, they cannot forfeit their seat in
                  the MD and MS courses through the same are not of
                  their choices.”
4.       This Writ Petition came up on 29.04.2020 when the following order was

      passed by this Court:-
“Mr. Anumolu submitted that NEET Examination
                  is the qualifying examination for admissions to Post
                  Graduate courses leading to Degrees of MS and MD as
                  well as various Diplomas, whereafter the rankings in
                  the NEET Examination are taken into account to fill up
                  the seats available for Diplomate of National Board
                  (DNB) Courses. However, the candidates who are
                  selected either for said Post Graduate Degree or
                  Diploma Courses are not entitled to put in their
                  candidature for DNB Courses.
Mr. Anumolu further submitted that DNB Courses
                  have been made equivalent to Post Graduate Degrees
                  of MS and MD. Resultantly the candidates who may
                  get selected for Diploma Courses would thereafter lose
Writ Petition (Civil) No._____ of 2020 (Diary No.11011 of 2020)
Alapati Jyotsna & Others vs. Union of India & Others
6
the chance to be considered for courses like DNB
                  which are equivalent to Degree courses and would thus
                  be put to great prejudice.
Issue notice, returnable on 08.05.2020.”
5.       Thereafter concerned respondents put in their appearances and

      considering the urgency in the matter, all the learned counsel were finally heard

      on 08.05.2020 at the notice stage. At the request of the learned counsel

      appearing for the respondents they were granted some time to place on record

      their responses along with relevant documents and material.
6.       The submissions in the affidavit in reply of the National Board of

      Examination which is the designated authority to conduct NEET-PG 2020

      Examination are as under:-
“10. It is respectfully submitted that the rank obtained
                  by a candidate in the NEET-PG is utilized for various
                  counsellings including All India Quota, State Quota
                  and DNB seats.
11. It is respectfully submitted that the counselling of
                  All India Quota seats of post graduate medical courses
                  is being conducted by the Medical Counselling
                  Committee, DGHS, Central Government (hereinafter
                  referred to as “MCC”) First round of which
                  commenced on 12.03.2020 and was ultimately
                  complete by 24.4.2020 with various candidates joining
                  the allotted institutes, the details whereof are set out in
                  the affidavit of the Union of India. In terms of letter
                  U-12021/44/2019-MEC dated 06.05.2020 issued by
                  the MCC, time to resign from the allotted institute
Writ Petition (Civil) No._____ of 2020 (Diary No.11011 of 2020)
Alapati Jyotsna & Others vs. Union of India & Others
7
through First round of counselling, has been extended
                  to 12.5.2020 in view of the COVID 19 Pandemic.
12. It is respectfully submitted that in the meanwhile,
                  the answering respondent vide notice dated 1.5.2020
                  had initiated their counselling process for the DNB
                  seats and the 1st Round of Counselling for DNB seats
                  has commenced on 8.5.2020.”
                                           ………
14. It is therefore respectfully submitted that since
                  the counselling process for the DNB seats has already
                  been initiated vide public notice dated 1.5.2020 and the
                  DNB seat matrix is already out, candidates can
                  reasonably assess their options on the basis of their
                  merit in the NEET-PB Examination, 2020.
15. It is respectfully submitted that in terms of the
                  extant counselling process, a candidate who has
                  participated in the first round AIQ can also participate
                  in the first round DNB, the results whereof will be
                  declared by 22.05.2020. If the candidate prefers the
                  allotment made to him in the 1st Round DNB to the
                  allotment made to him in the 1st Round AIQ, he can opt
                  for the same. If on the other hand he is not satisfied
                  with either, he can move out and seek to participate in
                  the further rounds of AIQ Counselling and DNB
                  Counselling, in accordance with the terms and
                  conditions are set out in the respective brochures for
                  the same. It is therefore submitted that the grievance
                  of petitioner that they are not given sufficient
                  opportunity and choice is even otherwise
                  misconceived.
………
17. It is respectfully submitted that as on 12.05.2020,
                  13527 candidates have registered for the counselling
                  for the DNB seats and the answering Respondent has
                  floated 3069 DNB (Post MBBS) seats for the First
                  round of counselling. It is relevant to mention herein
                  that few DNB (Post MBBS) seats are likely to be added
                  in the Second round of counselling.
Writ Petition (Civil) No._____ of 2020 (Diary No.11011 of 2020)
Alapati Jyotsna & Others vs. Union of India & Others
8
………
                  COMMON COUNSELLING FOR THE NEXT
                  ADMISSION SESSION OF 2021:
19. It is submitted that after some deliberations
                  between Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Govt.
of India and the answering Respondent, the answering
                  Respondent agreed “in principle” for consideration for
                  conducting common counselling for DNB PG seats
                  alongwith MD/MS seats from the next year and
                  accordingly a letter dated 27/02/2020 was sent to the
                  Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Govt. of India.”
7.       The Medical Council of India in its response submitted:-
“7. It is submitted that at the post-graduate level in the
                  field of Medicine the specialty/subjectare divided
                  under two categories-Clinical and Non-clinical. It is
                  relevant to submit that the preference of every student
                  is to first get a seat in Clinical subjects, and then aim
                  for securing a seat in their preferred Clinical subject in
                  which the student is desirous of taking admission and
                  pursue further studies. Seats in Non-Clinical subjects
                  at the post-graduate level are not the preferred choice
                  of students and there are very few students who opt for
                  these seats.
8. It is humbly submitted that at the post graduate
                  level the entire counselling process from the
                  perspective of the students revolves around the
                  specialty/subject in which the student is able to secure
                  the seat based on their rank in the NEET examination.
                  It is further submitted that generally students prefer to
                  opt for Diploma or DNB course in Clinical subject over
                  Post Graduate Degree Course in Non-Clinical subject.
9. It is further submitted that the objective behind
                  conducting online common counselling is to provide a
                  level playing field to all the candidates. It ensures that
                  the meritorious students as per their NEET rank are
Writ Petition (Civil) No._____ of 2020 (Diary No.11011 of 2020)
Alapati Jyotsna & Others vs. Union of India & Others
9
given the first preference to opt for the
                  subject/specialty in which they intend to take
                  admission, subject to the availability of seats in
                  Clinical and Non-Clinical subjects. Further, online
                  common counselling conducted by DGHS is a single
                  window system to allot seats in PG Medical Courses
                  (MD/MS/and Diploma seats). It would benefit the
                  students to include DNB courses in the said online
                  common counselling, thereby, giving the students
                  equal opportunity to compete for all the available seats
                  in the above-mentioned courses.
10. In the respectful submission of the answering
                  respondent, it would be in the larger interest of the
                  students that they are given the option of choosing
                  between MD/MS and Diploma seats as well as DNB
                  courses in the online common counselling conducted
                  by DGHS. In other words, the allotment of seats in
                  DNB courses may be done by the DGHS at the time of
                  online common counselling for All India Quota seats
                  in MD/MS and Diploma seats. This will ensure that
                  the students have the option of choosing seats of their
                  choice in MD/MS and Diploma seats as well as DNB
                  seats.
11. It is further submitted that as far as the admission
                  for the academic year 2020-21 is concerned the 1st
                  round of counselling for 50% All India Quota seats in
                  MD/MS/Diploma and MDS courses is already
                  concluded and seats have been allotted to the students.
                  In the respectful submission of the answering
                  respondent, at this juncture, to turn the clock back and
                  redo the whole exercise will lead to a complete and
                  avoidable chaos. It is most humbly and respectfully
                  submitted that direction, if any, be passed by this
                  Hon’ble Court may be made applicable from the next
                  academic session 2021-22.”
8.       The stand taken by the Union of India, Ministry of Health and Family

      Welfare is to the following effect:-
Writ Petition (Civil) No._____ of 2020 (Diary No.11011 of 2020)
Alapati Jyotsna & Others vs. Union of India & Others
10
“11. The petitioners herein were well aware in the
                  month of November, 2019 that there are two systems
                  of P.G. Medical counselling, for MD/MS Courses the
                  counselling for 50% AIQ/Central Universities/Deemed
                  Universities/Central Institutes is conducted by Medical
                  Counselling Committee (MCC) and for the remaining
                  50% State Quota seat is done by respective DMEs.
                  Further, it was also categorically mentioned that
                  counselling for DNB seats is to be done by National
                  Board of Examination at their level as per NBE Rules
                  and Regulations for admission to various Post
                  Graduate DNB Courses on the basis common merit
                  which students get through NEET-PG Examination.
                  Despite being well aware that there would not be
                  common counselling and it may result in a scenario
                  where they have to choose between the two, the
                  petitioners choose not to challenge it at the relevant
                  time.
………
15. As per the schedule for first round of counselling
                  total 41,903 candidates had participated in the NEET
                  PG, 2020 Counselling (Medical and Dental) and
                  14,381 Candidates had been allotted a seat through the
                  NEET PG Counselling, 2020 (Medical & Dental) and
                  9,071 Candidates have joined the allotted college either
                  by online or physical reporting to the
                  concerned/allotted college (Medical & Dental) till
                  24.04.2020 upto 05:00 p.m.
                                           ………
22. The answering Respondent is ready and willing to
                  conduct a common Counselling for MD/MS and DNB
                  Courses from the next academic session i.e. 2021-22.”
9.       As stressed in the responses of the National Board of Examination as

      well as of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare the counselling and

      consequential process of admission is now at an advanced stage.          The
Writ Petition (Civil) No._____ of 2020 (Diary No.11011 of 2020)
Alapati Jyotsna & Others vs. Union of India & Others
11
submission made by the petitioners, if accepted at this stage, would result in

      complete disturbance of the process of admission for the present year. At the

      same time the submission raised by the petitioners has found acceptance in the

      response of the Medical Council of India particularly in paragraphs 8 and 10.
Insofar as the present year is concerned, in view of the amendments to the

      Schedule as a result of Covid 19 Pandemic, a window of opportunity was still

      available to the concerned candidates as stated in paragraph 15 of the response

      filed by the National Board of Examination.
10.      Since the petitioners have approached the Court at a stage where the

      entire process has been undertaken and many candidates have been allocated

      various courses in the Counselling, we do not deem it appropriate to pass any

      direction for the present year. However, going by the assertions made in the

      response filed by the Medical Council of India, we may observe that a common

      counselling or single online counselling in the coming years would definitely

      take care of any similar grievance. Even paragraph 19 of the response filed by

      the National Board of Examination, the designated authority to conduct NEET-
PG, 2020 Examination accepts that said authority is agreeable “in principle” to

      conduct common counselling from the next year.
Writ Petition (Civil) No._____ of 2020 (Diary No.11011 of 2020)
Alapati Jyotsna & Others vs. Union of India & Others
12
11.      Consequently, while refusing to pass any directions in so far as the

      present year is concerned, we hope that the authorities will be able to have

      common counselling for DNB PG seats along with all Post Graduate seats

      leading to Degrees and Diplomas as set out in paragraph 19 of the response of

      the National Board of Examination so also in paragraph 22 of the response of

      Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for coming years starting with NEET-
PG 2021 Examination.
12.      This Writ Petition stands disposed of accordingly.
.………..…..……..……J.
                                                                  (Uday Umesh Lalit)




                                                                  ..………….……………J.
                                                                   (Dinesh Maheshwari)

      New Delhi;
May 26, 2020.