[Cites
27
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Gopal Prasad vs Bihar School Exam. Board on 28 May, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 568
Author:
Indira Banerjee
Bench:
Ajay Rastogi
,
Indira Banerjee
1


                                                                            REPORTABLE



                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.8225 OF 2012




                         Gopal Prasad                                    … Appellant


                                                       versus

                         Bihar School Examination
                         Board & Others                                 … Respondent




                                                JUDGMENT
Indira Banerjee, J.
I have gone through the draft judgment prepared by my


                           esteemed brother, but have unfortunately not been able to


                           agree that the appeal should be dismissed.
2.   The appeal is against an order dated 3.8.2012, passed by a
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Patna,
Date: 2020.05.28
15:31:34 IST
Reason:
dismissing Letters Patent Appeal No.1090 of 2012 and affirming
2
the order of the Single Bench dated 24.4.2017 dismissing the


Writ Petition CWJC No. 7718 of 2012, filed by the Appellant.
3.    The Appellant was appointed as Calligraphist-cum-Assistant


of the Bihar School Examination Board on 20 th May 1970, at


about 15½ years of age . It is not in dispute, that on the date of


appointment of the Appellant, that is, 20 th May 1970 there was


no minimum age prescribed for appointment to the post of


Calligraphist-cum-Assistant. However, the minimum age of entry


into pensionable service was 16 years. This meant that the


period of service of an employee before attaining the age of 16


years, would not count towards pension.
4.    By a Government circular dated 15 th January 1998 issued

by the Personnel and Administrative Reforms Department of the

State of Bihar, the minimum age for appointment to an inferior

service under the Government of Bihar was fixed at 18 years.

The said circular, fixing the minimum age for appointment at 18

years, which was issued almost 18 years after the appointment

of   the   petitioner,   was   prospective   and   applied   only   to
3
appointments made after issuance of the said circular.
5.    The terms and conditions of service of employees of the


Bihar School Examination Board are governed by the Bihar


Service Code.    Rule 73 of the Bihar Service Code inter alia


provides that “The date of compulsory retirement of a


Government Servant is the date on which he attains the age of


58 years.    He may be retained in service after the date of


compulsory retirement with the sanction of State Government


on public grounds, which must be recorded in writing.”
6.   On 15th January 2004, the Bihar School Examination Board


resolved to treat the age of entry into service, of those


incumbents who were below 18 years at the time of joining


service, as 18 years at the time of their appointment.
7.    The relevant extract of the resolution, as translated in


English, is extracted hereinbelow for convenience:-
“Today dated 15th January, 2004 meeting of Board of
       Bihar Schools Examination Committee held in the
       Room of the Chairman. In which Dr. Jitender Singh,
       Chancellor, Patna University, Patna and Shri Subhash
       Chander Chaudhary, Assistant Teacher, C.M. High
4
School, Siwan participated as Members in addition to
         the Chairman.
Proceedings

       Agenda No. 1 :          …………

       Agenda No.2 :

     Regarding employees        After analysis of the legal advice received
     having age less than 18    in the light of the judgment taken in the
     years appointed in the     meeting of the Committee held on
     Committee                  18.11.2003 about the employees having
                                age less than 18 years appointed in the
                                Committee, Hon’ble Member Dr. Jitender
Singh, chancellor Patna University, Patna
                                informed that proceedings should be
                                initiated in Committee also under the letter
                                No.1961 dated 12.11.1995 from the
                                Secretary, Higher Education Department,
                                Bihar Patna. According to the provision of
                                the said letter, decision was taken
                                unanimously that employees who have
                                been appointed in the Bihar Schools
                                Examination Committee at the age below
                                18 years, taking their age at 18 years as on
                                the date of their appointment, they be
                                superannuated on completion of age of 60
                                years in the case of Category-4 and on
                                completion of age of 58 years in case of
                                Category-3.
8.     On a bare reading of the said resolution, it is patently clear


that employees who had been appointed before attaining the


age of 18 years, were to be deemed to have attained the age of


18 years on the date of their appointment and that they would


superannuate on completion of 60 years of age if they were


Category-4 employees and on completion of 58 years of age in


case they were Category-3 employees. The age of 58 years for
5
category-3 employees was, later, during the tenure of service of


the Appellant, increased to 60 years.
9.   The resolution may not have perfectly been worded. In my


view, the resolution was a beneficial one in the interest of those


employees who would otherwise have been deprived of


pensionary benefits for the period of service rendered by them


before attaining the age of 18 years. Such employees were to


be deemed to be 18 years on the date of their appointment, so


that they were not deprived of pensionary benefits for part of


their service period, but were to retire on attaining the age of


retirement as prescribed in Rule 73 of the Bihar Service Code.


The resolution might also have been necessitated by reason of


irregular appointments after the Circular dated 15 th January


1998 of persons who had not attained 18 years of age, to put all


disputes with regard to the legality of their appointment to rest.


It does not appear that the resolution was intended to retire


employees who had joined service before attaining the age of


18 years, before completion of their actual age of retirement,
6
as per the Rules.
10. If it were the intent of the resolution, that employees


appointed before attaining the age of 18 years, would retire


before attaining the actual age of retirement, as per Rule 73 of


the Bihar Service Code, the language and/or wording of the


resolution would have been different. The resolution would then


have expressly stated that, the date of birth of employees,


appointed before attaining the age of 18 years, would, for the


purpose of retirement, be deemed to be the date on which the


concerned employee would have been born, if he/she were to


complete 18 years of age on the date of appointment.         The


Resolution would clearly have stated      that such employees


would retire on attaining the age of retirement prescribed in the


Bihar Service Code on the basis of their deemed date of birth,


notwithstanding the fact that they may not have attained the


age of retirement as per the Bihar Service Code as per their


date of birth as recorded by the Bihar School Examination


Board.
7
11. As observed above the date of retirement of the employees


of the Bihar School Examination Board is governed by Rule 73 of


the Bihar Service Code.    No decision to decrease the age of


retirement of    employees who had joined service before


attaining the age of 18 years, could in my view, have been


taken without amending Rule 73 of the Bihar Service Code in


accordance with law. There could be no question of amendment


of any provision of the Bihar Service code merely by a resolution


of the Bihar School Examination Board.
12. On 14th February 2004 an Office Order was issued to the


Appellant, the contents of which, as translated, are extracted


hereinbelow:-
“Shri Gopal Prasad, Assistant got appointment in
        Bihar School Examination Committee in the age
        less than 18 years,       The minimum age for
        appointment in service in any of the Government
        (Semi-Government) Autonomous Institutions has
        been prescribed at 18 years. Decision has been
        taken in the meeting of the Bihar Schools
        Examination Committee held on 15.01.2004 that
        taking their age at 18 years as on the date of their
        appointment,     they    be    superannuated     on
        completion of age of 60 years in the case of
        Category-4 and on completion of age of 58 years in
8
case of Category-3.
Therefore, treating the age of Shri Gopal Prasad,
          Assistant at 18 years as on the date of his
          appointment i.e. 27.05.1970, as per the directions,
          orders are issued to record his date of retirement in
          Service books as 31.05.2010.”
13.   The order dated 14th February 2004 in so far as the same

purports to record the date of retirement of the Appellant as 31 st

May 2010 in his Service Book, is contrary to Rule 73 of the Bihar

Service Code and also beyond the scope and ambit of the

resolution taken on 15th January 2004.        Any prescription of

minimum age for appointment, subsequent to the appointment

of the Appellant, could not retrospectively be applied to the

Appellant.
14.   From the pleadings filed in connection with this appeal, it is

not clear whether the Appellant objected to the said Office Order

dated 14th February 2004.     In any case, an office order which is

patently illegal and entails adverse civil consequence is not

precluded from challenge on the ground that the aggrieved

employee may not have objected to the office order, and more

so, when the legality of similar orders was awaiting adjudication

in Courts of law. There were various writ petitions pending in the
9
High Court, on the question of whether persons who had joined

service before attaining the age of 18 years could unilaterally be

retired before they actually attained the age of retirement

stipulated in Rule 73 of the Bihar Service Rules, because they

were to be deemed to have completed 18 years of age on the

date of their appointment. It is also a matter of record that many

of these writ petitions were decided in favour of the employees,

instances of which have been given later in this judgment.
15. It is not in dispute that the Appellant’s date of birth is 19 th

November 1954 as per the records of the Bihar School

Examination Board.       It is nobody’s case that the date of birth of

the Appellant as recorded, that is 19 th November 1954, is not his

correct date of birth.
16.   The Appellant’s date of birth being 19th November 1954 he

was to complete 58 years of age on 19 th November 2012. The

age of retirement was, however increased to 60 from 58 years,

before 18th November 2012.       The Appellant’s date of birth being

19th November 1954, he was to complete sixty years of age on

18th November 2014.
10
17. As   observed     above,   long   before   the   Appellant    was

appointed in service of the Bihar School Examination Board,

Rule 5 in Appendix-5 of the Bihar Pension Rules was amended.

The qualifying age of government servants for consideration of

pensionary   benefits    was    raised   from   16    to   18    years.

Governmental    authorities,    however,    continued      to   appoint

employees who had not attained eighteen years of age.
18.   On or about 16 th February 2012, the Appellant’s son filed

an application under the
Right to Information Act
, enquiring

about the date of superannuation fixed by the Board for his

father’s retirement.
19.   By a letter dated 26th March 2012 the Board informed the

Appellant’s son that in view of the decision dated 14 th February

2004, the Appellant’s age as on 27th May, 1970 was to be

considered 18 years and therefore his retirement was to be on

31st May 2010, on completion of 58 years, which age had later

been increased to completion of 60 years. The date of

retirement would therefore be 31st May 2012.
20.    Thereafter, the Appellant filed the writ petition CWJC
11
No.7718 of 2012 in the High Court of Patna challenging the

       communication dated 20th March 2012 under the
Right to

       Information Act
and also the order dated 14th February 2004.
21.     By an order dated 24th April 2012, the Single Bench

       dismissed the writ petition, relying upon the Full Bench judgment

       of the Patna High Court In
Ragjawa Narayan Mishra and

       Another vs. Chief Executive Officer, Bihar Rajya Khadi

       Gramoudyog Board and Ors.1
.            The Full Bench of Patna High

       Court had held:-
“16. Be that as it may, one thing is certain that admittedly
             both the petitioners when they entered into the contract with
             the respondent Board they had not attained the age of
             majority. Apart from its legal impact and effect, the
             ramifications and end result on the status of a contract, in
             terms of the service relationship, a person could be said to
             have entered into a valid service, only, when he has attained
             the age of majority. So the minimum age prescribed at the
             entry point in the Government service has been 18 years. The
             maximum age prescribed for the exit point is 58 years. In
             other words, the total length of period of Government service
             in any case for pensionary benefits would not exceed 40
             years. It is In this context, the Government Circular
             mentioned herein above needs to be considered. When there
             is a clear Rule provision anything contrary to or inconsistent
             with or incompatible to it, any circular or resolution or order,
             will not have any legal and valid effect to abridge the right
             enshrined in the Rule Provision. Even if the said circular of
             1998 as relied upon by the petitioners is considered to be
             beneficial to them then, also, it cannot be read at this

1 . 2006 (1) PLJR 410
12
juncture with the existing statutory provision incorporated in
the Bihar Pension Rules, as well as, the Bihar Service Code.
Therefore, from that point of view also the petitioners cannot
be allowed to contend that they have right to continue even
beyond the age of 58 years though provided in Rule 73 of the
Bihar Service Code which prescribes the superannuation age
of 58 years.
17. Thirdly, it is settled and established proposition of law and
principles of jurisprudence that a person who takes undue
advantage by one or other reasons at the entry point in the
service cannot be allowed to urge that he be given higher
benefit and if it Is urged then clearly, it goes to show that
something wrong or irregular has been done, at the entry
point, in service. So the settled principle, also, creates a very
strong impediment in getting the relief from this Court which
is exercising extraordinary, prerogative, equitable and
discretionary writ jurisdiction by invocation of the provision of
Article 226
of the Constitution of India.
18. In our opinion, therefore, the impugned orders questioned
in both the writ petitions, obviously, cannot be interfered with
from any point of view as discussed hereinabove. The
proposition of law, therefore, is made evidence and
unambiguous that the superannuation age prescribed in Rule
73 of the Bihar Service Code will apply for retirement purpose
and a person cannot be continued beyond the age of
completion of 40 years in service. It is, therefore, evidently,
clear that a Government servant who has completed 40 years
of service or has attained the age of 58 years has to be
superannuated in terms of the existing Rule provision. Our
answer, therefore, is very clear and we answer this reference
accordingly. The contradictory view in the aforesaid decisions
referred to hereinbefore, shall not be a good law.”
22.     The mere fact that an employee may have been a

minor at the time of his initial appointment is inconsequential

in the absence of any law at the material time of his

appointment, prohibiting appointment        of 15/16 year old
13
minors.     The Appellant who was 15½ years old may have

been a minor, but certainly not a toddler. It is absurd that any

rational employer, far less a statutory body, would appoint a

toddler.    The hypothesis of appointment of a toddler is far

fetched and unrealistic. The apprehension of claims in future

to appointment from persons less than 18 years of age is also

baseless in view of the circular dated 15 th January 1998 which

fixes 18 years as the minimum age of retirement.            The

circular would govern subsequent appointments.
23.        It may be true that a minor is incompetent to enter

into a contract, as observed by my esteemed brother.          A

contract may not be enforceable against a minor.     A contract

executed by a minor may be voidable at the option of the

minor.     The minor may, on attaining majority, repudiate or

ratify and accept the contract.
24.        It is nobody’s case that any of the concerned

employees repudiated their contract of appointment           on

attaining majority.    An employer who knowingly appoints

minors with impunity, with its eyes open, cannot evade its

obligations under the contract of employment, and that too

after the employee has rendered service for almost two

decades after attaining majority. The contracts can be said

to have been ratified by the employees concerned, on

attaining majority. It cannot, also be said, that an employee

appointed when he was 15½ years old, attained any undue
14
advantage, when there was no minimum age for appointment

at the material time.
25.   The learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition

relying on the decision of the Full Bench in
Ragjawa Narayan

Mishra
(supra), and the Division Bench dismissed the appeal

from the decision of the learned Single Judge.
The learned

Single Bench, as well as the learned Division Bench, had no

option but to follow
Ragjawa Narayan Mishra
(supra), since

judicial discipline required the Benches of lesser strength to

follow the decision of the Full Bench.
26.
In my view, the interpretation of the Full Bench of

Rule 73 of the Bihar Service Code        in
Ragjawa Narayan

Mishra
(supra)     is misconceived and erroneous.      Counsel

appearing on behalf of the Appellant has rightly argued that

there is no rule which prescribes the length of service as a

criteria for superannuation.    Neither Rule 73    of the Bihar

School Code, nor Rule 57 of the Bihar Pension Rules, 1950

prescribed any limit to the length of service.
27.      The Full Bench fell in error in proceeding on the basis

of the length of service, when Rule 73 of the Bihar Service
15
Code prescribes a specific age of superannuation.   As argued

on behalf of the Appellant, Rule 73 of the Bihar Service Code

prescribes an age of retirement. The said Rule does not make

length of service a criteria for retirement.
28.     The raising of the minimum qualifying age of the

government servant for pensionable service, from 16 to 18

years, meant that if an employee entered service before

attaining the age of 18 years, the period of service from the

actual date of appointment till attainment of the qualifying

age for pensionable service, would not count for the purpose

of computation of pension/pensionary benefits.
29.
In
Ragjawa Narayan Mishra
(supra), the Full

Bench failed to appreciate that the circular of 1998 could have

no manner of application to appointments that had already

been made before the said circular was issued, and certainly

not to appointments made almost two decades before

issuance of the aforesaid circular, at a time when admittedly

there was no minimum age for appointment to government

service. Even assuming that the total length of Government
16
service for pensionary benefits cannot exceed the length of

time between the date of attaining of 18 years and the

attainment of age of 58/60 years as per Rule 73, that would

mean that pensionary benefits would have to be computed on

the basis of the length of service after completion of 18 years

of age.     In no case can an employee be retired before

attaining 58 and/or 60 years of age, as prescribed in Rule 73

of the Bihar Service Code.
30. The finding of the Full Bench in Ragjawa Narayan Mishra

(surpa), that the superannuation age prescribed in Rule 73 of

the Bihar Service Code would apply for retirement purpose and

a person could not be continued after completion of the

retirement age is unexceptionable.   In no circumstances could

a government servant claim any right to continue in service

after competion of the age of retirement prescribed in Rule 73

of the Bihar Service Code. However, since length of service is

not a criteria for retirement under the applicable rule, that is

Rule 73 of the Bihar Service Code, a government servant who

had not completed the age of retirement as per his/her actual
17
date of birth recorded in the service records, cannot be made

to retire on the ground of completion of 40 years of service or

service in excess of 40 years.     At best, the length of service

would be deemed to be forty years for computation of

pensionary benefits.
31.        With the greatest of respect to the Full Bench, I am

unable to agree that Rule 5 in Appendix-5 of the Bihar Pension

Rules prescribing the qualifying age of the government servant

for consideration of pensionary benefits and/or raising of such

age from 16 years to 18 years makes any difference to the age

of retirement prescribed under the Rule 73 of the Bihar Service

Code.
32.        The age of retirement and qualifying service for the

purpose of retirement benefits are not one and the same.

Qualifying service for retirement means that the length of

service for the purpose of computation of retiral benefits would

commence from attainment of the age of qualifying service of

pension.
33.        Thus, if the age of qualifying service for pension is 18
18
years, the length of service for computation of pensionary

benefits would have to be computed from the date of

attainment of 18 years of age.     However, if the prescribed

age of retirement is completion of 60 years, an employee

cannot be forced to retire before attaining that age except on

grounds provided in Service Rules. For example, an employee

may prematurely be retired by way of disciplinary action, if

the rules so provide.
34.      When the age of retirement is governed by express

rules, which do not prescribe length of service as a criteria of

retirement, but provide for retirement upon attainment of age,

an employee cannot be made to retire before attaining that

age of retirement, only because he/she has served for a

certain length of time, by a convoluted process of logical

reasoning. My judicial conscience, also does not permit me to

uphold the judgment under appeal, only because the High

Court has, for a while, followed the Full Bench decision of that

Court which has held the field for a while.     The Full Bench

decision was, in my opinion, erroneous. This Court has time
19
and again reversed its own decisions including those of

          Constitutional Benches, which have held the field for decades.

          To cite an example, the Constitution Bench Judgment of this

          Court in
Atiabari Tea Co. Ltd. v. State of Assam
2 which

          held the field for almost half century was overruled by     a

          judgment of nine-Judge Bench judgment n
Jindal Stainless

          Ltd v. State of Haryana3
. I see no reason why the judgment

          and order impugned should not be set aside.
35.       The issues of whether a government servant could be

          superannuated from service on completion of 40 years of

          service even in the absence of any such rule, taking aid of

          Rule 73 of the Bihar Service Code, which only prescribed the

          age of superannuation and whether after completion of 40

          years of service, a person could be retired from service,

          treating his age as 18 years at the time of entry in service,

          were considered by a Division Bench of the High Court of

          Jharkhand presided over by S.J. Mukhopadhaya, J. in
Ganesh

          Ram vs. State of Jharkhand and Ors.
numbered W.P.(S)



2 AIR 1961 SC 232
3 2016 SCC Online 1260 decided on 11.11.2016
20
No.1210 of 2003, reported in 2006(2) FLR 156 in the context

of Rule 73 of the Bihar Service Code. The Bihar Service Code

is applicable in the State of Jharkhand created pursuant to the
Bihar Reorganization Act, 2000
, and comprising areas that

were earlier in the State of Bihar. The issues were answered

in the negative in favour of the employees and against the

State of Jharkhand and others.
A copy of   the judgment in
Ganesh Ram
(supra) is also annexed to the Paper Book as

Annexure P-5.
36.
In
Ganesh Ram
(supra) the Court found, and rightly,

that there was no common minimum age of 18 years

prescribed by the State of Bihar for appointment to service of

the State, or   in the State of Jharkhand.      The minimum

eligibility age varied from job to job.   The Court observed

and held:-
“7…..The definition of 'employee', as laid down
         under
Section 2(i)
of the Act, means any person,
         who is employed for hire or reward or to do any
         work, skilled or unskilled, etc. and also includes an
         employee,      employed      by    the    appropriate
         Government i.e. State Government or Central
         Government. Clause (a) to
Section 2
defines
21
"adolescent" means a person, who has completed
            his fourteenth year of age but has been completed
            his eighteenth year. "Adult" has been defined under
            Clause (aa) of
Section 2
, which means a person,
            who has completed his eighteenth year of age and
            "child", as defined under Clause (bb) of
Section 2
,
            means a person, who has not completed his
            fourteenth year of age.
Section 3
of Minimum Wages
            Act, 1948 while prescribes the manner in which the
            appropriate Government will fix the minimum rates
            of wages, under Sub-section (3) appropriate
            Government is empowered to fix different minimum
            rates of wages for "adults", "adolescent", "children"
            and "apprentices". This simply shows that even in
            the Government employment, an "adolescent",
            though minor, can be appointed for whom different
            wages may be fixed.”

The High Court further noted:-
“8. The State of Bihar has issued Police Order No.
            209-82, circulated vide Memo No. 6568/P2/43-271-
            88, dated 11th August, 1988. This Police Order is
            also applicable in the State of Jharkhand, in view of
Section 84
of the Bihar Reorganization Act, 2000. As
            per this Order, in every distinct, out of the
            sanctioned strength of police force, two posts can
            be reserved in which dependent children of police
            force, below 18 years of age, can be appointed on
            compassionate ground, if the police personnel dies
            while on duty. Those children, so appointed, are
            commonly known "as Bal-Arakshi" and are paid
            minimum of the scale of pay of the post, without
            annual increment, till they attain majority. It is only
            on attaining majority, if the "Bal-Arakshi" so wishes
            and is qualified, they are appointed as Constable
            against such posts. The children, on appointment,
            are provided with two half-pants, two shirts two-sets
            of socks, one pair of shoes etc. This simply goes to
            show that there is no bar on appointment of a minor
            in the services of the State.”
37.   Of Course,   as noted in the judgment in
Ganesh Ram
22
(supra) after the enactment and enforcement of the
Child Labour

(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986
employment of a child

which means a person who has not completed 14 years of age is

prohibited for certain types of work.       However, the said
Child

Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986
is of no application

in this case, because the petitioner was appointed long before

the enactment and enforcement of the said Act and in any case

he was above 14 years of age at the time of appointment.
38.   The issue of whether an employee could be made to retire

before completion of actual age of retirement as prescribed in

Rule 73 of the Bihar Service Code on the basis of a deemed age

was answered in the negative, against an employer and in

favour of the employee in the following cases referred to in
Ganesh Ram
(supra):-
1.     Mokhtar Ahmad v. B.S.R.T.C. and Ors. (1995(1) PLJR 183(DB)
2.
Mantu v. C.C.L.
(2001 (1) JCR 181)
3.
Kalanand Jha v. State of Jharkhand and Ors.
(2001 (3) JCR 228)
4.
Balkeshwar v. Central Coalfields Ltd.
(2002 (1) JCR 175
5.
Pranadhar Prasad v. State of Jharkhand and Ors
.
(MANU/JH/1137/2002.
39. I am of the view that the law has correctly been interpreted

by the Division Bench of the High Court of Jharkhand in
Ganesh

Ram
(supra). A person can only be retired on attainment of the

prescribed age of retirement unless the rules expressly make

length of service a criteria of retirement,       as in the case of

employees of the Bihar State Electricity Board, governed by
23
Notification dated 9th September 1997, issued under Section 79
(c) of the
Electricity Supply Act, 1948
, under which the date of

superannuation prescribed was completion of 60 years of age or

completion of 42 years of service, whichever is earlier.
40. The    judgment      in
Nagaland      Senior     Government

Employees Welfare Association and others
(supra) referred

to by my esteemed brother is in my view clearly distinguishable.
39. In the aforesaid case the applicable Rules expressly made

completion of the length of service prescribed, a criteria for

retirement.
41. This Court upheld the validity of
Section 3
of the Nagaland

Retirement from Public Employment Act, 1991 which provided:-
"S.-3. Retirement from public employment: (1) Notwithstanding
 anything contained in any rule or orders for the time being in force,
 a person in public employment shall hold office for a term of thirty-
 three years from the date of his joining public employment or until
 he attains the age of fifty-seven years whichever is earlier :
Provided that in special circumstances, a person under public
  employment may be granted extension by the State Government
  upto a maximum of one year;
Provided further that the Government may have the cases of all
  persons under public employment screened from time to time to
  determine their suitability for continuation in public employment
  after the attainment of the age of fifty years.
(2) All persons under public employment shall retire on the
  afternoon of the last day of the month in which he attains the age
  of fifty-seven years or on completion of thirty-three years of public
  employment whichever is earlier.”
24
42.
By the Nagaland Retirement from Public Employment

(Amendment) Act, 2007
(the First Amendment Act, 2007) the

age of retirement was enhanced to 60 years from 57 years.        By

the Nagaland Retirement from Public Employment (Second

Amendment) Act, 2009 (the
Second Amendment Act, 2009
) the

length of service of the State Government employees was

increased to 35 years instead of 33 years. This Court held :-
“a provision such as that at issue which prescribes
         retiring the persons from public employment in the
         State of Nagaland on completion of 35 years’ service
         from the date of joining or until attaining the age of 60
         years, whichever is earlier, does not suffer from the
         vice of arbitrariness or irrationality and is not violative
         of
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution. The appeal
         has no merit and is dismissed with no order as to
         costs.”
43. As observed above, in this case Rule 73 of the Bihar

Service Code does not prescribe any length of service as criteria

for retirement. The prescribed age of retirement for employees

of the category to which the Appellant belonged was 58 years,

later increased to 60 years.   The decision of the respondents to

retire the Appellant before he attained the age of 60 years as

per his actual date of birth, as recorded in the service records

cannot be sustained.
44.   I am of the view that the appeal should be allowed and

the judgment and order of the Division Bench and the Single
25
Bench be set aside.    The Appellant is entitled to a declaration

 that the Appellant was entitled to continue in service till 18 th

 November 2014, being the date on which he completed 60

 years of age, as per his service records, and shall be entitled to

 all consequential benefits including arrears of pay, if any,

 pensionary benefits etc.
45.   Since we have not agreed, let the matter be placed before

 Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India for assignment to a larger

 Bench.
.................................J
                                         (INDIRA BANERJEE)
MAY 28, 2020
NEW DELHI
                                                  REPORTABLE

               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

               CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 8225 OF 2012



GOPAL PRASAD                                   ….APPELLANT(S)


               VERSUS


BIHAR SCHOOL EXAMINATION BOARD
AND OTHERS                                   ….RESPONDENT(S)




                          JUDGMENT


Rastogi, J.
1.   The present appeal is directed against the judgment dated

3rd August, 2012 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court

of Judicature at Patna in Letters Patent Appeal No. 1090 of 2012

confirming the judgment of the Single Bench of the High Court

dated 24th April, 2012 upholding that the appellant has rightly

been retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation.
1
2.   The brief facts relevant for the present purpose which

manifest from the record are that the appellant was an employee

of Bihar School Examination Board(hereinafter being referred to

as “Board”) and was initially appointed as a Calligraphist cum

Assistant vide order dated 20 th May, 1970 pursuant to which he

joined service on 27th May, 1970. Although the date of birth of

the appellant as per school records was 19th November, 1954 and

at the time of entering into service on 27 th May, 1970, he was 15

years 6 months and 8 days old.       At the time of his entry into

service, the retirement age of the employees of the Board was 58

years but at a later stage, the age of retirement was extended by

the Government of Bihar from 58 years to 60 years, in

consequence the Board also in its meeting held on 30 th March,

2005 decided to extend the age of retirement of its employees

from 58 years to 60 years and pursuant thereto, the date of

compulsory retirement of the Board employee became the date on

which one attained the age of 60 years.
3.   Before the matter is examined on merits, it will be apposite

to take note of the material projection of the rules relevant for the

purpose.   The services of the State Government employees are
2
governed by Bihar Service Code, 1952, Bihar Pension Rules,

1950.   The age of superannuation has been prescribed under

Rule 73 of the Bihar Service Code, 1952. At the same time, Rule

57 of the Bihar Pension Rules, 1950 effective from 20 th January,

1950 prescribes the qualifying service, and further amended by

Rule 5 of Section IV(Qualifying service) of the Pension Rules

amended with effect from 23 rd August, 1950. The rules relevant

for the purpose are extracted hereunder.
Rule 73 of the Bihar Service Code, 1952


          “The date of compulsory retirement of a Government
          servant is the date on which he attains the age of 58
          years. He may be retained in service after the date of
          compulsory retirement with the sanction of the State
          Government on public grounds, which must be
          recorded in writing.”
     Rule 57 of the Bihar Pension Rules, 1950 effective from 20 th
     January, 1950

          “For   a Government servant in inferior service,
          qualifying service, shall not begin until the
          Government servant concerned attained the age of 16
          years.”
     Rule 5 of Section IV(Qualifying Service) of the Pension Rules
     effective from 23rd August, 1950
           “The minimum age after which service for pension is
           raised from 16 to 18 years in the case of Government
           servant belonging to an inferior service (1) who enters
           service of the Government of Bihar, after the date on
           which this order came into force or (2) who, having
           entered such service on or before that date did not
           hold a lien or suspended lien on a permanent
           pensionable post under the Government of Bihar on
           that date.”
3
4.   The reliance has also been placed by a Government Circular

dated 15th January, 1998 issued by Personnel and Administrative

reforms Department of the State of Bihar.
5.   On a careful scanning of the aforesaid provisions, it clearly

manifest that the pension rules were introduced in 1950 and

after amendment was made under Rule 5 of the Pension Rules,

1950 effective from 23rd August, 1950, the minimum age of the

qualifying service for pension became 18 years. It is not disputed

that minimum age for entering into service under Bihar Service

Code, 1952 has not been prescribed but still there cannot be any

entry into service before one has attained the age of majority, i.e.

18 years as prescribed under the Rules, 1950 unless there is a

specific rule to the contrary.      Keeping in view the age of

retirement, as in the instant case is of 60 years, the maximum

qualifying service which one could render would be of 42 years.
6.   The Board in its meeting held on 15 th January, 2004 took a

decision that those who have entered into service prior to

attaining the age of 18 years, taking their age as 18 years as on

the date of their appointment, they will be superannuated on

competition of 60 years in the case of category­4 and on
4
competition of age of 58 years in the case of category­3.              The

extract of the Resolution of the Board meeting held on 15 th

January, 2004 placed at Annexure P­2 of the paper book,

relevant for the purpose is extracted hereunder:­

“….
Agenda no. 2
Regarding employees having age After analysis of the legal advice
less than 18 years appointed in the received in the light of the judgment
Committee.                          taken in the meeting of the
                                    Committee held on 18.11.03 about
                                    the employees having age less than
                                    18     year    appointed      in   the
                                    Committee, Hon’ble Member Dr.
                                    Jitender Singh, Chancellor Patna
                                    University, Patna informed that
                                    proceedings should be initiated in
                                    Committee also under the letter No.
                                    1961 dated 12.11.1995 from the
                                    Secretary,       High       Education
                                    Department, Patna. According to
                                    the provision of the said letter,
                                    decision was taken unanimously
                                    that employees who have been
                                    appointed in the Bihar Schools
                                    Examination Committee at the age
                                    below 18 years, taking their age at
                                    18 years as on the date of their
                                    appointment,           they         be
                                    superannuated on competition of
                                    age of 60 years in the case of
                                    Category­4 and on completion of age
                                    of 58 years in case of Category­3.
7.    Taking note of its resolution dated 15 th January, 2004, the

appellant was informed vide communication dated 26 th March,

2012 that he has completed 42 years of qualifying service which
5
an employee could render and accordingly he stood retired from

service on 31st May, 2012 after completing 42 years of qualifying

service.
8.      The claim of the appellant was that he should be retired

from service on completing 60 years on the basis of his age

recorded in the Board as well as in his service book, i.e., 19 th

November, 1954. It appears from the record that the controversy

and conflict of opinion of the Division Bench of the High Court of

Bihar was resolved by the Full Bench vide Judgment dated 5 th

January, 2005 by the High Court of Patna in the case of
Ragjawa Narayan Mishra and Ors. Vs. Chief Executive

Officer, Bihar Rajya Khadi Gramoudyog Board and Ors.
1

which was noticed by the Single Bench of the High Court and

confirmed by the Division Bench in its impugned judgment while

repudiating the claim of the appellant for continuation in service

until he completes the age of 60 years on the basis of his age

recorded in the Board, i.e. 19 th November, 1954.
9.      Learned counsel for the appellant submits that a person

cannot be superannuated prior to his attaining the age of 60


1   2006(1) PLJR 410
6
years merely because he completes 42 years of qualifying service,

in the absence of any such rule to the contrary. The aforesaid

decision was in teeth of Rule 73 of the Bihar Service Code, 1952

which    merely   prescribes   the   age   as   the   criteria   for

superannuation. There is no rule prescribing length of service as

a criteria for superannuation and this has not been considered

by the Full Bench which has been relied upon by the High Court

in the impugned judgment in repelling the contention of the

appellant.
10.   Learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand,

while supporting the findings recorded by the Division Bench of

the High Court in the impugned judgment submits that there

was difference of opinion between the two Division Benches of the

High Court and that has been resolved by the Full Bench in
Ragjawa Narayan Mishra and Ors.
case(supra) and this has

been followed consistently by the High Court and further submits

that the entry into public employment could not be offered before

one attains the age of majority i.e. 18 years as per
Section 3
of

The Majority Act, 1875, the age of superannuation would be 58

years/60 years, as the case may be, the total service which
7
logically one could render may not exceed in any case beyond

40/42 years of service and this what has been resolved by the

Board in its meeting held on 15 th January, 2004 and this was

never the subject matter of challenge even by the appellant when

he was communicated by letter dated 26 th March, 2012 that he

would be attaining the age of superannuation on 31 st May, 2012

on completing 42 years of service.
11.   Learned counsel further submits that Rule 73 of the Bihar

Service Code, 1952 read with Rule 57 of the Bihar Pension Rules,

1950 and Rule 5 of Section IV of the Pension Rules makes it clear

that there could not be any entry in the Government service

before the person attains the age of 18 years even in the year

1970 when the appellant was appointed and if the age at the

entry level and the exit level has been prescribed by the rule

making authority, by no stretch, one could go ahead more than

40/42 years of service.       In the given circumstances, when the

appellant indisputedly had completed 42 years of service in May

2012,   the   decision   of   the   respondent   to   retire   him   on

superannuation cannot be said to be faulted with and it may not

be revisited at this stage more so when it has been consistently
8
followed by the High Court for almost more than one and half

decade and needs no interference.
12.   The provisions of the aforesaid statutory rules which has

been referred to supra envisage that the Government, by virtue of

an amendment inserted rule 5 to the Bihar Pension Rules which

came into effect w.e.f. 23rd August, 1950, much before the

appellant entered into service of the Board, the qualifying age of a

Government servant for consideration of pensionary benefits

came to be 18 years in the Government service which came to be

clarified by the Government by its order dated 15 th January, 1998

making its intention clear to all its subordinates that 18 years

shall be the age of Government servant entering into service.
13.   There is no dispute that the service conditions of the

employees are ordinarily governed by the statutory rules or in its

absence, under regulations or administrative decisions having a

binding force but the person who attains the age of majority

alone be competent enough to enter into valid contract of service.
Section 11
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 defines as to who is

competent to contract.
“Who are competent to contract – Every person is
          competent to contract who is of the age of majority
9
according to the law to which he is subject, and who is
             of sound mind and is not disqualified from contracting
             by any law to which he is subject.”
14.   The provision clearly manifests that for entering into valid

contract of service, one has to attain the age of majority in terms

of
The Majority Act, 1875
and what could be the age of majority

has been defined under
Section 3
of The Majority Act, 1875

which is as under:­

             “3. Age of Majority of persons domiciled in India­(1)
             Every person domiciled in India shall attain the age of
             majority on his completing the age of eighteen years
             and not before.
(2)   In computing the age of any person, the date on
             which he was born is to be included as a whole day
             and he shall be deemed to have attained majority at
             the beginning of the eighteenth anniversary of that
             day.”
15.   Indisputedly, the appellant, in the instant case, was minor

on the date of entry into service in May 1970 and unless there is

a specific rule to the contrary, minor is not eligible/qualified to

seek public employment. It is true that the minimum age at the

entry level shall always be prescribed by the rule making

authority.     In the instant case, the State authority under its

Pension      Rules,   1950    prescribes    the   qualifying    service   of

Government servant which was raised to 18 years by an
10
amendment made effective from 23 rd August, 1950.               If the

minimum age at the relevant time was not prescribed under the

Bihar Service Code, 1952, at least the Government is justified in

taking assistance of the Pension Rules, 1950 to hold that the

minimum age at the entry point shall be 18 years for all practical

purposes.     That apart, if the age at the entry level is left open

ended, the minor of whatever age, can seek his eligibility for

public employment leaving no lifetime of service one could render

which is manifestly illogical and can never be the intention of the

rule making authority.
16.     Admittedly, in the instant case, when the appellant entered

into service, he was 15 years and 6 months old and had not

attained the age of majority and the minimum age at the entry

point in terms of the Pension Rules, 1950 is 18 years and

maximum age prescribed for exit point is 60 years as a logical

consequence, the total length of service which one could render

in the Government service may not exceed 42 years and when

there    is   an   unambiguous   self­explicit   provision,   anything

contrary to or inconsistent with or incompatible to it, any circular

or resolution or order, will not have any legal and valid effect to
11
abridge the right enshrined in the scheme of Rules and this what

has been considered by the Full Bench of the Patna High Court

which was relied upon by the single Judge of the High Court

while repudiating claim of the appellant in
Ragjawa Narayan

Mishra and Ors.
(supra) as follows:­


          “16. Be that as it may, one thing is certain that
          admittedly both the petitioners when they entered into
          the contract with the respondent Board they had not
          attained the age of majority. Apart from its legal
          impact and effect, the ramifications and end result on
          the status of a contract, in terms of the service
          relationship, a person could be said to have entered
          into a valid service, only, when he has attained the age
          of majority. So the minimum age prescribed at the
          entry point in the Government service has been 18
          years. The maximum age prescribed for the exit point
          is 58 years. In other words, the total length of period of
          Government service in any case for pensionary
          benefits would not exceed 40 years. It is in this
          context, the Government Circular mentioned herein
          above needs to be considered. When there is a clear
          Rule provision anything contrary to or inconsistent
          with or incompatible to it, any circular or resolution or
          order, will not have any legal and valid effect to
          abridge the right enshrined in the Rule Provision. Even
          if the said circular of 1998 as relied upon by the
          petitioners is considered to be beneficial to them then,
          also, it cannot be read at this juncture with the
          existing statutory provision incorporated in the Bihar
          Pension Rules, as well as, the Bihar Service Code.
          Therefore, from that point of view also the petitioners
          cannot be allowed to contend that they have right to
          continue even beyond the age of 58 years though
          provided in Rule 73 of the Bihar Service Code which
          prescribes the superannuation age of 58 years.
17. Thirdly, it is settled and established proposition of
          law and principles of jurisprudence that a person who
          takes undue advantage by one or other reasons at the
12
entry point in the service cannot be allowed to urge
           that he be given higher benefit and if it Is urged then
           clearly, it goes to show that something wrong or
           irregular has been done, at the entry point, in service.
           So the settled principle, also, creates a very strong
           impediment in getting the relief from this Court which
           is exercising extraordinary, prerogative, equitable and
           discretionary writ jurisdiction by invocation of the
           provision of
Article 226
of the Constitution of India.
18. In our opinion, therefore, the impugned orders
           questioned in both the writ petitions, obviously,
           cannot be interfered with from any point of view as
           discussed hereinabove. The proposition of law,
           therefore, is made evidence and unambiguous that the
           superannuation age prescribed in Rule 73 of the Bihar
           Service Code will apply for retirement purpose and a
           person cannot be continued beyond the age of
           completion of 40 years in service. It is, therefore,
           evidently, clear that a Government servant who has
           completed 40 years of service or has attained the age
           of 58 years has to be superannuated in terms of the
           existing Rule provision. Our answer, therefore, is very
           clear and we answer this reference accordingly. The
           contradictory view in the aforesaid decisions referred
           to hereinbefore, shall not be a good law.”
17.   One view has been expressed by the full Bench of the Patna

High Court of which the reference has been made, the other view

of the prospect which has been referred to by the Jharkhand

High Court of which a reference has been made by the appellant

in the appeal but what persuaded me further is that the

judgment of the Full Bench of the Patna High Court dated 5 th

December, 2005 at least in the State of Bihar has been

consistently followed for almost a decade and a half and learned
13
Single Judge/Division Bench has passed several orders placing

reliance on the Full Bench of the Patna High Court. The view

which has been expressed is one of the plausible view and, in my

view, it would not be advisable to overturn only for the reason

that the view expressed by the Jharkhand High Court appears to

be more plausible in appreciating the scheme of statutory rules of

which a reference has been made.
18.   Indisputedly, the appellant cannot be allowed to contend

that he has a right to continue upto the age of 60 years as per his

date of birth recorded in the Board records in view of Rule 73 of

the Bihar Service Code, 1952. From the scheme of Rules, it is

clear that the superannuation age prescribed under Rule 73 of

the Bihar Service Code, 1952 will apply for retirement purpose

and the person cannot be continued beyond the age of

completion of 42 years in service taking note of the Pension

Rules, 1950.   It clearly manifests that the Government servant

who had completed 42 years of service on attaining the age of 60

years, both implicit, has to be superannuated in terms of the

scheme of Rules and this what has been considered by the Full
14
Bench of the High Court in the judgment which has been relied

by the High Court of Patna in the impugned judgment.
19.   A two Judge Bench of this Court in
Nagaland Senior

Government Employees Welfare Association and Others Vs.

State of Nagaland and Others
2010(7) SCC 643 had an

occasion to examine the validity of Section 3 of the Public

Employment      Act,     1991      as    amended        by    the     Public

Employment
(Amendment) Act, 2007
which was substituted by

the following provision:­

        “3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any
        rule or orders for the time being in force, a person in
        public employment shall hold office for a term of 35
        years from the date of joining public employment or
        until he attains the age of 60 years, whichever is
        earlier.
(2) A person under public employment shall retire
        on the afternoon of the last day of the month in
        which he attains the age of 60 years, or in which he
        completes 35 years of public employment,
        whichever is earlier.”


This
Court further held
that fixation of maximum length of

service as an alternative criterion for retirement from public

service, by no stretch of imagination, can be held to be violative

of any recognized norms of employment planning.                   Para 40 is

extracted hereunder:­
15
“40.
We are afraid, K. Nagaraj case [(1985) 1 SCC
        523 instead of helping the appellants, rather
        supports the stand of the State. Fixation of
        maximum length of service as an alternative
        criterion for retirement from public service, by no
        stretch of imagination, can be held to be violative of
        any recognised norms of employment planning.
        There may be a large number of compelling reasons
        that may necessitate the Government (or for that
        matter the legislature) to prescribe the rule of
        retirement from the government service on
        completion of specified years. If the reasons are
        germane to the object sought to be achieved, such
        provision can hardly be faulted.”
20.   In the instant case, apart from the scheme of rules of which

a reference has been made, the appellant could not enter into

service below the age of attaining majority, if there is no express

provision of minimum age at the entry level under the Bihar

Service Code as prayed, in isolation is accepted and the age at

the entry level is left open ended, it will take us to a stage where

a toddler or a minor of any given age can claim his eligibility to

enter into public employment which is manifestly illogical and

impermissible in law.
21.   Thus, under the existing scheme of Rules, the qualifying

service which one could render in any manner would not exceed

42 years and this what has been clarified by the Government by

its circular dated 15th January, 1998 and that was taken note of
16
by the Board in its meeting held on 15 th January, 2004 which

was not the subject matter of challenge and the appellant was

communicated of retirement on attaining full employment of 42

years rendered on 31st May, 2012, which, in my opinion, could

not be said to be in contravention to the scheme of rules.
22.   The appeal is without substance and is accordingly

dismissed.
23.   Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
………………………………….J.
                                      (AJAY RASTOGI)
NEW DELHI
MAY 28, 2020
17