[Cites
22
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Rajasthan vs Meh Ram on 6 May, 2020
Author:
A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench:
Dinesh Maheshwari
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
1


                                                                 REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1894/2010

          State of Rajasthan                                   …Appellant(s)

                                              Versus

          Mehram & Ors.                                      ...Respondent(s)


                                          JUDGMENT
A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
1.             This appeal takes exception to the judgment and order

          dated 5.11.2007 passed by the High Court of Judicature for

          Rajasthan at Jodhpur1 in D.B. Criminal Appeal No. 271/1982,

          whereby the conviction of the respondent No. 1/original accused

          No. 5 (Mehram S/o Mr. Chhagna Ram) under
Section 302
of the

          Indian Penal Code2 has been converted into one under
Section

          326
, IPC and the substantive sentence awarded therefor is

          reduced only to the period already undergone (about five months)

          by the accused No. 5. At the outset, the learned counsel for the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2020.05.06
16:39:58 IST
Reason:
1 For short, “the High Court”
          2 For short, “
IPC
”
2
appellant­State had made it amply clear that the State was

pursuing this appeal only against the accused No. 5 (Mehram

S/o Chhagna Ram) for restoration of his conviction under
Section

302
, IPC and to award him sentence of life imprisonment.
2.   Briefly stated, five accused were named in the First

Information Report (FIR) registered on 14.8.1981 at P.S. Nagaur

in relation to an incident at village Gowa Khurd. The case set out

in the stated FIR, as noted by the trial Court, reads thus: ­

        “2. …
        “On 14.08.1981 at 9:30 p.m. in the evening Complainant
        injured Mangilal, lodged an oral report with the Officer
        Incharge, Police Station Nagaur to the effect that he has
        four fields at Village Gowa Khurd, out of which one field
        is situated about a distance of one km. away from the
        village. Complainant has further stated that for going to
        that field they have to use an old way passing through
        the fields of Heera, Chhagna and Jeevan. However, this
        way is not recorded in Government record. In the report,
        Complainant has further stated that last year sons of
        accused Heera obstructed the sons of the complainant
        party from going to their field by that unrecorded way.
        But upon intervention of Anna Kaka, they were pacified.
        Thereafter, this year after rainy season, accused Heera
        and Chhagna closed that way. Therefore, they had to
        cultivate their field having gone through Basni. In the
        report, complainant has further stated that at about
        dusk when he along with his wife were going for removing
        the weeds to another fields and at that time his younger
        brother Ghewar and Sawanta were grazing goats at a
        distance. At that time quarrel was taken place between
        accused Ramnarayan and Ghewar on account of way and
        they went to village. At 5 o’ clock in the evening, his wife
        had also gone to village. Complainant has further stated
        that at the time of sunset while he alone was coming
        towards the village from the field. And when he reached
3
the village near pond, then accused persons­ Mehram
           and Baksharam, having armed with ‘Kassies’ and
           accused      persons­     Ramnarayan,    Heeraram      and
           Ramniwas, having lathies in their hands came out from
           the back of ‘Kai’ (bushes) and surrounded the
           Complainant. Accused Baksharam with the intention to
           kill struck ‘Kassi’ blow from the sharpen side on the head
           of Mangilal, but Mangilal managed to prevent it by lifting
           the hand, due to which Mangilal sustained injury over
           his palm. Accused Baksharam tried to inflict another
           ‘Kassi’ blow to Mangilal, whereupon Bhuraram caught
           hold the ‘Kassi’. And Mehram, Moti and Annaram arrived
           at the place of occurrence from their fields. Thereafter,
           accused Mehram S/o Chhagana struck a ‘Kassi’ blow
           from sharpen side on the head of Bhura from the
           backside, due to which Bhura fell down, accused
           Ramniwas inflicted a lathi blow over the head of Mehram
           S/o Annaram. Thereafter, all the accused persons gave
           beatings. Then Ratna, Moti and Annaram had intervened
           after reaching on the spot. Accused persons having
           assumed Bhura died ran away. Complainant has further
           stated that accused persons have given beatings with the
           intention of taking revenge on account of way dispute…”

On   the     basis   of   the   above       complaint,   investigation   was

commenced for offences punishable under
Sections 147
,
148
,
149
,
323
,
307
and
302
, IPC.             The case was committed to the

Sessions Court by the Chief Judicial Magistrate in February,

1982, which was numbered as Sessions Case No. 9/1982. After

a full­fledged trial, in which fourteen (14) prosecution witnesses

came to be examined, the trial Court, on extensive analysis of the

evidence on record, vide judgment and order dated 21.7.1982,

running into around 115 loosely typed pages, found the named
4
accused guilty of the concerned offences, and passed the

following order: ­

                                “ORDER
              Hence, accused Mehram son of Chhagna is hereby
        held guilty of committing offence under
Section 148
,
302
,
324
/
149
Indian Penal Code.
Accused Ramniwas is hereby held guilty of
        committing offence under Section 147, 323, 324/149
        India Penal Code and accused persons­ Heera Lal,
        Ramnarayan under Section 323, 324/149 Indian Penal
        Code and accused Baksharam is hereby convicted under
        Section 148, 324 I.P.C.
Accused     persons  Heeraram,   Ramnarayan,
        Ramniwas and Baksharam are not found guilty of
        committing offence under
Section 302
and
302
/
149
Indian Penal Code.
Hence, accused Mehram is hereby sentenced to
        undergo life imprisonment and to pay fine of Rs.100/­ in
        default of payment of fine to undergo additional three
        months rigorous imprisonment under
Section 302
Indian
        Penal Code.
Accused persons­ Mehram and Baksharam each of
        them is hereby sentenced to undergo six months simple
        imprisonment and to pay fine of Rs.100/­ in default of
        payment of fine to undergo 15 days additional simple
        imprisonment for committing offence under Section 148
        and accused persons Ramnarayan and Ramniwas for
        committing offence under Section 147 I.P.C.
Accused Baksharam for committing offence under
Section 324
and accused persons­ Ramniwas, Heeraram,
        Ramnarayan and Mehram for committing offence under
Section 324
/
149
I.P.C. each of them is hereby sentenced
        to undergo six months and to pay fine of Rs.100/­ in
        default to undergo 15 days simple imprisonment.
        Accused Ramniwas is further sentenced to undergo three
        months simple imprisonment under
Section 323
I.P.C. All
        the sentences shall run concurrently.
Accused       persons­Heeraram,     Ramnarayan,
        Ramniwas and Baksharam shall be entitled to get benefit
        under Section 428 I.P.C.
5
Clothes and arms (
Art.1
to
Art.10
) shall be
        destroyed after the expiry of period of limitation for
        appeal. Copy of the judgment be made available to
        accused persons.”

As regards the accused No. 5 (Mehram S/o Chhagna Ram), he

came to be convicted for offences punishable under
Sections 148
,
302
,
324
/
149
, IPC and sentenced to undergo life imprisonment

with fine of Rs.100/­ for the offence punishable under
Section

302
, six months’ simple imprisonment with fine of Rs.100/­ for

offence punishable under
Section 148
, IPC and six months’

simple imprisonment with fine of Rs.100/­ for offence punishable

under
Section 324
/
149
, IPC.
3.   All the five accused preferred appeal before the High Court

being D.B. Criminal Appeal No. 271/1982. The appeal filed by

Ram Niwas (respondent No. 2/original accused No. 3), Heera

Ram (respondent No. 3/original accused No. 1), Ram Narayan

(respondent No. 4/original accused No. 2) and Laxa Ram

(respondent No. 5/original accused No. 4) came to be partly

allowed and their conviction under
Section 149
, IPC was set

aside, but under
Sections 323
,
324
,
147
and
148
, IPC, the

conviction was maintained. They were sentenced for the period

already undergone for the stated offences. As regards Mehram
6
S/o Chhagna Ram (respondent No. 1/accused No. 5), the High

Court converted the conviction under
Section 302
, IPC into one

under
Section 326
, IPC on the finding that the said accused had

exceeded his right of private defence.    Additionally, the High

Court confirmed his conviction under
Section 148
, IPC. Despite

the charge of murder and intentionally causing death of Bhura

Ram (deceased), the High Court awarded sentence of period

already undergone (around five months) by the accused No. 5

and directed him to pay compensation of Rs.50,000/­ (Rupees

fifty thousand only) to the next of kin of the deceased – Bhura

Ram.
4.     As aforesaid, even though the State has filed the present

appeal against all the five accused persons, at the outset, it was

made clear by the counsel for the State that the appeal is being

pursued only against the respondent No. 1/accused No. 5

(Mehram S/o Chhagna Ram) in respect of nature of offence and

on the point of sentence.      The counsel for accused No. 5,

however, urged that the said accused had a right to challenge the

finding of guilt and conviction under
Section 326
and
148
, IPC,

recorded against him, even though the said accused had not
7
preferred a formal appeal against the impugned judgment.         To

make good this submission, reliance is placed on
Chandrakant

Patil vs. State
through CBI3, Sumer Singh vs. Surajbhan

Singh & Ors.4, State of Rajasthan vs. Ramanand5 and
Section 377(3)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 6.

According to him, the accused No. 5 was entitled to acquittal, as

the prosecution had failed to substantiate the charges framed

against him. In any case, in the alternative it is submitted, that

the incident had occurred on the spur of the moment due to

provocation given to the accused and the said accused in

retaliation and in exercise of right of private defence, ended up in

causing single injury to the deceased (Bhura Ram) without any

intention to cause his death. Even for that reason, the accused

No. 5 was entitled to benefit of doubt and it was not a fit case for

conviction even under
Section 326
/
148
, IPC. It is urged that the

accused No. 5 is a senior citizen (aged about 70­75 years) and

suffering from various old age diseases and due to efflux of time,

the Court ought not to entertain this appeal filed by the State.

Learned counsel contends that even if it is a case of excessive

3   (1998) 3 SCC 38
4   (2014) 7 SCC 323
5   (2017) 5 SCC 695
6    For short, “
Cr.P.C
.”
8
exercise of right of private defence, the benefit should be given to

the accused.
In support of the said contention, the learned

counsel has placed reliance on the decisions of this Court in
Gottipulla Venkatasiva Subbrayanam & Ors. vs. the State of

Andhra Pradesh & Anr.7
,
Deo Narain vs. The State of Uttar

Pradesh8
,
Subramani & Ors. vs. State of Tamil Nadu9
and
State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Gajey Singh & Anr.10
.
5.    We have heard Dr. Manish Singhvi, learned senior counsel

for the appellant and Mr. Sushil Kumar Jain, learned senior

counsel for the respondent.
6.    The accused No. 5 (Mehram S/o Chhagna Ram) is justified

in contending that it is open to the said accused to challenge the

finding and order of conviction under
Section 326
/
148
, IPC

recorded against him in the appeal filed by the State, assailing

the impugned judgment of the High Court. That being the settled

legal position, as expounded in
Chandrakant Patil
(supra),

Sumer Singh (supra) and
Ramanand
(supra) including
Section

377(3)
of the Cr.P.C., which predicates that in the appeal filed

7 (1970) 1 SCC 235 (paragraphs 17 and 18)
8 (1973) 1 SCC 347 (paragraph 5)
9 (2002) 7 SCC 210 (paragraphs 19 to 27)
10 (2009) 11 SCC 414 (paragraph 30)
9
against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy, the

accused may plead for his acquittal or for reduction of the

sentence. Resultantly, we may have to consider the correctness

of the finding of fact recorded by the trial Court and the appeal

Court (High Court) against the accused No. 5 (Mehram S/o

Chhagna Ram).
7.   Reverting to the judgment of the trial Court, it is noticed

that the trial Court vide judgment and order dated 21.7.1982,

extensively analysed the evidence of each witness and the stand

taken by the rival parties. On the basis of that analysis, the trial

Court proceeded to hold that the prosecution had succeeded in

substantiating the allegation that the accused party was hiding

behind the ‘Kair’ bushes and on arrival of the complainant party

at the scene of occurrence, came out of the bushes and assaulted

the complainant party including Bhura Ram (deceased). The trial

Court recorded the following finding: ­

        “24. … Hence, it is established that place of occurrence
        was the ‘Kair’ bushes land, the height of ‘Kair’ bushes
        was 5 to 6 ft. and by the depositions of witness Mangilal
        (PW­11) and spot inspection report (Ex. P­21) and
        accused persons were hiding behind the ‘Kair’ bushes.
        Accordingly, the fact of accused persons duly armed with
        weapons hiding behind the ‘Kair’ bushes has also been
        established and that accused persons were the
10
assailants, otherwise they would not have hidden behind
        the ‘Kair’ bushes.”

It then proceeded to find that before the incident, some quarrel

had taken place between accused No. 2 – Ram Narayan, Ghewar

and Motaram on account of grazing goats, in which Ram Narayan

had assaulted Ghewar, who belonged to complainant side. The

circumstances clearly indicate that the accused persons intended

to take revenge and due to which they had arrived at the place of

occurrence from the village armed with lethal weapon(s) for

assaulting the complainant party at an opportune moment. The

trial Court then found that the accused persons had not been

able to give any explanation for coming together at the place of

incident nor about the bringing of lethal weapon(s) like “kassi” at

the site. The trial Court in that context observed thus: ­

        “25. ... Fourthly, accused persons have not been able to
        give any explanation of coming all the five accused
        persons altogether. Nor they have given any explanation
        of bringing lethal weapon like – ‘Kassi’ with them.
        Therefore, by the fact viz. going of accused persons from
        village, having armed with deadly weapons, giving
        beatings to Ghewarram belonging to complainant side by
        Ramnarayan amongst accused persons prior to the
        occurrence, it has been fully established that accused
        persons in order to take revenge, duly armed with lathies
        and ‘Kassies’ had arrived at the place of occurrence,
        therefore, accused persons are proved to be the
        aggressor.
26. In my opinion, the arguments of learned counsel
        appearing for the accused persons to the effect that by
11
the prosecution evidence, revolving lathi by Mangilal is
        proved and, therefore, Complainant side was the
        assailant, does not appear having any substance. Firstly,
        in view of the aforesaid discussion, accused persons have
        been proved to be the aggressor, therefore, first revolving
        lathi by Mangilal after having surrounded, it cannot be
        said that Mangilal was assailants. Secondly, by the
        depositions of prosecution witnesses viz. Ramratan (PW­
5), Motiram (PW­6), Annaram (PW­7), Mehram (PW­8) and
        Mangilal (PW­11), it has been established that Mangilal
        was revolving lathi while he was surrounded and was
        raising alarm that ‘Maare Marre’. Therefore, revolving
        lathi by the complainant side after assaulting was in
        defence and, therefore, accused persons do not get the
        right of private defence.”

The trial Court then went on to find that the complainant side

and accused persons, both, had sustained injuries in the

incident in question. The trial Court, however, opined that in the

present case, non­explanation of injuries sustained by accused

persons by the prosecution had no vital impact on the

prosecution case, and observed thus: –

        “28. …      Firstly, in the present case it has been
        established that accused persons were the aggressor. It
        has also been established that accused persons have
        started the occurrence. Therefore, prosecution side has
        given explicit evidence with regard to the genesis of the
        occurrence. The prosecution evidence is unambiguous
        and, therefore, non­submission of explanation of the
        injuries sustained by accused persons, does not have any
        effect on the prosecution case. …”

The trial Court unambiguously noted that the injuries sustained

by the accused persons are superficial and minor.                     After

analysing the medical and ocular evidence, the trial Court found
12
that during the scuffle, deceased Bhura Ram had caught hold of

“kassi” blow inflicted by Laxa Ram (accused No. 4) and thereafter,

Mehram S/o Chhagna Ram (accused No. 5) inflicted “kassi” blow

from the sharpen side on the head of Bhura Ram (deceased) with

intention to kill him, which blow struck on the vital part of his

head. And as per the medical evidence, that injury was sufficient

to cause death of Bhura Ram. The trial Court then proceeded to

analyse the evidence on record and noted as follows: ­

        “39. Hence, depositions of witness Mangilal (PW­11) gets
        corroboration by the depositions of eyewitnesses­ PW­5,
        6, 7 and 8, Injury Reports Ex. P­9, 10 and PW­11 Post
        mortem report of deceased Bhura, Report (Ex. P­13)
        lodged by Mangilal immediately after the incident, spot
        condition memo (Ex. P­1), site­plan of the place of
        occurrence (Ex. P­14), recovery of blood stained lathi
        (Article­8) from the possession of accused Ramniwas,
        recovery of clothes of injured and deceased which have
        been found to be stained with human blood and accused
        persons being the aggressor and by giving beatings by
        accused Ramnarayan to Ghewar and Motaram belong to
        complainant side, prior to the occurrence and by the
        depositions of PW­1 it is also proved that on 14.08.81 in
        the evening time at village Gowa Khurd, accused
        persons­Heeraram, Ramnarayan, Ramniwas, Baksharam
        and Mehram formed an unlawful assembly and at that
        time accused Baksharam and Mehram were duly armed
        with lethal weapons like ‘Kassies’ and amongst the
        accused persons, in furtherance to their common object,
        accused Baksharam intentionally inflicted simple injuries
        with ‘Kassi’ from sharpen side on the hand of Mangilal
        and when Bhura came to rescue, then accused Mehram
        inflicted a ‘Kassi’ blow from sharpen side over the head of
        Bhura. It is also established that when Mehram came to
13
rescue Bhura, then Ramniwas caused injuries with lathi
over the head and shoulder of Mehram.
40. Learned Advocate for the accused persons has also
contended that Bhura was come to rescue, suddenly he
sustained this injury, therefore, by the act of accused
Mehram, it cannot be said that he was having any motive
to kill and at the most the case of the accused falls within
the purview of
Section 304
Clause II
I.P.C
. and, therefore,
accused shall be acquitted of the charge under
Section
302
Indian Penal Code.
41. In my opinion, no substance appears in the
contention raised by learned defence counsel, because by
the depositions of Dr. Ghodawat (PW­9) it is proved that
in the ordinary course of nature injury No.1 on the head
of Bhura was sufficient to cause death and due to this
injury Bhura died. Beneath this injury the complete bone
was cut in thickness. All the membranes over the brain
were cut. Accordingly, it is proved that injury No. 1 was
sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature,
injury No. 1 placed over the vital part of body like head,
causing injury with a lethal weapon like ‘Kassi’ from the
sharpen side, arriving of Bhura to rescue from backside,
engaging of accused persons in giving beatings and
causing very deep injuries, by which it is proved that
accused have forcefully inflicted injuries and falling of
Bhura immediately after sustaining injuries, by these
facts, it is proved that accused Mehram was having
intention to kill Bhura and he has caused head injury to
Bhura with the intention to kill, due to which Bhura died.
Therefore, accused Mehram S/o Chhagna caused injury
to Bhura with the intention to kill. Thus, he has
committed offence of homicidal death by committing
murder of Bhura and, therefore, charge of committing
offence under
Section 302
Indian Penal Code has been
fully established against accused Mehram son of
Chhagna.
42. In my opinion, no substance appears in the
argument of learned Advocate for the accused persons
that the act of accused falls within the purview of
Section
304
Part II
I.P.C
. Firstly, Mehram was already assailant,
secondly accused Mehram has given beatings with
weapon, he was standing there after making preparations
and, therefore, it cannot be said that killing of Bhura by
accused Mehram S/o Chhagana was sudden. Rather, it is
proved that Mehram S/o Chhagna has caused injury to
14
Bhura with the intention to kill, therefore, his case falls
        within
Section 302
I.P.C.”

Indeed, the trial Court went on to hold that the prosecution had

not succeeded in substantiating common object of committing

murder of the person concerned and acquitted the accused of

charge under
Section 149
, IPC.
8.   When the matter travelled to the High Court at the instance

of the accused persons by way of appeal, the Division bench of

the High Court partly allowed the appeal and, if we may say so,

by a cryptic judgment, which reads thus: ­

             “…..
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties
        and have given our thoughtful consideration to the
        material available on record.
Admittedly the way to field which is being claimed
        by the complainant party, is not a sanctioned way, so
        much so that it is not even recorded in the revenue
        record. The complainant party is claiming it through
        prescription. If prescription has such maturity in it that it
        got converted into an actionable right, the complainant
        party could have sought a declaration to that effect.
        Without taking recourse to the lawful measures, the
        complainant party insisted on sing that way by courtesy
        only. This puts the complainant party on the offensive,
        and in that way the complainants stand on a weaker
        footing when they assert that the accused assaulted
        them. There were enough provocations created by the
        complainants to the accused persons by asserting a right,
        which was not a legally recognized right. In that
        background when the complainants and the accused,
        entered into a conflict, then the question of common
        object stands ruled out. Both the parties have quarrelled,
        and have inflicted injuries to each other. It was almost a
        case of free fight and in that view of the matter, invoking
15
Section 149
IPC is not considered proper by us and,
therefore,
Section 149
IPC deserves to be excluded from
consideration.
When
Section 149
IPC is taken out then individual
participation has to be seen to the deceased it was only
accused Meh Ram, who is said to have caused injuries.
All other accused persons were held guilty with the aid
[sic] of
Section 149
IPC. Conviction with the aid of
Section
149
IPC, therefore, deserves to be set aside. After setting
aside the conviction of other accused persons except Meh
Ram under
Section 302
IPC they stand convicted under
Sections 323
,
324
,
147
and
148
IPC. For those offences
whatever period they have already undergone can be
considered sufficient and in that view of the matter, the
appeal of the accused Ram Niwas, Heera Ram, Ram
Narayan and Baxa Ram is allowed to the extent that the
conviction under
Section 302
/
149
IPC is set aside. Their
conviction under
Sections 323
,
324
,
147
and
148
IPC is
maintained and the period already undergone which is
more than 5½ month is considered sufficient to meet out
the ends of justice.
Now we take up the case of accused Meh Ram. He
is said to have caused the total blow. But that was in the
background that both the parties fought a free fight. Meh
Ram himself has sustained injuries and in that view of
the matter it can be said that he cannot have the
intention of causing death of the deceased. It may be said
that he had exceeded his right of private defence. At best
a case under
Section 326
IPC can be said to be made out
against him.
In the result, the appeal of accused Ram Niwas,
Heera Ram, Ram Narayan and Boxa Ram accused is
partly allowed. Their conviction and sentence under
Section 149
IPC is set aside and their conviction under
Sections 323
,
324
,
147
and
148
IPC is maintained. As
regards the sentence, the period already undergone is
considered sufficient to meet the ends of justice.
So far as accused Meh Ram is concerned, his
conviction under
Section 302
IPC is converted into one
under
Section 326
IPC and his conviction under
Section
148
IPC is maintained. However, he is sentenced to the
period already undergone. Meh Ram is directed to pay
compensation to the tune of Rs.50,000/­ to the next of
kin of the deceased.”
16
9.     After having gone through the relevant evidence and

judgments of the trial Court and the appeal Court (High Court),

we have no reason to depart from the conclusion reached by the

trial Court that there were tangible circumstances and evidence

to indicate that the accused party was the aggressor, who was

hiding in the bushes and appeared only after the complainant

party arrived on the spot. The accused party had assembled at

the spot with lethal weapon(s) and all the accused were waiting

for the complainant party to arrive at the spot and started

assaulting the complainant party.       The blows inflicted by the

concerned accused, in particular accused No. 5, were with an

intention to kill Bhura Ram (deceased). The death of Bhura Ram

was caused due to the blow inflicted by accused No. 5 and was a

homicidal death.    We have no reason to depart from the said

findings recorded by the trial Court and if we may say so, the

same remained undisturbed by the High Court. The High Court

by its cryptic judgment, proceeded on the erroneous assumption

that   the   accused   party   had    been   provoked   due   to   the

unauthorised entry of the complainant party on their fields and

to defend their possession, they had to resort to right of private

defence.     While doing so, the accused party, in particular,
17
accused No. 5 (Mehram S/o Chhagna Ram), exceeded his right of

private defence.    There was no common object because the

incident in question occurred due to provocation and spiralled

into a free fight, causing injuries to both sides. The fallacy in the

reasoning of the High Court is palpable from the evidence of

prosecution witnesses, which has been elaborately analysed and

rightly accepted as truthful by the trial Court, substantiating the

allegations against the accused party of being the aggressors.

Once it is a case of accused party being the aggressors and they

commenced assault on the complainant party and further, the

accused No. 5 (Mehram S/o Chhagna Ram) having been found to

have assaulted Bhura Ram (deceased) with intention to kill him,

the question of invoking the right of private defence does not

arise. In fact, no defence evidence was produced to substantiate

the plea of exercise of private defence. The two theories (of being

aggressors as opposed to exercise of right of private defence) are

antithesis to each other.
10.   Had it been a case of complainant party being the aggressor,

the accused party and accused No. 5 (Mehram S/o Chhagna

Ram) in particular, could be heard on the factum of right of
18
private   defence.       The   nature     of   injuries   caused       to   the

complainant party and to the accused party are also indicative of

the fact that the accused party was the aggressor. As regards the

injuries caused to the deceased (Bhura Ram) due to the assault

by the accused No. 5 (Mehram S/o Chhagna Ram), as noted in

the post­mortem examination (Exhibit P­11) by Dr. Ghodawat,

the same reads thus:­

          “1. Incised wound of size 5.1 cm. x bone deep. This
          injury was in the middle parietal region of head.
          Underneath which bone was fully cut in obesity. All
          membranes covering brain were cut. Brain matter was
          appearing from the deepness of wound.
2.     One bruise of size 3.x2 cm. which was in the middle
          of left foot on front portion. Injury was ante mortem in
          nature. Brain matter was also cut parallel to the
          deepness of wound, which was cut up to half cm.”
                                                (emphasis supplied)

In the opinion of the doctor, the cause of death of Bhura Ram

(deceased) was brain injury and due to the injury No. 1. The fact

that the death was caused by the injury No. 1 alone, does not

mean that it was not a case of homicidal death. Nor there can be

presumption that there was no intention to cause death by

inflicting such injury.      The evidence on record has been duly

analysed by the trial Court and it has been held that accused No.

5 (Mehram S/o Chhagna Ram) had caused injury No. 1 with
19
intention to cause death of Bhura Ram (deceased) to teach lesson

to the complainant party for their repeated unauthorised entry on

the fields belonging to the accused party despite warnings and

obstructions caused in that behalf in the past.
11.   We may now usefully refer to the injury report (Exhibit D­7)

of accused No. 5 (Mehram S/o Chhagna Ram), who had suffered

simple injuries on his person caused by blunt weapon.                 The

description of injuries therein reads thus: ­

        “1.   Abrasion 1 x 1 cm which was in the middle posterior
              region of left fore­finger;
2.    Abrasion 1 x .3 cm. in the middle top portion of left
              index finger;
3.    Bruise 6 x 1 cm. over Rt. Shoulder oblique placed.
4.    Two abrasions 1.5 x 4 cm. in the lower portion of Rt.
Thigh, both were placed at a distance of 0.5 cm.
              each other.
5.    Injured was complaining pain in his left foot.”


From the description of injuries, it is amply clear that these

injuries are superficial and as rightly found by the trial Court,

will have no bearing on the prosecution case, even if the same

remain unexplained.        The fact that some of the accused had

received grievous injuries, does not belie the prosecution case

that the accused were the aggressors. There was no reason for

the accused to remain in hiding position equipped with lethal
20
weapon(s), waiting for the arrival of the complainant party and on

their arrival, to immediately commence attack and cause fatal

injuries to the complainant party. Such being the factual matrix,

it is unfathomable as to how the plea of right of private defence

could be invoked by the accused. If such a plea is not available,

the question of answering the plea in favour of the accused that it

was a case of excessive exercise of right of private defence does

not arise at all.   The basis of the High Court judgment being

flawed in this regard, the conclusion recorded by it cannot stand

the test of judicial scrutiny. For the same reason, the question of

converting the offence under
Section 302
to one under
Section

326
cannot be countenanced, both on facts and in law.
12.   Indeed, the trial Court’s finding of guilt recorded against

accused No. 5 (Mehram S/o Chhagna Ram), is unexceptionable.

However, on the nature of offence, the trial Court considered the

plea of the accused only in reference to offence falling under
Section 304
Part II of the
IPC
.      The trial Court rejected that

argument and we must uphold that conclusion, because the

finding of fact is that the act was done by the accused with the

knowledge that it is likely to cause death, and with intention to
21
kill Bhura Ram (deceased).      But before we express our final

opinion, it is necessary to examine as to whether the case in

hand would be covered under the exceptions predicated in
Section 300
, IPC, so as to apply
Section 304
, IPC – be it Part I or

Part II thereof. The facts of the present case would indicate that

the accused, in particular accused No. 5, at the relevant time,

was deprived of the power of self­control by grave and sudden

provocation due to repeated unauthorised entry on the fields

belonging to accused party. Further, the solitary fatal blow on

the vital part of the head by accused No. 5 caused the death of

Bhura Ram (deceased). The provocation was not invited by the

accused party, but was obviously at the instance of the

complainant party, who entered the fields unauthorizedly despite

the objection taken by the complainant party in that regard on

the same day earlier.    However, as the death of Bhura Ram

(deceased) was caused by the act of accused No. 5 giving one fatal

blow on the head, which was with the intention of causing his

death or causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death,

the case would be covered by
Section 304
Part I,
IPC
.         It is

certainly not a case to simply proceed under
Section 326
of the

IPC, as held by the High Court. We disapprove that approach of
22
the High Court.      Even if the High Court had justly applied
Section 326
, IPC, we fail to appreciate as to how the High Court

could have imposed sentence only for a period (about five

months) undergone considering the nature and gravity of the

offence and the background in which it is committed by the

accused party, in particular, accused No. 5.
13.   The learned counsel for the accused No. 5 was at pains to

persuade us that the said accused is now about 70­75 years of

age and at this distance of time, it may not be appropriate to

send him back to jail. Taking overall view of the matter, we are

not impressed by this submission. Even in case of offence under
Section 326
, IPC, which commended to the High Court, the same

was punishable with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment

of either description which may extend to ten years and also

liable to fine.   Had it been a conviction under
Section 326
, as

aforesaid, the sentence of only about five months in the facts of

the present case, by no stretch of imagination, was adequate.
14.   Be that as it may, in our considered opinion, the accused

No. 5 (Mehram S/o Chhagna Ram) deserves to be convicted for

the offence punishable under
Section 304
Part I of the
IPC
. For
23
the reasons already recorded, it is unnecessary for us to dilate on

the decisions of this Court pressed into service regarding

approach to be adopted by the Court in respect of cases

pertaining to accused exceeding his right of private defence.
15.   Taking overall view of the matter, we are of the considered

opinion that in this case, the accused No. 5 (Mehram S/o

Chhagna Ram) deserves to be awarded sentence of ten (10) years

of simple imprisonment and he must pay compensation to the

tune of Rs.50,000/­ (Rupees fifty thousand only) to the next kin

of the deceased, if it is yet to be paid in terms of order of the High

Court.
16.   Accordingly, we partly allow this appeal.       The impugned

judgment of the High Court and that of the trial Court are

modified by convicting the accused No. 5 (Mehram S/o Chhagna

Ram) for offence punishable under
Section 304
Part I and
Section

148
, IPC. He is sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for

ten (10) years for offence punishable under
Section 304
Part I

and six (6) months’ simple imprisonment for offence punishable

under
Section 148
and fine of Rs.100/­ on each count, in default

to undergo fifteen (15) days’ additional simple imprisonment.
24
Both sentences to run concurrently. Further, the period already

undergone by accused No. 5 (Mehram S/o Chhagna Ram) shall

be adjusted by giving the benefit under
Section 428
, Cr.P.C. In

addition, the accused No. 5 (Mehram S/o Chhagna Ram) is

directed to pay compensation to the tune of Rs.50,000/­ (Rupees

fifty thousand only) to the next of kin of the deceased (Bhura

Ram), if already not paid. The bail bonds stand cancelled and

the accused No. 5 (Mehram S/o Chhagna Ram) is directed to

surrender within six weeks from the date on which lockdown in

the country due to pandemic COVID­19 including in the State of

Rajasthan is relaxed, to undergo the remaining sentence period.
17.   The appeal is disposed of in the above terms.               Pending

interlocutory applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
..................................J.
                                         (A.M. Khanwilkar)


                                         ..................................J.
                                         (Dinesh Maheshwari)
New Delhi;
May 6, 2020.