[Cites
6
, Cited by
11
]
Supreme Court of India
Lt. Governor Of Delhi & Ors vs M/S. Ganesh Flour Mills Co. Ltd on 9 January, 1973
Equivalent citations: 1973 AIR 705, 1973 SCR (3) 211, AIR 1973 SUPREME COURT 705, 1973 3 SCC 487, 1973 TAX. L. R. 1923, 31 STC 354, 1973 3 SCR 211, 1973 (1) SCWR 308, 1973 SCC (TAX) 323
Author:
Hans Raj Khanna
Bench:
Hans Raj Khanna
,
K.S. Hegde
,
P. Jaganmohan Reddy
PETITIONER:
LT. GOVERNOR OF DELHI & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
M/S.  GANESH FLOUR MILLS CO.  LTD.

DATE OF JUDGMENT09/01/1973

BENCH:
KHANNA, HANS RAJ
BENCH:
KHANNA, HANS RAJ
HEGDE, K.S.
REDDY, P. JAGANMOHAN

CITATION:
 1973 AIR  705		  1973 SCR  (3) 211
 1973 SCC  (1) 487


ACT:
Central Sales Tax Act
1956-
S. 8(3)(c)
-Respondent dealing  in
vegetable products applied for amendment of the Registration
Certificate  to	 include Tin plates or tin sheets  used	 for
packing.  Whether respondent can invoke the benefit  of	 the
said clause.



HEADNOTE:
The  respondent	 company is a registered  dealer  under	 the
Central	 Sales Tax Act
1956 and deals mainly with  vegetable
products.  It was granted the registration certificate under
the  Central  Sales Tax (Registration and  Turnover)  Rules,
1957.	In  1958, the respondent, applied to the  Sales	 Tax
Officer for amendment of the Registration Certificate so  as
to include Tin-plates or Tin-sheets under Sub-section (3) of
Section	 8
of the Act on the ground that those	 goods	were
used  by the respondent for packing its	 vegetable  products
for sale.
The application was rejected by the Sales Tax Officer on the
ground that the goods in question were "Declared Goods"	 and
therefore,  their purchase on the strength  of	registration
certificate could be allowed only if they were to be  resold
in  the	 form in which they had been  purchased	 A  revision
petition  against  the	said  order  was  dismissed  by	 the
Commissioner  of  Sales	 Tax who held  that,  the  goods  in
question were not containers and that "Tin Plates", or	"Tin
Sheets"	 did  not  constitute  packing	material.    Further
revision filed before the Chief Commissioner was  dismissed.
The respondent thereafter, filed an application for making a
reference  to  the High Court, but it was  rejected  by	 the
Chief  Commissioner on the ground of limitation.   The	res-
pondent,  thereafter, moved the High Court for direction  to
the  Chief Commissioner to refer the question of law to	 the
High,  Court.  In addition, the respondent filed a  petition
under
Art.226
and
227
of the Constitution for a direction to
the  appellants to decide the application for  amendment  of
the  Registration Certificate in accordance with  law.	 The
High Court allowed the writ petition and held that the words
in  See. 8(3) (c) of the Act were wide enough to  cover	 the
goods  in question.  On appeal to this Court, the  appellant
raised	the  following	question The  "Tin  Sheets  and	 Tin
Plates" are not covered by clause (c) of Sub-section (3)  of
Section	 8
of the Act, as those  goods	 constitute  neither
"containers  nor  materials  intended  for  being  used	 for
packing	 of goods for sale." Further as tin sheets  and	 tin
plates	cannot	he used by the respondent unless  they.	 are
converted  into. containers, the respondents  cannot  invoke
the benefit of
S.8(3)(c)
, of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal,
HELD:(i)  The  materials referred to in Clause (c)  of
Sec.
8(3)
according to its plain language, should be such as	 are
intended for packing of goods for sale.	 Once the  intention
of  using  the materials for packing of goods  for  sale  is
proved.	 the requirements of the Clause would be  satisfied.
The fact that tin sheet and tip plates have to be  subjected
by  the	 respondent to the Process of cutting  and  moulding
into tin containers would not take them out of the  category
of  materials  intended for being used for  the	 packing  of
goods 'for sale.  The cutting and moulding is essential	 for
putting the tin sheets and tin plates into
212
shape  with  a	view to adapt them  for	 actual	 user.	 The
process of cutting and moulding does not alter the nature of
the  materials	intended for use in packing  the  goods	 for
sale.  It only facilitates the actual user for packing. [214
FG]
(ii) Packing  materials	 are necessary not  only  for  solid
articles, but also for those in liquid and semi-liquid form.
In  a  society	that produces  foodstuffs  and	manufactured
articles  in  one.  locality  and use  them  in	 another'  a
wrapping   or	container  is  necessary   during   storage,
transport and sale. [215-B]
Encyclopaedia  of  Britannica, Vol. 17 of 1968	Edn.  p.  22
referred to.
The  functions of a package are (1) to contain a  convenient
sized  unit  or amount of a product; (2) to  protect  it  in
transit;  (3) to aid its safe delivery to the  consumer	 and
(4)  in	 some cases, to display the product or	promote	 its
sale, or to act as a dispenser of it.  The packing  industry
has expanded to meet the demands for processed and preserved
foods rather than seasonal crops and new materials are being
used for containers.  In the present case, as the tin-sheets
and tin-plates purchased by the respondent were intended  to
be  used  for  packing of vegetable  products  sold  by	 the
respondent,  it is entitled to invoke the benefit of  Clause
(c) of
S. 8(3)
. [215C-D]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal  No.  1776  of
1969.
Appeal	by certificate from judgment and order date  May  3,
1968  of the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in Civil	Writ
No. 135-D of 1960.
S.  K.	Aiyar,	S.  P. Nayar and  R.  N.  Sachthey  for	 the
appellants.
Rameshwar Nath for the respondent.
The, Judgment of the Court was delivered by
KHANNA,	 J. This appeal on certificate by the Lt.   Governor
Delhi  and  two others is directed against the	judgment  of
Delhi  High  Court whereby it accepted	the  petition  under
article	 226
and
227
of the Constitution of India  filed  by
the respondent company and directed the appellants to decide
the  respondent's application for amendment of	registration
certificate in the light of observations made by the court.
The  respondent	 company is a registered  dealer  under	 the
Central Sales Tax Act, 1956
(hereinafter referred to as	 the
Act)  and  deals mainly in vegetable  products	(vanaspati).
The  respondent was granted registration  certificate  under
the  Central  Sales Tax (Registration and  Turnover)  Rules,
1957.	On December 11, 1958 the respondent applied  to	 the
Sales	Tax  Officer  for  amendment  of  the	registration
certificates  so  as to include therein tin  plates  or	 tin
sheets under sub-section (3) of
section 8
of the Act on	 the
allegation that those goods were used by the respondent	 for
packing its vegetable products for sale.  The said appli-
213
cation	was rejected by the Sales Tax Officer on the  ground
that the goods in question were declared goods and, as such,
their  purchase on the strength of registration	 certificate
could be allowed only if they were to be resold in the	form
in  which they had been purchased.  Revision petition  filed
by the respondent against the order of the Sales Tax Officer
was dismissed by the Commissioner of Sales Tax on the ground
that  tin  plates or tin sheets were not  declared.goods  or
goods  of special importance.  On the other hand,  according
to the Commissioner, those goods could fall in the  category
mentioned  in clause (c) of sub-section (3) of
section 8
of
the  Act provided they were either containers  or  materials
used  for  packing  of goods  for  sale.   The	Commissioner
further held that the goods in question were not  containers
as  they  had to undergo manufacturing process	before	they
could  be used as containers.  The goods were also held	 not
to  fall in the second category of being materials used	 for
packing	 vegetable oil because, according to him,  the	word
"packing"  was invariably used for holding  solid  contents.
He,  therefore, held that "tin plates" or "tin	sheets"	 did
not constitute packing material.  Further revision filed  by
the  respondent was dismissed by the Chief Commissioner	 who
agreed with the opinion of the Commissioner.  An application
was  thereafter	 filed	by  the	 respondent  for  making   a
reference  to the High Court of the question of law  arising
from the order of the Chief Commissioner.  This	 application
too was rejected by the Chief Commissioner on the ground  of
being  barred by time.	The respondent thereafter moved	 the
High  Court  for a direction to the  Chief  Commissioner  to
refer  the question of law formulated by the  respondent  to
the High Court.	 In addition to that, the respondent filed a
petition  under
articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution  of
India  for  a  direction to the	 appellants  to	 decide	 the
respondent's  application for amendment of the	registration
certificate in accordance with law.
The writ petition was resisted by the appellants.  The	High
Court accepted the writ petition and held that the words  of
clause (c) of sub-section (3) of
section, 8
of the Act	were
wide  enough to cover the goods in question.   According  to
the High Court, it was not necessary that those goods should
be  capable  of	 being	used directly  for  the	 purpose  of
packing.  It was quite enough if the intention of the dealer
was  to	 acquire them in order that they might be  used	 for
packing	 of.  goods  for sale even if  in  that	 process  of
adapting them for such use, they bad to undergo some  change
in  shape  or  form.   It  was	further	 observed  that	 the
respondent's  object was to. convert the tin sheets and	 tin
Plates into tin containers with a view that the same, might
be  filled  with the vegetable oil products to	be  sold  to
different parties.
Before	proceeding further, we may set out  sub-section	 (1)
and clause (c) of sub-section (3) of
section 8
of the Act
214
"(1) Every dealer, who in the course of inter-
	      State trade or commerce-
(a)   sells to the Government any goods; or
(b)   sells to a registered dealer other	than
	      the Government goods of a description referred
	      to in sub-section (3);
shall  be	 liable to pay tax  under-this	Act,
	      which shall be three per cent of his turnover.
(3)   The	 goods referred to in clause (b)  of
	      sub-section
(1)
(b)*	*    *	   *
(c)   are	  containers  or   other   materials
	      specified	 in the certificate of	registration
	      of the registered dealer purchasing the goods,
	      being  containers	 or materials  intended	 for
	      being used for the packing of goods for sale;
Mr.  Aiyar on behalf of the appellants has argued  that	 tin
sheets and tin plates are not covered by clause (c) of	sub-
section	 (3)  of
section 8
of the Act  reproduced  above  as
those,	goods constitute neither. containers nor  "materials
intended for being used for packing of goods for sale".	 Mr.
Ramesliwar Nath on behalf of the respondent has not disputed
that tin sheets and tin plates do not constitute containers,
but,  according	 to  him,  they	 fall  in  the	category  of
materials  intended for being used for packing of goods	 for
sale.  There is, in our opinion, considerable force in	this
sub-mission  of Mr, Rameshwar Nath.  The materials  referred
to  in clause (c) according to its plain language should  be
such as are intended for being used for the packing of goods
for  sale.   Once the intention of using the  materials	 for
packing	 of goods for sale IS proved, the  requirements.  of
the  clause  would be satisfied.  The High Court  has  found
that the respondent purchased tin sheets and tin plates from
dealers in Bihar and elsewhere with a view to convert  those
sheets	and plates into tin containers in order to fill	 the
same   with  vegetable	oil  products  for  being  sold	  to
different, parties.  This finding of the High Court has	 not
been  questioned before us.  It has; however, been urged  on
behalf	of the appellants that as tin sheets and tin  plates
cannot	be used by the respondent unless they are  converted
into containers, the respondent cannot invoke the benefit of
clause	(c) of sub-section (3) of
section 8
of the Act.	  We
find it difficult to accept this contention.  The fact	that
tin  sheets  and  tin plates have to  be  subjected  by	 the
respondent  to the process of cutting and moulding into	 tin
containers  would  not	take them out  of  the	category  of
materials intended for being
215
used  for  the packing of goods for sale.. The	cutting	 and
moulding  is  essential for putting the tin sheets  and	 tin
plates into shape with a view to adapt them for actual user.
The  process  of  cutting and moulding does  not  alter	 the
nature of the "materials intended for being used for packing
of goods for sale"; it only facilitates the actual user	 for
packing.
We are also of the view that packing materials are necessary
not only for solid articles but also for those in liquid and
semiliquid  form.  According to observations on page  22  of
Encylopaedia Britannica, Vol.17, 1968 Edition, in a  society
that produces foods-stuffs and manufactured articles in one
locality  and uses them in another, a wrapping or  container
is  necessary  during  storage, transport,  and	 sale.	 The
functions  of a package are : (1) to contain, a	 convenient-
sized  unit  or amount of a product; (2) to  protect  it  in
transit;  (3) to aid its safe delivery to the consumer;	 and
(4)  in	 some cases to display the product and	promote	 its
sale or to act as a dispenser of it.  Originally  instituted
to  produce  simple containers, the,  packing  industry	 has
expanded  to  meet the demands for processed  and  preserved
foods,	rather	than  seasonal	crops,	and  to	  distribute
increased varieties of manufactured items.  Packing reflects
developments in other industries, especially  petrochemicals
and   plastic's,  whereby  new	materials  and	methods	  of
construction  have  been provided for  containers.   It	 has
further	 been  observed that cans, both tin  and  aluminium,
are,  now used for ready-cooked products, brewery  products,
soft  drinks,  and  many  oils	and  semisolids.   Where   a
reclosable  pack is needed lever-lid or slip-lid  cans	are,
used instead of sealed cans.
As the tin sheets and tin plates purchased by the respondent
were  intended to be used for packing of vegetable  products
sold by the respondent, the respondent, in our opinion,	 was
entitled  to  invoke the benefit of  clause  (c)  reproduced
above.	 In  the result, the appeal fails and  is  dismissed
with costs.
S.C.					 Appeal dismissed.
216