[Cites
7
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs M/S. Modi Industries Ltd on 30 March, 1973
Equivalent citations: 1973 AIR 1281, 1973 SCR (3) 835, AIR 1973 SUPREME COURT 1281, 1973 (1) SCC 781 1973 3 SCR 835, 1973 3 SCR 835
Author:
A.N. Grover
Bench:
A.N. Grover
,
Kuttyil Kurien Mathew
PETITIONER:
UNION OF INDIA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
M/S.  MODI INDUSTRIES LTD.

DATE OF JUDGMENT30/03/1973

BENCH:
GROVER, A.N.
BENCH:
GROVER, A.N.
MATHEW, KUTTYIL KURIEN

CITATION:
 1973 AIR 1281		  1973 SCR  (3) 835
 1973 SCC  (1) 781


ACT:
Indian Railways Act, 1890
Ss. 26 and 41-Complaint in respect
of past dues cannot be made under s. 41 before Railway Rates
Tribunal--In such cages. v. 26 of Act is not a bar to a suit
in civil court and question of reasonableness of charges can
be gone into by civil court.



HEADNOTE:
By  agreement dated July 4, 1933 the respondent company	 was
liable to pay charges for a railway siding at agreed  rates.
Clause	23 of the agreement laid down that it shall be	open
to the Railway Administration on giving six months notice of
sum  intent, to revise the said charges.. Clause 24  related
to  termination of the agreement in the event of  nonpayment
of dues within one month of demand., On March 26, 1949	the-
railway	 authorities informed the respondent that the  rates
were  proposed	to be increased with effect  from  April  1,
1949.	The  respondent objected" to the increase  as  being
against clause 23 of the agreement.  By a subsequent  letter
in September 1951 the Divisional Superintendent of the Rail-
way  asked the respondent to pay the charges at much  higher
rates.	 There	was  prolonged	correspondence	between	 the
parties	 without the respondent agreeing to pay	 the  higher
rates  demanded.   On September 29,  1955  the.	  Divisional
Engineer  addressed  a letter to  the  respondent  proposing
revision  of  the siding charges with effect from  April  1,
1956  after the expiry of six months according to clause  23
of the agreement.  These proposed'. charges were much  lower
than  the charges demanded by the earlier letters..  On	 May
17, 1957 the General Manager of the Railway sent a letter to
the  plaintiff for payment of Rs. 93,981-8-0 in	 respect  of
the  period  December  1  1949 to March	 31,  1956.  it	 was
intimated  that on failure to make the said  payment  within
one  month the supply of wagons would be stopped' and  steps
to determine the agreement would be taken., In May 1957	 the
respondent served a notice under
s. 80
of the Code of  Civil
Procedure  and'	 thereafter filed a suit.  The	trial  court
partly	decreed	 the suit.  The High, Court  decreed  it  in
toto.  In the appeal by certificate to this Court, filed' on
behalf	of the Union of India, the questions that  fell	 for
consideration  were  :	(i)  whether  the  civil  court	 had
jurisdiction  in  view	of  Ss. 26 and'	 41  of	 the
Indian
Railways Act, 1890
, to determine the reasonableness; of	 the
charges-,  (ii)	 whether  the  courts  below  if  they	 had
jurisdiction  were  justified in holding the charges  to  be
unreasonable.
Dismissing the appeal,
HELD  :	 (i) From the facts it appeared that the  rates	 are
being revised and actually enhanced, but then the matter was
kept  pending and there was exchange of	 correspondence	 and
discussion between the parties from time to time.  No effort
was  made to enforce the demand made in the various  letters
and the plaintiff was allowed to make payments according  to
the  rates originally agreed.  It was only in May 1957	that
the respondent was really threatened to make payment of	 the
outstanding  amount calculated at the revised rates on	pain
of  the	 supply of wagons being stopped	 and  the  agreement
being determined.
According to the decisions of this Court it was hardly	open
to the respondent to file a complaint under
s. 41
of the Act
with regard to the.
836
Reasonableness	or otherwise of the rates and charges  which
had  already 'become due and payable.  The plaintiff had  no
grievance  whatsoever with :regard to the charges which	 had
been fixed with effect from April 1, 1956.  By means of	 the
letter dated September 29, 1955, and therefore there was  no
question  of its filings, a complaint with regard to  those
charges.   Its	grievance was confined only  to	 the  amount
which  was  being  demanded  on the  basis  of	the  revised
enhanced rates between the period December 1, 1949 and March
1,  1956.  If that amount bad actually been realised by	 the
railway authorities the plaintiff could only file a suit for
its  refund and could not have laid a complaint under
s.  41
of  the	 Act before the Railway Tribunal.   By	analogy	 the
plaintiff  could not have filed a complaint with regard	 to
the  past dues as the Railway Tribunal could not have  given
any  relief in respect thereof 'following the law laid	down
by this ,Court.	 In this view of the matter apart from other
questions  involving  the  validity  of	 clause	 23  of	 the
agreement  as also of the notice or intimation of  rates  on
the  ground on noncompliance with its terms the suit  ,could
not  be	 held barred under
s. 26
of the Act  and  the  civil
court could grant the relief claimed. [842H-843P]
Union  of  India  v. The  Indian  Sugar	 Mills	Association,
Calcutta,  [1967]  3 S.C.R. 219, Raichand  Amulakh  Shah  v.
Union  of  India, [1964] 5 S.C.R. 148 and Upper	 Doab  Sugar
Mills  Ltd.  v. Shahdara (Delhi)  Saharanpur  Light  Railway
Company Ltd., [1963] 2 S.C.R. 333 at p. 342, referred to.
(ii) There was no serious infirmity in the reasoning of	 the
High  Court by which it arrived at the conclusion  that	 the
question  of reasonableness of the charges, keeping in	mind
the  'facts  of	 this case, was justiciable.   Nor  bad	 any
justification  been  shown  'for  reopening  the  concurrent
finding	 of the two Courts below that the rates	 which	were
demanded for the period in question were unreasonable.	 The
suit was thus rightly decreed. [843E]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal  No.  1616  of
1967.
Appeal	by certificate from the judgment and order dated  '-
September  30,	1966 of the Allahabad High  Court  in  First
Appeal -No. 198 of 1960.
Gobind Das and B. D. Sharma, for the appellant.
C. B. Agarwala, Uma Mehta, S. K. Bagga, Swreshta Bagga and
Ram Arora, for the respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
GROVER,	 J.---This  is	an  appeal  by	certificate  from  a
judgment ,of the Allahabad High Court in a suit filed by the
plaintiff-respondent   for   an	  injunction   against	 the
defendant-appellant  restraining it from realizing the	sum,
of Rs. 93,981-8-0 on account of the alleged siding  charges
for  the period December 1, 1949 to March 31, 1956 and	from
stopping  the supply of wagons in the railway siding of	 the
plaintiff  and further from cancelling the agreement  ,dated
July 4, 1933 for the aforementioned reason.
The  facts necessary for deciding the appeal may be  stated.
By means of an agreement dated July 4, 1933 the	 plaintiff
entered	 into an agreement with the Secretary of  State	 for
India-in-Council  through  the agent of	 the  North  Western
Railway (now represented
837
by the Union of India) whereby it was agreed that the former
shall  Jay a railway siding from Begamabad Station  Yard  of
that  railway  for enabling the plaintiff to  carry  on	 its
business  at its, premises.  Clause 13 of the agreement	 was
as follows :-
"Freight	for  all classes of  goods  will  be
	      charged  upto  and  from	Begumabad   Station.
	      Railway Receipts and invoices shall be  issued
	      to and from the station only and in accordance
	      with the rates from time to time published  in
	      the Goods Traffic Books of this Railway  Admi-
	      nistration will make the following charges  in
	      each  direction  from every  wagon  loaded  or
	      empty  in	 or removed from the lines A  and  B
	      mentioned in clause 15 below
	      (1) Per 4 wheeled wagon Re. One.
(2) Per 6 wheeled wagon Re. One and annas
			 eight
		    (3) Per 8 wheeled wagon Re. two."
Clause 23 of the agreement provided
	      "Notwithstanding	anything  laid down  in	 the
	      foregoing clauses of this Agreement, it  shall
	      be  open	to  the	 Railway  Administration  on
	      giving  six months notice of such	 intent,  to
	      revise the charges laid down in clauses 8, 12,
	      13 and 19 of this Agreement".
Clause	24  related to termination of the agreement  in	 the
event of non payment of dues within one month of demand.  On
March  26,  1949 the Divisional Superintendent of  the	E.P.
Railway (successor in interest of the North Western Railway)
informed  the plaintiff that the rates were proposed  to  be
increased  with	 effect from April 1,  1949,  the  increased
charges being mentioned in that letter.	 As this  intimation
was  not in accordance with clause 23 of the  agreement	 the
plaintiff   refused  to	 agree	to  the	  increase.    Other
objections  were 'also raised, one of the  objections  being
that   the   charges   were   excessive.    The	  Divisional
Superintendent	addressed  another letter on  May  18,	1949
informing  the plaintiff that with effect from	December  1,
1949  the charges mentioned therein would be made.   A	good
deal   of   correspondence  and	 discussions   between	 the
representatives of the plaintiff and the railway authorities
took  place  and  by  a	 letter	 dated	July  20,  1951	 the
Divisional Superintendent intimated that the revised  siding
charges	 in  force from December 1, 1949  were	purely	pro-
visional  and  were  subject  to  revision.   Meanwhile	 and
subsequent to the above date the required tests were made to
determine  the	charges.  In September 1951  the  Divisional
Superintendent	wrote  to  the	plaintiff  that	 the  siding
charges should be, paid with effect
838
from December 1, 1949 to September 30, 1951 at the following
rates :-
(i) Per 4 wheeled wagon	    Rs.	    51-
  (ii) Per 6 wheeled wagon	    Rs.	    7/8/-
  (iii) Per 8 wheeled wagon	    Rs.	     10/-
The   plaintiff	 protested  against  what  was	called	 the
exorbitant nature of the charges and made it clear that	 the
letter	of September 1951 did not comply with clause  23  of
the  agreement and that the charges were  unreasonable	and
could  not  be	legitimately  made.   Another  letter  dated
October	 26/November  6,  1951 was sent	 by  the  Divisional
Superintendent	saying that the siding charges to be  levied
with effect from first October 1951 were being assessed	 and
would be intimated to the plaintiff and meanwhile it  should
,continue  to  pay  the charges demanded in  the  letter  of
September 1951 provisionally.  The Divisional Superintendent
addressed another letter dated November 27, 1951  explaining
the  result of the test and the actual cost of the  shunting
etc.   A  demand was made' that the revised  siding  charges
should	be paid from December 1949 to September 30, 1951  at
Rs. 4/- per 4 wheeler, Rs. 6/per 6 wheeler and Rs. 8/- per 8
wheeler.  The plaintiff, however. did not pay the  increased
rates  demanded.   On  September  29,  1955  the  Divisional
Superintendent addressed a letter to the plaintiff proposing
revision  of  the siding charges with effect from  April  1,
1956  after the expiry of six months according to clause  23
of  the	 ,agreement.   The  charges  as	 demanded  were	  as
follows:--
(i) 4 wheeled wagon Rs. 1 20/-
(ii) 6 wheeled wagon     Rs. 2 -10/-
     (iii) 8 wheeled wagon    Rs 3 501-
On  May 17, 1957 the General Manager of the Railway  sent  a
letter	to the plaintiff for payment of the, amount  of	 Rs.
93,981-8-0  representing the difference between the  amounts
due  from  December  1,	 1949 to March	31,  1956.   It	 was
intimated  that on failure to make the said  payment  within
one month the supply of wagons would be stopped and steps to
determine  the	agreement would be taken.  In May  1957	 the
plaintiff served a notice under s. 80 of the Civil Procedure
Code  to be defendant and ,.hereafter in October  1958	the
suit out of which the appeal has arisen was filed.
Out of the issues framed by the trial court on the pleadings
of the parties the following need be mentioned
	      (1)   "Whether  the enhancement of the  siding
	      charges  by  the	defendant  is	unjustified,
	      exorbitant and illegal ?
8 39
	      (2)   Whether the demand of Rs. 93,981-8-0  by
	      the defendant is illegal ?
(3)   Whether the court has no jurisdiction to
	      try the suit ?"
On  issue.   No.  1 the trial court held  that	the  charges
demanded were unjustified and exorbitant.  It was held	that
out  of	 the  demand of Rs. 93,981-8-0 the  demand  for	 Rs.
22,111-3-0  was	 illegal.  On issue No. 4  the	trial  court
expressed the view that it had jurisdiction to try the	suit
in respect of that portion of the claim whereby the legality
of  the	 enhanced  siding charges  had	been  challenged  on
account of being in violation of clause 23 of the  agreement
but it had no jurisdiction to try the suit in respect of the
second	ground whereby the enhanced siding charges had	been
challenged as unjustified and exorbitant.
The  plaintiff appealed to the High Court and the  defendant
filed cross objections.	 The High Court affirmed the finding
of the courts below that the enhancement made by the Railway
Administration	was highly unjustified and exorbitant.	 But
it  did	 not accept its finding about the  legality  of	 the
enhancement and also on the question of the jurisdiction  of
the  civil  court.  The appeal was consequently	 allowed  in
toto and the cross objections were dismissed.
The  principal	question which has been agitated  before  us
relates to the jurisdiction of the civil court to  determine
the  reasonableness of the charges.  A	subsidiary  question
has  been  raised  that assuming the  civil  court  had	 the
jurisdiction,  whether	the courts below were  justified  in
holding	 that  to  be  unreasonable.   For  the	 purpose  of
determining  the question of jurisdiction we shall  have  to
examine the relevant provisions of the Indian Railways ,Act,
1890, hereinafter called the 'Act'.
Section 3
contains	 the
definitions.  Clauses 11 and 13 defining the words "traffic"
and rates" are as follows -
"(11) "trafic" includes rolling stock of every
	      description as well as passengers, animals and
	      goods;
(13) "rate" includes any fare, charge or other
	      payment  for  the carriage of  any  passenger,
	      animal or goods";
Chapter V headed "traffic facilities" commences with S.	 26.
According  to that section except as provided in the Act  no
suit  shall be instituted or proceedings taken for  anything
done  or any omission made by the Railway Administration  in
violation or contravention of any provision of that Chapter.
Section	  27   (1  )  places  a	 duty	on   every   Railway
Administration	to afford all reasonable facilities for	 the
receiving,  forwarding	and delivering of traffic  upon	 and
from the several railways belonging to or worked
840
by  it and for the return of the rolling stock.	 Section  29
is as follows :-
S.29  (1)	 "The  Central	Government  may	  by
	      general  or  special  order  fix	maximum	 and
	      minimum  rates for the whole or any part of  a
	      railway and prescribe the conditions in  which
	      such rates will apply.
(2)   The	 Central Government, may, by a	like
	      order, fix the rates of any other charges	 for
	      the  whole  or  any  part	 of  a	railway	 and
	      prescribe	 the conditions in which such  rates
	      of charges shall apply.
(3)   Any	   complaint	that	a    railway
	      administration   is  contravening	 any   order
	      issued  by the Central Government	 under	sub-
section (1) shall be determined by the Central
	      Government"..
Section 34 relates to the constitution of the Railway  Rates
Tribunal for the purpose of discharging functions  specified
in Chapter V. Sections 39     and  40 give the	jurisdiction
and powers of the Tribunal, Section 41	to the extent it  is
material may be reproduced :-
S.41 (1)	 "Any	complaint  that	 a   railway
	      administration-
(a)   is contravening the provisions of s.  28
	      or
(b)   is	charging  for the  carriage  of	 any
	      commodity between two stations a rate which is
	      unreasonable or
(c)   is	levying	 any other charge  which  is
	      unreasonable,
may  be, made to the Tribunal, and the Tribunal	 shall	hear
and  decide  any  such	complaint  in  accordance  with	 the
provisions of this Chapter".
(
2
)
	       ...................................................
.
(3)   In the case of a complaint under  clause
(b)  or  clause  (c) of  subsection  (1),	 the
	      Tribunal	may fix such rate or charge-  as  it
	      considers reasonable :
Provided
	      that .........................................
(4)........................	   "
on  behalf of the appellant the bar created by the s. 26  to
the  jurisdiction of ordinary courts has been  invoked.	  It
has  been  argued that s. 29(2) postulates the	fixation  of
rates  of  charges other than those contemplated  by  sub-s.
(1).	If   there  is	any  grievance	that   the   railway
administration is levying a charge which is unreasonable  it
will be covered by S. 41 (1) (c) and there-
841
fore,	only  a	 complaint  can	 be  made  to  the   railway
administration	in  that matter.  The  jurisdiction  of	 the
civil  court will be barred because  exclusive	jurisdiction
has  been  conferred  on  the  Railway	Rates  Tribunal	 for
determining whether the charge being levied is unreasonable.
According to the High Court Chapter V has nothing to do with
charges	 which are payable under a contract.   The  validity
and interpretation of clause 23 of the agreement between the
parties	 was  a matter for the interpretation of  the  civil
court and could not possibly be barred by
s. 26
of the	Act.
Section	 41  (1) (c) has no application	 to  an	 enhancement
already made in the purported exercise of the right under  a
contract.
Now  section  26  only bars the institution  of	 a  suit  or
proceedings  for  anything  done or  any  omission  made  in
violation  or contravention of any provision of	 Chapter  V.
Section	 29(2)	empowers the Central Government to  fix	 the
rates  of any other charges by a general or  special  order.
In  view of the language of s. 41 (1) (c) if it	 is  assumed
that  the  rates cannot be unreasonable and if	the  Central
Government  fixes unreasonable rates it may be	possible  to
say  that there has been a contravention or violation of  s.
29(2).	But such fixation of rates under that provision	 has
to be by a general or special order.  It has been  suggested
that  a	 communication	made under a  contract	cannot	fall
within the meaning of the word "order" as contemplated by s.
29. Prima facie, there may be some difficulty in acceding to
the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that
any part of s. 29 will cover a revision of rates made by the
railway	 authority  in terms of a contract  but	 the  matter
seems  to stand concluded by the decision of this  Court  in
Union  of  India  v. The Indian	 Sugar	Mills-	Association,
Calcutta
()  according  to which it is  immaterial  that	 the
charges being levied by the railway administration arise  as
a result of a voluntary agreement.  The real difficulties in
the  way  of  the appellant are two fold;  firstly,  if	 any
question arises about the validity of a clause of a contract
that  will be entertainable by a civil court.
As
laid	down
in
Raichand Amulakh Shah v. Union of India
(2) the  Railways
Tribunal  has  no jurisdiction to decide whether  the  rules
empowering  the railway administration to levy a  particular
charge are ultra vires or whether the railway administration
collected  amounts  in excess of the charges  which  it	 can
legally	 levy under a rule.
In
Upper Doab Sugar Mills	Ltd.
v.  Shahadara  (Delhi)	Saharanpur  Light  Railway   Company
Ltd.
(,') two main points arose; one was whether the  Railway
,Tribunal  had	jurisdiction to entertain the  complaint  as
regards	 the  reasonableness  of  the  rates  prior  to	 the
institution of the complaint
(1) [1967] 3 S. C. R. 219.    (2) [1964] 5 S. C. R. 148.
(3) [1963] 2 S. C. R. 333 at p. 342.
6-L797SupCT/73
842
and  the  other	 was whether it had  jurisdiction  to  grant
refund	for the aforesaid period.  This is what was said  by
Das Gupta J.
"The words "charging" in cl. (b) and "levying"
in  cl. (c) were used in the one and the	same
	      sense.  We find it impossible to agree however
	      that  they were used to include  "collecting".
	      It  appears to be clear that if the  intention
	      of  the legislature was to give  the  Tribunal
	      jurisdiction  over  complaints  in  connection
	      with  charges  ,already made  the	 legislature
	      would have used the words "has charged and  is
	      charging"	  and  would  not  merely  say	 "is
	      charging".   Special  jurisdiction of  such  a
	      nature  would  be given clearly and  the	very
	      fact  that  the words "has charged"  have	 not
	      been  used is sufficient ground for  ,thinking
	      that it was not the legislature's intention to
	      give the Tribunal jurisdiction over complaints
	      in  connection with charges made in the  past.
	      In our opinion, the words "is charging" in cl.
(b)  and	"is  levying" in  cl.  (c)  must  be
	      construed to mean "is demanding a price at the
	      present time for services to be rendered".
Coming to the facts of the present case it is apparent	that
one of the main questions involved was whether clause 23  of
the  contract  between the parties was not void	 because  it
contravened  s.	 29  of the
Indian  Contract  Act
.   Another
question  which had to be investigated was whether a  proper
notice regarding the enhancement of rates had been given  in
accordance  with the terms of the said agreement.  From	 the
facts which have been stated it appears that the rates	were
being revised and actually enhanced, but then the matter was
kept  pending and there Was exchange of	 correspondence	 and
discussion  between-  the  parties from time  to  time.	  No
effort	was made to enforce the demand made in	the  various
letters	 and  the  plaintiff was allowed  to  make  payments
according  to the rates originally agreed.  It was  only  in
May  1.957 that the plaintiff was really threatened to	make
payment of the outstanding amount calculated at the  revised
rates on pain of the supply of wagons being stopped and	 the
agreement being determined.  It is somewhat surprising	that
in  September  1955 the rates which were revised  were	very
much  less-than	 those	which were demanded  for  the  prior
period.	 The position thus remained in a flexible state	 and
there  is  a  good deal of substance in	 the  submission  on
behalf of the plaintiff-respondent that a complaint was	 not
filed under
S. 41
of the Act because the rates which  ",were
being  paid  and  actually accepted were  the  same  as	 the
contractual  rates  and not the revised or  enhanced  rates.
According to the decisions of this Court referred to before,
it was hardly open to the plaintiff to file a complaint with
regard	to the reasonableness or otherwise of the rates	 and
charges which had already become due
843
and payable.  The plaintiff had no grievance whatsoever with
regard to the charges which had been fixed with effect	from
April  1,  1956 by means of the letter dated  September	 29,
1955  and  therefore there was no question of its  filing  a
complaint  with regard to those charges.  Its grievance	 was
confined only to the amount which was being demanded on	 the
basis  of  the revised ,enhanced rates	between	 the  period
December  1,  1949 and March 1, 1956.  If  that	 amount	 had
actually  been	realised  by  the  railway  authorities	 the
plaintiff  could only file a suit for its refund  and  could
not have laid a complaint under
s. 41
of the Act before	 the
Railway	 Tribunal.  By analogy the plaintiff could not	have
filed  a complaint with regard to past dues as	the  Railway
Tribunal could not have given any relief in respect  thereof
following the law
laid down by
this Court.  In this view  of
the  matter  appart  from  other  questions  involving	 the
validity  of  clause  23 of the agreement ,as  also  of	 the
notice	or intimation of enhancement of rates on the  ground
of non-compliance with its terms the suit could not be	held
barred	under
S. 26
of the Act and the	 civil	court  could
grant the relief claimed.
We	 have  not been shown any serious infirmity  in	 the
reasoning  of  the  High Court by which it  arrived  at	 the
conclusion that the question   of  reasonableness   of	 the
charges, keeping in mind the  facts   of  this	 case,	 was
justiciable.   Nor  has	 any justification  been  shown	 for
reopening  the	concurrent finding of the two  courts  below
that  the rates which were demanded for the period in  ques-
tion were unreasonable.	 The suit was thus rightly decreed.
The  appeal fails and it is dismissed; but we make no  order
as to costs.
G.C.			    Appeal dismissed.
844