[Cites
5
, Cited by
17
]
Supreme Court of India
Laljee Dubey And Others vs Union Of India And Others on 13 November, 1973
Equivalent citations: 1974 AIR 246, 1974 SCR (2) 255, AIR 1974 SUPREME COURT 252, 1974 LAB. I. C. 193, 1974 2 SCR 249, 1974 2 SCJ 342, (1974) 1 SERV LR 416, 1974 (1) SCC 230, 1974 (1) LABLJ 248
Author:
Ranjit Singh Sarkaria
Bench:
Ranjit Singh Sarkaria
,
V.R. Krishnaiyer
PETITIONER:
LALJEE DUBEY AND OTHERS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT13/11/1973

BENCH:
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
BENCH:
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.

CITATION:
 1974 AIR  246		  1974 SCR  (2) 255
 1974 SCC  (1) 188
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1980 SC1185	 (1,5)
 R	    1987 SC 424	 (22)
 R	    1987 SC1676	 (27)
 D	    1990 SC1607	 (17)


ACT:
Constitution of India, Arts. 14 and 16-Discrimination in the
matter	of conferment of benefit through  an  administrative
order-Letter   of   President  dated   November	  17,	1953
classifying checkers post in Government Harness and Saddlery
Factory, Kanpur as posts of lower division clerks-Appellants
denied	the  designation as clerks  while  others  similarly
situate were given the benefit Held discriminatory.



HEADNOTE:
The  appellants were employed as checkers in the  Government
Harness	 and  Saddlery Factory, Kanpur.	 Their	duties	were
substantially	clerical.   The	 question   of	 designating
checkers substantially during clerical work was referred  by
the   Government  to  a	 committee  known   as	 "Kalyanwala
Committee".   The  committee recommended  that	the  persons
doing  clerical work should be designated as lower  division
clerks.	 The recommendation was accepted by the President of
India  by his letter dated November 17, 1953.  The  Director
General	 was directed to re-classify checkers as  L.D.Cs  if
they  were matriculates or completed three years  continuous
service	 as  checkers.	 The appellants	 claimed  that	they
satisfied the above test and yet they were not classified as
lower  division clerks.	 The appellants filed a	 civil	suit
for a declaration that they were entitled. to be  classified
and  redesignated as lower division clerks,  founding  their
claim  on  the President's letter dated November  17,  1953.
The grievance of the appellants was that other employees who
did not possess the necessary qualifications were designated
as  L.D.Cs.  The  trial Court on  evidence  found  that	 the
appellants  were performing duties which were  substantially
of  a clerical nature and therefore granted the	 declaration
in favour of the appellants.  The District Court, on  appeal
by  the	 State, held that the Court had no  jurisdiction  to
grant relief since the President's letter was in the  nature
of  departmental  rules.  On appeal by the  appellants,	 the
High  Court held that the letter of the President  of  India
did not constitute a rule under
Art. 309
of the Constitution
but  was  merely  in  the nature  of  an  administrative  or
executive  order.   Before this Court, the  appellants	con-
tended	that the letter dated November 17, 1953,  should  be
implemented    because	 the   Government    accepted	 the
recommendations	 of  the Kalyanwala  Committee.	  The  other
checkers   performing  duties  similar	to  those   of	 the
appellants  having  been granted the benefit  of  the  order
contained  in  the President's letter, denial  of  the	same
benefit	 to the appellants who were similarly situate  would
be violative of the fundamental rights guaranteed under
Art.
14
and
16.
Allowing the appeal,
HELD  : (i) The letter of the President of India dated	17th
November, 1953 gave a sanction to the recommendations of the
Kalyanwala   Committee.	  The  authorities   admitted	some
checkers  as lower division clerks and left others to  their
own  posts.   The direction containing the sanction  of	 the
President indicates that the checkers who had the  requisite
qualifications, viz., passing matriculation examination	 or,
in  the	 alternative three years continuous service  in	 the
department,  were  to-	be  put in  the	 category  of  lower
division clerks.  In the case of checkers who had  requisite
qualifications	the authorities concerned had no  option  to
make any selection among such persons for the conferment  of
the   benefit.	 The  appellants  possessed   the   required
qualifications	and  were performing the duties	 which	were
substantially clerical.	 The appellants are thus entitled to
be  designated as lower division clerks in  accordance	with
the  directions	 contained in the letter  of  the  President
dated	November  17,  1953.   There  has   been   arbitrary
discrimination against the appellants.
In  the case of checkers. who did not possess the  requisite
qualifications,	 the  authorities  had	the  discretion	  in
matters	 of  classification of checkers	 as  lower  division
clerks.	  [253F-G]
250
(ii)Held  further that it was not necessary to	express	 any
opinion as to whether the President's letter dated  November
17,  1953 became a rule under
Art. 309
of the  Constitution.
[254C]
Purushottam  Lal and others v. Union of India  and  another,
[1973] 1 S.C.C. 651, followed.
Union of India v. K. P. Joseph and others, A.I.R. 1973	S.C.
303, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal  No.  1987  of
1968.
Appeal	by Special Leave from the judgment and	Order  dated
the  29th  September, 1965 of the Allahabad  High  Court  in
Second Appeal No. 2517 of 1961.
R.   K.	 Garg,	S. C. Agrawala and V. J.  Francis,  for	 the
appellants.
S.   N. Prasad and R. N. Sachthey, for the respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
RAY,  C.J.  This  is an appeal by  special  leave  from	 the
judgment  dated	 29 September, 1965 of	the  Allahabad	High
Court.
The  question in this appeal is-whether the  appellants	 who
are plaintiffs in the suit are entitled to be classified and
re-designated as lower division clerks.
The  appellants were employed in the Government Harness	 and
Saddlery Factory, Kanpur.  They were designated as checkers.
Their  duties  were substantially clerical.  They  made	 was
resentations  to  the authorities for  being  classified  as
clerks.	  The  matter  was referred to	a  Committee  called
'Kalyanwala  Committee'.   The	Committee  recommended	that
persons	 doing clerical work should be designated  as  lower
division  clerks.   The recommendation was accepted  by	 the
President  of India.  The Director General was	directed  to
re-classify  checkers as lower division clerks if they	were
matriculates  or completed three years' continuous  service.
The appellants claimed that they satisfied the tests and yet
they  were  not classified as lower  division  clerks.	 The
grievance of the appellants was that other employees who did
not possess the necessary qualifications were designated  as
lower	division  clerks.-  The	 appellants  asked   for   a
declaration  that  they were entitled to be  classified	 and
redesignated  as  lower	 division  clerks.   The  appellants
founded their claim on the letter dated 17 November, 1953.
The  respondents contended that the duties performed by	 the
appellants   were  not	substantially  clerical	 and   other
employees who were sufficiently qualified were designated as
lower division clerks.
The  trial  Court  referred to	the  oral  evidence.   Three
witnesses on behalf of the appellants narrated their  career
in the service of Harness and Saddlery Factory and described
the duties performed by them.  The trial Court also referred
to the evidence on behalf of the respondents.  The principal
issue  before  the, trial Court was whether  the  appellants
were  entitled	to  be classified and  designated  as  lower
division  clerks  on  the basis	 of  the  recommendation  of
Kalyanwala  Committee and the sanction of the  President  of
India thereon.	On
251
this  issue  the  trial Court referred to  the	evidence  on
behalf	of  the parties and found that the  evidence  showed
beyond any doubt that the appellants performed duties  which
are  of	 a substantially clerical  nature.The  trial  Court,
therefore, answered the issue in favour of the appellants.
On  appeal  the	 District  Judge found	in  favour,  of	 the
appellants  that  the  duties performed by them	 were  of  a
substantially clerical nature.	The District Judge, however,
held  that the Court had no jurisdiction to grant relief  to
the   appellants  even	if  departmental  rules	 have	been
disregarded by the executive authorities.
The  High Court on second appeal found that the	 finding  of
the  trial  Court as well as of the appellate Court  was  in
favour	of  the appellants that they performed duties  of  a
substantially clerical nature.	The learned single Judge  of
the  High Court on second appeal referred the matter to	 the
learned Chief Justice for constituting a larger Bench on the
question  as to whether the order of the President of  India
created a right in favour of the appellants.
The  matter was thereafter heard by a Division Bench of	 the
High Court.  The question for consideration before the	High
Court  was  whether  the  letter  dated	 17  November,	1953
conferred  any	right  on the  appellants.   The  appellants
contended  that the letter constituted a rule framed by	 the
President  of India under
Article 309
of  the  Constitution.
The respondents on the other hand contended that the ,letter
was a mere order of an administrative nature.
The  letter  dated 17 November, 1953 was  addressed  by	 the
Under  Secretary  to the Government of	India,	Ministry  of
Defence	 to the Director General, Ordnance  Factories.	 The
letter	referred to the recommendationis of a  committee  of
Enquiry	 called the 'Kalyanwala Committee' and conveyed	 the
sanction of the President as follows
	      "The existing posts of Checkers, Grades 1 & 11
	      in Ordnance Factories, the duties of which are
	      substantially clerical, shall be classified by
	      you  in consultation with the D.F.A. (FYS)  as
	      posts   of   Lower   Division   Clerks.	 The
	      incumbents of the posts so classified will  be
	      redesignated as lower division clerks provided
	      they  are at least matriculates, or,  if	non-
	      matriculates,  they  have completed  3  years'
	      continuous  service  as Checkers on  the	date
	      from  which these orders take effect  or	from
			    the	 date  of reorganisation  of  the
 existing
	      cadre of Checkers whichever is later.  Such of
	      the  incumbents  of these posts  as  are	non-
matriculates  and have not completed 3  years'
	      continuous service as Checkers on the date  of
	      effect  of  this	letter,	 provided  they	 are
	      considered  suitable in all respects  for	 the
	      work,  will  also	 be  redesignated  as  Lower
	      Division	 Clerks;  they	will,  however,	  be
	      reverted	as  checkers as and  when  vacancies
	      occur,  in future in that grade and will	then
	      be  replaced  in the grade of  Lower  Division
	      Clerks by qualified individuals.
The  remaining  posts  will  continue  to	  be
	      designated  as Checkers but there will  be  no
	      grades.  Incumbents of these
252
posts  will be brought on to the single  scale
	      of  Rs. 45-2-553-85 in place of  the  existing
	      two scales of Rs. 40-1-50-2-60 and Rs. 55-3-85
	      on  the date of from which these	orders	take
	      effect  or the date of reorganisation  of	 the
	      cadre of Checkers; whichever is later".
The  letter dated 17 November, 1953 consisted of  directions
of  two	 different  nature.  First,  there  were  directions
laying down how certain Checkers were to be reclassified as
lower division Clerks.	Second, directions given related  to
the  abolition	of the two grades of Checkers  who  remained
after excluding those persons who were redesignated as Lower
Division  Clerks.   There was a further	 direction  that  in
future	there  would  be  only	one  single  grade  for	 the
Checkers.   That grade would be Rs. 45-2-55-3-85 instead  of
the two preexisting scales of Rs. 40-1-50-2-60 and Rs. 55-3-
85.
The High Court on second appeal was divided in opinion.	 One
of the learned Judges held that the letter contained  orders
and in structure governing certain individuals only who were
in  service  towards  the  end of  the	year  1953  and	 the
underlying  idea was to reclassify them as Checkers.   There
was  no idea to fix conditions of service of  Checkers for
all  time.   The  letter did not  constitute  a	 rule  under
Article	 309
of the Constitution.  The letter was  an	mere
direction  of an administrative nature.	 The  other  learned
Judge held that the letter laid down conditions of  service.
Conditions  of	service	 could only  be	 prescribed  by	 the
President  by Rules under
Article 309.
The letter  amounted
to a rule framed by the President of India.
In  view  of the division the question was referred  to	 the
third  learned	Judge  as to whether  the  letter  dated  17
November,  1953 constituted a rule framed by  the  President
under
Article 309.
The third learned Judge held  that	 the
letter	was  of	 a  composite nature.	There  were  ad	 hoc
directions in respect of certain checkers.  The letter	also
laid  down some conditions of service which would  apply  to
the  remaining	checkers.  The letter did not  constitute  a
rule  framed  by the President of India under
Article	309.
The letter merely contained an order of an administrative or
executive  nature.   This view of the  third  learned  Judge
become the majority view of the High Court.
Counsel	 on  behalf  of the appellants	contended  that	 the
letter dated 17 November, 1953 should be implemented because
the  Government	 accepted the recommendation  of  Kalyanwala
Committee.   Counsel  for  the	appellants  submitted  these
reasons.   Denial  of  the  benefits of	 the  order  to	 the
appellants  is	violative of fundamental  rights  guaranteed
under
Articles	 14
and
16
of  the  Constitution.   Other
checkers   performing  duties  similar	to  those   of	 the
appellants  have  been	granted the  benefit  of  the  order
contained in the letter dated 17 November, 1953 whereas	 the
appellants  who are similarly situate have been	 arbitrarily
denied the benefit of the same.
In  the recent decision in
Purshotam Lal & Ors. v. Union  of
India  & Anr.
[1973] 1 S.C.C. 651 this Court held  that	 the
Government was bound to implement the recommendations of the
Second Pay
25 3
Commission  and	 if  the Government did	 not  implement	 the
report regarding some employees only there would be a breach
of
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution.
In
Purshottam
Lal
case (supra) the Government of India set up a Commission
called	 the  "Second  Pay  Commission"	 to   enquire	into
emoluments  and conditions of service of Central  Government
employees.   Purshottam Lal and others were employed in	 the
Forest Research Institute and College, Dehra Dun.  They were
Research  Assistants.  Their contention was that their	case
was covered by the recommendations of the Commission.  On  2
August,	 1960  the Government issued a	notification  giving
effect to the recommendations of the Pay Commission.  On  21
June,  1962 the Government of India revised the pay  scales
of the petitioners and stated that therevision of the  pay
scales of the petitioners would take effect fromthe   date
of  the issue of the order.  The petitioners contended	that
the  revised pay scales of similar posts in  similar  sister
institutes of the Research Institute under the same Ministry
had  been  implemented from 1 July, 1959  according  to	 the
Second	Pay Commission recommendations, and, therefore,	 the
petitioners   were   entitled	to  the	  benefit   of	 the
retrospective  date,  viz., 1 July,  1959.   The  Government
contended  that	 it  was for the Government  to	 accept	 the
recommendations of the Pay Commission and while doing so  to
determine  what categories of employees should be  taken  to
have  been included in the terms of reference.	 This  Court
did  not  accept  the contention  of  the  Government.	 The
Government  made  reference  in respect	 of  all  Government
employees.   The  Government accepted  the  recommendations.
Therefore,  the	 Government  was  bound	 to  implement	 the
recommendations in respect of all Government employees.	 The
reason	given by this Court was that if the  Government	 did
not implement the Report regarding some employees only there
would	be  a.	breach	of
Articles  14
and
16
of	 the
Constitution.
In the present case the letter dated 17 November, 1953 shows
that   the   President	of  India  gave	 sanction   to	 the
recommendations	 of Kalyanwala Committee.   The	 authorities
admitted  some of the persons as lower division	 clerks	 and
left  others to their own posts.  The  direction  containing
the  sanction of the President indicates that  checkers	 who
had   the  requisite  qualifications,  viz.,   passing	 the
matriculation  examination  or	in  the	 alter-native  three
years'	continuous service in the department were to be	 put
in the category of lower divisions clerks.  The letter dated
17  November,  1953 divided checkers into two  groups.	 The
first	group  consisted  of  checkers	who  possessed	 the
necessary qualifications as
laid down in
that	order.	 The
second	group  consisted of those who did not  possess	that
qualification.	 In the case of persons of the	first  group
the authorities concerned could not have any option to	make
any  selection	among such persons.  The direction  in	that
letter	indicates that such persons should be classified  as
lower  division	 clerks.  In the case of the  second  group,
viz.,	those	who  did  not  fulfill	 the   qualification
requirements it was left open to the authorities to exercise
their  discretion and classify some of the checkers  in	 the
posts of lower division clerks if they considered them to be
fit  and suitable to serve in those posts.   The  appellants
were, therefore, entitled to be designated as lower division
clerks, in accordance with the directions contained in
254
the letter dated 17 November 1953.  There has been arbitrary
discrimination against the appellants.
In  another decision in
Union of India v. K. P.	 Joseph	 and
Ors.
not yet reported in Supreme Court Reports but  reported
in  A. 1. R. 1973 S. C. 303 this Court considered Whether  a
general	 order described as Office Memorandum providing	 for
certain	 benefits to ex-military personnel on  re-employment
on  the	 basis of their length of  actual  military  service
conferred any right relating to conditions of service.	This
Court  held  that the persons mentioned in  the	 order	were
entitled to have their pay fixed in the manner specified  in
the order and that was part of the conditions of service.
It is not necessary to express any opinion as to whether the
letter	dated 17 November, 1953 became a rule under
Article
309
of the Constitution.  For the purposes of the appeal  it
is  sufficient to hold that the letter has been accepted  by
the  authorities and given effect to in the case of some  of
the employees belonging to the same group as the appellants.
For  these reasons, the appellants are entitled to  succeed.
The  appeal is accepted.  The judgment of the High Court  is
set aside.
The parties will pay and bear their own costs in view of the
fact  that  they  did so throughout  tinder  the  orders  of
Court.,
S.B.W.
Appeal allowed.
2 5 5