[Cites
10
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Suryavir vs The State Of Haryana on 3 February, 2022
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1




                                                                             REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.177 OF 2022
                                (@ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.951 of 2022)
                                       (@ Diary No(s).19963 of 2020)

             SURYAVIR                                                    ..APPELLANT

                                                   VERSUS

             STATE OF HARYANA                                            ..RESPONDENT


                                               JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.          Delay condoned. Leave granted.
2.          This appeal challenges the judgment and order dated 12.03.2014 passed

             by the High Court1 in CRA-D-No.1049-DB of 2009.
3.          The present appellant (original accused No.1) and two persons named

             Devender alias Dhola and Pardeep were tried in Sessions Trial No.16 of

             19.03.2009 in the Court of Sessions Judge, Jind for having caused the murder
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
of one Rajinder alias Raju on 1.10.2008 at about 6.00 p.m and thereby
Indu Marwah
Date: 2022.02.06
18:18:24 IST
Reason:
1 The High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh.
2
committed offences punishable under
Section 302
/
120-B
of the Indian Penal

Code, 18602 and Section 25 of the Indian Arms Act, 19593.
4.     The crime came to be registered pursuant to FIR No.566 of 01.10.2008

lodged with City Police Station, Jind at the instance of one Om Prakash, later

examined as PW-12 in the trial. The substantive part of the report was as

under:
“Yesterday, on 30.09.2008, I had been to Delhi, as usual for
           bringing the goods. On my return to my house in the evening at
           about 5.30, my wife Janki Devi told me that Kuldeep and
           Kamaljeet had sent two youngsters at our home pretending to see
           the house, who forcibly entered the house and asked about our son
           Raju, who was not present at house at that time. They were sent
           out by my wife. My wife can identify them on confrontation.
           Today, at about 6.00 p.m. I and my wife Janki Devi, were going to
           market for purchasing some household goods. When, after
           coming out of the house, we reached at the main road, on which
           the ‘Gurudwara’ situates, my son Raju was seen coming from
           Bharat Cinema side. A white car came alongwith him from his
           back side, occupied by three youngsters. The car was suddenly
           stopped by the side of Raju and two boys alightened from it and,
           before my sight, one of the boys fired from his pistol on Raju’s
           neck. Raju fell down on the ground right on receiving the shot
           and the duo fled away towards the canal in that car. Later on,
           whose names were known to be Suryavir son of Balram, Brahman
           r/o Aggarwal Market, Jind, Pardeep son of Balwan Jat r/o Bhiwani
           Road, Jind and Devender @ Dhola son of Umed Singh, caste Jat
           of Sharma Nagar, Bhiwani Road, Jind. I and my wife started
           taking care of my son Raju who was smeared with blood and
           brought him to General Hospital, Jind for treatment in a three-
           wheeler, who breathed his last in the way itself. I suspect that
           Kamaljeet and Kuldeep sons of Meghraj Punjabi resident of Ved
           Nagar, Jind hatching a conspiracy, have got my son Raju shot
           dead through Suryaveer, Pardeep and Devener @ Dhola, due to
           the grudge of not vacating the house.”

2 ‘
IPC
’, for short.
3 ‘
The Arms Act
’, for short.
3
5.   Post-mortem on the body of the deceased was conducted by Dr.

Ashwani Kumar, later examined as PW-2, who observed: -
“3. Injuries – (A) A lacerated wound of size 1 centimeter x 0.9
         cm x depth (/) on gape of neck placed 1 cm below posterior
         hairline and 2 cm lateral to midline on left side. Margins are
         inverted and tattooing present around the wound clotted blood
         was present around the wound.
(B) Lacerated wound of size 1.8 x1 cm x depth (?) was present
         on neck 9 cm above to upper end of sternum and 1.5 cm lateral
         to midline on left side Horizontal placed Margins averted Clotted
         blood was present around the wound.
On dissection of injury No.A. subcutaneous tissue and
         muscles were lacerated on further dissection, there is laceration
         of left wall of trachea. Major blood vessel on left side were
         lacerate collected of blood was present in trachea and illegible.
         On further dissection injury No.A communicates with injury No.
         B.

         (C) A lacerated wound of size 1 x 1 cm depth (?) was present on
         anterior surface of left thigh 9 cm below anterior superior iliac
         spine margins are inverted and tattooing was present Clotted
         blood was present.
On dissection of injury No.C there is laceration of subcutaneous
         soft and muscles on further dissection by going illegible and
         illegible there was of relieve girds (anterior margin) illegible left
         illegible and found embedded in the muscles between L4 & L5
         vertebras on left side.
4. Scalp Skull, chest wall ribs and cartilages, abdominal wall
         mouth pharynx esophagus illegible bladder and organs of
         generations were healthy Brain Membranes pleura right and left
         lung, beast illegible have spleen kidneys stomach small and large
         intestine pale healthy, stomach contains 100 cc of semi digested
         food, small intestine contains chyme and gases, large intestine
         contains fecal matter and gases. Larynx and trachea as
         described.
In my opinion cause of death in this case was due to shock and
         hemorrhage as a result of injuries describe by me. All injuries
4
were antemortem in nature and sufficient to cause death in
            ordinary course of nature.”
6.    After completion of investigation, chargesheet was filed in which it was

asserted that the assailants had come on motorcycles and after having fired at

the deceased had fled away on the motorcycles.
7.    During the trial, the prosecution relied upon the testimony of PW-12

Om Parkash, father of the deceased and PW-15 Janki Devi, mother of the

deceased.
A.    PW-12 in his examination-in-chief stated as under:-
“On 30.09.2008, I returned from Delhi in the evening and my
            wife informed that two young boys had come at in our house and
            they had entered our house forcibly. She further told me that our
            landlord sent them. She further told me that they had enquired
            about Rajinder alias Raju from her and she had sent them out
            saying that Rajinder alias Raju was not available in the house.
On the next day i.e. 1.10.2008 after I returned from Delhi, I
            alongwith my wife sent to the market to make some purchase of
            household articles. When we reached on the road of the market,
            we saw Rajinder alias Raju coming from the side of Bharat
            Cinema. In the meantime, 2-3 persons came from Bharat Cinema
            side and they fired at my son Rajinder alias Raju and after that
            we lost our senses. Thereafter, I brought my son Rajinder alias
            Raju in an auto rickshaw to General Hospital, Jind. Again said
            when I was bringing him to the hospital, Rajinder alias Raju died
            on the way. There was rumour in the Mohala that Suryavir,
            Devender alias Dhola and Pardeep had fired at my son Rajinder
            alias Raju. Said Suryavir, Devender alias Dhola and Pardeep are
            today present in the Court facing trial in this case. I do not know
            why they killed my son Rajinder alias Raju. I lodged report with
            the police vide my statement Ex.PH. It bears my signatures. The
            police had called me and had told that Suryavir, Devender alias
5
Dhola and Pardeep were the assailants. Again said, I was called
        by the police for identification of the accused and I had
        identified them as the killers of my son Rajinder alias Raju.
        Memos Exs.PS and PT bear my signatures. The police had come
        to my house at noon time and had taken me away saying that
        some secret information was received. The police had
        interrogated the accused, who had disclosed about the weapon of
        offence. The police had first taken me to Rohtak Road, Jind and
        thereafter the accused had got recovered the weapons from near
        an electric pole installed near the Forest Office. After removing
        some earth the accused had got recovered pistol and revolver,
        and cartridges, which were wrapped in a polythene bag. The
        police had brought the pistol and revolver after putting the same
        in black polythene bag and thereafter, I do not know what
        proceedings the police did. Recovery memo Ex.PU bears my
        signatures. The police obtained my signatures on sketches Ex.PV
        and PW when the pistol and revolver were got recovered. I do
        not know what proceedings the police on 24.10.2008 did.”

     In his cross-examination, the witness accepted:
“It is correct that I had stated to the police that three young
        boys had come in a white colour Maruti car and one out of them
        had fired at my son and thereafter the same went away in the
        same car. Volunteered- at that time, I was not in complete
        senses.”

B.   PW-15 Janki Devi in her examination-in-chief stated as under:-
“All the three accused, now present in the Court, have committed
        murder of my son named Raju on 1st October, i.e. about seven
        months back and now 8th months is running, at about 06:00 P.M.
        At that time, I alongwith my husband had come from our house
        for going to the market. After we had covered a short distance
        from our house towards the road, I saw that my son Raju was
        coming from the side of Bharat Cinema, Jind. When we reached
        the road. I saw that my son Raju was at a distance of 15 to 20
        yards from us. All the three accused now present in the Court
        were standing near my son Raju and all the three accused were
        armed with pistols and they fired shots at my son Raju. After
        receipt of fire shots my son Raju fell down. Thereafter, we took
        our son Raju to General Hospital Jind, in a three-wheeler.
        Before reaching the hospital, my son died on the way.
………
6
The accused present in the Court, after firing shots at my son
          Raju, had then escaped from the spot on the motorcycles towards
          the canal. From the hospital, I came back to my house. The
          police had visited the spot and lifted blood from there vide
          recovery memo Ex.PM. which was attested by me. I had pointed
          out the place of occurrence to the police.”

      In her cross-examination, the witness stated:-
“I had mentioned before the police that the accused after firing
          shot had escaped on the motorcycles (confronted with statement
          Ex.DA wherein it is not so recorded).”
8.    The Trial Court by its judgment and order dated 15.10.2009 accepted

the case of prosecution insofar as accused Suryavir and Devender were

concerned, while benefit of doubt was given to the third accused Pardeep,

who was acquitted of all the charges. The Trial Court convicted Suryavir and

Devender of the offences punishable under Section 302 read with 34
IPC
and

sentenced them to undergo life sentence. For the offence under
Section 25
of

the Arms Act, they were awarded substantive sentence of one year and six

months and to pay a fine in the sum of Rs.2000/-.
9.    The convicted accused Suryavir and Devender preferred CRA-D-No.

1049-DB and 1087-DB of 2009 respectively in the High Court, which by its

common judgment and order impugned herein affirmed the view taken by the

Trial Court and dismissed both the appeals.
7
10.   Accused Devender alias Dhola preferred S.L.P. (Crl.) No.9957 of 2016

challenging his conviction and sentence. Said Special Leave Petition was

rejected by this Court at the admission stage on 05.12.2016 without any

reasoned order.
11.    S.L.P. (Crl.) Diary No(s). 19963 of 2020 was thereafter preferred by

Suryavir i.e. the appellant with delay challenging the very same judgment

rendered by the High Court.
12.   At the stage of issuance notice, it was fairly accepted that the case of

the co-accused was rejected by this Court but it was submitted that the matter

called for interference by this Court.
13.   Now the matter is taken up for final hearing.
14.   We have heard Mr. R. Basant, learned Senior Advocate and Mr. Uday

Kumar Sagar, learned Advocate for the State.
15.   Mr. Basant learned Senior Advocate submits:-
(a)   Going by the contents of the First Information Report, PW-12 was

unaware of the identity of the assailants and it was only on the basis of rumors

that he came to know about the names of the assailants. The source of such

information establishing the identity of the assailants was neither disclosed

nor any evidence in that behalf was led by the prosecution.
8
(b)   PW-12 Om Prakash clearly asserted that the assailants had come in a

white car which version was completely given a go-by when the witnesses

stepped into the box; and the prosecution now asserted that the assailants

came on motorcycles and after having shot the deceased fled away on the

motorcycles.
(c)   The incident of the previous day was not even adverted to by PW-15;
Janki Devi. It was also not the case of the prosecution that those two persons

who had come to the house of PWs 12 and 15 were the same persons who

were now convicted.
(d)   Though the witnesses had never disclosed the identity of the assailants

on the basis of their own knowledge, even, in order to check whether they had

really seen the assailants, test identification parade ought to have been

conducted. Such test identification parade would have afforded greater

assurance to the Court about the identity of the assailants.
(e)   The alleged enmity with and suspicion against Kamaljeet and Kuldip

was not even investigated into.
16.   Mr. Uday Kumar Sagar, learned Advocate appearing for the State on the

other hand submits that two courts had consistently taken the view which also
9
found affirmation in dismissal of Special Leave Petition preferred by co-

accused Devender and that there is no reason to take a different view in the

matter.
17.   It is quite clear that PW-12 and PW-15 were not aware of the identity of

the assailants. Their source of information was rumours, on the basis of

which an assertion about the identity of the appellant was made in the first

information report. What was the source of information, was never disclosed

at any juncture nor any witness was examined by the prosecution to establish

that. In the absence of primary source who knew the identity and had

witnessed the incident, such assertions in the first information report as well

as the examination-in-chief of the witnesses would not be adequate and

trustworthy. It was not even the case of PW-15 that two convicted accused

had come to her house on the previous day. As a matter of fact, she did not

even assert anything about the incident that occurred on the previous day.

There was, thus, no occasion for her to have seen the convicted accused

earlier. Furthermore, no test identification parade was conducted.                Box

identification by the witnesses for the first time in court, in the circumstances,

could not by itself be relied upon to establish the identity of the assailants.
18.   That leaves us with subsidiary evidence regarding recovery, which in

the absence of substantive evidence, by itself would not be sufficient. In the

circumstances, in our considered view, the prosecution failed to establish its
10
case beyond reasonable doubt. The appellant would, therefore, be entitled to

acquittal. The instant appeal is thus allowed acquitting him of the charges

levelled against him.
19.   We must now consider the effect of dismissal of S.L.P. (Crl.) No.9957

of 2016 preferred by co-accused-Devender alias Dhola. The order dismissing

the special leave petition did not give any reason for dismissal.
20.   In our view, the cases of both the convicted accused i.e. Devender and

the present appellant stand on the same footing and if after having considered

the matter, benefit is given to the present appellant, similar benefit ought to be

extended to Devender.
21.
In similar circumstances, in
Akhil Ali Jehangir Ali Sayyed v. State of

Maharashtra4
, a Bench of two judges of this Court relied upon the earlier

decision rendered by a Bench of three Judges of this Court in
Harbans Singh

vs. State of U.P.5
and extended the benefit to a co-accused whose special

leave petition and review application were dismissed by this Court.
The relevant discussion on the point was:
“6. The above is not enough to dispose of this matter. As the
          second accused Jabbar was placed on the same situation as the
          appellant in this case (if not lesser),
Article 21
of the
4 (2003) 2 SCC 708
5 (1982) 2 SCC 101
11
Constitution would not permit us to deny the same benefit to the
second accused, notwithstanding the fact that the SLP and the
review application filed by him have been dismissed by this
Court. We are supported on this aspect by a course adopted by a
three Judge bench headed by chief justice Chandrachud
in Harbans Singh v. State of U.P. In that case also, the co-
accused were sentenced and the sentence had been confirmed by
this Court earlier. But when a benefit was granted in another
appeal to one of the other co-accused, the three Judge bench held
that the same benefit shall be extended to the earlier co-accused
also albeit the dismissal of their appeals on an antecedent date.
7.The following passage from
the said decision
can be profitably
extracted below:
“19. In the circumstances hereinabove stated, I am of the
     opinion that it will be manifestly unjust to allow the death
     sentence imposed on the petitioner to be executed. The question
     that, however, troubles me is whether this Court retains any
     power and jurisdiction to entertain and pass any appropriate
     orders on the question of sentence imposed on the petitioner in
     view of the fact that not only his special leave petition and
     review petition have been dismissed by this Court but also the
     further fact that his petition for clemency has also been rejected
     by the President.
20. Very wide powers have been conferred on this Court for due
     and proper administration of justice. Apart from the jurisdiction
     and powers conferred on this Court under
Articles 32
and
136
of
     the Constitution, I am of the opinion that this Court retains and
     must retain, an inherent power and jurisdiction for dealing with
     any extraordinary situation in the larger interests of
     administration of justice and for preventing manifest injustice
     being done. This power must necessarily be sparingly used only
     in exceptional circumstances for furthering the ends of justice.
Having regard to the facts and circumstances of this case, I am
     of the opinion that this is a fit case where this Court should
     entertain the present petition of Harbans Singh and this Court
     should interfere.”
8. After bestowing our anxious consideration on the fact
situation in this case and also the spirit of
Article 21
of the
Constitution we hereby order that the conviction passed on the
second accused Jabbar shall also stand altered to Section 304
Part I, and a sentence of rigorous imprisonment for ten years be
12
awarded to him. This is done on a parity of reasoning and justice,
          otherwise glaring injustice would result for him in a case where
          his role was by no means more serious than that of the present
          appellant who was A 1 in the case.”
22.   In the premises, for furthering the ends of justice, we recall the order of

dismissal passed by this Court in S.L.P. (Crl.) No.9957 of 2016 and said SLP

is restored to the file. This course is adopted even in the absence of any such

prayer or application on part of Devender. We proceed to grant leave in his

matter and allowing his appeal, we extend similar benefit to said Devender.

He is thus acquitted of all the charges levelled against him.
23.   The Registry is directed to send appropriate intimation with regard to

the appeal arising out of SLP (Crl.) No.9957/2016 being allowed to the

concerned Jail authorities so that benefit can be extended to said Devender.
24.   Both convicted accused shall be set at liberty unless their custody is

required in connection with any other offence.
…………………………………………….J.
                                          [UDAY UMESH LALIT]



                                   …………………………………………….J.
                                   [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]
New Delhi,
FEBRUARY 3, 2022.