[Cites
3
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Wizaman Impex Pvt. Ltd. vs Kedrion Biopharma Inc on 7 February, 2022
Author:
Dinesh Maheshwari
Bench:
Vikram Nath
,
Dinesh Maheshwari
1


                                                                                            REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                         CIVIL APPEAL       NO.   466 OF 2022


     M/S WIZAMAN IMPEX PVT. LTD.                                                             APPELLANT

                                                            VERSUS

     KEDRION BIOPHARMA INC.                                                                  RESPONDENT


                                                       JUDGEMENT
Dinesh Maheshwari, J.
Having regard to the short point involved and the contesting

     parties being represented, we have heard learned counsel for the

     parties finally at this stage itself.
By way of this appeal, the appellant-company, said to be the

     corporate                 debtor    within       the    meaning     of   the     Insolvency      and

     Bankruptcy Code, 20161, has questioned the judgment and order dated

     15.12.2021, as passed in Company Appeal (AT) Insolvency No. 981 of

     2020                 whereby,   the    National        Company     Law   Appellate        Tribunal,

     Principal                 Bench,    New    Delhi2      has   set    aside      the    order    dated

     06.10.2020, as passed by the National Company Law Tribunal, New

     Delhi Bench- V3 in CP(IB) 841(ND) of 2020 and has also allowed the

     application                moved      by   the    applicant       (respondent        herein)   under
Signature Not Verified
Section 9 of the Code.
Digitally signed by
Rajni Mukhi
Date: 2022.02.18
18:07:08 IST
Reason:
1 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the Code
     2 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the Appellate Tribunal’ or ‘the NCLAT’.
     3 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the Adjudicating Authority’ or ‘the NCLT’.
2
The said application under Section 9 of the Code was filed by

the    applicant-respondent        on   30.06.2020,   in     its    capacity   as    an

operational creditor of the corporate debtor while claiming, inter

alia, that there had been a distribution agreement whereby, the

corporate debtor was to sell the pharmaceutical products of the

applicant company only until its subsidiary by the name “Kedrion

India” was capable of doing so. Several invoices were raised in

duration and credit notes were also issued. It has been the case of

the applicant-respondent that as regards the debts due, a notice

dated 25.07.2019 was sent, demanding a sum of USD 9,01,000 but, the

said    demand    notice    was     returned   undelivered.         Thereafter,      on

07.08.2019, another demand notice was sent at the new registered

office address of the corporate debtor. The applicant alleged that

on 17.08.2019, the corporate debtor replied to the said demand

notice disputing the admitted and acknowledged the dues payable,

with   reference    to    its   pending    dispute    with    the   Directorate      of

Health Services, Maharashtra with regard to the supply of short

shelf-life products. The applicant contended that the corporate

debtor had committed a default within the meaning of Section 3(12)

of the Code and the outstanding amount qualified as an operational

debt within the meaning of Section 3(11) read with Section 5(21) of

the Code.
In   its   order    dated    06.10.2020,      the     NCLT   considered      the

documents referred by the applicant in support of its contention

that there had been acknowledgment of debt and thereby the period

of limitation would shift from the date of acknowledgment. The NCLT

observed that the document dated 15.12.2017 was a credit memo,
3
issued by the applicant and not by the respondent and thus, it

could not be treated as an acknowledgment of debt. As regards

document dated 07.07.2016 carrying the signatures of the Director

of the Company and addressed to the Bank regarding payment of

pending invoices, the NCLT observed that even if the said letter

was treated as an acknowledgment of debt, the limitation would run

from    its    date,   i.e.,   07.07.2016.    The   NCLT    further     considered

another letter dated 02.02.2017 and observed that even if the said

document was taken as an acknowledgement of debt, the limitation

would run from 02.02.2017.         Hence, the NCLT came to the conclusion

that, viewed from any angle, the application filed on 30.06.2020

was beyond the period of three years in terms of
Article 137
of the
Limitation      Act,   1963
.   Thus,   the   NCLT   proceeded      to   reject    the

application so made by the respondent.
It appears from the perusal of the record that the applicant-

respondent, in appeal against the aforesaid order of the NCLT,

moved an application (I.A. No. 2685 of 2020) before the Appellate

Tribunal and thereby, sought permission to produce the exchanges of

e-mails       from   03.11.2017   to   11.01.2019     with     respect     to     the

propositions for settlement of dues. Admittedly, the said documents

were not on record before the NCLT.
However, the Appellate Tribunal found it just and proper to

grant permission to the applicant (appellant before the NCLAT) to

place    such    additional    documents     on   record;    but   accorded      such

permission only in the impugned order dated 15.12.2021. Thereafter,

on the basis of the said additional documents taken on record, the

Appellate Tribunal came to the conclusion that the corporate debtor
4
had admitted its liability and had shown its readiness to make

payment   as    also   to    revise      the    settlement         proposal.        All    such

suggestions, admissions and offers evidenced by the said e-mails

were taken by the Appellate Tribunal as acknowledgement by the

corporate   debtor     within     time    and       thus,     it   was   held       that   the

Adjudicating Authority erred in holding the applicant’s claim to be

barred by time.
Though      several     contentions        have    been     urged    by   the    learned

counsel   for    contesting      parties       as     regards      effect     of    the    said

documents placed before the Appellate Tribunal by way of I.A. No.

2685 of 2020 but, we are clearly of the view that the impugned

order allowing the appeal and even admitting the application under
Section 9
of the Code cannot be sustained on a short point that the

said additional documents were taken on record only while finally

deciding the appeal and without adequate opportunity of response to

the corporate debtor. However, at the same time, due consideration

of the said documents also appears requisite and the documents

i.e., the said e-mails, cannot be removed out of consideration only

because they were not on record before NCLT.
For what has been discussed and observed hereinabove, in our

view, the appropriate course in this matter would be to set aside

the impugned order dated 15.12.2021 passed by NCLAT to the extent

it has allowed the application under
Section 9
of the Code filed by

the applicant-respondent but while retaining the other part of the

impugned order taking the documents filed with I.A. No. 2685 of

2020 on record. After taking the said documents on record, for the

appropriate     process     of   adjudication         in    the    matter,     it    is    also
5
considered just and proper that the order dated 06.10.2020 passed

by NCLT be also set aside and the NCLT be directed to re-consider

the   application         under
Section    9
of    the   Code   as    filed    by   the

applicant-respondent while taking into consideration the additional

documents now taken on record and at the same time, while extending

an adequate opportunity of hearing to the corporate debtor.
We may, of course, observe that at the outset Mr. Nakul Dewan,

learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent has attempted

to question the maintainability of this appeal at the instance of

the corporate debtor because NCLAT had, by the impugned order,

allowed     the    application       under
Section      9
of   the    Code.    We    have

overruled     such    objection       for    the    simple     reason      that    the    said

application had been rejected by NCLT and was allowed only by way

of impugned order and until the said order was examined by this

Court and attained finality, the right and locus of the corporate

debtor to challenge the correctness thereof, could not have been

denied. In any case, in the present matter, the impugned order was

passed on 15.12.2021 and admittedly, no other steps had been taken

in    the    matter       including     that       of     appointment      of     resolution

professional.        In    the     given     set    of     facts,     we   overruled       the

objections raised by the learned senior counsel for the respondent.
Accordingly, this appeal is allowed to the extent and in the

manner indicated hereinabove. The application under
Section 9
of

the   Code    in     CP(IB)       841(ND)    of    2020    stands     restored      for    re-

consideration by the Adjudicating Authority keeping in view the

observations and requirements foregoing.
6
It goes without saying that we have not pronounced on the

merits of the case either way and not even on the evidentiary value

and effect of the documents in question. All the aspects are left

open for examination by the Adjudicating Authority in accordance

with law.
Having regard to the circumstances of the case and the fact

that the application under
Section 9
of the Code was filed way back

on 30.06.2020, we would expect the Adjudicating Authority to assign

a reasonable priority to the matter and to proceed expeditiously.
………………………………………….J
                                                (DINESH MAHESHWARI)



                                                 ………………………………………….J
                                                      (VIKRAM NATH)


NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 7,2022.