[Cites
6
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Gowramma C (Dead) By Lrs. vs Manager (Personnel) Hindustan ... on 23 February, 2022
Author:
K.M. Joseph
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
,
K.M. Joseph
1

                                                                                  REPORTABLE



                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                   CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1575 – 1576 OF 2022
          (ARISING FROM SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (C)                  NOS.2367-2368 OF 2019)



     GOWRAMMA C (DEAD) BY LRS                                                     APPELLANT(S)


                                                      VERSUS


     MANAGER (PERSONNEL) HINDUSTAN AERONAUTICAL
     LTD. & ANR.                                                              RESPONDENT(S)



                                                J U D G M E N T
Leave granted.
1.                  The appellant impugns the judgment of the Division Bench by

     which the High Court confirmed the view taken by the learned single

     Judge.                 The   original     appellant    passed   away   and    the   legal

     representatives pursue the appeal as additional appellants.
2.                  The appellant was appointed as Staff Nurse (Group-C) with the

     respondent. There was an inquiry against her by the respondent on

     the charge that the appellant had professed to belong to the Scheduled
Signature Not Verified
Caste category and secured employment, whereas, she did not belong
Digitally signed by
JAGDISH KUMAR
Date: 2022.03.14
17:52:39 IST
to the Scheduled Caste community. The Tahasildar verified the caste
Reason:
certificate and vide order dated 10.07.2009, it was found that the
2
appellant did not belong to the community ‘Adi Karnataka’ which is a

Scheduled Caste. The appellant challenged the order of the Tahasildar

before the High Court and the learned single Judge repelled the

challenge to the order by its judgment dated 29.12.2009. Following

the said judgment, it is that the Disciplinary Authority, by order

dated 08.10.2010, dismissed the appellant from service relying upon

the order of the Tahasildar. The appellant challenged the judgment

of the learned single Judge before the Division Bench and the Division

Bench by judgment dated 28.06.2011 allowed the appeal filed by the

appellant and found that actually the power to rule on the Caste

status did not lie with the Tahasildar but with another authority

and verification of the caste certificate was directed to be made

over to the Bangalore District Caste Verification Committee, which

was the Competent Authority. The said authority verified the caste

status of the appellant and found that the appellant, in fact,

belonged to the Scheduled Caste in question. There upon the appellant

gave a representation and on 12.04.2014, the appellant was reinstated

without   any    consequential     benefits.     A   representation       dated

28.04.2014, did not yield results. This occasioned the filing of the

writ petitions, which has finally generated the appeals before us.
3.    The learned Single Judge partly allowed the Writ Petitions filed

and   directed   the   first   respondent   to   give   promotion,   if   any,

notionally and 50 per cent of the back wages and the retirement

benefits on the basis of the last pay cheque that she would be

entitled to, in case, she were granted any notional promotion. The

appellant filed a review petition which was dismissed. Thereafter,
3
the writ appeals were filed, which culminated in the impugned order

being passed, affirming the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
4.   Heard the learned counsel for the appellants and learned counsel

for the respondents.
5.   Learned counsel for the appellants would contend that denial of

the full back wages is unsustainable as it is a case where the

appellant was not at fault. She was kept out of the employment without

any misconduct on her part. She always belonged to the caste in

question and denial of the full back wages is not justified.
6.   Per-contra, learned counsel for the respondents would point out

that impugned orders would reflect that the Court had reconciled the

relevant aspects that both the appellant and the respondents were

not at fault. He would further project the dimension that it is a

case where in the writ petition the appellant had not specifically

pleaded that she was not gainfully employed during the period in

question. It was only in the review petition that the case was set

up which was rightly rejected. He also sought to draw support from a

line of judgments for the contention that Courts have recognised that

merely upon an employee being reinstated it does not ipso facto

follow   that   he   becomes   entitled   for   full   back   wages.   In   such

circumstances, those decisions will decide the destiny of such a

claim. In the facts of this case, having regard to the fact that two

Courts have concurrently found that the respondents were acting on

the basis of the report of Tahasildar who had opined that the

appellant was not a member of the Scheduled Caste, the respondents

were entitled to take shelter under the principle that when the
4
employer was not at fault, the employee cannot have the absolute

right to claim full back wages.
7.   Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the

view that the appellant is entitled to partial relief. This is for

the following reasons:-
The appellant was employed by the respondent which is State

     under
Article 12
of the Constitution of India. The appellant was

     dismissed    from   service   only     on   the   report      given   by   the

     Tahasildar. There is no other charge against the appellant

     regarding any kind of misconduct or misrepresentation. The

     appellant relying on a caste certificate entitling her to be

     treated as member of the Scheduled Caste secured employment.

     This was put under a cloud. The doubt regarding her caste

     certificate was fortified in favour of the respondent by the

     report of the Tahasildar. It was, however, found that the

     Tahasildar    was   incompetent       to   give   such   an   opinion.     The

     competent authority has cleared the appellant and she stood

     vindicated by the view expressed by the authority, which, in

     law, could possibly have found as to which caste she belonged

     to. It is a case, therefore, where the appellant was completely

     blameless in the matter. She had to go through a long series of

     sittings even according to the respondent which was held by way

     of enquiry and at the end of the day though on the basis of

     decision of the Division Bench which again she was constrained

     to appeal to, matter reached the hands of the competent authority

     which conclusively and finally found that she belonged to the
5
Scheduled Caste which she always professed she was a member of.
8.   At the same time, the respondent has a case that the appellant

did not specifically plead about her being unemployed during the

relevant period. It is also pointed out that an attempt was made in

the review which proved futile.       In this regard support is sought

from the decision in 2018 (18) SCC 299 by the respondent.
9.   It is true that no work no pay is a principle which is apposite

in circumstances where the employee does not work but it is not an

absolute principle, which does not admit of exceptions.
In this regard

we may notice that in one of the judgments relied upon by the

respondents, namely,
State of Kerala v. E.K. Bhaskaran Pillai
2007

(6) SCC 524 which, in fact, dealt with issue as to monetary benefits

when retrospective promotion is given, this Court held:
“… So far as the situation with regard to
        monetary benefits with retrospective promotion
        is concerned, that depends upon case to case.
        There are various facets which have to be
        considered. Sometimes in a case of departmental
        enquiry or in criminal case it depends on the
        authorities to grant full back wages or 50 per
        cent of back wages looking to the nature of
        delinquency involved in the matter or in
        criminal cases where the incumbent has been
        acquitted by giving benefit of doubt or full
        acquittal. Sometimes in the matter when the
        person is superseded and he has challenged the
        same before court or tribunal and he succeeds in
        that and direction is given for reconsideration
        of his case from the date persons junior to him
        were appointed
,
in that case
the court may grant
        sometimes full benefits with retrospective
        effect and sometimes it may not. Particularly
        when the administration has wrongly denied his
        due then
in that case
he should be given full
        benefits including monetary benefit subject to
        there being any change in law or some other
        supervening factors. However, it is very
6
difficult to set down any hard-and-fast rule.
         The principle “no work no pay” cannot be accepted
         as a rule of thumb. There are exceptions where
         courts have granted monetary benefits also.”
                                      (Emphasis supplied)
10.
In the decision in
P.V.K. Distillery Ltd. v. Mahendra Ram
2009

(5) SC 705 again relied upon by respondent,          the matter arose out of

an award by the Labour Court where exercise of power under
Section

11 A
of the Industrial Disputes Act was made.              This is also a case

where   incidentally   the   court    noted   that   the    appellant-employer

remained closed for years together and it was declared as              a sick

unit.   In this regard, a fact       which weighed with the court is found

reflected in following statement :
“18. Although direction to pay full back wages on a
         declaration that the order of termination was
         invalid used to be the usual result but now, with
         the passage of time, a pragmatic view of the matter
         is being taken by the Court realising that an
         industry may not be compelled to pay to the workman
         for   the  period   during   which   he   apparently
         contributed little or nothing at all to it and/or
         for a period that was spent unproductively as a
         result whereof the employer would be compelled to go
         back to a situation which prevailed many years ago,
         namely, when the workman was retrenched.”
                                          (Emphasis supplied)
11.   In regard to interference in such matters, i.e., cases relating

to back wages, we find similar approach adopted in other decisions

which no doubt the respondent lays store by [see in this regard 2007

(5) SCC 742].   Though the decision reported in
Canara Bank v. Damodar

Govind Idoorkar
2009(4) SCC 323 again relied upon by the respondent

did involve the service of the employee being terminated as he had

secured employment in the reserved category using a false caste

certificate and the court modified direction of the High Court which
7
ordered full back wages by substituting the order by reducing it to

50%, we do not find that any principle has been laid down which could

be treated as constituting it as a precedent.
The decision in
Deepali Gundu Surwase v. Kranti Junior Adhyapak Mahavidyalaya (D.Ed
.)

and Others 2013 (10) SCC 324 involved the High Court setting aside

the award of back wages on the ground that the appellant had not

proved the factum of non-employment.   The court inter alia laid down

as follows:
“(vi) In a number of cases, the superior courts
        have interfered with the award of the primary
        adjudicatory authority on the premise that
        finalization of litigation has taken long time
        ignoring that in majority of cases the parties
        re not responsible for such delays.      Lack of
        infrastructure and manpower is the principal
        cause for delay in the disposal of cases. For
        this   the  litigants   cannot   be   blamed   or
        penalized. It would amount to grave injustice
        to an employee or workman if he is denied back
        wages simply because there is long lapse of time
        between the termination of his service and
        finality given to the order of reinstatement.
        The courts should bear in mind that in most of
        these cases, the employer is in an advantageous
        position vis-à-vis the employee or workman. He
        can avail the services of best legal brain for
        prolonging the agony of the sufferer i.e. the
        employee or workman, who can ill-afford the
        luxury of spending money on a lawyer with certain
        amount of fame.    Therefore, in such cases it
        would be prudent to adopt the course suggested
        in Hindustan Tin Works (P)Ltd., (1979) 2 SCC 80
12.   The most important question is whether the employee is at fault

in any manner. If the employee is not at all at fault and she was

kept out of work by reasons of the decision taken by the employer,

then to deny the fruits of her being vindicated at the end of the

day would be unfair to the employee. In such circumstances, no doubt,
8
the question relating to alternative employment that the employee

may have resorted to, becomes relevant. There is also the aspect of

discretion which is exercised by the Court keeping in view the facts

of each case. As we have already noticed, this is a case where apart

from    the   charge   of   the   employee   having    produced   false    caste

certificate, there is no other charge. Therefore, we would think that

interests of justice, in the facts of this, would be subserved, if

we enhance the back wages from 50% to 75% of the full back wages,

which she was otherwise entitled. The appeals are partly allowed.

The impugned judgments will stand modified and the respondents shall

calculate the amount which would be equivalent to 75% of the back

wages and disburse the amount remaining to be paid under this judgment

within a period of six weeks from today to the additional appellants.
13.    Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of.
…………………………………………J.
                                                      [K.M. JOSEPH]




                                                      …………………………………………J.
                                                       [HRISHIKESH ROY]


New Delhi
23rd February, 2022