[Cites
5
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Suresh Yadav @ Guddu vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 25 February, 2022
Author:
Dinesh Maheshwari
Bench:
Vikram Nath
,
Dinesh Maheshwari
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1349 OF 2013


             SURESH YADAV @ GUDDU                          .....APPELLANT(S)


                         Vs.

             THE STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                     .....RESPONDENT(S)



                                        JUDGMENT
DINESH MAHESHWARI,J



                         Though the matter is posted for directions but,

             having regard to the circumstances of the case and the

             issues involved, we have heard learned amicus curiae and

             learned counsel for the State finally at this stage itself.
Shorn     of   unnecessary   details,   the   relevant

             background aspects of the matter are that the appellant

             herein had been convicted of offences under
Section 302
IPC

             and
Sections 25
and
27
of the Arms Act, after having been

             tried in Sessions Case No. 05 of 2004 by the Court of Ninth

             Additional Sessions Judge (F.T.C.), Durg.
The accusations against the appellant had been that

             he was having a love affair with the deceased but, got

             enraged when he saw the deceased talking to another boy;
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Rajni Mukhi
and caused multiple injuries to the deceased by a pointed
Date: 2022.02.26
15:08:02 IST
Reason:
knife, leading to her death. As per the post-mortem report
1
(Ex. P-21A), as many as 12 injuries were found over the

body of the deceased, including penetrating wounds on lungs

and liver. The prosecution also examined PW-1 as an eye-

witness, who asserted having seen the appellant repeatedly

causing    injuries     on   the   person   of    the    deceased.    The

prosecution further asserted that the weapon of offence,

the knife of about 21 cm long blade, was recovered on the

disclosure made by the appellant.
Taking an overall view of the evidence, the Trial

Court     held   that    the   prosecution       had    been   able    to

substantiate     the    charges;     and,   after       convicting    the

appellant as noticed above, awarded varying punishments,

including that of life imprisonment for the offence under
Section 302
IPC. In appeal, the High Court again examined

the relevant evidence and found no reason to interfere with

the findings of the Trial Court and thus, affirmed the

conviction of the appellant as also the punishments awarded

to him.
The learned amicus curiae has submitted that there

had been no evidence of matching of the blood allegedly

found on the knife with that of the deceased; that PW-1

cannot said to be a reliable witness, particularly when the

incident allegedly happened in front of his house, but he

neither raised any alarm nor tried to save the deceased;

and that excessive number of injuries on the person of the

deceased would suggest involvement of more than one person.

Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent-State has
2
duly supported the findings of the Trial Court and the High

Court.
Having examined the matter in its totality, we find

no reason to consider any interference in this appeal.
As regards the scope and width of such an appeal by

special leave against concurrent findings, this Court, in

the   case of
Pappu v.    State of      Uttar Pradesh
:     Criminal

Appeal Nos. 1097-1098 of 2018 decided on 09.02.2022, after

a survey of various decisions on the topic, has summed up

as follows:
“20…...In such an appeal by special leave, where
       the Trial Court and the High Court have
       concurrently returned the findings of fact after
       appreciation of evidence, each and every finding
       of fact cannot be contested nor such an appeal
       could be dealt with as if another forum for
       reappreciation of evidence. Of course, if the
       assessment by the Trial Court and the High Court
       could be said to be vitiated by any error of law
       or procedure or misreading of evidence or in
       disregard to the norms of judicial process
       leading to serious prejudice or injustice, this
       Court may, and in appropriate cases would,
       interfere in order to prevent grave or serious
       miscarriage of justice but, such a course is
       adopted only in rare and exceptional cases of
       manifest illegality. Tersely put, it is not a
       matter of regular appeal. This Court would not
       interfere with the concurrent findings of fact
       based on pure appreciation of evidence nor it is
       the scope of these appeals that this Court would
       enter into reappreciation of evidence so as to
       take a view different than that taken by the
       Trial Court and approved by the High Court.”


            The submissions made before us are essentially for

reappreciation of evidence or for taking a different view

of the evidence than that has been taken by the Trial Court

and   the    High    Court.    Nothing   of   any   misreading    of   the
3
evidence or any error of law or procedure has been pointed

out.
Even otherwise, we do not find the present one to

be    a   case         of    manifest        illegality          so    as    to    call     for

interference. The evidence of PW-1, being the eye-witness

to     the    incident,               remains      unimpeachable            and    has     been

believed          by    the      two     Courts.          His    evidence          cannot    be

discarded only for the reason that he allegedly did not

raise     any      alarm         or    did   not    try    to     intervene         when    the

deceased          was       being      ferociously        assaulted          and    stabbed.

Excessive number of injuries do not ipso facto lead to an

inference about involvement of more than one person; rather

the       nature            of    injuries         and      similarity             of    their

size/dimension would only lead to the inference that she

was mercilessly and repeatedly stabbed by the same weapon

and by the same person.
For       what      has     been      discussed          hereinabove,         this

appeal is required to be dismissed.
As        per       the     Office         Report        and    the        Custody

Certificate             placed         before       us,     it        appears       that     on

07.09.2019, the appellant, after having served the sentence

of imprisonment for a period of 15 years 9 months and 27

days, was released under
Section 432
CrPC by the Government

of Chhattisgarh. Having regard to the circumstances, we

make it clear that dismissal of this appeal shall not be of

any adverse effect on such exercise of power of remission

by the Government of Chhattisgarh.
4
Subject to the observations foregoing, this appeal

 stands dismissed.
We place on record our appreciation for the able

 assistance extended by the learned amicus curiae as also by

 the   learned counsel   for the   State in   disposal of   this

 matter.
...................J.
                                         (DINESH MAHESHWARI)




                                         ...................J.
                                                (VIKRAM NATH)

New Delhi;
February 25, 2022.
5