[Cites
6
, Cited by
10
]
Supreme Court of India
New Okhla Industrial Development ... vs Ravindra Kumar Singhvi (Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 15 February, 2022
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
Hemant Gupta
REPORTABLE

                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                               CIVIL APPEAL NO. 382 OF 2012


         NEW OKHLA INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
         AUTHORITY                                                              .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                                 VERSUS

         RAVINDRA KUMAR SINGHVI (DEAD) THR.
         LRS.                                                                 .....RESPONDENT(S)




                                                        JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.              The present appeal has been filed by the original defendant against

                         the judgment and decree passed by the High Court on 25.02.2010

                         upholding the findings of the first Appellate Court dated 19.12.1999

                         whereby the decree of the Trial Court was affirmed.
2.              The plaintiff-respondent was allotted a residential plot No. D-49, Sector-
30, Noida1 as a member of the Defence Services Cooperative Housing
Signature Not Verified   Society on 06.10.1981. The possession of the plot was handed over to
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2022.02.15
16:52:35 IST
Reason:
him on 24.08.1991.
1         Hereinafter referred to as ‘Sector 30 Plot’
1
3.       However, prior to the allotment of the said plot, plot No. 84, Sector-
15A, Noida2 was allotted to Smt. Amila Singhvi, wife of the plaintiff on

         10.03.1981. As per the pleaded case of the plaintiff, there was an

         uncertainty on account of litigation between the Society of which he

         was a member with the appellant authority. Therefore, the plot at

         Sector 15A was applied for, which was allotted to the plaintiff’s wife on

         10.3.1981. It was pleaded that since the plaintiff was interested in

         Sector 30 plot as member of the Society, therefore, the wife of the

         plaintiff transferred the Sector 15A plot in favor of one Mrs. Kanta Modi

         after obtaining permission from the appellant. Later, a transfer deed

         was executed on 25.10.1990.
4.       The plaintiff was served with a notice on 12.06.1996 that the Sector 30

         plot had been obtained by him by submitting a false affidavit as Sector

         15A plot was already allotted to his wife. The grievance of the plaintiff

         was that since the Sector 15A plot has been sold after obtaining

         permission from the appellant, therefore, the Sector 30 plot was the

         only plot in possession of the plaintiff. With the said claim, the suit for

         declaration was filed restraining the defendant from re-allocating the

         Sector 30 plot and from dispossessing the plaintiff from the same. After

         considering the reply, the plot was cancelled on 18.10.1996.
5.       In the written statement filed by the appellant, it was asserted that

         there was no litigation in respect of the Sector 15A plot and that the

2    Hereinafter referred to as ‘Sector 15A Plot’
2
plaintiff was aware of the allotment of the Sector 15A plot when Sector

30 plot was allotted. However, the plaintiff intentionally concealed such

factum of allotment and filed a false affidavit for the Sector 30 plot. It

was also pleaded that the plaintiff was aware of the terms and

conditions of allotment that the plaintiff and his wife cannot retain both

the plots separately. The Sector 15A plot was sold only to conceal the

fact of obtaining double allotment. It was further contended that Sector

15A plot was allotted on 10.03.1981 and the wife of the plaintiff sworn

an affidavit on 04.03.1983 that the allotee, her spouse and dependent

children have not been allotted residential plot/house/flat in Noida,

Delhi or New Delhi. The plaintiff was allotted Sector 30 plot on

06.10.1981. The plaintiff had also filed an affidavit along with his letter

dated 1.12.1988 that he, his spouse and dependent children did not

own in full or part any residential plot/house/flat in Noida, Delhi and

New Delhi. The affidavit filed by the plaintiff reads thus:
“AFFIDAVIT
      I, Ravindra Kumar Singhvi S/o Late Shri K.M. Singhvi R/o of E-
      227, East of Kailash, New Delhi-110065, aged about 39 years do
      hereby solemnly affirm and state on oath as under:-
1.    That I have attained the age of majority on 26.01.1968.
2.    That I am a bonafide and registered member of the
            Defence Services Cooperative Housing Society (Regd.) in
            my own name and right on May 1, 1976.
3.    That I have deposited Rs.125/- as membership fee of the
            above cooperative housing society on 18.07.1975.
4.    That I, my spouse and dependent children do not own in
3
full or in part on lease hold or free hold basis any
                 residential plot or house in NOIDA and have not been
                 allotted any plot, or house on hire purchase basis in
                 NOIDA complex.”
6.   The learned Trial Court decreed the suit inter alia on the ground that

     the lease executed in favour of the plaintiff cannot be determined

     merely by passing the subject order in terms of
Section 111 (g)
of the

     Transfer of Property Act, 1887 as no notice for determination of lease

     under the said section has been issued. Therefore, all rights in the

     lease would survive. The first Appellate Court and the High Court

     affirmed the findings recorded by the Trial Court. The High Court

     further held that plaintiff and his wife had no ulterior motive to

     perpetrate fraud on the appellants. It was noted that there was no

     willful or dishonest intention on the part of the plaintiff and his wife.
7.   Learned counsel for the appellant herein argued that the entire basis of

     the decree passed by the Courts was erroneous and wholly untenable

     in law. Lease was not cancelled for the reason that there was any

     violation of the terms and conditions of the lease. The allotment was

     cancelled as false affidavits were filed by the allotees of both the plots

     which knocks down the very allotment since it was obtained by

     concealing material facts. The appellant had a policy that a family

     would not get more than one plot so as to provide housing to large

     number of citizens.
8.   Learned counsel for the appellant also referred to the letter of
4
allotment of plot to the plaintiff dated 6.10.1981 along with the terms

     and conditions for the sale of developed leasehold rights of residential

     plots to the members of the Cooperative Housing Building Societies in

     New Okhla Industrial Development Area (NOIDA). It was contended

     that such terms and conditions were applicable to all the Cooperative

     Housing Building Societies. The relevant conditions read thus:
“1. ELIGIBILITY:
Any person who is competent to contract. A person himself
           owning or in the case of his/her spouse or dependent children
           owning a plot or house within municipal corporations of Delhi or
           New Delhi or Noida Complex will not be eligible for allotment of a
           plot in NOIDA.
2. NOTE MORE THAN ONE PLOT:
An eligible person will be allotted not more than one residential
           plot in the New Okhla Industrial Development Authority. Area
           separately eligible for allotment of plot and for this purpose they
           shall be treated as a single eligible person.
xxx                        xxx                              xxx




           15. LEASE DEED AND OTHER CONDTIONS OF LEASE

            xxx                        xxx                              xxx
(I)   If the allotment of lease of the plot is obtained by any
           misrepresentation misstatement or fraud or if there is any
           breach of the conditions of the lease, the allotment or as the
           case may be, the lease may be cancelled and the possession of
           the plot and the building thereon may be taken over by the
           Authority and the lessee will not be entitled to any
           compensation.”
9.   Thus, it was averred that the allotment was cancelled for the reason
5
that the wife of the plaintiff was allotted a plot earlier in point of time

         but still, the plaintiff filed an affidavit not disclosing the allotment of

         such plot to his spouse. Thus, it was a violation of the terms and

         conditions of the allotment.
10.      On the other hand, Mr. P.S. Patwalia, learned senior counsel for the

         plaintiff argued that the terms and conditions of the sale of developed

         leasehold rights have not been produced on record. The plaintiff

         became the member of the Cooperative Housing Society in the year

         1976 but the disputes were pending for a long time. Therefore, the plot

         at    Sector    15A    was     sought,   which        was   allotted   to   his   wife.
Subsequently, after the settlement of the dispute, such plot was

         allotted to the Society and as a member of the Society, he has been

         allotted a residential plot.
11.      It has been admitted by the plaintiff-respondent that on account of

         dispute regarding the allotment, no construction has been raised over

         the said plot.
12.      It was further submitted that in terms of Section 14 of the Uttar

         Pradesh Industrial Development Act, 1976, the Chief Executive Officer

         can    resume    the    site    or   building    in    case   of   non-payment       of

         consideration or any installment or breach of any condition of such

         transfer or breach of any rule or regulation made. The judgment of this

         Court reported as
ITC Limited v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.3
3     (2011) 7 SCC 493
6
has been relied upon to submit that in case a lessee commits default in

         paying either the premium or lease amount or commits breach of any

         term of the lease, the Chief Executive Officer alone can resume the

         plot.   The Authority to resume implies and includes the Authority to

         unilaterally cancel the lease as well.
13.      It was also argued that the finding of fact recorded by the trial court

         and affirmed by the First Appellate Court was not interfered with by the

         High Court in the second appeal as no substantial question of law

         arose for consideration. Learned counsel for the respondent also relied

         upon judgments of this Court reported as
Teri Oat Estates (P) Ltd. v.

         U.T., Chandigarh & Ors.4 and Managing Director
, Haryana State

         Industrial       Development   Corporation    &   Ors.   v.   Hari   Om

         Enterprises & Anr.5 to contend that determination of lease has to be

         the last resort.
14.      We have heard learned counsels for the parties and find that the

         plaintiff had invoked the jurisdiction of the Civil Court even though he

         had filed a false affidavit that his spouse or dependent children have

         not been allotted any plot.
15.      It is an admitted fact that the wife of the plaintiff was allotted Sector

         15A plot on 10.3.1981. The wife sworn an affidavit on 4.3.1983 that

         neither she nor her spouse owned any other plot in Noida. It was on

         6.10.1981 that the plaintiff was informed about allotment of residential

4     (2004) 2 SCC 130
5     (2009) 16 SCC 208
7
plot measuring 450 sq. yards in Sector 30. The allotment was said to

      be subject to terms and conditions as enclosed. The relevant extract

      from such terms and conditions have been reproduced above. Such

      terms clearly show that a person himself owning, or in case of his

      spouse or dependent children owning a plot within the Municipal

      Corporation of Delhi or New Delhi or Noida complex, will not be eligible

      for allotment of a plot in Noida. The affidavit of the wife of the plaintiff

      was false as the plot measuring 450 sq. yards stood allotted to the

      plaintiff on 6.10.1981. Therefore, on the date the wife of the plaintiff

      had sworn the affidavit, the Sector 30 plot was already allotted to the

      plaintiff.   The argument that plot might have been allotted but the

      possession was not with the wife of the plaintiff is incorrect.         The

      affidavit was to the effect that she has not been allotted any plot either

      in her name or in the name of her husband. The affidavit was not that

      the plot has been allotted but possession has not been delivered.
16.   On the other hand, the plaintiff had sworn an affidavit, sent to the

      appellant with his letter dated 1.12.1988 that he, his spouse and

      dependent children do not own in full or in part on leasehold or

      freehold basis any residential plot. Even this affidavit is in respect of

      allotment of a plot not in respect of delivery of possession. It may be

      stated that when in 1988, the plaintiff had sworn the affidavit, the

      lease deed dated 31.1.1983 already stood executed in respect of

      Sector 15A plot. Since the lease was executed, the wife of the plaintiff
8
applied for permission to transfer which was granted and transfer deed

         was executed on 25.10.1990.            The permission was granted by the

         appellant without having knowledge of the fact that the husband of the

         allottee has already been allotted a separate plot. Once an affidavit

         has been filed which is on the face of it false to the knowledge of the

         executants, no benefit can be claimed on the ground that delivery of

         possession was given.
17.
In
M. Veerabhadra Rao Vs. Tek Chand6
, this Court was considering

         an affidavit attested by an Advocate in terms of
Section 3(2)
of the

         Oaths Act, 1969. The conduct of appellant to attest an affidavit without

         oath and the attestation on the representation of the respondent that it

         bears     his     signatures,   came    up   for   consideration.    In   these

         circumstances, this Court held as under:
“17. The expression 'affidavit' has been commonly understood to
                  mean a sworn statement in writing made especially under oath or
                  on affirmation before an authorised Magistrate or officer. Affidavit
                  has been defined in sub-clause (3) of
Section 3
of the General
                  Clauses Act, 1897 to include 'affirmation and declaration in the
                  case of person by law allowed to affirm or declare instead of
                  swearing.' The essential ingredients of an affidavit are that the
                  statements or declarations are made by the deponent relevant to
                  the subject matter and in order to add sanctity to it, he swears or
                  affirms the truth of the statements made in the presence of a
                  person who in law is authorised either to administer oath or to
                  accept the affirmation……”
18.      Therefore, affidavits filed were not mere sheet of paper but a solemn

         statement made before a person authorized to administer oath or to


6     1984(Supp) SCC 571
9
accept affirmation. The plaintiff had breached such solemn statement

         made on oath.
19.      The terms and conditions of allotment conveyed to the plaintiff on

         1.12.1988 have a specific clause that if allotment is obtained by any

         misrepresentation or misstatement or fraud, the lease may be

         cancelled and the possession of the plot and the building thereon may

         be taken by the Authority. Therefore, cancellation of allotment of plot

         obtained after filing false affidavit is a legitimate ground of cancellation

         of lease. Fraud vitiates all actions as
laid down by
this Court in S.P.

         Chengalvaraya Naidu (Dead) by LRs. v. Jagannath (Dead) by

         LRs. & Ors.7 wherein it was held as under:
“5. The High Court, in our view, fell into patent error. The short
                question before the High Court was whether in the facts and
                circumstances of this case, Jagannath obtained the preliminary
                decree by playing fraud on the court. The High Court, however,
                went haywire and made observations which are wholly perverse.
                We do not agree with the High Court that “there is no legal duty
                cast upon the plaintiff to come to court with a true case and
                prove it by true evidence”. The principle of “finality of litigation”
                cannot be pressed to the extent of such an absurdity that it
                becomes an engine of fraud in the hands of dishonest litigants.
                The courts of law are meant for imparting justice between the
                parties. One who comes to the court, must come with clean
                hands. We are constrained to say that more often than not,
                process of the court is being abused. Property-grabbers, tax-
                evaders, bank-loan-dodgers and other unscrupulous persons
                from all walks of life find the court-process a convenient lever to
                retain the illegal gains indefinitely. We have no hesitation to say
                that a person, who's case is based on falsehood, has no right to
                approach the court. He can be summarily thrown out at any
                stage of the litigation.”



7     (1994) 1 SCC 1
10
20.   The argument that the lease was required to be determined by the

      Chief Executive Officer is not tenable. The determination of lease by

      the Chief Executive Officer would arise if in case there was any

      violation of the terms of lease. If the condition precedent for grant of

      lease itself was fraudulent, the cancellation of lease was not required

      to be preceeded by permission of the Chief Executive Officer.            Still

      further, the Chief Executive Officer has granted permission on

      13.9.1998, though the cancellation order was passed on 18.10.1996.
Thus, it is a case of irregularity at best which stands removed with the

      permission of the Chief Executive Officer.       The argument that if the

      statute prescribes a power to do a certain thing in a certain way, such

      thing must be done in that way and other modes of performance are

      necessarily forbidden is not applicable in the present case. Firstly, for

      the reason that admittedly, false affidavits were filed by the plaintiff as

      well as by his wife. The filing of a false affidavit disentitles the plaintiff

      for any equitable relief.   Secondly, any irregularity in the process of

      cancellation stands cured with Chief Executive Officer granting

      permission on 13.9.1998.
21.   The judgment in ITC Limited as relied upon by the respondent is on

      altogether different facts. In that case, the allotment made in favour of

      ITC Limited was subject matter of challenge in Public Interest Litigation

      in writ petitions filed before the Allahabad High Court. The issue was in

      respect of cancellation of lease on account of violation of the terms,
11
not based upon fraud in obtaining the lease.
22.   The judgments of this Court in Teri Oat Estates and Hari Om

      Enterprises are also on different facts wherein the Doctrine of

      Proportionality was applied.
23.   The fact is that the second plot allotted to the plaintiff had been

      allotted against the express terms of allotment. Therefore, there is

      neither equity nor any law in favor of the plaintiff.           A person who

      misleads the Authority in obtaining allotment of a plot is not entitled to

      any relief.
24.   Consequently, the appeal is allowed. The judgment and decree of the

      courts below are set aside and the suit is thus dismissed.
.............................................J.
                                                                (HEMANT GUPTA)



                                           .............................................J.
                                                     (V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN)

NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 15, 2022.
12