[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Santosh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 22 February, 2022
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1

                                                                                  NON-REPORTABLE

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1506 OF 2019

      SANTOSH & ANR.                                                             Appellants

                                           VERSUS

      STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH                                                     Respondent



                                                   J U D G M E N T
1.                  This   appeal    under     Section   2(A)   of   the     Supreme    Court

      (Enlargement                 of     Criminal   Appellate   Jurisdiction)     Act,   1970   is

      directed against the judgment and order dated 08.03.2019 passed by

      the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Government Appeal

      No.448 of 2004.
2.                  The basic factual aspects of the matter as set out by the High

      Court in its judgment are extracted hereinbelow for facility:
“3. On the complaint (Ex-Ka-1) of Shalendra Kumar Tripathi
                          (PW-1), FIR (Ex-Ka-15) of Case Crime No. 160 of 1998 was
                          registered under
Section 147
,
148
,
149
,
307
,
302
IPC at
                          P.S. Shahpur, district Gorakhpur, on 23.03.1998 at 21:30
                          hours, by Head Moharrir Tulsi Ram (PW-8), against Uma,
                          Bhola, Santosh, Gopal, Shalesh and some unknown accused.
                          It has been stated in the FIR that today on 23.03.1998,
                          the informant along with his brother-in-law Sri Vivek
                          Kumar Pandey was returning towards his quarter, from
                          Dharamshala, after purchasing vegetables. As soon as they
                          reached at Bauliya colony, Durga Temple, they heard loud
                          noise and it appeared that the quarrel was going on. At
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by Dr.
Mukesh Nasa
Date: 2022.02.26          that time, Asgar came and informed them that Uma, Bhola,
11:15:55 IST
Reason:
Santosh, Gopal, Shalesh, along with his other friends were
                          abusing and assaulting the ladies and children of his
                          family. He asked them to go and pacify them. In the
                          meantime Ramesh Yadav, Ramesh Tiwari, Chunna Pal also came
2
there from northern side, on scooter and motorcycle. They
all proceeded towards the quarter of Asgar along with him
at about 8:30 PM. In the meantime, Uma (Magahia dom),
Bhola (dom), Santosh son of Bhola, Shalesh son of Gopal
armed with gupti and pistol, Gopal and his other friends
armed with hockey and danda, challenged them hurling
abuses and exhorted to assault them and none of them would
be escaped as they were helpers of Asgar. The accused
chased them and opened fire upon his brother-in-law,
Ramesh Yadav and Asgar. After receiving firearm injury,
his brother-in-law tried to hide in a quarter in western
side, where aforesaid persons reached and committed his
murder, causing gunshot injury. Ramesh Yadav also received
gunshot injury. Asgar also received injury. Hearing hue
and cries, various persons came on spot and intervened in
the matter, as a result of which, they could save their
life. On the spot, dead body and motorcycle TVS Suzuki UP
51-1603   of  his   brother-in-law,  scooter   and  Bullet
motorcycle were lying. After lodging the report legal
action be taken.
4. After registration of FIR, SHO Kapil Muni Singh (PW-7)
started investigation. He copied the check FIR and G.D.
entry in case diary. He recorded statement of Shalendra
Kumar Tripathi the informant. He made spot inspection and
prepared   site-plan  (Ex-Ka-10),   on  pointing   out   of
informant. He received blood stained and plane floor from
the place where dead body of Vivek Kumar Pandey was lying
and prepared its recovery memo (Ex-Ka-11). He took into
possession the motorcycles TVS Suzuki UP 51-1603, Bullet
URX 7247 and scooter UMH 2242 and prepared its recovery
memo. He recorded statements of the witnesses of recovery
memos and Ramesh Tiwari. He visited Emergency Ward of
District   Hospital,  Gorakhpur   and   tried  to    record
statements of injured Asgar and Ramesh Yadav but they were
not in position to give statement. On the basis of
statements of the witnesses, he added
Section 452
,
504
,
506
IPC in the case. On 24.03.1998, he recorded statement
of Santosh Upadhyay and the injured Asgar and Ramesh
Yadav. On 25.03.1998, he arrested Uma, Bhola and Ravi
Shankar and recorded their statements. They confessed
their guilt and became ready for recovery of the weapons
used in commission of crime. On the pointing out of Uma
Shankar, one pistol of 12 bore with one empty cartridge
fasten in its barrel, on the pointing out of Bhola, one
gupti and on the pointing out of Ravi Shankar one hockey
were recovered. He got prepared recovery memo (Ex-Ka-12)
of the weapons through SI R.K. Gautam. He sent the clothes
of the deceased, blood stained and plane floor, pistol,
empty cartridge and gupti for chemical examination through
letter (Ex-Ka-13). He obtained injury reports of Asgar and
Ramesh Yadav and copied it in case diary on 26.03.1998. He
recorded statements of witnesses of the Inquest. He
3
recorded statement of Chunna Pal on 10.05.1998. He
     submitted charge sheet (Ex-Ka-14) against the accused, on
     which cognizance was taken.
5. On the basis of recovery memo (Ex-Ka-12) of the
     weapons, FIR (Ex-Ka-17) of Case Crime Nos. 162 and 163 of
     1998 were registered under
Section 3
/
4
/
25
of Arms Act,
     1959 on 25.03.1998 at 19:50 hours at P.S. Shahpur,
     district Gorakhpur, against Uma @ Uma Shankar and Bhola,
     by Head Moharrir Tulsi Ram. SI Anil Kumar Singh (PW-9)
     investigated the matter. He prepared site-plan (Ex-Ka-18)
     of place of recovery. He recorded statements of the
     witnesses and on completion of investigation, he submitted
     charge sheets (Ex-Ka-19 and Ka-20), on which cognizance
     was taken.
6. Asgar Ali and Ramesh Yadav went to District Hospital
     Gorakhpur. In hospital, Dr. S.S. Parvez (PW-6) examined
     injuries of Ramesh Yadav on 23.03.1998 at 9:45 PM and
     prepared Injury Report (Ex-Ka-8). He examined Asgar on
     23.03.1998 at 10:10 PM and prepared Injury Report (Ex-Ka-
9).”
3.   The injuries suffered by Ramesh Yadav and Asgar were noticed

by Dr. S.S. Parvez (PW-6) and the injuries were as under:
“Ramesh Yadav-
(1) Incised wound 3cm x 0.5cm x scalp deep, vertical on
         the middle part of the left eye brow, bleeding
         present.
(2) Lacerated wound 3cm x 0.5cm x scalp deep, on the outer
          aspect of left eyebrow, bleeding present.
(3) Lacerated wound 1.5cm x 0.5cm x cartilage deep, on the
          middle of the nose, bleeding present, KUO (kept under
          observation), Advised X-Ray of Nose.
(4) Lacerated wound 1.5cm x 0.5cm x muscle deep, 2cm below
          the left eye, bleeding present.
(5) Contused Trans swelling on the left side of face and
          forehead, in the area of 10cm x 7cm, KUO, Advised X-
Ray of face.
(6) Abrasion 5cm x 2cm on the left side back, lateral
         aspect.
(7) Incised wound 1cm x 0.5cm x depth, KUO, on the left
         side back, middle part.
4
(8) Incised wound 1cm x 0.5cm x depth, KUO, on the right
          side back, middle part. Both are KUO, advised X-Ray
          of the chest.
(9)    Incised wound 1cm x 0.3 cm on the left side                 of
            abdomen, depth KUO, Injury KUO, advised X-Ray.

     (10) Incised wound 0.5cm x 0.3cm x depth KUO, on the left
          side of chest, Injury KUO, advised X-Ray.

     (11) Incised wound 0.5cm x 0.3cm x depth KUO, on the right
          side of chest, Injury KUO, advised X-Ray.

     Asgar Ali -
(1)    Lacerated wound 1cm x 0.4cm x scalp deep on his back
            of head, right side, blood oozing, 11cm above and
            back of right ear, KUO (kept under observation),
            Advised X-Ray of skull.
(2)    Trans. swelling, tender, 5cm x 4cm on the left wrist
            joint, KUO, advised X-Ray of the left wrist with
            hand.
(3)    Abrasion   3cm   x   1.5cm,   just   above   the   right   knee
            joint.
(4)    Abrasion 5cm x 0.25cm on the middle part of he back,
            upper part.“
4.   The autopsy on the body of the deceased was conducted by Dr.

Shyam Lal Barnwal (PW-4) on 24.03.1998 at 4.00 p.m., who found the

following ante-mortem injuries on the body of the deceased:
“(i)      Multiple lacerated wound, in an area of 14cm x
               12cm, on the right side of abdomen, varying in
               size, 1.5cm to 2cm in length and 0.5cm in width
               and muscle deep.
(ii)      Firearm wounds of entry, 1.5cm x 1.5cm x abdomen
               cavity deep, on right side abdomen, upper part,
               blackening present, margin inverted, underlying
               peritoneum, liver lacerated and one metallic cog
               shot recovered from abdomen cavity.
(iii)     Multiple incised wound in an area of 12cm x 8cm,
               on the left side of chest, varying in size 1.5cm
               to 2cm in length and 0.5cm in width, muscle deep.
5
(iv)         Incised wound 3cm x 0.5cm x muscle deep on the
                   right forearm, upper part.
In the internal examination, peritoneum was lacerated.
      Abdomen cavity contained 2 liter blood. Stomach contained
      3 ounce watery fluid. Small Intestine was empty and large
      intestine contained gases and fecal matter.      Liver was
      lacerated.   Urinary Bladder was empty.      According to
      opinion of the Doctor, death was caused due to shock and
      hemorrhage, as a result of ante-mortem injuries.”
5.    After       completion    of   investigation,     six     accused      persons,

namely, Gopal, Bhola, Uma, Ravishankar, Santosh and Sailesh were

tried for having committed the offences punishable under
Sections

147
,
148
,
149
,
323
,
307
,
302
,
504
,
506
IPC in the Court of the

Additional Sessions Judge, Court No.3, Gorakhpur in Sessions Trial

No.571 of 1998.
6.    Apart from examining the informant Shailendra Kumar Tripathi

as PW-1, the prosecution mainly relied upon the evidence of the

injured witnesses.
7.    PW-2 Asgar in his testimony narrated that he and Ramesh Yadav

as well as the deceased were surrounded and blows by hockey sticks

were showered upon them whereafter the deceased Vivek had taken

shelter in someone’s house to save his life.                  The accused persons

gave him a chase and gunshot was fired at Vivek in the house where

he   had   taken     shelter.   As   regards   the    assault     on   the   witness

himself,     he    gave   sufficient   particulars     in   his   examination-in-

chief.     Nothing substantial was extracted in the cross-examination.
8.    PW-3 Ramesh Yadav gave details about the way the incident had

developed and stated as under:
6
“Shailesh, Santosh and Uma fired gunshots with an intent
      to kill us. All of them chased us. We ran to save us.
      Vivek, Asgar and I were cornered.     I sustained gunshot
      injury on my back.      After cornering us, they started
      assaulting with gupti, latho and sticks.
When Vivek ran towards west to save his life, the accused
      chased him. He hid himself by entering the house of Mr.
      Sharma. The accused pushed the door and shot him. After
      committing his murder the accused while coming out were
      uttering: “Saala bahut paisa mangta tha, ab nahin mangega.
      Uska kaam tamam kar diya (He has been repeatedly asking
      for money, now he will not ask for same. We have killed
      him)”.
When the accused cornered, fired gunshot and started
      assaulting.   Vivek sustained gunshot injury as also the
      injuries caused by gupti, lathi and stick. Asgar and I
      sustained several injuries.”

      The   examination   further   indicated   that   the   witness   was

required to be hospitalized for a week.
9.    The Trial Court by its judgment and order dated 19.08.2003

found that the case of the prosecution as against the accused was

not proved.   The Trial Court thus acquitted     the accused of all the

charges levelled against them.
10.   Being aggrieved, the State preferred Government Appeal No.448

of 2004 in the High Court.      The High Court found the presence of

PW1 Shailendra at the place of occurrence to be doubtful but found

the evidence of the injured eye-witnesses i.e. PW2 Asgar and PW3

Ramesh Yadav to be credit worthy.     It was observed:
“According to medical evidence, the deceased Vivek Kumar
      Pandey received one gunshot injury while Asgar Ali and
      Ramesh Yadav, the remaining injured did not receive any
      gunshot injury.   Showing pistol in the hands of Uma and
      Shalesh and their participation in the incident appears to
      be exaggeration.    Many unnamed accused assaulted with
      lathi as such participation of Ravi Shankar and Gopal are
      also doubtful and appears to be exaggeration. Uma, Ravi
      Shankar, Gopal and Shalesh are entitled for benefit of
7
doubts.    However, participation of Bhola, armed with
      gupti and Santosh armed with pistol and some unnamed
      accused armed with lathi and causing injuries to Vivek
      Kumar Pandey (the dec
11.   Accepting the appeal insofar as accused Santosh and Bhola were

concerned,    the    High    Court     reversed        the   order   of     acquittal    and

convicted    said    two     accused        of   the    offences       punishable      under

Sections 302, 324 read with 34
IPC
and awarded them sentence of

life imprisonment under the first count and imprisonment for three

years on the second count.              The acquittal of rest of the accused

persons was affirmed by the High Court.
12.   The   convicted       accused    being     aggrieved      have       preferred    this

criminal appeal.
13.   We have heard Mr. Aldanish Rein, learned Advocate for the

appellants, and, Mr. Vinod Diwakar, learned Additional Advocate

General for the State.
14.   The   prosecution       has     mainly     relied      upon    the    eye-witnesses

account unfolded through the testimonies of PW-2 and PW-3. The

injuries suffered by these two witnesses and the fact that those

injuries    were    noticed    by     the    concerned       Doctors    soon    after    the

incident, sufficiently prove the presence of the witnesses at the

time of the occurrence.              Their testimonies are quite cogent and

consistent with the medical evidence on record. Though the High

Court was sitting in appeal against acquittal, in the facts and

circumstances on record, the interference at the hands of the High

Court was quite justified. We, therefore, see no reason to take a
8
different view in the matter.
15.   Affirming the view taken by the High Court, we dismiss this

appeal.   The appellants shall serve out the sentence awarded to

them.
............................J.
                                 (UDAY UMESH LALIT)



                                 ............................J.
                                 (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)




                                 ............................J.
                                 (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)
New Delhi,
February 22, 2022.