[Cites
0
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Ajay Gupta vs Pramod Kumar Sharma on 25 February, 2022
Author:
Dinesh Maheshwari
Bench:
Dinesh Maheshwari
,
Vikram Nath
REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1385 OF 2022

             AJAY GUPTA                                                          APPELLANT(S)

                                                       VERSUS

             PRAMOD KUMAR SHARMA                                                 RESPONDENT(S)
                                                  O R D E R
Dinesh Maheshwari, J.
Having heard learned senior counsel for the appellant at

             sufficient length and having perused the material placed on

             record, we do not feel persuaded to entertain this appeal under

             Section 62 of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 20161 by one of

             the         resolution    applicants2       in     the    corporate       insolvency

             resolution process3 concerning the corporate debtor-B.B. Foods

             Pvt. Ltd.
The appellant seeks to question the judgment and order

             dated        13.01.2022    as    passed     by     the   National       Company   Law

             Appellate        Tribunal,      Principal       Bench,   New   Delhi4    in   Company

             Appeal (AT) Insolvency No. 35 of 2022 whereby, the Appellate

             Tribunal declined to interfere in the order dated 13.12.2021

             passed in I.A. No. 367 of 2021 in CP No.(IB)349/ALD/2018 by the

             National Company Law Tribunal, Allahabad Bench, Allahabad5 by

     1 Hereinafter also referred to as “the Code’.
Signature Not Verified
2 A consortium led by the appellant (comprising of a private limited company and
Digitally signed by
Rajni Mukhi
the appellant himself) has been the resolution applicant.
Date: 2022.03.02
16:52:09 IST
     3 ‘CIRP’, for short.
Reason:
4 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the NCLAT’ or ‘the Appellate Tribunal’.
     5 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the NCLT’ or ‘the Adjudicating Authority’.
1
which, the Tribunal granted the prayer of the appellant to

  amend his resolution plan dated 22.10.2021 but, at the same

  time, also allowed the other resolution applicant to place any

  modification in their resolution plan before the Committee of

  Creditors6.
Shorn   of     unnecessary     details,       the    relevant   background

  aspects for the present purpose are that as regards the CIRP in

  question,     there    had    been    two     resolution       applicants,    the

  consortium led by appellant being one of them.                  It appears that

  there had been deliberations in the CoC over the resolution

  plans    submitted      by    the    appellant       and     other    resolution

  applicant;     and    in     the    minutes    of     eighth    meeting      dated

  02.11.2021, the CoC indicated its deliberations/observations

  concerning the two resolution plans in the following terms:
“At this stage, the representative of Resolution
          Applicant, namely, Sirius Foods Private Limited was
          invited to have detailed deliberations on the
          Resolution Plan submitted by Sirius Foods Private
          Limited and during the course of deliberations,
          defects/technical difficulty was pointed out and
          thereafter, representative of Resolution Applicant,
          namely, Sirius Foods Private Limited assured that all
          defects would be removed to the extent possible and
          to the satisfaction of the COC and Resolution
          Professional.     No further objections/issues were
          raised by any other participant of the meeting and
          accordingly, representative of Resolution Applicant,
          namely, Sirius Foods Private Limited left the meeting
          thereafter.
At this stage, the representative of Resolution
          Applicant, namely, consortium of Prabhat Warehouse
          and Cold Storage Limited and Mr. Ajay Gupta was
          invited to have detailed deliberations on the
          Resolution Plan submitted by, consortium of Prabhat
          Warehouse and Cold Storage Limited & Mr. Ajay Gupta
          and    during    the     course    of    deliberations,
          defects/technical    difficulty    were    pointed   out
          and   thereafter,     representative    of    Resolution
          Applicant, namely, consortium of Prabhat Warehouse

6 ‘CoC’, for short.
2
and Cold Storage Limited and Mr. Ajay Gupta assured
      that all defects will be removed to the extent
      possible and to the satisfaction of the COC and
      Resolution Professional and left the meeting room.
      No further objections/issues were raised by any other
      participant   of   the   meeting   and   accordingly,
      representative of the said Resolution Applicant, left
      the meeting thereafter.”

      After the aforesaid deliberations/observations of CoC, the

appellant sent a communication dated 18.11.2021 and annexed

therewith    his   affidavit    dated     17.11.2021    in    the   so-called

‘clarification in respect of the resolution plan’. The contents

of this affidavit dated 17.11.2021 read as under: -
“AFFIDAVIT
      I, Ajay Gupta, a director in Prabhat Warehouse Cold
      Storage Private Limited and on behalf of Ajay Gupta
      individual, which form a consortium and being the
      lead member of the said consortium, do hereby affirm
      as follows:
1. The consortium of Prabhat Warehouse Cold Storage
      Private Limited and Ajay Gupta have submitted a
      resolution plan dated 27th September, 2021 which was
      further    amended   vide    Resolution    Plan    dated
      22nd October, 2021. In the amended resolution plan,
      payment schedule and the resolution of the corporate
      debtor has been mentioned, which we would be
      honouring at the earliest.
2. That while submitting the amended resolution plan,
      I    was   under   certain    apprehensions    regarding
      litigations   being   involved   in   the   process   of
      resolution of the corporate debtor, but now after
      seeking legal advice on behalf of the consortium,
      state that the amount of payment to be made under the
      resolution plan of Rs. 16.10 crores will remain the
      same and is not being modified, however I’m putting
      forth my gesture of making the payment upfront, if
      the bank allows the same within 90 days of the
      receipt of the order of Hon’ble NCLT approving our
      resolution plan, as I would be taking the possession
      of the corporate debtor on the payment of upfront
      amount of resolution amount i.e. Rs.16.10 crore.
3. Our payment of upfront amount under the resolution
      plan is in no way going to modify the plan and I am
      submitting this affidavit so to clear my point.”

      It    appears   that     the   appellant’s   proposal         for   such

modification/amendment of the resolution plan was declined by

the    resolution     professional.        Thereupon,        the    appellant
3
approached the Adjudicating Authority by filing I.A. No. 367 of

21 in C.P. No. (IB) 349/ALD/2018. The Adjudicating Authority

took note of the submissions made on behalf of the appellant

and passed the order dated 13.12.2021 granting the prayer of

the appellant but, at the same time, correspondingly allowed

the other resolution applicant to place any modification in

their submitted resolution plan before CoC so as to provide

level playing field. The order dated 13.12.2021 so passed by

the Adjudicating Authority reads as under:-
“I.A. No. 367/2021
Ld. Counsel for the applicant present.   Ld.
     Counsel for the CoC present. Ld. Counsel for the RP
     present. Ld. Senior Counsel for the other Resolution
     Applicant whose plan is also being considered by the
     CoC present.
This is an application filed by one of the
     Resolution Applicant seeking to amend the final
     Resolution Plan dated 22.10.2021 submitted by the
     applicant to make the following amendments:-
(a) To uncaps the CIRP costs on conditions
     stated therein;
(b) To reduce term of the plan from 180 days
     to 90 days.
At this point of time, we are conscious of the
     fact that the CIRP period will come to end on
     06.01.2022 and a decision on the resolution plans
     will have to be taken first by the CoC and,
     thereafter by this Adjudicating Authority.
Therefore, the ends of justice will be met if we
     direct the applicant herein to place the affidavits
     at Page Nos. 290 to 298 alongwith the covering letter
     addressed to the sole member of the CoC for
     consideration. Since we do not wish to disturb level
     playing field, the other resolution applicants whose
     plans are also being considered will also be
     permitted   to  place   any   modification  in   their
     submitted resolution plan before the CoC for its
     consideration.    Such    modifications    shall    be
     communicated to the CoC, no later than 48 hours from
     now.
Accordingly, IA No. 367/2021 is disposed of.”


    Thereafter, the resolution plans were considered by the
4
CoC on 21/22.12.2021 and the plan of the other resolution

applicant was approved.
The appellant, on the other hand, attempted to question

the said order dated 13.12.2021 before the Appellate Tribunal.

The   Appellate        Tribunal     took    note    of      the    grievance        of   the

appellant that its resolution plan came to be known to everyone

and hence, no opportunity should have been given to the others

to modify.
The    Appellate         Tribunal     found      no      substance       in    those

submissions      while     taking        the    view     that       the    Adjudicating

Authority had passed the impugned order so as to maintain the

level playing field.            The Appellate Tribunal also took note of

the fact that the resolution plans had already been considered

by CoC on 21.12.2021.
We may also indicate that earlier, the said order dated

13.01.2022 as passed by the Appellate Tribunal was sought to be

questioned before us by the erstwhile director of the corporate

debtor but, we declined to accede locus to the said appellant

and   hence,     the    said    appeal     [@   Dy.      No.      2729    of   2022]     was

dismissed, while rejecting the application seeking permission

to file appeal, by our order dated 07.02.2022.
Now, the said order dated 13.01.2022 of the Appellate

Tribunal    is    sought       to   be     questioned        by     the    unsuccessful

resolution applicant.
The   learned      senior     counsel      has     painstakingly          taken     us
5
through the relevant contents of the Request for Resolution

  Plan7 as issued by the Resolution Professional as also the

  minutes of the meeting of CoC and the affidavit filed by the

  appellant. Learned counsel would strenuously contend that so

  far as the appellant is concerned, it had not been a case of

  modification of the resolution plan because modification as

  such was not even permissible under the conditions of RFRP; and

  the submissions of the appellant by way of the affidavit dated

  17.11.2021 had only been to meet with the requirements of the

  COC,    as   reflected      in    the   minutes       of   the   meeting   dated

  02.11.2021      and   for        such   a       proposition,     there   was   no

  justification in granting any liberty to the other resolution

  applicant to modify its resolution plan. Learned senior counsel

  has also contended that appellant had been rather prejudiced in

  the matter for the reason that the terms of its resolution plan

  became known to the other resolution applicant when the matter

  was examined by the Adjudicating Authority while passing order

  dated 13.12.2021.
We do not find the submissions aforesaid making out a

  case for interference. This is for the simple reason that on a

  perusal of the order dated 13.12.2021, this much is clear that

  certain key features/stipulations of the resolution plan were

  sought to be amended by the appellant. Whether it was done in

  response to the requirement of the CoC or otherwise, the fact

  of the matter remains that there was going to be modification

  of the relevant terms of the resolution plan of the appellant.

7 ‘RFRP’, for short.
6
When that was being permitted at the request of the appellant

himself, we cannot find fault in the Adjudicating Authority

having passed an order so as to balance the position of the

respective   parties    and   to      provide     level     playing    field   by

granting   corresponding      permission        to    the   other     resolution

applicant to place its modification for consideration of CoC.
So far as affidavit dated 17.11.2021 is concerned, though

the appellant stated in paragraph 3 thereof that the payment of

upfront amount under the resolution plan was in no way going to

modify the plan but, that had only been an expression of the

understanding of the appellant about the legal effect of the

propositions      put   forward       by     him,     which     included       the

modification of the term of plan from 180 days to 90 days. Such

a   proposition    could   not     have    been      treated    as    formal   or

innocuous or of no material bearing.
So far as the factor relating to divulging of the contents

of the plan is concerned, the same had been of the making of

the   appellant    himself.      If    the    appellant        had    chosen   to

divulge/disclose the terms of its resolution plan before the

Adjudicating Authority, there had not been any fault on the

part of the resolution professional or the CoC or the other

resolution applicant.
Thus, the view taken by the Adjudicating Authority as also

by the Appellate Tribunal appears to be reasonable and sound,

calling for no interference.
Before concluding on the matter, we need to indicate two
7
other relevant factors concerning this matter. One is that the

other   resolution   applicant,   whose   resolution    plan     has   been

accepted by the Committee of Creditors, is not before us and

has not been impleaded as a party respondent in this appeal.

Hence, no order prejudicial to the interest of the successful

resolution applicant could be passed in this appeal. Secondly,

the matter would nevertheless require further processing before

the   Adjudicating   Authority;   and     for   that   matter,    we   are

informed that the approval of the Committee of Creditors has

already been placed before the Adjudicating Authority.
Taking note of all the facts and circumstances of the

case, while declining to interfere in this appeal, we leave all

the relevant aspects of the matter open for examination by the

Adjudicating Authority but, strictly in accordance with law.

  Subject to the observations foregoing, this appeal stands

dismissed.
...................J
                                                                     .
(DINESH MAHESHWARI)



                                                  ....................
J.
                                                     (VIKRAM NATH)
New Delhi;
February 25, 2022.
8