[Cites
7
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Chandra Sekhar Jha vs Union Of India on 28 February, 2022
Author:
K.M. Joseph
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
,
K.M. Joseph
1

                                                                              REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).1566 OF 2022



                      CHANDRA SEKHAR JHA                                      Appellant(s)


                                                              VERSUS


                      UNION OF INDIA & ANR.                                  Respondent(s)




                                                 ORDER
K.M. JOSEPH, J.
1.   By the impugned order, the High Court has rejected the

                      appeal carried by the appellant against the order passed

                      by the Tribunal under
Section 129E
of the Customs Act, 1962

                      (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’). This is for the

                      reason   that   the   appellant       has   not   complied    with   the

                      requirement under
Section 129E
of the Act, as regards, the

                      pre-deposit of the amount in terms of the said provision.
2.   The   appellant    while     traveling       in   a     train   was
Signature Not Verified
intercepted.      The case against him appears to be that he
Digitally signed by
JAGDISH KUMAR
Date: 2022.03.08
18:02:18 IST
Reason:               was carrying Gold smuggled into India from Bangladesh, and

                      was accompanied with another person also. On conclusion of

                      the proceedings, the Commissioner of Customs (Preventive)
2
West Bengal, Kolkata passed a common order, wherein the

appellant came to be visited with penalty in a sum of Rs.75

lakhs.   It appears that the other person was also asked to

pay penalty. They preferred appeals before the Customs,

Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, Kolkata in the

year 2017. The Tribunal finding that the appellant has not

made pre-deposit dismissed the appeal. It is this order

which was put in issue before the High Court and the High

Court has upheld the order.
3.   We heard Mr. Galib Kabir, learned counsel for the

appellant. Learned counsel for the appellant would point

out that demand for pre-deposit is not warranted in law.

His argument is premised on the fact that the appellant is

entitled to have this case dealt with, under the provision

of 129E of the Act, which was in the statute book prior to

the present avatar, substituting it by Act 25 of 2014.
4.
Section 129E
of the Customs Act, 1962, as it stood

before substitution by Act 25 of 2014, reads as follows:-
“129E. Deposit,pending appeal, of duty and
         interest, demanded or penalty levied.- Where in
         any appeal under this Chapter, the decision or
         order appealed against relates to any duty any
         interest demanded in respect of goods which are
         not under the control of the customs authorities
         or any penalty levied of goods which are not
         under the control of the customs authorities or
         any penalty levied under this Act, the person
         desirous of appealing against such decision or
         order shall, pending levied under this Act, the
         person desirous of appealing against such
3
decision or order shall, pending the appeal,
       deposit with the proper officer duty and
       interest demanded or the penalty levied:
Provided that where in any particular case, the
       Commissioner    (Appeals)   or   the   Appellate
       Tribunal is of the opinion that the deposit of
       duty and interest demanded or penalty levied
       would cause under hardship to such person, the
       Commissioner (Appeals) or, as the case may be,
       the Appellate Tribunal may dispense with such
       deposit subject to such conditions as he or it
       may deem fit to impose so as to safeguard the
       interests of revenue:
Provided further that where an application is
        filed before the Commissioner (Appeals) for
        dispensing with the deposit of duty and
        interest demanded or penalty levied under the
        first proviso, the Commissioner (Appeals)
        shall, where it is possible to do so, decide
        such application within thirty days from the
        date of its filing.”



    It is thereafter that the present version was inserted

with effect from dated 06.08.2014, which reads as follow:-
“129-E. Deposit of certain percentage of duty
     demanded or penalty imposed before filing
     appeal.—The    Tribunal   or   the   Commissioner
     (Appeals), as the case may be, shall not
     entertain any appeal,—
(i) under sub-section (1) of
Section 128
, unless the
        appellant has deposited seven and a half per cent
        of the duty, in case where duty or duty and penalty
        are in dispute, or penalty, where such penalty is
        in dispute, in pursuance of a decision or an order
        passed by an officer of customs lower in rank than
        the   Principal    Commissioner   of   Customs   or
        Commissioner of Customs;
(ii) against the decision or order referred to in
        clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
Section 129-A
,
        unless the appellant has deposited seven and a half
        per cent of the duty, in case where duty or duty
        and penalty are in dispute, or penalty, where such
4
penalty is in dispute, in pursuance of the decision
       or order appealed against;
(iii) against the decision or order referred to in
       clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
Section 129-A
,
       unless the appellant has deposited ten per cent of
       the duty, in case where duty or duty and penalty
       are in dispute, or penalty, where such penalty is
       in dispute, in pursuance of the decision or order
       appealed against:
Provided that the amount required to be deposited
       under this section shall not exceed Rupees Ten
       crores:
Provided further that the provisions of this
        section shall not apply to the stay applications
        and appeals pending before any appellate authority
        prior to the commencement of the Finance (No. 2)
        Act, 2014.]”
5.   The specific argument of the learned counsel for the

appellant is that in the case of the appellant in view of

the fact that the act relates to the year 2013 (namely on

28.2.2013), the appellant must be governed by
Section 129E
prior to the substitution. This is for the reason that the

substitution of
Section 129A
was effected on 06.08.2014

which is after the date of the incident (28.02.2013). On

the basis of the same, it is contended that under
Section

129E
, as it stood, prior to the substitution there was a

power available with the Appellate Authority in the matter

of demand of pre-deposit. He would point out that the amount

for pre-deposit in his case is harsh and onerous.
6.   On a conspectus of the provisions of
Section 129E
before and after the substitution, it becomes clear that

the law giver has intended to bring about a sweeping change

from the previous regime and usher in a new era, under
5
which the amount to be deposited was scaled down and pegged

at a certain percentage of the amount in dispute. In other

words, while under
Section 129A
, as it stood prior to the

substitution, the appellant was to deposit the duty and

the interest demanded or the penalty levied, in the present

regime, the appeal is maintainable upon the appellant

depositing seven and the half percent of the amount.   Under

the earlier regime, in other words the entire amount which

was in dispute had to be deposited. Under the earlier avatar

of
Section 129E
, the law giver also clothed the appellate

body with power as contained in the first proviso. The

first proviso provided the Commissioner (Appeals) or as

the case may be, Appellate Tribunal the power to dispense

with such deposit, subject to conditions as he deemed fit

to impose to safeguard the interest of the revenue.
7.   The question whether it is undue hardship has been the

subject matter of the judgment of this Court in
Benara

Valves Ltd. and others vs. Commissioner of Central Excise

and another
, reported in (2006) 13 SCC 347, wherein it,

inter alia, held as follow:-
“13. For a hardship to be “undue” it must be shown
        that the particular burden to observe or perform
        the requirement is out of proportion to the nature
        of the requirement itself, and the benefit which
        the applicant would derive from compliance with
        it.”
8.   It is in sharp departure from the previous regime that

the new provision has been enacted. Under the new regime,

on the one hand, the amount to be deposited to maintain
6
the appeal has been reduced from 100% to 7.5% but the

discretion which was made available to the appellate body

to scale down the pre-deposit has been taken away.
9.    The first proviso of
Section 129E
of the present

Section enacts a limitation on the total amount which can

be demanded by way of pre-deposit.                  The first proviso

provides that the amount required to be deposited should

not exceed Rs.10 Crores. In this regard, the law giver has

purported to grant relief to an appellant.                       The second

proviso contemplates that
Section 129(e)
as substituted

would not apply to stay applications and appeals which are

pending    before     the     Appellate    Authority     prior      to   the

commencement of the
Finance Act
(2) of 2014.                 The amended

provision, as we have already noticed has come into force

from 06.08.2014. Therefore, in regard to stay applications

and   appeals    which       were   pending   before     any      Appellate

Authority prior to commencement of
The Finance (No.2) Act
2014,
Section     129E
as    substituted     would    not     apply.

Substitution     of    a    provision     results   in   repeal     of   the

earlier     provision        and    its   replacement       by    the    new

provision.1
10.   As far as the argument of the appellant that for the

reason that the incident which triggered the appeal filed

by the appellant took place in the year 2013, the appellant
1
[See in this regard, a discussion in Justice G. P. Singh, Principles on
Statutory Interpretation (12th Edition) page No.676.
7
must be given the benefit of the power available under the

substituted     provision,    it   does    not   appeal    to   us.   The

substitution has effected a repeal and it has re-enacted

the provision as it is contained in
Section 129E
. In fact,

the acceptance of the argument would involve a dichotomy

in law.     On the one hand, what the appellant is called upon

to pay is not the full amount as is contemplated in
Section

129(E)
before the substitution.            The order passed by the

Commissioner     is   dated   23.11.2015      which   is    after     the

substitution of
Section 129E
. The appellant filed the

appeal in 2017. What the appellant is called upon to pay

is    the   amount    in   terms   of
Section   129E
after     the

substitution, namely, the far lesser amount in terms of

the fixed percentage as provided in
section 129E
. The

appellant, however, would wish to have the benefit of the

proviso which, in fact, appropriately would apply only to

a case where the appellant is maintaining the appeal and

he is called upon to pay the full amount under
Section 129E
under the earlier avtar.
11.   We would think that the legislative intention would

clearly be to not to allow the appellant to avail the

benefit of the discretionary power available under the

proviso to the substituted provision under
Section 129E
.

When the appellant is not being called upon to pay the full

amount but is only asked to pay the amount which is fixed

under the substituted provision, we do not find any merit

in the contention of the appellant.                 However, in the
8
interest of justice we extend the period for complying with
Section 129E
by a period of two months from today. Subject

to the same, the appeal will stand dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed

of.
……………………………………………J.
                                       [K.M. JOSEPH]




                                        …………………………………………J.
                                        [HRISHIKESH ROY]

New Delhi
28th February, 2022