[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The Surat Parsi Panchayat Board vs Union Of India on 4 February, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Surya Kant
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
CA 1067/2022
                                                             1


                                                                                               REPORTABLE
                                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                                   Civil Appeal No 1067 of 2022
                                            (Arising out of SLP (C) No 17130 of 2021)



                      The Surat Parsi Panchayat Board and Another                       Appellants


                                                        Versus


                      Union of India and Others                                         Respondent(s)




                                                         ORDER
1    Leave granted.


                      2    This appeal arises from a judgment and order dated 23 July 2021 of a Division

                           Bench of the High Court of Gujarat.


                      3    A petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution was instituted before the High
Court by the Surat Parsi Panchayat Board seeking, among other things,

                           directions to allow the performance of Dokhmenashini or funeral rights in the

                           Dokhmas belonging to the Parsi Zoroastrian community. The basis of the

                           grievance was that the protocols which were notified on 15 March 2020 by the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Chetan Kumar
Date: 2022.02.08
14:52:24 IST
Reason:
CA 1067/2022
2
Union Government during the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic setting out

               modalities for the disposal of dead bodies do not comport with the tenets of the

               Zoroastrian faith. The High Court dismissed the petition.
4        Notice was issued on 6 December 2021after hearing Mr Fali S Nariman, learned

               senior counsel for the appellants. The next order of this Court dated 10 January

               2022, is extracted below:
“1   Mr Fali S Nariman, learned Senior Counsel appearing on
                            behalf of the petitioners, has submitted a written note
                            indicating the manner in which the funeral rites of Parsi
                            Zoroastrians who have died due to Covid-19 would be
                            carried out at the Towers of Silence. Learned Senior Counsel
                            submits that the proposed guidelines meet the concerns of
                            the Union Government over public health and safety while
                            preserving the sanctity of the Zoroastrian faith. The guidelines
                            which have been issued by the Union Government in the
                            Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Annexure P-1) do not
                            take into account the concerns of the Zoroastrian
                            community in regard to the modalities ordained for funeral
                            rites.
2    We have requested Mr Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor
                            General to render assistance.
3    Ms Deepanwita Priyanka, learned counsel, appears on
                            behalf of the State of Gujarat.
4    On the request of the learned Solicitor General, list the
                            Special Leave Petition on 17 January 2022.”


      5        During the course of the ensuing hearings, an effort was made to reach an

               acceptable resolution of the issues raised. There is on the one hand the

               fundamental right founded on
Article 25
of the Constitution. On the other hand
CA 1067/2022
3
there are concerns based on the need to preserve public health during the time

               of the pandemic. The Solicitor General fairly agreed to intervene.
6        An agreed protocol has been placed before the Court which meets both the

               concerns reflected above. The protocol reads thus:
“AGREED PROTOCOL & STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE FOR
                       HANDLING DEAD BODIES OF PARSI ZOROASTRIAN COVID-19
                       VICTIMS - AS AGREED BETWEEN THE PETITIONERS ON THE ONE HAND
                       AND THE UNION OF INDIA – REPRESENTED BY THE LEARNED
                       SOLICITOR GENERAL OF INDIA ON THE OTHER HAND.
Under normal circumstances in the Zoroastrian religion, the
                       management of dead bodies strictly adheres to specific rules that
                       aim in separating the corpse from living persons while ensuring the
                       dignity and respect of the dead as well as for their living relatives.
                       Even during normal times, Zoroastrian ritual tradition already
                       conforms to the basic rule required to be implemented during
                       times of COVID of separating the dead from the living, the family
                       have no physical contact with the dead member. Since for Parsi
                       Zoroastrians, the disposal of the dead in the Tower of Silence
                       (wherever located) is a religiously mandated obligation and duty.
The nature and scale of the corona virus (COVID-19) pandemic,
                       has created challenges, and the Parsi community and their High
                       Priests have in consultation, worked out a standard Procedure
                       which they are willing to undertake to continue keeping in mind
                       the restrictions and regulations imposed by the Government of
                       India on all communities pertaining to those who have died due
                       to a COVID-19 infection during the pandemic.
1A.   Dead bodies of the Parsi Zoroastrians who die of Covid 19
                             will be brought to the funeral parlour in the Tower of Silence
                             complex and will only be handled by the Nassasalars-
                             (professional Corpse bearers who have been professionally
                             employed by the Panchayats). The corpse bearers are and
                             will continue to be fully vaccinated and their temperatures
                             duly recorded before every funeral and carrying out
                             procedures of handling dead bodies as per existing COVID
                             guidelines.
CA 1067/2022
4
1B.   Neither relatives nor friends are permitted nor will be
                     permitted to touch the dead body and it will be ensured
                     that they will always remain beyond 10 feet from the dead
                     body.
2.    The Nassasalars, at all times, while handling the dead body
                     of the Parsi Zoroastrian COVID-19 victim will wear the PPE kit,
                     gloves, face shield and N – 95 mask and the Govt of India
                     regulations pertaining to dead bodies of COVID – 19 victims
                     having been read and explained to them and they will be
                     cautioned to follow the directives of the Govt. of India.
3.    The body of the COVID-19 Parsi victim will be brought by
                     the Nassasalars to the Tower of Silence Complex from
                     mortuary or home in a body bag which will not be opened,
                     but as per existing Guidelines, the face of the deceased will
                     be allowed to be seen from a distance of at least 10 feet
                     by the family only by unzipping the face – covering of the
                     body bag.
4.    The final funeral prayers i.e. the “GehSarna” (or Paidast)
                     ceremony (which is the recitation of the first Gatha handed
                     down by the Prophet Zarathushtra) over the dead body, is
                     and will be by two Parsi Zoroastrian Priests wearing N-95
                     masks and gloves, who will stand at a distance of 10 feet
                     from the dead body.
The final prayers (which last about 1 hour) will be
                     completed and upon its completion, the Nassasalars will
                     carry the body to the Dokhma (Tower of Silence) where no
                     one except the professionally employed corpse bearers
                     can enter.
As per Parsi religious traditions, no relative can touch, or
                     much less kiss the body and every person at the funeral will
                     perform hand hygiene after the funeral ceremony – a
                     distance of at least 10 feet from the body will always be
                     maintained. The individuals who will transport the dead
                     body are the Parsi Nassasalars (the professional pallbearers)
                     and no one else. Normally two Nassasalars will carry the
                     body (in the body bag) to the Tower of Silence (Dokhma
                     No.3) in a bier.
CA 1067/2022
5
5.    Relatives attending the Gehsarna (Paidast) ceremony will
                     wear face masks and follow other guidelines as prescribed
                     by the Government of India and will sit 10 feet away from
                     the dead body and only such number of family members
                     will be permitted to attend the funeral as per the
                     applicable guidelines.
6.    One Dokhma No.3 has been set aside for Covid victims
                     alone and used for performing religious ceremonies for
                     dead bodies of Parsis COVID-19 victims. This Dokhma No. 3
                     will not be used for non-Covid-19 dead bodies.
7.    Only Dokhma No.3 (in the Tower of Silence) will be used for
                     dead bodies of Parsi Covid victims. And non-Covid victims’
                     bodies will be placed in other Dokhmas i.e Dokhma No.1
                     and Dokhma No.2. Since the principal mode of disposal at
                     the Tower of Silence is through strong and powerful rays of
                     the Sun, and hence to deal with the problem of birds of
                     prey, the Petitioner undertakes to install as soon as possible,
                     a metallic bird net over Dokhma-No 3 – which is exclusively
                     reserved for the dead Parsi COVID-19 victims; this will
                     eliminate contact with birds and animals and will avoid any
                     intrusion by vultures. Hence, there will be no exposure of the
                     body to birds etc. once the metallic net gets installed over
                     Dokhma-No 3.
8.    Religious rituals such as reading from religious scripts,
                     sprinkling holy water and any other last rites that does not
                     require touching of the body are allowed.
9.    After each ceremony, the entire funeral area/parlour will
                     be washed, sprayed and disinfected. All PPE suits, masks
                     and face shields will be disposed off and a new set will be
                     used for each COVID-19 victim’s funeral ceremony.
It is requested that a final Order in invitum be passed in the above
               SLP No: 17130/2021 and in Writ Petition No:7585 of 2021 before the
               High Court of Gujarat in the above terms.”
CA 1067/2022
6
7        A request has been jointly made on behalf of the appellants as well as the

               respondents that a final order in invitum be passed both in the appeal and

               consequently, in the writ proceedings which became the subject matter of the

               judgment of the High Court.
8        The dispute has been amicably settled. The Court has been assured that the

               protocol and the Standard Operating Procedure comports with the tenets of

               the Zoroastrian faith, while according with the need expressed by the Union

               government for the maintenance of safety and hygiene in the context of the

               Covid-19 pandemic.
9        We appreciate the fair stand which has been adopted by both the sides in

               ensuring that the issues which have been raised before the Gujarat High Court

               and, in continuation, in the proceedings before this Court have been amicably

               resolved. The dialogic process of judicial review can, as this case reflects,

               provide effective solutions which provide acceptable outcomes which promote

               harmony. The protocol and the Standard Operating Procedure are accepted

               and an order is passed in terms of the statement which has been jointly placed

               on the record of these proceedings.
10       The judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court of Gujarat dated 23 July

               2021 shall stand set aside. The writ petition shall be governed by the agreed

               statement which has been placed on the record in these proceedings.
CA 1067/2022
7
11       The appeal is disposed of in the above terms.
12       Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
….....…...….......………………........J.
                                                          [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                          ….....…...….......………………........J.
                                                          [Surya Kant]

      New Delhi;
February 4, 2022
      CKB