[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Anju Kalsi vs Hdfc Ergo General Insurance Co. Ltd. on 21 February, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Surya Kant
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
CA 1544-45/2022
                                                          1


                                                                                         Reportable


                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          Civil Appeal Nos 1544-1545 of 2022
                                     (Arising out of SLP (C) Nos 32397-32398 of 2017)



                      Anju Kalsi                                                    Appellant


                                                     Versus


                      HDFC Ergo General Insurance                                   Respondents
                      Company Limited and Another



                                                 JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J



                      1   Leave granted.
2   These appeals arise from a judgment of the National Consumer Disputes

                          Redressal Commission1 dated 24 March 2017 in the exercise of its revisional

                          jurisdiction against an order of the State Consumer Disputes Redressal

                          Commission2, Chandigarh.
1 “NCDRC”
                      2 “SCDRC”
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Chetan Kumar
Date: 2022.02.23
12:09:58 IST
Reason:
CA 1544-45/2022
2
3      On 3 September 2013, the appellant’s son obtained the benefit of an

             insurance cover under a policy called the “Cardsure Package Policy”. The

             appellant’s son was an account holder with HDFC Bank Limited and had

             availed of a debit card from the bank. The bank, which is the second

             respondent, obtained an insurance cover on 3 September 2013 from the first

             respondent. The insurance cover was to commence from 25 August 2013

             and was to end on 24 August 2014. Against the payment of premium by the

             bank to the insurer, the insurer provided an insurance cover for card holders

             of the bank. For ‘Platinum’ card holders, the base cover was in the amount of

             Rs 5 lakhs. In addition, the cover would stand increased by five times of

             every rupee spent on purchases through the debit card, extending up to an

             accelerated cover of Rs 5 lakhs, thus making up a total sum insured of Rs 10

             lakhs. The appellant’s son died in a road accident on 30 October 2013. The

             appellant as the mother of the deceased and nominee made a claim under

             the insurance cover. The claim was repudiated by the insurer on 17

             December 2013 on the ground that the deceased had not undertaken a “non-

             ATM transaction” in the period of three months immediately preceding the

             date of the accident.
4      The appellant instituted a consumer complaint before the District Consumer

             Disputes Redressal Forum3, Bhatinda upon the repudiation of the claim under
      3 “District Forum”
CA 1544-45/2022
3
the policy. The complaint was allowed by the District Forum on 16 July 2014

             in the amount of Rs 5 lakhs together with interest at 9% per annum from 1

             February 2014 and compensation and costs quantified at Rs 20,000/-. The

             order on the consumer complaint was challenged both by the appellant and

             by the first respondent. The SCDRC dismissed the appeal for enhancement of

             compensation and allowed the appeal by the insurer. The SCDRC held that

             the deceased had failed to use the debit card with a non-ATM transaction

             during the period of three months immediately prior to the date of the

             accident and hence, the condition precedent for a claim under the insurance

             policy had not been fulfilled. The order of the SCDRC was affirmed by the

             NCDRC by its judgment dated 24 March 2017.
5      We have heard Ms N Annapoorani, counsel appearing on behalf of the

             appellant through the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee and Mr Rajiv

             M Roy, counsel for the insurer.
6      The issue which arises for determination in the present case falls within a

             narrow compass. The SCDRC reversed the award of the claim by the District

             Forum on the ground that a mandatory condition of the insurance policy,

             namely, that there has to be a non-ATM swipe transaction within a stipulated

             period prior to the date of the event had not been fulfilled. The two

             conditions which have a bearing on this issue are respectively, conditions 5

             and 9 of the ‘Special Conditions’ forming a part of the insurance cover. The
CA 1544-45/2022
4
insurance cover was provided by the first respondent to the second

             respondent, but the debit card holders of the bank were beneficiaries of the

             cover of insurance. Special Conditions 5 and 9 of the insurance policy which

             was issued by the first respondent to the second respondent read as follows:
“5.   Non ATM swipe (transaction) is mandatory i.e. on or before
                          6 months from the date of loss for claims eligibility.
9.    For accidental death coverage the following conditions
                          should be fulfilled – Under Platinum card only:
Step I: Base cover – Rs 50,000 per card by doing one POS
                                  transaction in the last three months.
Step II: Accelerated cover up to Rs 5,00,000/- (Total of up
                                   to Rs 10,00,000/-) for over Rs 1 spent on purchase
                                   through the Platinum Debit Card, sum assured
                                   increases by five times the spent amount (subject
                                   to minimum spends of Rs 20,000) in the last 12
                                   months as per the latest bank statement of the
                                   customer.”
7      The genesis of the dispute lies in whether the Special Conditions of the policy

             which was issued by the bank to the insurer were drawn to the notice of the

             account holder. Before the District Forum, the appellant, in her consumer

             complaint made the following averments:
“That the opposite party no.1 and 2 never issued any insurance
                    policy or its terms and condition or any document related to the
                    insurance ever issued to the account holder or complainant till
                    date except the said covering letter in which it is mentioned
                    that Personal Accident insurance Cover upto Rs.10.00 lacs and
                    also mentioned that when the account holder on every Rs.1/-
                    spent on purchased through this card, the same increased the
                    sum insured by 5 times. The opposite parties 'also did not
CA 1544-45/2022
5
disclose any Policy Number to the complainant or account
                     holder till date.”
8      The second respondent who were the bankers of the deceased did not

             appear in the proceedings.
9      A reply to the consumer complaint was filed by the first respondent, who is

             the insurer, in which it was stated that:
“That in reply to para No.4 of the complaint it is submitted
                          that the opposite party No.2 had purchased a insurance
                          policy from the replying opposite party named as Cardsure
                          Package Policy bearing No.2999200570315100000 and
                          the replying opposite party sent the entire terms and
                          conditions along with the policy to the opposite party no.2
                          and it is pertinent to mention here that the said group
                          insurance policy purchased by opposite party no.2 to
                          protect its account holders who were interested to avail
                          the benefits of platinum debit card, gold debit card,
                          women advantage card, world card, business card etc. It is
                          further pertinent lo mention here that the opposite party
                          no.2 at the time of issuing the said card as described
                          above the opposite party no. 2 also provide a debit card
                          usage guide with the said card and this fact is clearly
                          mentioned in the covering letter on which the complainant
                          herself relied upon, there is specifically mentioned i.e.
                          "For Details and Terms and Conditions, Please Refer
                          to the Usage Guide Enclosed" and there is further
                          specifically mentioned that "Conditions Apply". Rest of
                          para is incorrect, hence denied.”
10     The contention of the appellant was that save and except for the covering

             letter which indicated that an insurance cover against personal accident was

             being provided to the account holder, neither the insurer nor the bank had

             ever furnished the insurance policy, its terms and conditions or any
CA 1544-45/2022
6
document related to the insurance cover to the account holder. The

             deceased was a customer of the bank and it was for the bank to establish

             that when it dispatched the debit card to its customer, both the covering

             letter as well as the debit card usage guide had been furnished to the

             deceased. The bank remained away from the proceedings. The insurer could

             not possibly have adduced any evidence in regard to whether the debit card

             usage guide had been actually furnished to the deceased account holder.


      11     The evidence which was tendered by way of an affidavit on behalf of the

             insurer by its Manager (Legal), does not displace the burden which was cast

             on the bank, whose customer the deceased was, of establishing that the

             debit card usage guide containing the requisite terms and conditions had

             actually been furnished to the deceased account holder. The NCDRC upheld

             the decision of the SCDRC by holding that there was no specific averment in

             the complaint that the debit card usage guide was not enclosed to the

             forwarding letter. This finding proceeds on a misreading of the averments in

             the complaint. The NCDRC also held that the forwarding letter referred to the

             usage guide and if the guide had not been furnished, the deceased account

             holder would in the ordinary course of human conduct have written to the

             bank complaining that usage guide had not been made available. The

             specific averment of the appellant in the consumer complaint was that save

             and except for the covering letter, neither the insurance policy nor its terms

             and conditions were furnished to the account holder or the appellant. It was
CA 1544-45/2022
7
also averred that no document relating to the insurance cover was issued to

             the account holder or the appellant by the insurer or the banker.


      12     The insurance cover was governed by a policy between the first and the

             second respondents. The terms of the insurance cover had to be specifically

             communicated to the account holder. The account holder had to be put on

             notice that the insurance cover would become available only after a

             transaction took place of the nature spelt out in the special conditions of the

             insurance policy. Insistence on communication to the account holder is

             necessary because the policy was issued to the bank by the insurer. The

             account holders are beneficiaries of the policy. In the present case, the bank

             did not choose to    defend the proceedings at all. The insurer who also

             belongs to the HDFC group could well have applied for a summons to be

             issued to the bank for production of its records in the course of the evidence

             which would establish as to whether the debit card usage guide had been

             made available to the account holder. In this backdrop, and in the absence of

             such a course of action being adopted, the case of the appellant as set out in

             the   complaint   remained    uncontroverted.    Consequently,      unless   the

             respondents were able to establish on a cogent basis that the special

             conditions of the policy which was issued by the first respondent to the

             second respondent were drawn to the notice of the account holder for whose

             benefit the insurance cover extended, the claim ought not to have been

             rejected.
CA 1544-45/2022
8
13     Mr Rajiv M Roy, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the insurer made an

             attempt to support the findings by urging that the debit card usage guide

             was suppressed by the appellant. We are unable to subscribe to this

             contention since, as a matter of fact, the case of the appellant was that save

             and except for the covering letter no further documentation had been

             furnished to the account holder. Learned counsel for the insurer has

             submitted in the alternate that the deficiency of service, if any, would be on

             the part of the bank and that there was no deficiency on the part of the

             insurer. We are not inclined to go into this aspect of whether or not there was

             deficiency of service on the part of the bank. The deficiency of service on the

             part of the insurer lies in the wrongful repudiation of the claim under the

             policy. The insurer would however be at liberty to work out its remedy

             against the second respondent – bank.
14     For the reasons which we have indicated, we find that the case which was set

             up by the appellant has not been displaced. Hence, the appellant was validly

             entitled to the award of the basic claim in the amount of Rs 5 lakhs together

             with interest as directed by the District Forum. The appellant would not be

             entitled to the claim under the enhanced cover since it was linked to

             purchases made against the debit card.
15     For the above reasons, we allow the appeals and set aside the impugned

             judgment of the NCDRC dated 24 March 2017. The judgment of the District
CA 1544-45/2022
9
Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum, Bhatinda shall accordingly stand

             restored and the appellant would be entitled to compensation in the amount

             of Rs 5 lakhs together with interest from 1 February 2014 at 9% per annum.

             The appellant would also be entitled to compensation and costs quantified at

             Rs 20,000/- as awarded.
16     Payment in terms of the present order shall be made over to the appellant by

             a demand draft drawn in her name within a period of one month from the

             date of the present judgment.
17     Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
….....…...….......………………........J.
                                                   [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                   ..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                   [Surya Kant]


      New Delhi;
February 21, 2022
      CKB