[Cites
4
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Odisha vs M/S Panda Infraproject Limited on 24 February, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO.1083 OF 2022

         State of Odisha & Ors.                                     ..Appellant (S)
                                              VERSUS

         M/s Panda Infraproject Limited                           ..Respondent (S)

                                                With

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO.1084 OF 2022


         State of Odisha & Ors.                                     ..Appellant (S)
                                              VERSUS

         M/s Panda Infra Projects (India) Pvt. Ltd.               ..Respondent (S)


                                          JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 23.03.2021 passed by the High

                         Court of Orissa at Cuttack in W.P. (C) No.26408 of 2017,

                         by which the High Court has allowed the said writ petition
Signature Not Verified
and has quashed and set aside the order passed by the
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2022.02.24
16:34:58 IST
Reason:
State, banning the respondent herein from participating or
1
bidding for any work to be undertaken by Government of

     Odisha and transacting any business with Government of

     Odisha, either directly in the name of propriety bidder or

     indirectly under any different name or title, the State of

     Odisha has preferred the present C.A. No.1083 of 2022.
2.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the subsequent

     consequential order passed by the High Court vide order

     dated 04.06.2021 in W.P. (C) No.16723 of 2021 by which

     the High Court, in consequence of the earlier order dated

     23.03.2021 passed in W.P. (C) No.26408 of 2017, directed

     the State of Odisha to remove the name of the contractor –

     respondent herein from the list of blacklisted contractors,

     the State of Odisha has preferred the present C.A. No.1084

     of 2022.
3.   That the respondent – contractor was awarded a contract

     for construction of a flyover over the railway level crossing

     at Bomikhal Junction in Bhubaneswar. That in pursuance

     of   the   said   contract   the   respondent   –   contractor

     constructed the said flyover. In the year 2017, a ten meter

     slab of the flyover collapsed during concreting of the
2
railway over bridge at the level crossing, which resulted in

loss of life and property. One person died and eleven

others were injured. A high­level inquiry was conducted by

the Chief Engineer (Design) and Chief Engineer (DPI and

Roads). The committee submitted a comprehensive report

after a detailed inquiry and found the contractor –

respondent herein guilty. It was found that the contractor

did not submit the formwork design and adopted his own

arrangement leading to collapse of such a huge structure

during construction. It was also found that the contractor

had not ensured adequate safety measures during the

period of construction; otherwise such an unfortunate fatal

accident could have been avoided. It was found that the

quality assurance had not been maintained as stipulated

in the codes and manuals and as per the agreement. It

was found that there were a lot many deficiencies in

workmanship that could affect the quality of work, as

found in other formwork assemblies. Therefore, the

committee found the contractor responsible for such a

serious accident.
3
3.1   On the basis of such report the State Government took the

      matter   very   seriously   and   directed   that   immediate

      necessary action be taken for blacklisting the contractor

      following the procedure as per the Orissa Public Works

      Department (OPWD) Code. Thereafter, a show cause notice

      was issued to the contractor and the contractor was asked

      to show cause as to why it be not blacklisted for

      intentionally   violating   the   relevant   clauses   of   the

      Agreement No.15­P1/2011­12. The respondent filed a

      detailed reply. That on considering the allegations in the

      said show cause notice and reply thereto, the Chief

      Engineer (DPI & Roads) Odisha issued an order dated

      12.12.2017, whereby the respondent – contractor was

      blacklisted with immediate effect, for intentional violation

      of condition of the contract leading to injuries and loss of

      life. The respondent – contractor was banned from

      participating or bidding for any work to be undertaken by

      the Government of Odisha and the contractor was also

      banned from transacting business with Government of

      Odisha, either directly or indirectly.
4
3.2   Aggrieved by the order of blacklisting dated 12.12.2017,

      the contractor filed Writ Petition (C) No.26408 of 2017

      seeking quashing of the order of blacklisting and by the

      impugned judgment and order, the High Court has set

      aside the order of blacklisting mainly on the ground that

      the order of blacklisting is in violation of principles of

      natural justice. The impugned judgment and order passed

      by the High Court quashing and setting aside the order of

      blacklisting is the subject matter of Civil Appeal No.1083

      of 2022.
3.3   That thereafter the contractor filed another Writ Petition

      (C) No.16723 of 2021, making a grievance that despite the

      order of blacklisting set aside by the High Court in Writ

      Petition (C) No.26408 of 2017, the contractor’s name

      continues to be shown as the blacklisted in the official

      portal of the Government of Odisha. By the order dated

      04.06.2021, the High Court has disposed of the said writ

      petition by directing the State to pass appropriate orders to

      stop showing on the official portal of the Government of

      Odisha the name of the contractor – respondent herein as
5
a blacklisted company to enable the contractor to seek

      renewal of its licence as well participate in future tenders.

      The order dated 04.06.2021 passed by the High Court in

      Writ Petition (C) No.16723 of 2021 is the subject matter of

      Civil Appeal No.1084 of 2022.
4.    Shri Ashok Kumar Parija, learned Advocate General has

      appeared on behalf of the State of Odisha and Shri Sibo

      Sankar Misra, learned Advocate has appeared on behalf of

      the respondent – contractor.
5.    Shri Ashok Kumar Parija, learned Advocate General

      appearing on behalf of the State of Odisha has vehemently

      submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case,

      the High Court has materially erred in quashing and

      setting aside the order passed by the State of Odisha

      blacklisting the respondent – contractor.



5.1   It is contended that the High Court has erred in holding

      that the order of blacklisting was in violation of the

      principles of natural justice.
6
5.2   It is submitted that as such before blacklisting the

      respondent – contractor a show cause notice was issued

      and served upon the respondent. The procedure as

      required as far as Appendix­XXXIV of OPWD Code was

      followed        and   thereafter,   after   considering   the   reply

      submitted by the contractor, the order of blacklisting was

      passed. It is submitted that therefore, the High Court has

      erred in holding that the order of blacklisting was in

      breach of principles of natural justice.



5.3   It is further submitted by Shri Parija, learned Advocate

      General appearing on behalf of the State that the High

      Court has also erred in concluding that the blacklisting

      order was pre­decided as the same was passed on the

      basis of the recommendations made in the inquiry report.

      It is urged that in fact the findings recorded by the inquiry

      committee can be said to be the basis for initiating the

      action     of    blacklisting   against     the   contractor.   It   is

      submitted that therefore, the findings recorded by the

      inquiry committee can be said to be a prima facie opinion

      while initiating the proceedings for blacklisting. It is
7
submitted that merely because show cause notice was

      issued   and   the   blacklisting   order   was   passed   on

      consideration of the inquiry report, that by itself it cannot

      be said that the blacklisting order was pre­decided.



5.4   It is further submitted by Shri Parija, learned Advocate

      General, appearing on behalf of the State that even

      otherwise, while passing the impugned judgment and

      order quashing and setting aside the blacklisting order,

      the High Court has not at all considered the seriousness of

      the allegations against the contractor. It is submitted that

      it was a case of grave lapse and omission and commission

      on the part of the contractor; a serious incident occurred

      in which one person died and eleven others were injured. It

      is submitted that therefore, the High Court ought not to

      have interfered with the order passed by the State

      Government blacklisting the respondent – contractor
6.    The present appeals are vehemently opposed by Shri Sibo

      Sankar Misra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      respondent – contractor.
8
6.1   It is submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the

      case the High Court has rightly observed and held that the

      order of blacklisting was pre­determined and the same was

      in breach of principles of natural justice.


6.2   It is submitted that before a show cause notice was issued

      to the respondent – contractor, a communication/letter

      dated 10.10.2017 was written by the Under Secretary in

      the Works Department to the Chief Engineer which shows

      that the Government had already ordered blacklisting of

      the contractor and the Engineer­in­Chief was directed to

      take immediate action for blacklisting the contractor. It is

      submitted that as rightly observed that the action of

      blacklisting the contractor was pre­determined.        It is

      submitted that it is rightly observed by the High Court that

      giving a show cause notice was an empty formality which

      was not going to change the decision already taken to

      blacklist the contractor.
9
6.3   It is further submitted that even in the show cause notice

      there was no reference to the letter dated 10.10.2017

      and/or to the report of the committee.
6.4   It is further submitted that even after the show cause

      notice containing serious allegations of violations by the

      contractor, the contractor was asked to execute the

      balance work, on a revised design, which the contractor –

      respondent admittedly completed to the satisfaction of the

      Department by 31.03.2018. It is submitted that therefore,

      the   High    Court   has   rightly   quashed    the   order   of

      blacklisting the respondent – contractor.

6.5   In the alternative, it is contended by learned counsel

      appearing on behalf of the respondent – contractor that in

      the facts and circumstances of the case, the order of

      blacklisting the respondent – contractor permanently can

      be said to be too harsh and/or disproportionate to the

      charge/misconduct      proved    against   the   respondent    –

      contractor.
10
6.6   It is urged that it was the first offence by the respondent –

      contractor. That after the impugned order passed by the

      Government,     the    Government         of     Odisha,    Works

      Department    passed     an     office    memorandum         dated

      26.11.2021, which provides that the blacklisting period

      per offence shall be limited to three years subject to an

      overall maximum cumulative period of ten years for

      multiple offences. It is submitted that the respondent has

      completed a period of 4 ½ years of its blacklisting. It is

      submitted    that   therefore    the     order    of   blacklisting

      respondent – contractor permanently also deserves to be

      quashed and set aside.
6.7   Making the above submissions and relying on the

      decisions of this Court in the cases of
Erusian Equipment

      & Chemicals Ltd. Vs. State of West Bengal and Anr.
(1975) 1 SCC 70, Kulja Industries Limited Vs. Chief

      General Manager, Western Telecom Project Bharat

      Sanchar Nigam Limited and Ors. (2014) 14 SCC 731

      and M/s.
Daffodills Pharmaceuticals Ltd. & Anr. Vs.

      State of U.P. & Anr.
2019 (17) Scale 758, it is prayed to
11
dismiss the present appeals and/or in the alternative to

      reduce the period of blacklisting.
7.    We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      respective parties at length.
8.    By the impugned judgment and order, the High Court has

      set aside the order passed by the Government of Odisha

      blacklisting the respondent contractor mainly on the

      ground that the same was pre­determined and in breach of

      principles of natural justice.
8.1   However, it is required to be noted that the action of

      blacklisting followed a high­level inquiry conducted by two

      members committee, Chief Engineer (Designs) and Chief

      Engineer (DPI & Roads). After studying the contract

      provisions and drawings, as also inquiry on the spot and

      after a detailed consideration of the general behaviour and

      collapse of the formwork, a comprehensive report was

      submitted and the following observations were made in

      respect of the respondent – contractor: ­

          “(b)   In respect of the Contractor
12
(i)      The Contractor has not submitted the
                        formwork design and has adopted his own
                        arrangement leading to such occurrence of
                        collapse of such huge structure during
                        construction. Design of the formwork is
                        the responsibility of the Contractor and
                        the Contractor shall also be entirely
                        responsible for adequacy and safety of
                        formwork, notwithstanding any approval
                        or review of drawing and design by the
                        Engineer.
(ii)     The Contractor has not ensured adequate
                        safety measures during construction
                        activities with which such unfortunate
                        fatal accident could have been avoided,
                        even in case of failure.
(iii)    Quality  assurance     has    not    been
                        emphasized as stipulated in the codes and
                        manuals and as per the Agreement.
(iv)     There are lot many deficiencies in
                        workmanship that may affect the quality
                        of work, as found in other formwork
                        assemblies."
8.2   Thereafter, the State Government studied the report

      submitted        by   a   high­level   committee     and      having

      considered the case of lapse on the part of the contractor,

      a serious incident had taken place of collapse of a ten

      meter slab and in the said incident, one person died and

      eleven others were injured. Hence, a decision was taken to

      blacklist the contractor after following the proceedings as

      per the OPWD Code. Thereafter, a show cause notice was
13
issued   upon   the    respondent    –     contractor   and    the

respondent – contractor was called upon to show cause as

to why he be not blacklisted. The said show cause notice

was issued in terms of the provisions and the procedures

in the OPWD Code. The respondent – contractor replied to

the same. After considering the allegations in the show

cause notice and the reply submitted by the contractor,

thereafter the Government passed an order of blacklisting.

Merely because the show cause notice was issued after the

inquiry committee report was considered and thereafter

the State Government took the decision to initiate

proceedings for blacklisting, that by itself it cannot be said

that the order of blacklisting was pre­determined as

observed by the High Court. The communication dated

10.10.2017 by the State Government to the Chief Engineer

can be said to be a proposed decision to initiate the

proceedings for blacklisting. In the communication dated

10.10.2017, it has been specifically mentioned that the

action   be   taken   for   blacklisting   after   following   the

procedure as per the OPWD Code. Before any show cause

notice is issued for any action when a tentative decision is
14
taken, it cannot be said that subsequent decision followed

      by a show cause notice and the proceedings as per the

      OPWD Code can be said to be pre­determined. Before

      initiation of any proceedings for blacklisting, there can be

      a tentative decision on the basis of the material available

      forming a tentative/prima facie opinion that action is

      required. In the instant case a committee submitted a

      detailed report which was the basis for issuance of the

      show cause notice to the respondent. The action initiated

      against the respondent was not in a vacuum but after

      considering the committee’s report and after following the

      due procedure as required. Therefore, the High Court has

      erred in holding that the blacklisting order was pre­

      determined.
8.3   So far as the findings recorded by the High Court that the

      blacklisting order was in breach of principles of natural

      justice is concerned, it is to be noted that the blacklisting

      order was passed after issuing a show cause notice to

      which the contractor – respondent was called upon to reply

      and show cause as to why he be not blacklisted. A detailed
15
show cause notice was issued with specific allegations to

      which the respondent – contractor submitted a detailed

      reply. After considering the allegations in the show cause

      notice, considering the reply and also by considering the

      material available on record the order of blacklisting was

      passed. We fail to appreciate, how in such a case the

      blacklisting order can be said to be in breach of principles

      of natural justice.
8.4   In the case of Grosons Pharmaceuticals (P) Ltd. & Anr.
v. State of U.P., (2001) 8 SCC 604, the order of

      blacklisting was challenged by the contractor on the

      ground that the contractor was not supplied with all the

      materials on the basis of which charges against him were

      based. It was the case on behalf of the contractor that non­

      supply of such material resulted in violation of principles

      of natural justice. To that, this Court observed that it was

      sufficient requirement of law that an opportunity of show

      cause was given to the appellant before it was blacklisted.

      This Court observed that the contractor was given an

      opportunity to show cause and it did reply to the show­
16
cause   to   the   State   Government   and   therefore   the

      procedure adopted by the Government while blacklisting

      the contractor was in conformity with the principles of

      natural justice.
8.5   In the present case as observed hereinabove, show cause

      notice was issued upon the contractor by which the

      contractor was called upon to show cause why he be not

      blacklisted; the show cause notice was replied to by the

      contractor and thereafter, after considering the material

      on record and the reply submitted by the contractor and

      having found the serious lapses which led to a serious

      incident in which one person died and eleven others were

      injured, the State Government took a conscious decision to

      blacklist the contractor. Therefore, it cannot be said the

      order blacklisting the contractor was in violation of

      principles of natural justice.
8.6   As observed by this Court in the case of
Gorkha Security

      Services v. Govt. (NCT of Delhi) & Ors.
, (2014) 9 SCC

      105, the fundamental purpose behind the serving of a
17
show­cause notice is to make the noticee understand the

      precise case set up against him which he has to meet. This

      would require the statement of imputations detailing out

      the alleged breaches and defaults he has committed, so

      that he gets an opportunity to rebut the same. Another

      requirement is the nature of action which is proposed to be

      taken for such a breach.
8.7   As per the law
laid down by
this Court in a catena of

      decisions “debarment” is recognised and often used as an

      effective    method         for    disciplining      deviant

      suppliers/contractors who may have committed acts of

      omission and commission. It is for the State or appropriate

      authority to pass an order of blacklisting/debarment in the

      facts and circumstances of the case. Therefore, the High

      Court has erred and has exceeded its jurisdiction in

      exercise of powers under
Article 226
of the Constitution of

      India by quashing and setting aside the blacklisting order,

      that too, without adverting to the serious allegations and

      the act of omission and commission on the part of the

      contractor which led to a serious incident of collapse of ten
18
meter slab while concrete work of the deck was going on

      and due to which one person died and eleven others were

      injured.    It   was   specifically   found   that   the    safety

      arrangements were lacking severely in the construction

      work zone. It was also found that quality assurance was

      not emphasised as stipulated in the codes and manuals

      and as per the Agreement. Therefore, the High Court ought

      to have considered the seriousness of the incident in which

      due to omission and commission on the part of the

      contractor in constructing the flyover one person died and

      eleven others were injured.
9.    The next question which is posed for consideration of this

      Court is, whether, in the facts and circumstances of the

      case       the    contractor      was     required     to      be

      debarred/blacklisted permanently?
9.1   In the case of Kulja Industries Limited (supra), this

      Court has observed that “debarment” is never permanent

      and the period of debarment would invariably depend

      upon the nature of the offence committed by the erring

      contractor.
19
In the said decision this Court emphasised on

prescribing guidelines by determining the period for which

the blacklisting should be effective. It is observed and held

by this Court that while determining the period for which

the blacklisting should be effective, for the sake of

objectivity and transparency it is required to formulate

broad guidelines to be followed. It is further observed that

different periods of debarment depending upon the gravity

of the offences, violations and breaches may be prescribed

by such guidelines. In the present case, after the order of

blacklisting was passed, the State Government has

formulated guidelines by O.M. dated 26.11.2021 which

provides as under:­

   “The blacklisting period per offence shall be limited to 03
   (Three) years subject to an overall maximum cumulative
   period of 10 (Ten) years for multiple offences”


   However, we may observe that we do not approve of

the guidelines issued by the State Government by O.M.

dated 26.11.2021. Duration of blacklisting cannot be

solely per offence. Seriousness of the lapse and the

incident and/or gravity of commission and omission on
20
the part of the contractor which led to the incident

should be the relevant considerations. In a given case, it

may happen that the commission and omission is very

grave and because of the serious lapse and/or negligence,

a major incident would have taken place. In such a case,

it may be the contractor’s first offence, in such a case,

the period/duration of the blacklisting/banning can be

more than three years. However, as the said guidelines

are not under challenge, we rest the matter there and

leave it to the State Government to suitably amend

and/or modify the said office memorandum. However,

what we have observed above can be a guide while

determining the period of debarment/blacklisting.


  In the instant case, it might be true that the offence

was the first offence committed by the contractor.

However, considering the seriousness of the matter that

due to the omission and commission on the part of the

contractor a serious incident had occurred as there was a

collapse of a ten meter slab while constructing a flyover

in which one person died and eleven others injured, as
21
such the contractor does not deserve any leniency.
However, to debar him permanently can be said to be too

      harsh a punishment. But considering the subsequent

      O.M. dated 26.11.2021 reproduced hereinabove (to which

      as such we do not agree as observed hereinabove), we are

      of the opinion that if the blacklisting is restricted to five

      years, it may be in the fitness of things.
10.   In view of the above discussion and for the reasons stated

      above, present appeal, i.e., C. A. No. 1083 of 2022 is

      allowed in part. The impugned judgment and order

      passed by the High Court quashing and setting aside the

      order dated 12.12.2017 blacklisting the respondent

      herein – contractor is hereby quashed and set aside.

      However, the period of blacklisting is ordered to be

      restricted to five years from the date of passing of the

      order of blacklisting. Civil Appeal No.1083 of 2022 is

      allowed to the aforesaid extent.
22
In view of the order passed in Civil Appeal No.1083 of

       2022, Civil Appeal No.1084 of 2022 stands dismissed. In

       the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no

       order as to costs.
…………………………………J.
                                    (M. R. SHAH)



                                    …………………………………J.
                                    (B.V. NAGARATHNA)
New Delhi,
February 24, 2022.
23