[Cites
1
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Rajbir vs Suraj Bhan on 28 February, 2022
Author:
K. M. Joseph
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
,
K.M. Joseph
REPORTABLE


                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1700 OF 2022
                                 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 19687 of 2019)


     RAJBIR                                                                    APPELLANT (S)


                                                     VERSUS


     SURAJ BHAN & ANR.                                                         RESPONDENT(S)



                                                  J U D G M E N T
K. M. JOSEPH, J.
Leave granted.
1.                  While procedure is said to be the handmaiden of justice and

     substantial                 justice   must   prevail   and   the    former      may   take   the

     backseat, failure to follow the procedure laid down by law can result

     in grave miscarriage of justice to the judgment debtor and delay in

     the decree holder realising the fruits of the decree, all of which

     will be evident from facts of this case as we narrate them.
2.                  The appellant along with his brother agreed to sell certain

     property which we shall refer to, to the respondents-Suraj Bhan and

     Balraj on 28.01.2006.                  Thereupon, the respondents instituted a suit
Signature Not Verified
for              specific    performance.      It   was   inter    alia   the    case   of   the
Digitally signed by
Nidhi Ahuja
Date: 2022.03.08
17:46:29 IST
Reason:
respondents that the brother of the appellant (Raj Kumar) had already
1
CA No. 1700/ 2022 (@ SLP (C) No. 19687/ 2019)

conveyed his part of the property in conformity with the agreement.

The appellant, it would appear, had sold the property to a person

who was arrayed as second defendant in the suit.    The suit finally

came to be decreed. In other words, a decree for specific performance

was passed.   The terms of the decree may be noticed as follows:
“35. In view of the findings recorded under above
        mentioned issues, suit of plaintiffs succeed and is
        hereby decreed with cost. A decree of declaration to
        the effect that agreement to sell Ex.D1 and sale deed
        Ex.D3 are illegal, null and void paper transaction and
        not finding on the rights of plaintiffs qua the suit
        land.    A decree of possession by way of specific
        performance in the respective share of plaintiffs is
        hereby passed in favour of plaintiffs and against the
        defendants. The defendant no. 1 shall get the sale deed
        executed and registered in favour of plaintiffs in view
        of terms and plaintiffs, however, shall deposit the
        remaining part of sale consideration and within one
        month from the date of this judgment. In case of failure
        to get execute and register the sale deed by defendant
        no. 1, the plaintiffs will be at liberty to take the
        assistance of court in this regard.”


           Decree in terms thereto is as follows:
“Suit property: Land comprising in Khewat no. 346 Rect
        No. & Killa numbers 45 18.10.20/1.2364/3 4,62.78 14 &
        numbran 882.824 measuring 72 kanal 7 Marlas to the
        extent of 1/3 shares which comms out 24 kanal 2 Marlas
        situated in the revenue estate of village salahawas
        Tehsil & District Jhajjar.
This suit coming on this 4 day of January 2013
        for for final disposal before me(Fkhruddin, Civil Judge
        (Sr. Divn. Jhajar) in the presence of Shri M.S Ahlawat
        counsel for the plaintiff Sh. Mahesh Kumar counsel for
        defendant no. 1. Sh. R.P. Suhag counsel for defendant
        no.2.
Suit presented on: 16.1.2007

        It is ordered that suit of plaintiff succeed and is
        hereby decreed with costs. A decree of declaration to
        the effect that agreement to sell Ex D1 and sale deed
        Ex.D3 are illegal, null and void, paper transaction and
        no binding on the rights of plaintiffs qua the suit
2
CA No. 1700/ 2022 (@ SLP (C) No. 19687/ 2019)

         land.    A decree of possession by way of specific
         performance in the respective share of plaintiffs is
         hereby passed in favour of plaintiffs and against the
         defendants.   The defendants no. 1 shall get the sale
         deed executed and registered in favour of plaintiffs in
         view of terms and conditions of agreement to sell Ex
         P2. The plaintiffs however, shall deposit the remaining
         part of sale consideration and within one month from
         the date of this judgment. In case of failure to get
         execute and register the sale deed by defendant no. 1,
         the plaintiffs will be at liberty to take the assistance
         of court in this regard.”
3.    The appellant was unsuccessful in challenging the aforesaid

decree both in first appeal and, what is more, in the second appeal

before the High Court.      An attempt made before this Court culminated

in the rejection of the special leave petition filed by the appellant.
The respondents applied for execution.               The appellant filed his

objections.    They are as follows:
“The judgment debtor No. 1/ Objecting party preferred
         an appeal before the Hon’ble High Court of Punjab &
         Haryana against the judgment and decree under execution
         vide RSA No. 2187/2013 which was dismissed by the
         Hon’ble High Court of Punjab & Haryana vide judgment
         and order dated 16.05.2018.     Upon which the judgment
         debtor No. 1 moved a petition for special leave to appeal
         before the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India bearing No.
         23053/2018 but the same was dismissed vide order dated
         31.08.2018 and the judgment debtor No. 1 has no
         intention to file a review against the same.
The Judgment debtor No. 1 submits the following
         objections against the execution of the judgment and
         decree dated 04.01.2013:
1.     That the decree dated 04.01.2013 cannot be
         executed because of the own act and conduct of the decree
         holders.   In the decree dated 04.01.2013 the Hon’ble
         Civil Judge (Sr. Div.), Sh. Fakhruddin has clearly
         mentioned that the decree holders need to deposit the
         remaining sale consideration within one month from the
         dated of passing of the judgment and decree dated
3
CA No. 1700/ 2022 (@ SLP (C) No. 19687/ 2019)

         04.01.2013.    Relevant portion         of    the    decree   dated
         04.01.2013 is reproduced below:
“The defendant No. 1 shall get the sale deed
              executed and registered in favour of the
              plaintiffs in view of the terms and conditions of
              the agreement to sell Ex-P2.       The plaintiff
              however, shall deposit the remaining part of sale
              consideration within one month from the date of
              this judgment.”

                As per the terms and conditions of the agreement
         to sell Ex-P2 the total sale consideration for land
         measuring 42 Kanal and 11 Marla @ of Rs.12,25,000/- per
         acre   amounts   to   Rs.65,15,469/-   out   of   which
         Rs.2,50,000/- were paid as earnest money as such the
         remaining sale consideration amounts to Rs.62,65,469/-
         whereas the decree holders/plaintiffs allegedly have
         only deposited an amount of Rs.34,41,100/- which is
         deficient and there is no provision in the decree for
         later submission of the balance sale consideration or
         part payments of the same.
Prayer: It is therefore most respectfully prayed that
         in the present circumstances the application of the
         Decree Holders may kindly be dismissed with cost.
         Any other order which this Hon’ble court may deem fit
         and proper in the facts and circumstances of the present
         may also be passed in favour of the objecting
         respondent.”
4.    The objections of the appellant were rejected and dismissed with

exemplary    cost   of   Rs.3,000/-,   by   order     dated   30.05.2019.      The

respondents had produced a draft sale deed. Based on the same, we

notice that a further order dated 30.05.2019 came to be passed.                The

aforesaid order dated 30.05.2019 came to be challenged before the

High Court. By the impugned order, the High Court dismissed the

revision petition filed by the appellant. We may notice the following

part of the impugned judgment:
4
CA No. 1700/ 2022 (@ SLP (C) No. 19687/ 2019)

         “……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
         …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..


         It is evident from the decree that the suit property as
         mentioned was 24 Kanals 2 Marlas. Similar observations
         was also made in the RSA No. 2187 of 2013.       The SLP
         preferred by petitioner/JD No. 1 was also dismissed.
         There is nothing to show that the decree was qua 42
         Kanals 11 Marlas and not 24 Kanals 2 Marlas.
Learned counsel for the petitioner yet again
         insisted that the draft sale deed was not served upon
         him, which is a mandatory requirement. However, no such
         argument was raised by the JD/objector qua the same.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further
         submitted that an application was filed by the decree
         holder for appointment of Local Commissioner for
         execution of the sale deed in compliance of the impugned
         judgment and decree dated 04.01.2013 and it was allowed
         on the same day, whereas, it is mandatory to supply the
         copy of draft sale deed in compliance of Order 21 Rule
         34(2) of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908.
However, a perusal of the order dated 30.05.2019
         (Annexure P-4) passed by the Executing Court shows that
         a direction was issued to execute the sale deed in favour
         of the decree holder after getting the draft sale deed
         approved from the Court. Thus, the stage to hand over
         the draft sale deed had not arrived and the petitioner
         could have very well moved an application before the
         Court concerned to supply him the draft sale deed, which
         was never done.”
5.    We have heard Mr. Tarun Gupta, learned counsel for the appellant,

and Ms. Neelam Singh, learned counsel for the respondents-decree

holders.
6.    Learned counsel for the appellant would point out that this case

involves a clear contravention of
Order XXI Rule 34 of the Code of

Civil Procedure
, 1908 (
CPC
).        He would point out that the Court was

duty bound upon the draft sale deed being produced before it by the

decree holder, to make it over to the judgment debtor and to consider

the objections of the judgment debtor, and thereafter follow the
5
CA No. 1700/ 2022 (@ SLP (C) No. 19687/ 2019)

procedure therein, and only thereupon, a sale deed as such could be

executed.   It is a salutary provision in law and it had been observed

in its breach and it would cause miscarriage of justice.            He points

out that the respondents have not complied with the decree.               It

appears to be the case of the appellant inter alia that what is

involved under the agreement to sale was about 66 Kanals.            He would

further point out that what transpired in the court as a result of

the court ignoring the mandatory provisions of Order XXI Rule 34 may

be noticed.   He points out that on the basis of the draft sale deed

which was produced, without giving an opportunity to the appellant

to file his objections, a commissioner was appointed who immediately

proceeded to execute the sale deed itself.             He further emphasised

that what actually happened was that the sale deed has been executed,

which is again in departure from the terms of the decree.           The sale

deed takes in a different survey number.            In this regard, he points

out that the decree is relatable to Khewat 346.            The agreement also

relates to Khewat 346.       Thus, the property which was agreed to be

sold and which is the subject matter of adjudication and decree, was

Khewat 346, whereas the sale deed, he points out is relatable to

Khewat 448.   In this regard, he would submit that the decree schedule

property is part of a larger extent of the property and that the sale

deed relates to property abutting the road.           The result of the court

not giving an opportunity to the judgment debtor as is required under

Order XXI Rule 34 is that the execution court has countenanced the

situation which is inconsistent with the terms of the decree.
6
CA No. 1700/ 2022 (@ SLP (C) No. 19687/ 2019)
7.     Per    contra,   Ms.    Neelam     Singh,     learned    counsel       for   the

respondents, would point out that what has been agreed to be sold

and what is further the subject matter of the decree was only 24

Kanals and 2 Marlas; it was part of 48 Kanals and 4 Marlas.                         The

appellant and his brother were the persons who had right over the

same.    The appellant’s brother has already conveyed title and he has

no right over the same.             The appellant, by being called upon to

execute the sale deed in respect of 24 Kanals and 2 Marlas, would

not be prejudiced in any manner.              She would point out that the

respondents had produced the draft sale deed and it may have been

the duty of the court to act in terms of Order XXI Rule 34.                         She

further drew our attention to the proceeding at page 89 of the SLP

paperbook (Annexure R1) to point out that the case was pending

consideration before the court and it would have proceeded with the

matter but for the stay granted by this Court.
FINDINGS
8.     As far as the case relating to the exact extent which was the

subject matter of adjudication is concerned, we do not think that it

will be open to the appellant to revisit the matter by pointing out

that    the   respondents     had   not   complied    with     the   decree    in   not

depositing the consideration as provided therein.                An attempt to fix

the extent which the appellant is duty bound to convey by the decree

in excess of 24 Kanals and 2 Marlas cannot be countenanced. We would,

therefore, hold that the property which is the subject matter of the

decree is 24 Kanals and 2 Marlas.                  The said property would be
7
CA No. 1700/ 2022 (@ SLP (C) No. 19687/ 2019)

comprised in Khewat No. 346 and it is a part of larger extent of 48

canals and 4 Marlas which, in turn, undoubtedly, is part of larger

extent of 72 Kanals and 7 Marlas as referred to in the agreement.

This is on the basis of the terms of the decree.     It is, thereafter,

that the respondents-decree holders filed execution proceedings.
9.    Order XXI Rule 34 reads as follows:
“34. Decree for execution of document, or endorsement of
         negotiable instrument.-(1) Where a decree is for the
         execution of a document or for the endorsement for a
         negotiable instrument and the judgment-debtor neglects
         or refuses to obey the decree, the decree-holder may
         prepare a draft of the document or endorsement in
         accordance with the terms of the decree and deliver the
         same to the Court.
(2) The Court shall thereupon cause the draft to be
         served on the judgment-debtor together with a notice
         requiring his objections (if any) to be made within such
         time as the Court fixes in this behalf.
(3) Where the judgment-debtor object tot he draft, his
         objections shall be stated in writing within such time,
         and the court shall make such order approving or altering
         the draft, as it thinks fit.
(4) The decree-holder shall deliver to the Court a copy
         of the draft with such alterations (if any) as the Court
         may have directed upon the proper stamp-paper if a stamp
         is required by the law for the time being in force; and
         the Judge or such officer as may be appointed in this
         behalf shall execute the document so delivered.

         (5) The execution of a document or the endorsement of a
         negotiable instrument under this rule may be in the
         following form, namely-
“C.D., Judge of the Court of
              (or as the case may be), for A.B. in suit by E.F.
              against A.B.”
              and shall have the same effect as the execution of
              the document or the endorsement of the negotiable
              instrument by the party ordered to execute or
              endorse the same.
8
CA No. 1700/ 2022 (@ SLP (C) No. 19687/ 2019)

          (6) (a) Where the registration of the document is
          required under any law for the time being in force, the
          Court, or such officer of the court as may be authorised
          in this behalf by the Court, shall cause the document
          to be registered in accordance with such law.
(b) Where the registration of the document is not so
          required, but the decree-holder desires it to be
          registered, the Court may make such order as it thinks
          fit.
(c) Where the Court makes any order for the registration
          of any document, it may make such order as it thinks fit
          as to the expenses of registration.”
10.    The present is indeed a case where the decree in question

provides for the execution of the document.            The document is the

document of sale as contemplated under the decree.         Therefore, Order

XXI Rule 34 is clearly attracted.              It contemplates that if the

judgment debtor neglects or refuses to obey the decree, the decree-

holder is to prepare a draft of the document.            In this case, the

draft of the document is the draft sale deed.         The draft of the sale

deed must further be in accordance with the terms of the decree.         It

is to be delivered to the court.         Thereupon, it is not required that

the decree holder must directly deliver it to the judgment debtor.

The procedure, therefore, is that the decree holder must make it

available to the Court.       Under Order XXI Rule 34, it becomes the duty

of the court to thereupon cause the draft to be served upon the

judgment debtor.      There must be a notice inviting objections and the

court may fix a time within which objections are to be filed.           The

judgment debtor may or may not object. Order XXI Rule 34 sub-rule

(3) contemplates a situation where the judgment debtor objects. This
9
CA No. 1700/ 2022 (@ SLP (C) No. 19687/ 2019)

is to be contained in writing within the time provided.                    The court

is duty bound to make an order approving or altering the draft as it

thinks fit.     This is of considerable importance having regard to what

may follow subsequently on the strength of the decree.                 It is also

important from the point of view of the role of the executing court

which is to act in conformity with the decree.
11.    It is well settled that the execution court cannot go beyond

the decree.      The decree must be executed as it is.            Though, it is

indeed open to the executing court to construe the decree; it cannot

go beyond the decree.        Therefore, when objections are filed pointing

out in a given case that the proposed draft of the sale deed is not

in conformity with the decree, it becomes the duty of the executing

court to apply its mind and to make alterations in the draft, if

needed,    to   make   it   in   conformity   with    the   decree.   It    will   be

thereafter that the decree holder is to deliver it to the court with

the alterations if any made by the court, on proper stamp paper, if

required and the execution of the document is effected by the court

or the officer appointed.         There are other formalities contemplated

in regard to registration, all of which take place only after the

procedure which is contemplated in Order XXI Rule 34 sub-rule (1) to

(4) is followed.
12.    In the facts of this case, we may notice the order which is

impugned by the appellant before the High Court.              We notice from the

order that the proposed sale deed is seen taken on file.               Thereafter

the court refers to the application filed for appointment of a local
10
CA No. 1700/ 2022 (@ SLP (C) No. 19687/ 2019)

commissioner for the execution of the sale deed.                    The court refers

to the decree bearing the date 04.01.2013.                     Thereafter, the court

says that in the light of the present facts and circumstances the

present application was allowed.             The Civil Nazar of the Court was

appointed as local commissioner who was directed to carry out the

formalities for execution of the sale deed in accordance with the

terms and conditions of the agreement after getting the approved

draft sale deed from the court and report to this effect was to be

submitted in the court well before 06.07.2019.                   This order is dated

30.05.2019.        The sale deed came to be executed on 11.06.2019.                Thus,

this is a case where the court did not invite objections of the

appellant     to    the   draft     sale   deed   but    the    application       of   the

respondents for appointment of the commissioner to execute the sale

deed is allowed, no doubt, taking note of the order of the same date,

rejecting the objections of the appellant to the execution of the

decree.
13.    We must notice here that the objections on behalf of the

appellant to the execution petition are not be confused with his

objections to the proposed sale deed.              That the appellant may have

raised    contentions       to    the   effect    that    the     decree   itself      is

inexecutable and it was found meritless, would not absolve the court

of its duty to proceed with the matter of considering the draft sale

deed and the objections thereto under the provisions of Order XXI

Rule 34. Subsequent to the impugned order dated 30.05.2019, without

objections     being      invited    and   considered,     the     sale    deed    dated
11
CA No. 1700/ 2022 (@ SLP (C) No. 19687/ 2019)

11.06.2019 came to be executed which was registered.            Therefore, we

are of the view that this approach of the court in the matter of

executing the decree in question clearly contravenes the salutary

provisions of Order XXI Rule 34.
14.    The complain of the appellant is sought to be buttressed with

reference to the difference in the survey numbers as noticed by us

earlier.     While it is true that the court must be diligent in the

matter of executing a decree passed after adjudication which spans a

long period of time, it is also the duty of the court to execute the

decree as it is and in accordance with law.           Order XXI Rule 34 cannot

be diluted and any such departure from the provisions can have highly

deleterious consequences not merely qua the parties in question but

also persons who come to deal with those parties in future.            It can

lead to further litigation.        It is all of this which is sought to be

avoided by bringing clarity and precision and execution must be in

conformity with the adjudication contained in the decree.
15.    In this case, the court is presented with a fait accompli.        This

is for the reason that putting the cart before the horse, as it were,

without giving an opportunity to file objections to the draft sale

deed, the order impugned was passed.           The sale deed itself has been

executed in terms of the draft sale deed without objections being

called for and considered.         Learned counsel for respondents points

out that the case is taken up now to consider the objections by the

court.     The only course which is available to us is to direct the

objections of the appellant to the draft sale deed to be considered.
12
CA No. 1700/ 2022 (@ SLP (C) No. 19687/ 2019)

It is, however, pointed out by Mr. Tarun Gupta, learned counsel for

the appellant, that the copy of the draft sale deed has not yet been

served on the appellant.
16.    In such circumstances, we are inclined to pass the following

order:
The appeal is allowed.        We set aside the impugned order.        We

direct that the        execution court Civil Judge (Senior Division),

Jhajjar shall hand over the copy of the draft sale deed produced by

the respondents within a period of two weeks from the date of

production of copy of this judgment before the execution court.            The

appellant will be free to file his objections to the draft sale deed

within a period of three weeks thereafter.            Thereafter, after hearing

the parties, a decision will be taken on the objections.               Learned

counsel for the appellant would point out that appellant will in case

the sale deed is found to fall foul of the decree, bear the expenses

which has been incurred by the respondents towards registration.            If

the sale deed is found to not be in conformity with the decree, fresh

proceedings will be taken. Appropriate order will be passed by the

court so that the decree is executed as is provided in the decree.

Needless to say, in case the sale deed which has been executed on

the strength of the draft sale deed is found to be violative of the

decree, it will necessarily be set aside, and thereafter, a fresh

sale deed must be executed by the execution court. The entire process

shall be completed within four months from the date copy of the

judgment is produced before the court.
13
CA No. 1700/ 2022 (@ SLP (C) No. 19687/ 2019)

    Further proceedings based on the sale deed dated 11.06.2019

shall be kept in abeyance till a decision is taken by the Court.

   The appeal is allowed as above.
The parties will bear their respective costs.
……………………………………………………………………., J.
[ K.M. JOSEPH ]




                                       ……………………………………………………………………., J.
[ HRISHIKESH ROY ]


New Delhi;
February 28, 2022.
14