[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Manoj Sevani vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 15 February, 2022
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1

                                                                 NON-REPORTABLE
                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1655 OF 2019

      MANOJ SEVANI                                              Appellant

                                            VERSUS

      STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                                     Respondent


                                            WITH

                          CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.1656-1657 OF OF 2019

      MANOJ YADAV ETC.                                          Appellants

                                            VERSUS

      STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                                     Respondent


                                           WITH

                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1658 OF 2019

      MANOHAR BALMIKI                                           Appellant

                                            VERSUS

      STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                                     Respondent

                                            AND

                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.726-728 OF 2021

      MANI YADAV & ANOTHER ETC.                                 Appellants

                                            VERSUS

      STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                                     Respondent
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by Dr.
Mukesh Nasa
Date: 2022.02.16
17:09:00 IST
Reason:
                                                                              2

                               J U D G M E N T
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.    These         criminal     appeals        by      eight        convicted

accused/appellants are directed against the common judgment

and    order   dated      10.01.2018   passed    by   the     High   Court   of

Chhatisgarh at Bilaspur in Criminal Appeal Nos.830, 832, 833,

835, 836, 837, 843, 844 and 914 of 2012.
2.    Twelve persons were tried in Sessions Trial No.32 of 2010

in    the   Court    of   Additional   Sessions      Judge,   North   Bastar,

District Kanker, Chhattisgarh, for having committed offences

punishable under
Sections 147
,
148
,
302
/
149
,
307
/
149
of the

Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“
IPC
” for short) and
Section 25(1B)
read with
Section 4
of the Arms Act, 1959.
3.    By its judgment and order dated 04.09.2012, the trial

Court convicted and sentenced all the twelve accused persons

under
Sections 302
/
149
IPC to suffer imprisonment for life;

under
Sections 307
/
149
IPC to suffer rigorous imprisonment

for seven years; and, under
Sections 324
/
149
IPC to suffer

rigorous imprisonment for one year, with imposition of fine

and sentences in default.
Apart from the above convictions, accused No.1 Dinesh

Rawani was also sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for
3
one year under
Section 25(1B)
read with
Section 4
of the Arms

Act, 1959.
4.   The genesis of the prosecution was in the reporting made

by one Shailendra Kumar Dhruv (who was later examined as PW2

in the trial), on the basis of which FIR No.247 of 2009 dated

19.08.2009 was registered with Police Station City Kanker,

District   Kanker,   Chhattisgarh    in    respect   of   the   offences

punishable under
Sections 302
/
307
/
34
of the IPC and
Sections

25
/
27
of the Arms Act, 1959.
5.   The First Information Report named four persons, namely,

Dinesh Rawani, Brijesh Sonkar, Mani Yadav and Parmesh alias

Pammi   Thakur   while   others     were    not   named.    The   basic

allegations in the First Information Report were as under:-
“I reside at Bhati Para Kanker, and working as
        a booking Agent in Mahandera Travals. On
        17.08.2009 about 8 pm there is fight between
        the younger brother of Brigesh Shonkar and
        Lokesh, Dinesh Mahant on certain issues at
        Latra Para, due to same on 18.08 2009 around
        11 pm the Dinesh Ravani along with some
        companion Brijesh Sonkar, Mani Yadav, Parmesh
        Alyas Pammi Thakur and others having Gupti and
        Wooden stick (Patra) came at Tikara Para Near
        Hina Hotel where I with my Friends Ramesh
        Samarai, Durgesh Mahant, Natvar Soni, Ravi
        Chandavani, Guddu Alyas Parmveer and Paras
        Bhai stand near to the Pan Shop of Suresh
        Sahu, After watching us they came on 3 to 4
        motorcycle and stop there and Dinesh Ravani
        take out Gupti and attacked on Durgesh Mahant
        in result two injuries caused one on stomach
        and another on chest, Natwar Soni try to save
4
him during this he was also injured with
         Gupti, Mani Yadav with wooden stick (Patra)
         and rest of the companion with fist and hand
         started beating him and abusing him like
         mother and sister and said yesterday you act
         like Done "Dadagiri”, Durgesh Mahant and
         Natwar Soni were bleeding and fall down, after
         incident Dinesh Ravani with his companions
         escape   from   the  place   of   incident  by
         motorcycle, Dinesh Mahant and Natwar Soni were
         took to hospital on motorcycle by Ramesh
         Semarai, Parash Bhai and Ashu Shukla, where
         Durgesh was died and Natwar Soni was referred
         to Raipur for treatment, After that I came to
         Police Station for making complain Dinesh
         Ravani, Brijesh Sanker, Mani Yadav, Parmesh
         and others having Gupti and wooden stick were
         came with the intention to kill due to of old
         rage and did fight caused grave 1niury in
         result Durgesh Mahant was died, I will
         identify the friends of Durgesh Ravani after
         watching them. I lodge this complaint. Do the
         inquiry. The first information report was read
         over and it was written as I narrated.”
6.   Durgesh Mahant having succumbed to his injuries, post-

mortem on his body was conducted by Dr. A.K. Verma (later

examined as PW9 in the trial), who found injuries in the head

and piercing injury of 3 x ½ c.m. on the left side of the

chest.
The injured Natwar Soni was given medical attention by

Dr. Shirish Yadu (later examined as PW14 in the trial) who

found a cut injury of 2.5 x 3 c.m. in his stomach, which

injury   according to   the medical   opinion was   dangerous to

life.
5
7.   After conducting due investigation, twelve persons as

stated above, were sent up for trial.    The prosecution mainly

relied upon the following evidence:-
“A.   The injured person Natwar Soni was examined as

     PW1 who in his testimony asserted as under:-
“I identify the accused persons who are
           present in the Court. On 18.08.2009 at about
           10.45 of the clock in front of the house of
           Durgesh there is Pan Box. I, along with
           Pappu, Ramesh, Durgesh, Paras, Ravi Chandwani
           and Dudda near the house of Durgesh, was
           standing in Pan Box. At the same time in four
           motor cycles Dinesh, Brijesh, Javed, Sheroo,
           Manoj Sewani, Manoj Yadav, Parmesh Thakur,
           Yogesh, Rajendra Yadav, Arjun Yadav and Vicky
           Sarthi   near  me   where   I  was  standing.
Subsequently, caught the collar of Durgesh
           Mahant, accused Dinesh Rawani beat him by his
           hands and fat, Dinesh was carrying Gupti.
           Dinesh Rawani. assaulted by his Gupti on
           Durgesh Mahant. At that time I was saving in
           between both persons. At the same time
           Brijesh caught me from my back side and Javed
           caught me from my front side. At the same
           time accused Dinesh beat me by his Gupti on
           the upper side of my waist i.e. in my stomach
           at two places and below the left chest at one
           place beat me by his Gupti.
2)   Prior to beating (Marpeet) with me when
           he assaulted Durgesh Mahant by the Gupti,
           Durgesh Mahant fell down below. Thereafter I
           was caught by accused Brijesh and Javed and
           accused Dinesh Rawani assaulted me by his
           Gupti. Due to that attach I fell down below
           nevertheless I was not unconscious. After my
           falling accused Maniram Yadav gave beating
           on my back by Batta. All other accused
           persons beat me by their hand and legs.”
6
In his cross-examination, the witness accepted

as under:
“At the time of giving my statement to Shri
     Packra Saheb in Raipur I did not tell that
     other accused persons beat me by their hands
     and legs.”


B.   PW2,   the   original   informant   Shailendra   Kumar

Dhruv in his examination-in-chief asserted:-
“I know and identify all 12 accused persons
     who are present in the court. I am also
     known as Pappu. My main name is Shailendra.
     Pappu is my home name. My friends called me
     by name of Pappu. I along with Durgesh,
     Ravi,   Chandwani,   Ramesh,   Natwar    Soni
     Paramveer @ Gudda and Paras on 18.08.2009 at
     about 11.00 p.m. in the night, the Heena
     Hotel which is situated in Tikra Para of
     Kanker and near that Hotel there is Sahool
     Pan Thela. Where they were standing and were
     talking to each other. Between the Heena
     Hotel and Sahool Pan Thela, there is house
     of Durgesh Mahant. From the Hotel to Sahool
     Pan Thela the distance is about 20 ft. And
     Heerta Hotel is adjacent to the house of
     Durgesh Mahant. At the same time the accused
     persons in four motor cycles where we were
     standing came and stopped there. The persons
     who came in four motor cycles are Dinesh
     Rawani, Mani Yadav, Parmesh Thakur, Brijesh
     Sonkar, Manohar Valmiki, Manoj Sewani, Manoj
     Yadav, Vicky Sarthi, Javed Ali, Yogesh
     Thakur, Arjun Yadav and Rajendra Yadav were
     there. The accused persons on just their
     coming and just on looking Durgesh they all
     accused persons started abusing Durgesh
     Mahant. They all told Durgesh that you do
     some more Dadagiri, today we will teach a
     lesson to you. Saying so they all started
     beating   (Marpeet)  with   Durgesh   Mahant.
     Thereafter suddenly Dinesh Rawani who was
     having Gupti in his hand assaulted by his
7
Gupti to Durgesh Mahant. Mani Ram Yadav was
     having Batta of wood. By which Mani Ram
     Yadav beat Durgesh Mahant on his head and
     back. During this time Natwar Soni started
     saving the people. Then Dinesh Rawani by his
     Gupti three times assaulted Natwar Soni in
     his stomach.
(2) Even after the assault through the Gupti
     by Dinesh Rawani to Durgesh Mahant the other
     accused persons were also beating Durgesh
     Mahant by their hands and legs in which the
     accused persons who were beating Durgesh
     Mahant by their hands and legs are namely
     Dinesh Rawani, Brijesh, Mani Yadav, Parmesh
     Thakur, Manohar Valmiki, Manoj Sewani, Manoj
     Yadav, Vicky Sarthi, Saiyad Javed Ali, Arjun
     Yadav, Rajendra Yadav, Yogesh Thakur. And
     keeping in view to murder Durgesh Mahant,
     accused Maniram Yadav was beating Durgesh
     Mahant by his Batta of wood and other
     persons were beating Durgesh Mahant by their
     legs and hands. When Dinesh Rawani assaulted
     Natwar Soni by his Gupti consequently Natwar
     Soni fell down on the earth and he mixed
     with his blood on the earth.
C.   Another   injured   person,   namely,   Ramesh   Kumar

Semare (who was later examined as PW3) stated:-
“(3) On 18.08.2009 all accused persons came
     in four motor cycles and near us where we
     were standing and talking to each other and
     started abusing Durgesh Mahant and told
     Durgesh Mahant that you do Dadagiri now
     where you will go by saving yourself. At the
     same time Dinesh Rawani who was having Gupti
     in his hand assaulted by Gupti in the chest
     of Durgesh Mahant one time. Then the Gupti
     entered into the chest. Due to this reason
     he fell down on the earth. On this Natwar
     Soni and I did make peace in between them.
     At the time of making peace in between them
     Dinesh Rawani did three assaults on the
     stomach of Natwar Soni. Due to three assault
8
by the Gupti by Dinesh Rawani, Natwar Soni
     also fell down on the earth. The blood was
     coming out from his body. Following the
     injuries Durgesh Mahant fell down on the
     earth. Natwar Soni fell down on the earth.
     Despite the same he was in conscious mood. I
     did make peace in between the dispute with
     Durgesh   Mahant.  On   this  Dinesh  Rawani
     assaulted me one time by his Gupti on my
     right hand arm of my body. The injury sign
     of the same is still existing inside my
     arms. Witness opened his shirt and showed
     the same before the Hon'ble Court of his
     injury on the right hand arm towards inside.
     Then it was found that there was injury sign
     on the right hand arm towards inside.
(4) When Durgesh Mahant fell down on the
     earth following the assault given by Dinesh
     Rawani by his Gupti. Thereafter also the
     accused persons namely Brijesh Sonkar, Mani
     Yadav, Parmesh Thakur beat Durgesh Mahant by
     their Batta of wood on the head of Durgesh
     Mahant. Due to that beating Durgesh Mahant
     received injuries on his head. The blood was
     coming out. The remaining accused persons
     namely Manoj Yadav, Manoj Sewani, Arjun
     Yadav, Manohar Valmiki, Yogesh Thakur, Javed
     Ali did beating (Marpeet) with Durgesh
     Mahant with their hands, fats and legs.
Shailendra Dhruv who is known as Pappu was
     slapped by Manoj Sewani one time.
(5) When the accused persons heard sound of
     coming of the persons of the colony then all
     accused persons ran away from the incident
     place. The persons who reached at the
     incident place in which Shri Anil Patel,
     Deepak Chandwani and other 2-3 persons were
     there whose name I do not remember.”


D.   Ravi   Chandwani,   who   was   examined   as   PW7,

deposed:-
9
“(2) On 18.08.2009 in the night at about
10.45 p.m. after taking food from house I
went   outside   from   my   house   to   walk
something. My house is situated in Tikrapara
near the Heena Hotel. I went there for
walking. There my friend Durgadas Mahant his
full name and short name is Durgesh there
Shailendra, Ramesh, Paras Boi and Natwar
Soni met me and I was standing there talking
to them. At the same time on four different
motor cycles Dinesh Rawani, Brijesh Sonkar,
Mani Ram Yadav, Parmesh Thakur, Yogesh
Thakur, Arjun Yadav, Manoj Yadav, Manoj
Sewani,   Vicky   Sarthi,   Manohar   Valmiki,
Saiyad Ali, Rajendra Yadav these all 10-12
people were there where we were standing
there they came. Out of the motor cycles
Brijesh Sonkar came at which motor cycle and
getting down from the said motor cycle told
that you become more Dada. Abused telling
motherchod thereafter Brijesh Sonkar did
beating (Marpeet) to Durgesh Mahant by his
Patta as Brijesh Sonkar was having in his
custody. At the same time Natwar Soni was
making peace among them. Thereafter Dinesh
Rawani by his Gupti which was at about 1 and
half feet long as the witness stated it by
his hand showing a sign assaulted on the
head of Durgesh Mahant first time. But
Durgesh turned his head and due to that
reason the Gupti assault of Dinesh Rawani
did not hit Durgesh Mahant. Thereafter
Dinesh Rawani assaulted by his Gupti to
Durgesh Mahant on his chest and this time
Gupti of Dinesh Rawani entered into the
chest of Durgesh Mahant and blood started
coming outside from his chest. Consequently
Durgesh Mahant mixed with his blood and fell
down on the earth. Brijesh Sonkar, Parmesh
Thakur and Maniram Yadav were having Patta.
These all people did beating (Marpeet) on
the head of Durgesh Mahant and also did
beating (Marpeet) on the legs of Durgesh
Mahant.   Remaining    accused   persons   did
beating (Marpeet) to Durgesh Mahant by their
hands and legs.”
10
8.    Considering the evidence on record, the trial Court by

its     judgment      and     order    dated      04.09.2012     convicted     and

sentenced       all     the     twelve       accused    persons     as     stated

hereinabove.
9.    The convicted accused persons being aggrieved preferred

appeals before the High Court.               By   its   common    judgment     and

order    dated 10.01.2018,            the High     Court affirmed        the view

taken by the trial Court in respect of accused nos.1 to 9 but

granted       benefit   of    doubt     to   accused    nos.10,    11    and   12,

namely, Yogesh Singh Thakur, Arjun Yadav and Rajendra Yadav.
10. Out of said nine convicted accused, eight have preferred

appeals by special leave before this court while no appeal

has been preferred by accused No.7 Vicky Sarthi.
11. We heard Mr. Suryanarayana Singh, learned Senior Advocate

for     the    appellants      Mani     Yadav,     Parmesh     Thakur,    Brijesh

Sonkar, Dinesh Rawani.
We also heard Mr. Raj Kishor Choudhary, Mr. M.C. Dhingra,

Yogesh Tiwari, and Mr. Sameer Srivastava, learned Advocates

for rest of the appellants; and, Mr. Sumeer Sodhi, learned

Advocate for the State.
11
12. It was submitted on behalf of the appellants that the

First   Information       Report   was     lodged    against   four     named

accused while the identity of the rest of the accused was not

disclosed in the First Information Report. It was further

submitted   that    the   basic    allegations      were   against    accused

No.1 Dinesh Rawani while nothing substantial was attributed

to rest of the accused.            In the submission of the learned

counsel, the other accused could not be connected with the

aid of
Section 149
of the IPC.
13. Mr. Sumeer Sodhi, learned Advocate appearing on behalf of

the State relied upon the decision of this Court in
State of

Maharashtra v. Ramlal Devappa Rathod
, (2015) 15 SCC 77, to

submit that all the appellants were rightly convicted and

sentenced by the High Court and no interference on any count

was called for.
14. The reporting which led to the registration of the First

Information Report was against four named persons only. PW1,

an   injured       eye-witness,      did     not     attribute       anything

substantial to accused Parmesh in his examination-in-chief

but attributed overt acts to accused Javed. PW2 Shailendra

Kumar Dhruv, the informant, again attributed clear and overt

acts to two of the named persons from the First Information

Report. PW7 Ravi Chandwani on the other hand deposed about
12
the acts committed by Brijesh Sonkar, Mani Yadav and Parmesh

with clarity.      According to this witness, these three accused

had given patta blows on the head of the deceased.
15. Considering      the   totality    of    evidence      on    record      what

emerges is:-
a.   Accused No.1 Dinesh Rawani who was armed with

          gupti,    gave   fatal     blow    on    the   chest    of   the

          deceased as well as dealt blows on the injured

          witnesses.
b.   Apart    from    accused    No.1    Dinesh     Rawani    whose

          gupti blow landed in the chest of the deceased,

          three    accused,    accused      No.2    Brajesh,     accused

          No.3 Mani Yadav and accused No.4 Parmesh gave

          patta blows on the head of the deceased.                     The

          deceased died as a result of injuries suffered

          on the head and in the chest.
c.   Except the aforestated four accused, none of the

          other accused was stated to have given any blow

          to the deceased but as alleged by PW1 Natwar

          Soni,    accused    No.5   Javed    had    facilitated       the

          blow by accused No.1 Dinesh Rawani by holding

          the witness.
13
However, none of the other witnesses had

          named Javed with sufficient attribution in their

          testimonies.
d.   Accused Nos.1 to 4 were thus attributed clear

          and   overt    acts.    Their       names    appeared     in    the

          First Information Report and the case of the

          prosecution as against these four accused was

          quite clear and consistent.
e.   On    the   other     hand,    insofar       as   rest    of   the

          accused are concerned, none of them was named in

          the First Information Report.
f.   Apart       from    accused         No.5     Javed,       nothing

          substantial was attributed to anyone. Even the

          attribution insofar as accused No.5 Javed was

          concerned, was of holding the witness.
g.   Accused     Nos.10,    11     and    12    have   already      been

          granted benefit of doubt by the High Court.
16. Considering the totality of the circumstances on record,

in our view, except accused No.1 Dinesh Rawani, accused No.2

Brijesh   Sonkar,     accused    No.3    Mani       Yadav   and    accused      No.4

Parmesh Thakur, rest of the accused persons, namely, Sayyed

Javed, Manoj Sevani, Manoj Yadav and Manohar Balmiki are also
14
entitled to the benefit of doubt and are thus acquitted of

all the charges levelled against them.

    Since participation and acts committed by accused No.1 to

accused No.4 are clearly spelt out and stand proved from the

record, we convert conviction of said accused Nos.1 to 4 from
Sections 302
/
149
IPC to
Sections 302
/
34
IPC. Similarly, their

conviction under
Sections 307
/
149
IPC is also converted to

one under
Sections 307
/
34
IPC.
17. We, thus, dismiss the appeals preferred by accused No.1

Dinesh Rawani, accused No.2 Brijesh Sonkar, accused No.3 Mani

Yadav and accused No.4 Parmesh Thakur, but allow the appeals

preferred by the accused/appellants, namely, Manoj Sevani,

Manoj Yadav, Sayyed Javed, and Manohar Balmiki.
18. The   acquitted   appellants   be   set   at   liberty   forthwith

unless their custody is required in connection with any other

crime.
............................J.
                                   (UDAY UMESH LALIT)


                                   ............................J.
                                   (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)

                                   ............................J.
                                   (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)
New Delhi,
February 15, 2022.