[Cites
25
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Nawabbudin vs State Of Uttarakhand on 8 February, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.144 OF 2022


         Nawabuddin                                                ..Appellant(S)


                                              Versus

         State of Uttarakhand                                    ..Respondent(S)



                                         JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 22.08.2019 passed by the High

                         Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital in Criminal Appeal No.

                         280 of 2018 by which the High Court has dismissed the

                         said appeal preferred by the accused – appellant herein

                         and has confirmed the conviction of the accused for the

                         offences punishable under
Sections 376(2)(i)
of IPC and
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2022.02.08
16:29:04 IST
Section 5
/
6
of the Protection of Children From Sexual
Reason:
Offences Act, 2012 (hereinafter referred to as “POCSO
1
Act”), the original accused has preferred the present

     appeal.
2.   That as per the case of the prosecution on 17.06.2016 at

     about 5:00 pm, the first informant (PW­1) had gone to

     fetch water and her husband was out for work. At that

     time, her daughter (victim girl) aged four years was all

     alone in the house. The accused – appellant herein who

     was a neighbour of PW­1, enticed and took the victim girl

     in the bushes to rape her. However, at that time the

     accused was spotted by some persons naked in the

     process of raping the victim girl. The accused and the

     victim girl were disrobed. The people who had gathered

     around caught the accused red handed and handed him

     over to the police. That a first information report was

     lodged by PW­1 – mother of the victim girl for the offences

     punishable under
Sections 376
read with 511 of
IPC
and
Section 3
/
4
of the POCSO Act. The victim girl was

     medically examined by PW­10 – Dr. Vandana Sundriyal on

     17.06.2016.   During    the   course    of   investigation   the

     statement of the victim girl as well as the witnesses were

     recorded.   After   conclusion   of    the   investigation   the
2
investigating officer filed the chargesheet against the

      accused for the offences punishable under
Section 376(2)

      (F)
of IPC and
Section 3
/
4
of the POCSO Act. The charges

      were   framed   against   the   accused   for   the   offences

      punishable under
Section 376(2)(i)
of IPC and
Section 5
/
6
of the POCSO Act. The accused denied the charges and

      claimed to be tried. Therefore, he was tried by the learned

      Special Judge (POCSO Act) for the aforesaid offences.

2.1   To prove the charges against the accused and to prove the

      case, the prosecution examined as many as thirteen

      witnesses including PW­1 – mother of the victim girl and

      PW­10 – Dr. Vandana Sundriyal who examined the victim

      girl on 17.06.2016. After closure of the prosecution

      evidence, statement of the accused under
Section 313
of

      Cr.PC was recorded. His case was of total denial. On

      appreciation of evidence and more particularly relying

      upon the deposition of PW­10 ­ Dr. Vandana Sundriyal

      before whom the victim girl narrated the entire incident,

      the Trial Court held the accused guilty for the offences

      punishable under
Section 376(2)(i)
of IPC and
Section 6
of

      the POCSO Act, 2012. The Trial Court sentenced the
3
accused to undergo life imprisonment and also directed to

     pay monetary fine of Rs.50,000/­. The Trial Court also

     passed an order that out of the amount of fine of

     Rs.50,000/­, Rs.30,000/­ shall be paid to the victim girl as

     compensation.
3.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

     judgment and order of conviction and sentence passed by

     the learned Trial Court/Special Judge (POCSO Act), the

     accused preferred an appeal before the High Court. Before

     the High Court, amongst other grounds, one of the

     grounds was that the case would not fall under
Section

     5
/
6
of the POCSO Act and at the most the case may fall

     under
Section 7
/
8
of the POCSO Act as there was no

     penetration and at the most and even as per the case of

     the prosecution the accused had tried to commit the rape.

     By the detailed impugned judgment and order, the High

     Court has dismissed the said appeal and has confirmed

     the conviction of the accused and the sentence of life

     imprisonment. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the

     impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court,

     the accused has preferred the present appeal.
4
4.    Shri Saju Jacob, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

      the accused – appellant has vehemently submitted that in

      the facts and circumstances of the case the High Court

      has committed a grave error in dismissing the appeal and

      confirming the judgment and order of conviction passed by

      the learned Trial Court convicting the accused for the

      offences punishable under
Section 5
/
6
of the POCSO Act.

4.1   It is submitted that in fact the witnesses have not

      supported the case of the prosecution. It is submitted that

      the accused could not have been convicted on the sole

      testimony of PW­10 ­ Dr. Vandana Sundriyal.

4.2   It is further submitted by learned counsel appearing on

      behalf of the accused that even in the present case so

      called recording of the incident in the mobile has not been

      established and proved by the prosecution by leading any

      cogent evidence.
4.3   It is further submitted by learned counsel appearing on

      behalf of the accused that even as per the prosecution

      case, it was only an attempt of aggravated sexual assault.

      It is submitted that in absence of penetration and
5
aggravated penetrative sexual assault, the appellant could

      not have been convicted for the offences punishable under
Section 5
/
6
of the POCSO Act.
4.4   It is vehemently contended by learned counsel appearing

      on behalf of the accused that even considering the

      prosecution case as it is, at the most the case would fall

      under sexual assault punishable under
Section 8
of the

      POCSO Act. It is urged that in any case the case would not

      fall under aggravated penetrative sexual assault.

4.5   In the alternative, it is submitted by learned counsel

      appearing on behalf of the accused that at the time of the

      alleged incident accused was aged approximately 65 years

      of age and as on today he is 75 years of age. It is

      submitted that as per
Section 6
of the POCSO Act as it

      stood on the date of incident the minimum sentence

      provided was ten years but which may extend to

      imprisonment for life. It is therefore submitted that

      imposing life sentence is too harsh and disproportionate to

      the offence committed. Therefore, it is prayed to impose a

      lesser punishment than the life imprisonment.
6
5.    Shri Krishnam Mishara, learned counsel appearing on

      behalf of the State of Uttarakhand, while opposing the

      present appeal has vehemently submitted that in the

      present case as such the prosecution has proved the case

      beyond doubt. It is submitted that PW­10 ­ Dr. Vandana

      Sundriyal who is an independent witness has fully

      supported the case of the prosecution.
5.1   It is further contended by learned counsel appearing on

      behalf of the State that this is a case of penetrative sexual

      assault as defined under
Section 3(b)
of the POCSO Act. It

      is submitted that as per
Section 5(m)
whoever commits

      penetrative sexual assault on a child below twelve years, it

      can be said to be an aggravated penetrative sexual assault

      punishable under
Section 6
of the POCSO Act.

5.2   It is urged by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      State that the accused in the present case was a neighbour

      of the victim girl; he misused his position as a neighbour

      and tried to penetrate his finger and then tried to commit

      rape on the minor girl. However, before he could succeed

      in committing rape, he was caught red handed by the local

      persons. It is submitted that the entire incident was
7
narrated by the victim girl to Dr. Vandana Sundriyal – PW­
10. It is therefore submitted that when the accused

      misused his position as a neighbour and committed the

      offence under the
POCSO Act
upon a girl aged four years

      and looking to the object and purpose for which the
POCSO Act
has been enacted, no leniency should be

      shown to the accused. It is submitted that in the facts and

      circumstances of the case the accused does not deserve

      any sympathy or any leniency.
5.3   Making the above submissions it is prayed to dismiss the

      present appeal.
6.    We have heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of

      the respective parties at length.
7.    At the outset it is required to be noted that there are

      concurrent findings recorded by both the Courts below,

      recorded on appreciation of evidence on record to the effect

      that the accused tried to commit the offence of rape on the

      victim girl aged four years. It has been established and

      proved by the prosecution that the victim girl was lured by

      the appellant – accused; she was taken to the bushes;

      accused removed his own clothes as well as the clothes of
8
the   victim   girl   and   fondled   her   private   parts   and

penetrated his finger into the vagina of the victim girl. The

same is fully supported by Dr. Vandana Sundriyal – PW­

10, who examined the victim girl on 17.06.2016 and before

whom the victim girl narrated the entire incident to her

which was recorded in exhibit A­6 – medical examination

report. As per Dr. Vandana Sundriyal – PW­10 who is an

independent witness, the victim girl told her that the

accused tried to penetrate his finger and therefore she felt

pain and irritation in urination as well as she also felt pain

in her body. As per PW­10 there was redness and swelling

around the vagina. Though the other witnesses who seem

to have been won over might not have supported the case

of the prosecution, we see no reason to doubt the

deposition of PW­10 ­ Dr. Vandana Sundriyal, who is an

independent witness. There are no allegations on behalf of

the accused that there was any enmity with Dr. Vandana

Sundriyal. Therefore, we are of the opinion that it is safe to

convict the accused relying upon the deposition of PW­10 ­

Dr. Vandana Sundriyal before whom the victim girl

narrated the entire incident which was recorded in the
9
medical examination report namely exhibit A­6. Thus, it

      has been established and proved by the prosecution that

      the accused took the victim girl away from the house; took

      her deep into the bushes; disrobed her and removed his

      clothes as well; penetrated his finger in the vagina, due to

      which the victim girl felt pain and irritation in urination

      and he was about to force himself upon her and commit

      the offence of rape when he was caught red handed.

7.1   Now the next question which is posed for the consideration

      of this Court is, what offence the accused had committed.

      The Trial Court convicted the accused for the offences

      punishable under
Sections 376(2)(i)
of IPC and
Section 5
/
6
of the POCSO Act. It is the case on behalf of the accused

      that at the most it can be said to be an attempt to commit

      penetrative sexual assault and therefore at the most it can

      be said to be the case of sexual assault under
Section 7
of

      the POCSO Act punishable under
Section 8
of the POCSO

      Act. Therefore, it is the case on behalf of the accused that

      as it is neither a case of penetrative sexual assault nor

      aggravated   penetrative    sexual   assault,   therefore   the

      punishment    of   life   imprisonment   imposed     was    not
10
warranted and at the highest he could have been punished

     with imprisonment of either description for a term which

     shall not be less than three years but which may extend to

     five years, and shall also be liable to fine.
8.   While appreciating the aforesaid submissions the relevant

     provisions of the
POCSO Act
are required to be referred to

     and considered.
Section 3
of the POCSO Act defines

     ‘penetrative sexual assault’. As per
Section 3
of the Act, a

     person is said to commit ‘penetrative sexual assault’ if­(b)

     he inserts, to any extent, any object of a part of the body,

     not being the penis, into the vagina……….
Section 4
provides ‘punishment for penetrative sexual assault’.
Section 5
of the Act defines ‘aggravated penetrative sexual

     assault’ and as per
Section 5(m)
whoever commits

     penetrative sexual assault on a child below twelve years it

     is   aggravated   penetrative   sexual    assault.
Section   6
provides ‘punishment for aggravated penetrative sexual

     assault.’ In the present case, it has been established and

     proved that the accused penetrated his finger in the vagina

     and because of that the victim girl felt pain and irritation

     in urination as well as pain on her body and there was
11
redness and swelling around the vagina found by the

      doctor. We are of the opinion that therefore the case would

      fall under
Section 3(b)
of the POCSO Act and it can be said

      to be penetrative sexual assault and considering
Section

      5(m)
of the POCSO Act as such penetrative sexual assault

      was committed on a girl child aged four years (below twelve

      years) the same can be said to be ‘aggravated penetrative

      sexual assault’ punishable under
Section 6
of the POCSO

      Act. Therefore, both, the Trial Court as well as the High

      Court have rightly convicted the accused for the offences

      under
Section 5
of the POCSO Act punishable under
Section 6
of the POCSO Act.
9.    Now in so far as the prayer on behalf of the accused –

      appellant herein to take a lenient view in the matter by

      considering mitigating circumstances of old age of the

      accused and to alter the life imprisonment to any other

      punishment is concerned, the same has to be considered

      in light of the object and purpose of enactment of the
POCSO Act
.
9.1   In the case of
Eera Vs. State (NCT of Delhi
), (2017) 15

      SCC 133, this Court has observed on the Statement and
12
Objects and Reasons of POCSO Act in para 20 as under: ­
         “20. The purpose of referring to the Statement of
         Objects and Reasons and the Preamble of
         the Pocso Act is to appreciate that the very purpose of
         bringing a legislation of the present nature is to
         protect the children from the sexual assault,
         harassment and exploitation, and to secure the best
         interest of the child. On an avid and diligent
         discernment of the Preamble, it is manifest that it
         recognises the necessity of the right to privacy and
         confidentiality of a child to be protected and respected
         by every person by all means and through all stages of
         a judicial process involving the child. Best interest and
         well­being are regarded as being of paramount
         importance at every stage to ensure the healthy
         physical,     emotional,     intellectual    and    social
         development of the child. There is also a stipulation
         that sexual exploitation and sexual abuse are heinous
         offences and need to be effectively addressed. The
         Statement of Objects and Reasons provides regard
         being had to the constitutional mandate, to direct its
         policy towards securing that the tender age of children
         is not abused and their childhood is protected against
         exploitation and they are given facilities to develop in a
         healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and
         dignity. There is also a mention which is quite
         significant that interest of the child, both as a victim
         as well as a witness, needs to be protected. The stress
         is on providing child­friendly procedure. Dignity of the
         child has been laid immense emphasis in the scheme
         of legislation.
Protection and interest occupy the
         seminal place in the text of the
Pocso Act
.”

9.2   In the case of
Alakh Alok Srivastava Vs. Union of India

      & Ors.
(2018) 17 SCC 291, in para 14 and 20, it is

      observed as under: ­
          “14. At the very outset, it has to be stated with
          authority that the
Pocso Act
is a gender neutral
          legislation.
This Act
has been divided into various
          chapters and parts therein.
Chapter II of the Act
titled
          “Sexual Offences Against Children” is segregated into
          five parts. Part A of the said Chapter contains two
          sections, namely,
Section 3
and
Section 4
.
Section 3
defines the offence of “Penetrative Sexual Assault”
13
whereas
Section 4
lays down the punishment for the
          said offence. Likewise, Part B of the said Chapter
          titled “Aggravated Penetrative Sexual Assault and
          Punishment therefor” contains two sections, namely,
Section 5
and
Section 6
. The various sub­sections of
Section 5
copiously deal with various situations,
          circumstances and categories of persons where the
          offence of penetrative sexual assault would take the
          character of the offence of aggravated penetrative
          sexual assault.
Section 5(k)
, in particular, while laying
          emphasis on the mental stability of a child stipulates
          that where an offender commits penetrative sexual
          assault on a child, by taking advantage of the child's
          mental or physical disability, it shall amount to an
          offence of aggravated penetrative sexual assault.”

          “20.
Speaking about the child, a three­Judge Bench
          in
M.C. Mehta v. State of T.N.
(1996) 6 SCC 756

               “1. … “child is the father of man”. To enable
          fathering of a valiant and vibrant man, the child must
          be groomed well in the formative years of his life. He
          must receive education, acquire knowledge of man
          and materials and blossom in such an atmosphere
          that on reaching age, he is found to be a man with a
          mission, a man who matters so far as the society is
          concerned.”

9.3   As it can be seen from the Statement of objects and

      reasons of the
POCSO Act
since the sexual offences

      against children were not adequately addressed by the

      existing laws and a large number of such offences were

      neither specifically provided for nor were they adequately

      penalised, the
POCSO Act
has been enacted to protect the

      children from the offences of sexual assault, sexual

      harassment     and     pornography        and     to   provide   for

      establishment of special courts for trial of such offences
14
and for matters connected therewith and incidental

      thereto.
9.4   At this stage, it is required to be noted that the
POCSO Act
has been enacted keeping in mind
Article 15
and
39
of the

      Constitution of India.
Article 15
of the Constitution, inter

      alia, confers upon the State powers to make special

      provision for children.
Article 39
, inter alia, provides that

      the State shall in particular direct its policy towards

      securing that the tender age of children are not abused

      and their childhood and youth are protected against

      exploitation and they are given facilities to develop in a

      healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity.

      To achieve the goal as per
Article 15
and
39
of the

      Constitution, the legislature has enacted the
Protection of

      Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012
.
9.5   As noted in the Statement of objects and reasons, as per

      the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Children,

      to which India is a signatory to the treaty, the State Parties

      to   undertake all appropriate national, bilateral and

      multilateral measures to prevent (a) the inducement or

      coercion of a child to engage in any unlawful sexual
15
activity; (b) the exploitative use of children in prostitution

or other unlawful sexual practices; and (c) the exploitative

use    of    children    in   pornographic      performances     and

materials.
Article 19
of the Convention states the following: ­
1. States Parties shall take all appropriate
           legislative,    administrative,   social     and
           educational measures to protect the child from
           all form/s of physical or mental violence, injury
           or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment,
           maltreatment or exploitation, including sexual
           abuse, while in the care of parent(s), legal
           guardian(s) or any other person who has the
           care of the child.
2.   Such      protective   measures       should,  as
             appropriate, include effective procedures for the
             establishment of social programmes to provide
             necessary support for the child and for those
             who have the care of the child, as well as for
             other forms of prevention and for identification,
             reporting, referral, investigation, treatment and
             follow­up of instances of child maltreatment
             described heretofore, and, as appropriate, for
             judicial involvement.
The    general comment         No.13 on       the Convention

specifically dealt with the right of the child to freedom from

all forms of violence and it has observed that “no violence

against children is justifiable; all violence against children

is preventable”
16
10.   Keeping in mind the aforesaid objects and to achieve what

      has been provided under
Article 15
and
39
of the

      Constitution to protect children from the offences of sexual

      assault, sexual harassment, the
POCSO Act, 2012
has

      been enacted. Any act of sexual assault or sexual

      harassment to the children should be viewed very

      seriously and all such offences of sexual assault, sexual

      harassment on the children have to be dealt with in a

      stringent manner and no leniency should be shown to a

      person who has committed the offence under the
POCSO

      Act
. By awarding a suitable punishment commensurate

      with the act of sexual assault, sexual harassment, a

      message must be conveyed to the society at large that, if

      anybody commits any offence under the
POCSO Act
of

      sexual assault, sexual harassment or use of children for

      pornographic purposes they shall be punished suitably

      and no leniency shall be shown to them. Cases of sexual

      assault     or   sexual   harassment   on   the   children   are

      instances of perverse lust for sex where even innocent

      children are not spared in pursuit of such debased sexual

      pleasure.
17
Children are precious human resources of our country;

they are the country’s future. The hope of tomorrow rests

on them. But unfortunately, in our country, a girl child is

in a very vulnerable position. There are different modes of

her exploitation, including sexual assault and/or sexual

abuse. In our view, exploitation of children in such a

manner is a crime against humanity and the society.

Therefore, the children and more particularly the girl child

deserve   full   protection    and   need   greater   care   and

protection whether in the urban or rural areas. As

observed and held by this Court in the case of
State of

Rajasthan Vs. Om Prakash
, (2002) 5 SCC 745, children

need special care and protection and, in such cases,

responsibility on the shoulders of the Courts is more

onerous so as to provide proper legal protection to these

children.
In the case of
Nipun Saxena v. Union of India
,

(2019) 2 SCC 703, it is observed by this Court that a minor

who is subjected to sexual abuse needs to be protected

even more than a major victim because a major victim

being an adult may still be able to withstand the social
18
ostracization and mental harassment meted out by society,

       but a minor victim will find it difficult to do so. Most

       crimes against minor victims are not even reported as very

       often, the perpetrator of the crime is a member of the

       family of the victim or a close friend. Therefore, the child

       needs extra protection. Therefore, no leniency can be

       shown to an accused who has committed the offences

       under the
POCSO Act, 2012
and particularly when the

       same is proved by adequate evidence before a court of law.

10.1   In the present case it is to be noted that the accused was

       aged approximately 65 years of age at the time of

       commission of offence. He was a neighbour of the victim

       girl. He took advantage of the absence of her parents,

       when her mother went to fetch water and her father had

       gone to work. He is found to have committed aggravated

       penetrative sexual assault (as observed hereinabove) on a

       girl child aged four years, which demonstrates the mental

       state or mindset of the accused. As a neighbour, in fact, it

       was the duty of the accused to protect the victim girl when

       alone   rather   than   exploiting   her   innocence    and

       vulnerability. The victim was barely a four years girl. The
19
accused – appellant was the neighbour. The accused

instead of showing fatherly love, affection and protection to

the child against the evils of the society, rather made her

the victim of lust. It is a case where trust has been

betrayed and social values are impaired. Therefore, the

accused as such does not deserve any sympathy and/or

any leniency.
However, the punishment provided for the offence

under
Section 6
, as it stood prior to its amendment and at

the time of commission of the offence in the instant case

for aggravated penetrative sexual assault was rigours

imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten

years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and

shall also be liable to fine. Now as per the amended
Section 6
with effect from 16.08.2019, the minimum

punishment provided is twenty years and which may

extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean

imprisonment for the remainder of natural life of that

person, and shall also be liable to fine, or with death.

Therefore, at the relevant time the minimum punishment

provided for the offence under
Section 6
of the POCSO Act,
20
2012 was ten years RI and which may extend to

      imprisonment for life. It is reported that today the accused

      is aged 70­75 years of age and it is also reported that he is

      suffering from Tuberculosis (TB). Therefore, considering

      such mitigating circumstances we are of the opinion that if

      the life sentence is converted to fifteen years RI and the

      fine imposed by the Trial Court confirmed by the High

      Court to be maintained, it can be said to be an adequate

      punishment commensurate with the offence committed by

      the accused.
11.   In view of the above discussion the impugned judgment

      and order passed by the High Court and the learned

      Special Court convicting the accused for the offences

      punishable under
Sections 376(2)(i)
of IPC and
Section 5
of

      the POCSO Act and imposing the punishment under
Section 6
of the POCSO Act is hereby upheld. The accused

      is rightly held guilty for the aforesaid offences. However,

      for the reasons assigned hereinabove the sentence of life

      imprisonment is converted to that of fifteen (15) years RI

      with fine/compensation imposed by the Trial Court

      confirmed by the High Court. Now the accused shall
21
undergo fifteen (15) years RI with fine imposed by the Trial

      Court confirmed by the High Court for the aforesaid

      offences instead of life imprisonment. The present appeal

      is partly allowed to the aforesaid extent only.
…………………………………J.
                                      (M. R. SHAH)



                                      …………………………………J.
                                      (B.V. NAGARATHNA)
New Delhi,
February, 08th 2022
22