[Cites
41
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Waheed-Ur-Rehman Parra vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir on 25 February, 2022
Author:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
REPORTABLE


                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CRIMINAL APPEAL No.237 OF 2022
                                       (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No.9031/2021)


                         WAHEED-UR-REHMAN PARRA                                   …Appellant


                                                           Versus


                         UNION TERRITORY OF JAMMU & KASHMIR …Respondent



                                                    JUDGMENT
SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1.    The moot point arising for consideration in the present appeal is

                           whether in the case of certain witnesses being declared as protected

                           witnesses in the exercise of powers under
Section 173(6)
of the Code of

                           Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘
Cr.P.C
.’), read

                           with
Section 44
of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967

                           (hereinafter referred to as the ‘UAPA’) by the trial court, can the defence
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2022.02.25
seek recourse to the remedy under Section 207 and Section 161 of the
17:35:35 IST
Reason:
1
Cr.P.C
. for obtaining copies of redacted statements of these protected

  witnesses.
Background:
2.    A First Information Report (for short ‘FIR’), being FIR No.5/2020,

  was registered on 11.01.2020 under
Sections 18
,
19
,
20
,
38
&
39
of the

  UAPA read with
Sections 7
/
25
of the Arms Act, 1959 (hereinafter

  referred to as the ‘
Arms Act
’) and
Sections 3
/
4
of the Explosive

  Substance Act, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘
ES Act
’) against one

  Syed Naveed Mushtaq and others at P.S. Qazigund.            The National

  Investigation Agency (for short ‘NIA’) took up the investigation into this

  FIR under
Section 6(4)
read with
Section 8
of the NIA Act and the FIR

  was re-registered as RC/01/2020/NIA/JMU on 17.01.2020.                The

  appellant herein was arrested in the said FIR on 25.11.2020 and the NIA

  filed the second supplementary chargesheet in the FIR before the Court

  of 3rd Additional Sessions Judge, Jammu (Special Judge NIA Act) on

  22.03.2021 arraying the appellant as accused No.11 in the said

  supplementary chargesheet.
3.    On 22.12.2020, the respondent filed FIR No.31/2020 under
Sections 13
,
17
,
18
,
38
,
39
,
40
of the UAPA read with
Sections 120-B
,
2
121
,
121-A
and
124-A
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter

referred to as the ‘
IPC
’) at P.S. CIK, Srinagar without naming the

appellant. On the same set of allegations and evidence as that of the NIA

chargesheet, the respondent filed another final report/chargesheet in the

case arising out of FIR No.31/2020 before the Special Judge (NIA Act),

Srinagar where the appellant was arraigned as the sole accused. The

charges were framed against the appellant on 20.7.2021.
4.    The respondent herein moved an application under
Section 44
of

the UAPA read with
Section 173(6)
of the Cr.P.C. before the trial court

seeking declaration of five witnesses as protected witnesses and for

certain documents marked as D-1 to be excluded from the documents to

be provided to the accused. The trial court vide order dated 01.06.2021

allowed the application filed by the respondent herein, observing that in

view of the sensitivity of the case, it appeared that there was a threat to

the life and property of the witnesses and their families. Consequently

keeping in view the scope and object of
Section 44
of the UAPA, the

statements of prosecution witnesses marked as A-1 to A-5 were kept in a

sealed cover in view of their declaration as protected witnesses. In

addition, the documents marked as D-1 (which were also in a separate
3
sealed cover) were excluded from other documents and were placed in a

   sealed cover along with the statements of protected witnesses.

Trial Court Proceedings:
5.    An application under
Section 207
of the Cr.P.C. was filed by the

   appellant before the trial court praying for a redacted copy of the

   statements of protected witnesses A-1 to A-5. This was resisted by the

   respondents herein on the ground that the said application was not

   maintainable for the reason that whether copies of such statements

   needed to be furnished to the accused already stood decided by the trial

   court in terms of its order dated 01.06.2021. It was contended that
Section 207
Cr.P.C. was conditional upon
Section 173
Cr.P.C. and could

   not supersede it. The right of the accused to be supplied with all material

   as envisaged under
Section 207
Cr.P.C. could thus not be inferred to be

   absolute, which was quite evident from the reading of clause (iii) of
Section 207
Cr.P.C.. In addition it was contended that there was no

   power of review under the provisions of the
Cr.P.C
. and the prayer of the

   appellant would amount to seeking review of the earlier order dated

   01.06.2021.
6.    The trial court vide order dated 11.09.2021 allowed the application
4
of the appellant while observing that in view of
Section 44
, UAPA, and
Sections 207
and
173(6)
, Cr.P.C., it was amply clear that the prosecution

  was duty bound to provide the copies of the statements of protected

  witnesses A-1 to A-5 to the accused in order to provide a fair trial.

  Further, the order dated 01.06.2021 passed by the trial court did not

  restrict or inhibit the powers of the trial court under the aforementioned

  Sections.   It was opined that the object of the application of the

  prosecution was with the sole purpose of declaring the witnesses A-1 to

  A-5 as protected witnesses and nowhere did the order opine that the

  accused were precluded from obtaining the copies of the statements of

  those protected witnesses.
The High Court Proceedings:
7.    The respondents preferred an appeal before the High Court on the

  ground that the order dated 11.09.2021 would be in conflict with the

  earlier order dated 01.06.2021 and would negate the very purpose which

  was sought to be served in terms of the earlier order. It was further

  contended that this was essentially a review power which was sought to

  be exercised, and was procedurally and jurisdictionally not within the

  competence of the trial court. On the other hand, the appellant pleaded
5
that no appeal was maintainable arising from an interlocutory order.
8.    The High Court of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh vide impugned

   order dated 11.10.2021 allowed the appeal, observing that in the light of
Sections 17
&
44
of the UAPA it was clear that the legislature was fully

   aware of the existence of the general safeguards provided under
Section

   173(6)
Cr.P.C. and found it fit to give additional safeguards as mentioned

   in the said provisions.    The High Court opined in favour of the

   respondents, stating that the trial court having allowed the plea of

   protected witnesses and directing their testimonies to be kept in a sealed

   cover, permitting copies of redacted statements would amount to

   revisiting and reviewing its own orders, which was not permissible. The

   same would also expose the protected witnesses to vulnerability.

The Legal Position:
9.    In order to appreciate the controversy we would first set forth the

   legal position.
10.   The initial exercise of the power by the trial court was under
Section 173(6)
of the Cr.P.C. Chapter XII of the
Cr.P.C
. deals with

   “Information to the police and their powers to investigate”. Section 173

   refers to “Report of police officer on completion of investigation”. The
6
relevant provisions of
Section 173
Cr.P.C. read as under:
“173. Report of police officer on completion of investigation.
            (1) Every investigation under this Chapter shall be completed
            without unnecessary delay.
xxxx                xxxx                 xxxx              xxxx

            (6) If the police officer is of opinion that any part of any such
            statement is not relevant to the subject-matter of the
            proceedings or that its disclosure to the accused is not essential
            in the interests of justice and is inexpedient in the public
            interest, he shall indicate that part of the statement and append
            a note requesting the Magistrate to exclude that part from the
            copies to be granted to the accused and stating his reasons for
            making such request.”
11.      In the normal course of trial, all statements of prosecution

witnesses would have to be disclosed to the accused. Section 173(6) is

an exception to the said provision.             This is applicable in two

eventualities, viz.,

         a. Statement is not relevant to the subject matter of the

            proceedings.
b. Its disclosure to the accused is not essential in the interests of

            justice or expedient in the public interest.
It goes on to further state that such part of the statement be

      appended in a note requesting the Magistrate to exclude “that part
7
from the copies” to be granted to the accused and disclose the reasons

      for making such a request.
12.      A perusal of the application filed would show that the reason for

the same as set out by the Investigating Officer (for short ‘IO’) was that it

was a high profile case and would attract high public and media

attention, apart from some dreaded terrorist organisation(s) being part of

the conspiracy and the consequent investigation against them. There was

perceived to be an imminent danger to the life and property of such

witnesses and, thus, in the interest of justice and in the interest of these

witnesses they were required to be declared as protected witnesses. In

terms of
Section 44
of the UAPA, copies of their statements ought to be

excluded from the copies to be provided to the accused and be kept in a

sealed cover.
13.      We now turn to the second provision, which is
Section 44
of the

UAPA, which deals with “protection of witnesses” and reads as under:
“44. Protection of witnesses.—(1) Notwithstanding anything
            contained in the Code, the proceedings under this Act may, for
            reasons to be recorded in writing, be held in camera if the court
            so desires.
(2) A court, if on an application made by a witness in any
            proceeding before it or by the Public Prosecutor in relation to
8
such witness or on its own motion, is satisfied that the life of
         such witness is in danger, it may, for reasons to be recorded in
         writing, take such measures as it deems fit for keeping the
         identity and address of such witness secret.
(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
         provisions of sub-section (2), the measures which a court may
         take under that sub-section may include—
(a) the holding of the proceedings at a place to be decided
             by the court;
(b) the avoiding of the mention of the name and address of
             the witness in its orders or judgments or in any records of
             the case accessible to public;
(c) the issuing of any directions for securing that the identity
             and address of the witness are not disclosed;
(d) a decision that it is in the public interest to order that all
             or any of the proceedings pending before such a court shall
             not be published in any manner.
(4) Any person, who contravenes any decision or direction
         issued under sub-section (3), shall be punishable with
         imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, and
         shall also be liable to fine.”
14.   In terms of sub-section (2) of
Section 44
of the UAPA, if the

public prosecutor in relation to such witness pleads as aforesaid, then a

court on an application if satisfied that the life of such witness is in

danger, may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, take such measures as

it deems fit for keeping the “identity and address of such witness secret.”
9
We, thus, may say that the whole objective is that if from the testimony

of the witness, their location and identity can be deciphered, that portion

of the testimony should not be handed over. We are observing this in the

context of the prayer made by the accused before the trial court, where he

sought only the redacted statements of protected witnesses. We may also

simultaneously note that the order of the trial court dated 11.09.2021

permitted the same with a clear direction that the documents be delivered

after expunging the identity (name and address of the protected

witnesses) and relevant paras in their statements which disclosed their

occupation and identity. Thus, it went as far as to leave it to the Special

Public Prosecutor to take a call on what would be taken as relevant paras

in their statement which would disclose their occupation and identity,

apart from redaction of their names and addresses.
15.   We may also note that
Section 17
of the NIA Act is in pari materia

with the aforesaid provision.
16.
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C. deals with the “examination of

witnesses by police” while
Section 207
Cr.P.C. deals with the aspect of

“supply to the accused of copy of police report and other documents.”

This Section falls in Chapter XVI dealing with “commencement of
10
proceedings before Magistrates” and reads as under:
“207. Supply to the accused of copy of police report and
         other documents. – In any case where the proceeding has been
         instituted on a police report, the Magistrate shall without delay
         furnish to the accused, free of cost, a copy of each of the
         following:-
(i) the police report;
(ii) the first information report recorded under section 154;
(iii) the statements recorded under sub- section (3) of section
         161 of all persons whom the prosecution proposes to examine
         as its witnesses, excluding therefrom any part in regard to
         which a request for such exclusion has been made by the police
         officer under sub- section (6) of section 173;
(iv) the confessions and statements, if any, recorded under
         section 164;
(v) any other document or relevant extract thereof forwarded to
         the Magistrate with the police report under sub- section (5) of
         section 173:
Provided that the Magistrate may, after perusing any such part
         of a statement as is referred to in clause (iii) and considering
         the reasons given by the police officer for the request, direct
         that a copy of that part of the statement or of such portion
         thereof as the Magistrate thinks proper, shall be furnished to the
         accused:
Provided further that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any
         document referred to in clause (v) is voluminous, he shall,
         instead of furnishing the accused with a copy thereof, direct
         that he will only be allowed to inspect it either personally or
         through pleader in Court.”
11
17.     A reading of the aforesaid provision would show that it mandates a

      Magistrate, by using the word “shall”, without delay to furnish copy of

      what is specified therein, which would include statements recorded under

      sub-section (3) of Section 161 of all persons. The first proviso, however,

      carves out an exception that the Magistrate, in respect of clause (iii), after

      considering the reasons given by the police officer for the request, direct

      that a copy of that part of the statement or of such portion thereof as the

      Magistrate thinks proper, shall be furnished to the accused.

The Rival Contentions:
18.     Learned counsel for the appellant contended that the accused has a

      statutory right to get a copy of the witnesses’ statements in order to

      confront the witness during the course of trial in accordance with
Sections 161
and
207
of the Cr.P.C. and relied upon the judgment of this

      Court in
Mohd. Hussain v. State (GNCTD
)1 to emphasise that the

      accused has a right under the said provisions to receive copies of

      witnesses’ statements in order to mount and effective defence.
Additionally, in
Sidhartha Vashisht @ Manu Sharma v. State (NCT of

      Delhi
)2, it was opined that the right of the accused to receive the
1
(2012) 2 SCC 584
2
(2010) 6 SCC 1
12
documents and statements submitted before the court was absolute and

      must be adhered to. This was treated as a part of the requirement of a fair

      disclosure in a fair trial.
In
Jahid Sheikh v. State of Gujarat
3, this Court

      expressed a similar view with the conclusion that it was the duty of the

      Sessions Court to supply copies of the chargesheet and all relevant

      documents relied upon by the prosecution under
Sections 207
and
208
Cr.P.C., and the same could not be treated as an empty formality.
19.     Learned counsel for the appellant requested this Court to strike a

      balance, so as to not compromise fair trial in cases where special laws

      require concealment of the identity of witnesses. The counsel for

      appellant sought to justify the direction of the trial court as a very

      reasonable one, leaving it to the SPP himself to redact the appropriate

      information so as to safeguard the witnesses and their identities.
20.     On the aspect of a review power being exercised by the trial court,

      which was not within its jurisdiction, it was urged that the first direction

      to designate certain witnesses as protected witnesses was in the absence

      of the accused.     That was a distinct nature of proceedings.        Those

      proceedings could not take away the right of an accused to be supplied

      with witness statements as the objective was only to protect the witnesses
3
(2011) 7 SCC 762
13
and not to take out the whole statement out of the purview of
Section 207
of the Cr.P.C.       The second order dated 11.9.2021 was to fulfil the

      mandate of
Section 207
of the Cr.P.C., subject to the precautions to be

      taken in that behalf.
21.     Lastly it was sought to be urged that no appeal was maintainable

      before the High Court appeals against interlocutory orders are barred

      under
Section 21
of the NIA Act, which would equally apply to the

      prosecution and the defence.       To appreciate the contentions, we are

      reproducing
Section 21(1)
of the NIA Act, which provides an exception

      to interlocutory orders and reads as under:
“21 Appeals. - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
                  Code, an appeal shall lie from any judgment, sentence or order,
                  not being an interlocutory order, of a Special Court to the High
                  Court both on facts and on law.”
22.
Interestingly, a Division Bench of the Kerala High Court in
D.

      Subair T.P. & Ors. v. Union of India4
has opined on a similar issue by

      giving similar terms to the accused as the trial court in its order dated

      11.09.2021. However, the discretion to redact portions of the statement

      has been left to the trial court instead of the Special Prosecutor. No

      judgment of this Court under these provisions has been brought to our
4
(2021) 1 KLT (SN 17)
14
notice.
23.     On the other hand learned counsel for the respondent resisted the

      appeal essentially on the ground that the power of review was not

      available with the trial court (
Atul Shukla v. State of M.P. & Anr.
5). It

      was urged that in view of the charges levelled against the appellant, it

      was expedient in public interest for certain facts to be excluded from

      disclosure as there was an imminent threat to the life and safety of

      witnesses and their families.
Conclusion:
24.     On a conspectus of the aforesaid legal position and the limited

      contours of the facts required for determination of the issue, we are of the

      view that the provisions of
Section 173(6)
of the Cr.P.C. read with

      Section 44 of the UAPA and
Section 17
of the NIA Act stand on a

      different plane with different legal implications as compared to
Section

      207
of the Cr.P.C.     We say so as the first order was passed at the

      threshold. There was no notice to the accused. The objective of Section

      44, UAPA,
Section 17
, NIA Act, and Section 173(6) is to safeguard

      witnesses. They are in the nature of a statutory witness protection. On

      the court being satisfied that the disclosure of the address and name of
5
(2019) 17 SCC 299
15
the witness could endanger the family and the witness, such an order can

be passed. They are also in the context of special provisions made for

offences under special statutes. These considerations weighed with the

trial court while passing the order dated 01.06.2021, and even the

appellant has no quibble with the same.
25.   The occasion for the appellant/accused to come in and seek

redacted statements under
Section 207
of the Cr.P.C. arose when the trial

was to commence and the appellant was of the view that in order to plead

an appropriate defence there should be full disclosure minus the redacted

portion so that the testimonies of those witnesses could be utilised

without disclosing their identities or their place of residence. This is not,

in our view, an exercise of the power of review but the exercise of

powers at two different stages of proceedings under two different

provisions. The plea of the prosecution of this being a review power is,

thus misplaced. There is no doubt that the power of review is not

available with the trial court and the question was whether the exercise of

the power by the trial court under the two separate provisions vide orders

dated 01.06.2021 and 11.09.2021 can at all be said to be the power of

review in the latter order. The answer to this is clearly in the negative.
16
26.   We may also note another aspect arising from there being no

appeal against an interlocutory order. This aspect somehow has not been

dealt with by the High Court possibly because it opined that the latter

order amounted to a review of the earlier order. The appellant had not

challenged the earlier order dated 01.06.2021 and could not have done

so. Similarly the latter order could not have been challenged in appeal by

the respondents, being in the nature of an interlocutory order given the

provisions of
Section 21(1)
of the NIA Act.
27.   Having said so, we also come to the order passed by the trial court

on 11.09.2021 which has been cautiously worded. The order has not

only permitted redaction of the address and particulars of the witnesses

which could disclose their identities but has further observed as noted

aforesaid that even other relevant paras in the statement which would

disclose their occupation and identity could be redacted. Thus, a wide

discretion has been given and that too for the Special Public Prosecutor

to take a call. There could thus have hardly been a grievance raised by

the prosecution in this regard. On query to the learned counsel for the

respondent as to how this order can in any manner prejudice or have the

propensity to disclose the identity of the witnesses or their families with
17
the possibility of harm being caused to them, there has really been no

  answer. We believe that the order dated 11.09.2021 is both fair and

  reasonable for the prosecution and defence while protecting the witnesses

  and not depriving the defence of a fair trial with the disclosure of the

  redacted portion of the testimony under Section 207 of the Cr.P.C.
28.   The result of the aforesaid is that the impugned judgment of the

  High Court dated 11.10.2021 is set aside and the impugned order of the

  trial court dated 11.09.2021 is restored.
29.   The appeal is allowed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
………………………J.
                                                   [Sanjay Kishan Kaul]



                                                   ....……………………J.
                                                        [M.M. Sundresh]
New Delhi.
February 25, 2022.
18