[Cites
29
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Oil And Natural Gas Corporation Ltd vs The President, Oil Field Employees ... on 4 February, 2022
Author:
Aniruddha Bose
Bench:
Aniruddha Bose
,
L. Nageswara Rao
REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1033 OF 2022
                         (ARISING OUT OF PETITION FOR SPECIAL LEAVE TO
                                 APPEAL (CIVIL) NO. 9456 OF 2020)



                M/S. OIL AND NATURAL GAS
                CORPORATION LTD.                             …..APPELLANT(S)

                                            VERSUS

                THE PRESIDENT, OIL FIELD
                EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION & ORS.               ….RESPONDENT(S)



                                           JUDGMENT
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J.
Leave granted.
2.        The appellants before us are Oil and Natural Gas

                Corporation Limited (in short “ONGC”), a public sector

                undertaking engaged in the business of exploration and

                production of oil and gas. In this appeal, they assail a judgment

                of the Bombay High Court delivered on 30th January, 2020 in
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2022.02.07
15:59:41 IST
Reason:
Writ Petition No. 13015 of 2019 in which the claims of workmen

                to be entitled to fixation of pay and other allowances as per an
1
award of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal No. II,

(“Tribunal”) Mumbai has been upheld with certain modification

in the implementation part of that award.       The controversy

involved in this proceeding originates from a Direct Action notice

raised by a Union (Oil Field Employees Association represented

by their President-respondent no.1 in the present appeal) on

26th August, 2016. The workmen, whose cause the said Union

were espousing, were engaged by and getting their salaries paid

through different contractors appointed by the ONGC. ONGC’s

stand all along has been that these were contractors’

workmen – and not workmen of ONGC. In fact, ONGC’s case is

that another settlement has been reached with the Unions

representing majority of the contractors’ workmen (over 77%)

and that settlement arrived at on 19th September, 2016 is

binding on all similar workmen including those represented by

the respondent Unions. We shall address this issue later in this

judgment.    Earlier,   there   were    three   memoranda       of

understanding reached in the years 1992, 1995 and 2000

involving ONGC and different Unions representing the contract

workmen working with the ONGC. These memoranda covered

wages, allowances and other facilities to be provided by the

contractors to the “contract labour”. Copies of these memoranda
2
of understanding have been annexed at pages 93, 102 and 113

of the paperbook. The 2000 MoU had lapsed on 31st December,

2007.
3.   There had been certain parallel developments on the

industrial front involving ONGC and Unions espousing the

cause of workmen engaged by their contractors, which cast a

shadow on the dispute giving rise to this appeal. Six Unions

representing workmen engaged by contractors had submitted a

charter of 28 demands against ONGC and 57 of their

contractors. This was admitted for conciliation. ONGC wanted

to introduce a Fair Wage Policy (“FWP”) to cover contract

employees. Negotiation in that regard had started among the

parties.   A Memorandum of Settlement was signed on 19th

September, 2016 (to which we have already referred) under

which the FWP extended to contract labourers of Western

Offshore Unit, Mumbai was agreed to be implemented at all

work-centers of ONGC.      This settlement, according to the

appellants, was in terms of Section 12(3) read with
Section

18(3)(d)
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (the Act) and

entailed upward revision of wages as also certain other

measures of social protection including job security. The

signatories to this settlement were contractors’ representatives
3
and representatives of six Unions “In the presence of and

representing principal employers” as also the Conciliation

Officer. The representatives of ONGC signed in the capacity of

representatives of the principal employer. The Tribunal and the

High Court, however, held that the aforesaid arrangement was

not settlement within the meaning of
Section 18(3)(d)
of the Act

and was not binding on the workmen involved in the subject

dispute. The Tribunal had also referred to certain order of status

quo passed by the High Court to sustain its finding on this

count. We shall however address this issue on merit, testing

the reasoning of the High Court given in the impugned

judgment.
4.   The respondent-Oil Field Employees Association (the

actual party-respondent no. 1 is the President of the Oil Field

Employees Association) issued the Direct Action Notice on 26th

August, 2016 to the appellants. This Union was registered in

the year 2014 and claims to represent workmen engaged by

contractors of the ONGC. On 19th September, 2016 itself, one

P.D. Sunny, Conciliation Officer called the appellants and the

first respondent for conciliation of dispute arising out of the

notice for direct action of 26th August, 2016. On 26th September,

2016, a Charter of Demands was submitted before the
4
Conciliation Officer with a copy to the appellants. The main

demand of the respondent no.1 was that wages and service

conditions of the workmen engaged by the contractor should be

at par with the regular employees of ONGC.
5.   Thereafter, in course of conciliation proceeding the FWP

was brought on record and the respondent no. 1 questioned the

legitimacy of the FWP. The conciliation records subsequently

were transferred from said P.D. Sunny to one Dr. S. Gunahari,

Conciliation Officer & Regional Labour Commissioner (C),

Mumbai.     The latter recorded failure of conciliation and

forwarded the failure report to the Central Government. The

dispute then was referred by the Central Government to the

Tribunal and it was registered as Ref. CGIT No.2/40 of 2017.

The reference order was made by the Central Government on

18th September, 2017 in terms of
Section 10(2A) (1) (d)
of the

Act. The order of reference was in the following terms:-
“Whether the following demands of The President, Oil
        Field Employees Association are legal and justified?
1. To have uniform policies for all the
               workers irrespective of the contracts in
               the establishment of ONGC.
2. To get the MOU renewed with pay
               Revisions w.e.f. 1.1.2008.
3. To advise M/s. ONGC Management to
               release an advance of Rs.50,000/- per
               worker and to adjust it with the arrears
               after implementation of the Pay Revisions.
5
If not, to what relief the workmen are
                 entitled to?”
6.   ONGC questioned the legality of the order of reference in a

writ petition filed in the High Court of Bombay (registered as

Writ Petition No.5045 of 2018).          This writ petition was not

entertained by a Division Bench of the High Court and was

rejected by an Order passed on 29th January, 2019. It was,

inter-alia, held in this order:-
“8) It is further to be noted that in pursuance to the
             communication addressed by the Petitioner to the
             Chief Labour Commissioner, a Conciliation Officer
             vide his notice dated 15th September 2016 kept the
             matter for conciliation on 19th September, 2016 at
             12:30 hrs. Perusal of the minutes would reveal that
             in the said meeting, the representative of the
             Petitioner as well as the Respondent No.3 were
             directed to do certain compliances. However, it
             appears that on same day i.e. 19th September 2016
             at 15:00 hrs., settlement was entered into by the
             representatives of the certain Union and ONGC and
             57 contractors of the ONGC. It is to be noted that
             though the said settlement was to be arrived on
             the same day, the Petitioner neither informed the
             Conciliation Officer in the present proceedings
             about such a settlement being arrived at. The
             conduct of the Petitioner in not bringing to the
             notice of the Conciliation Officer in the present
             proceedings, the settlement which was to arrive
             within hours with representative of certain Unions
             before some other Conciliation Officer, in our
             considered view is not a conduct befitting the
             employer who is an organ of State and State
             within the meaning of
Article 12
of the
             Constitution of India.
9) It is further to be noted that though the
             Respondent No.3 and the Petitioner have completed
             their pleadings before the learned CGIT and though
             there were rounds of litigations, which reached upto
             this Court arising out of the interlocutory orders, the
6
Petitioner has chosen to move this Court for
            ad-interim orders only after the matter was kept for
            their evidence. We are of the considered view that
            having consciously submitted to the jurisdiction of
            the learned CGIT, it is not now open for the
            Petitioner to complain at such a belated stage that
            the reference was not warranted.
10) Apart from that the question as to whether the
            settlement arrived at between some of the Unions
            at one hand and the Petitioner's contractors on the
            other hand is binding on the Respondent No.3 and
            intervenors, can be very well looked into by the
            learned Tribunal in the proceedings before it.
11) In that view of the matter, we are not inclined
            to entertain the present Petition in its extraordinary
            jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution of
            India. The Writ Petition is therefore rejected.”
7.   In the reference, two other Unions participated and were

impleaded as parties therein on the basis of their applications.

These two Unions are Maharashtra Sanghatit Asanghatit

Kamgar Sabha (respondent no.2) and Maharashtra Employees

Union (respondent no.3).
8.   The Tribunal by its Order passed on 17th July, 2019 in

substance allowed the claim of the workmen articulated through

the Unions and ordered:-
“1. The reference is allowed.
2. It is declared that the demands of the union
               to have uniform policies for all the workers
               irrespective     of    contracts    in   the
               establishment of ONGC and to get the MOU
               renewed with pay revision w.e.f. 1.1.2008
               are legal & justified.
7
3. First party management is directed to enter
                into MOU with second party unions with
                pay revision w.e.f. 1.1.2008 and implement
                the same within 2 months from the date of
                order.
4. On renewal of MOU the first party
                management is directed to pay arrears
                arising out of implementation of MOUs
                within 2 months from the date of order
                failing which concerned workmen would be
                entitled to interest @ 6% per annum on the
                arrears and other benefits to which they are
                entitled to on implementation of MOU.”
9.   The High Court sustained the award in the writ petition

brought by ONGC on substantive issues but partly allowed the

petition challenging the legality thereof, inter-alia, holding:-
“20. Coming now to the reliefs formulated by it,
             it is but apparent that the tribunal does not
             appear to have applied its mind to individual
             revisions that may have to be made. As we
             have noted above, there is no infirmity in the
             conclusion of the tribunal that wage revisions
             had to be on the lines of MbPT settlement for
             the relevant period, but then based on related
             MbPT settlements, the court had to work out
             individual wage revisions for different
             categories of workmen, whose cause was
             espoused by the second party unions in the
             present case. The tribunal, firstly, had to work
             out individual revised wage scales and
             allowances for workmen at 12 Victoria Dock
             and Nhava Supply Base; it, then, had to
             formulate reasonable consolidated wages for
             workmen other than those working in 12
             Victoria Dock and Nhava Supply Base. This the
             tribunal appears to have clearly failed to do. It
             left it to the parties to work out the individual
             revisions. That I am afraid is not possible. It is
             one thing to say that the basis of wage revision
             is available in a document and quite another to
             apply that basis to the individual facts of the
             case. For example, it is one thing to say that
             workmen other than those working in 12VD
8
and Nhava Supply Base were to be paid wages,
that is, consolidated wages, worked out on the
basis of minimum basic wages of the concerned
categories of MbPT workers plus adjustments
towards allowances, and quite another to
actually provide for and stipulate such
consolidated wages so calculated and adjusted.
This was obviously for the tribunal to do and
not for the parties to work out. The tribunal
appears to have clearly missed this point. To
that extent, the matter must go back to CGIT
for     determination    of    actual    wage
scales/allowances of workmen working in
12VD and Nhava Supply Base (based on MbPT
scales/allowances) as well as other workmen
covered by the reference (for consolidated
wages based on MbPT scales and allowances).
21. The question then is of interim relief to be
granted      to    these     workmen      pending
consideration of the matter on remand by
CGIT. It is a matter of fact, and probably a sad
commentary on the times that we live in, that
the last wage revision of these workmen
occurred as far back as in 2000. That wage
revision was applicable only till 31 December
2007 and till date, there has been no further
revision in sight, though at least three revision
periods have gone by. On these facts, this court
is of a considered view that it would be in the
interest of justice to at least direct ONGC to pay
wages to the workmen concerned on the basis
of what was agreed in the settlement of 19
September 2016 minus its condition of
withdrawal of proceedings against ONGC.
These would indeed be minimum wages that
might in any case be payable to the concerned
workmen, that is to say, even if the unions were
wrong in the matter of calculation of wages in
accordance with the particulars submitted with
the statement of claim. If, on the other hand,
they were right that the workmen were entitled
to get wages in accordance with the particulars
submitted by them, these interim revised wages
could then be adjusted against such wages.
22. The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed
of by setting aside the operative order passed
by CGIT and remitting the reference, being
Reference No.CGIT-2/40 of 2017, to CGIT-2,
Mumbai for a fresh decision on (i) individual
9
wage scales and (ii) consolidated wages
            payable, respectively, to the contract workmen
            of ONGC working at (i) 12 Victoria Dock and
            Nhava Supply Base and (ii) the other workmen
            covered by the reference. It is made clear that
            such determination must be in the light of what
            has been observed above, in particular that the
            wage revision/s of these workmen has/have to
            be on the lines of the wage revision/s applicable
            to workmen of MbPT, which are placed before
            the court (i.e. MbPT settlements applicable for
            the periods from 2007 to 2011 and from 2012
            to 2016).
23. The tribunal is requested to accord top
            priority to this determination and dispose of the
            reference as expeditiously as possible and
            preferably within a period of eight months from
            the date this order is pointed out to the
            tribunal. To that end, either party may appear
            before the tribunal with notice to the other side
            and produce an authenticated copy of this
            order. The tribunal may thereupon fix the
            schedule of hearings and decide the reference
            accordingly.
24. Pending hearing and final disposal of the
            reference on remand, interim wages shall be
            paid to the concerned workmen by ONGC for
            the whole of the period of revision in
            accordance with MoS of 19 September 2016
            and also prospectively from the month of March
            2020.
25. Since the operative part of the award of
            CGIT has been set aside, pending criminal
            proceedings for non-implementation of the
            award shall not be proceeded with.”
10. The workmen, whose cause the three Unions espouse were

those who were inducted by contractors and were getting their

salaries paid through the contractors only. The main claim of

the workmen was for having a uniform policy for all workmen,

irrespective of contracts under which they were engaged in the
10
matter of wages and allowances. Last of the memoranda of

understanding signed in the years 1992, 1995 and 2000 was

executed on 29th December, 2000. The wage revision provided

for in the last memorandum of December, 2000 was to operate

till 31st December, 2007. Primarily, signatories to these

memoranda are the appellants-employer and the Unions. The

respective   contractors   were   not   signatories   to   these

memoranda. One of the major characteristics of the terms

contained therein, though not specifically spelt out in the

memoranda themselves, is that the wages and allowances

agreed upon therein were linked to the lines of settlement

signed between Mumbai Port Trust (earlier Bombay Port

Trust) and their workmen.    We shall henceforth refer to that

settlement as MbPT Settlement. These memoranda classified

contract employees in two categories, one set working for

Victoria Dock 12 and Nhava Supply base and the other set

working at various other locations including Mumbai and

Uran. There was variance in pay and allowance between these

two categories of workmen. This was in the case of 1992

settlement whereas the 1995 settlement followed similar line

of categorisation, but included workmen engaged in Panvel
11
to Mumbai and Uran.       The same form of categorisation was

there in the “2000 Settlement.”
11. Appearing on behalf of the appellants Mr. Cama, learned

senior counsel, has primarily argued on two points. His first

submission has been that the reference itself was not

maintainable as none of the workmen the Unions were

representing or espousing the causes of were employed by the

appellants. He has pointed out the definition of workmen in
Section 2(s)
of the Act in this behalf. The other point on which

submission was advanced by him was that the Settlement

arrived at on 19th September, 2016 covered all the employees

of contractors, considering the provisions of
Section 18(3)(d)
.

The Unions have been represented by Mr. Pallav Shishodia,

learned senior counsel and Mr. Shaligram G. Mishra,

respondent no. 1 appearing in person. The stand of the

Unions on the other hand has been that the concerned

workmen were actually employees of the appellants and

before the Tribunal itself, it was their case that their

engagement by the contractor would not by itself make them

contractors’ employees.    It is also their stand that the

settlement of 19th September, 2016 could not be treated to be

one under
Section 18(3)(d)
of the Act to bind the workmen
12
represented by the three Unions in this appeal. First, it has

been contended that the said settlement has not taken final

shape as certain procedural aspects for conclusion thereof is

yet to be taken. It has also been argued on their behalf that

the said settlement related to contractors’ workmen only

whereas the workmen involved in the present proceeding were

not employees of the contractors who had signed the said

settlement. On the other hand, the workers represented by

the Union are working in the establishment of the appellants

for a long period of time and they claimed to be entitled to the

service benefits directly from ONGC.
12. The Tribunal rejected the objection on jurisdictional

ground taken on the point that the concerned workmen were

not employees of the appellants and hence no dispute could

lie with ONGC. The Tribunal has also given the finding that

the FWP could not be treated as fair settlement as it entailed

withdrawal of the proceedings lodged by individual workmen

or Unions. It has been urged on behalf of the respondents that

many of these proceedings were for regularization or

absorption directly into the appellant company, a dispute

which has intricate link with the controversy involved in the

present proceeding. Mr. Cama has asserted that the finding
13
of the High Court on facts was perverse, and, on that count,

he invited interference by this Court in exercise of its

jurisdiction under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India. He

has relied on the decisions of this Court in the cases of
Workmen of the Food Corporation of India vs. Food

Corporation of India
[(
1985) 2 SCC 136], Parimal Chandra

Raha & Ors. vs. Life Insurance Corporation of India and

Ors.
[(1995) Supp (2) SCC 611], Indian Petrochemicals

Corporation Ltd. and Anr. vs. Shramik Sena & Ors. [(1996)

6 SCC 439] and Steel Authority of India Ltd. & Ors. vs.

National Union Waterfront Workers & Ors. [(2001) 7 SCC

1] in support of his submission that the workmen of the

contractor would not become the workmen of the principal

employer.
He has also cited the case of Secretary, State of

Karnataka & Ors. vs. Uma Devi & Ors. [(2006) 4 SCC 1] to

contend that there could not be backdoor entry of contractors’

employees directly into the establishment of the principal

employer. This genre of cases has been cited mainly in

support of two propositions of law urged on behalf of the

appellants. First is that there must be a jural relationship

brought about by an agreement to establish employer-

employee relationship between contractors’ employees and
14
that of the principal employer. Secondly, abolition of contract

labour in certain industries does not result in automatic

absorption of the workmen engaged by them in the concerned

establishment.
In the case of
Parimal Chandra Raha
(supra),

however, it has been held that where there was statutory

requirement of maintaining of canteens and the canteens of

the   respondent   corporation   had    become   part   of   the

establishment, the contractors engaged from time to time in

reality were agencies of the corporation and were only a veil

between the corporation and canteen workers.
In the case of

Steel Authority of India Limited of 2001 (supra), it has been

held that abolition of contract labour in certain in any part of

an establishment by a notification under
Section 10(1)
of the

Contract Labour (Regularization and Abolition) Act, 1970

(1970 Act) automatically does not lead to absorption of

contract labour working in those parts directly in the

establishment      concerned.
The     case     of   Indian

Petrochemicals (supra) mainly follows the ratio laid down in

the case of
Parimal Chandra Raha
(supra).
The proposition

of law
laid down in
the case of
Steel Authority of India

Limited vs. Union of India & Ors.
reported in [(2006) 12 SCC

233] is that mutually destructive plea that the employees were
15
of contractor and the principal employer could not be taken.
The ratio of the decision of Uma Devi (supra) also would not

apply in the facts of the present case. Here, the issue is not

of backdoor entry into an establishment but finding out

subsisting status of a set of workmen on the question as to

who is their actual employer. For determination of the fate of

the dispute raised by Unions, adjudication of the former

question becomes inevitable.
13. Mr. Cama has emphasised on the ratio of the case of
Mukand        Ltd.   vs.    Mukand         Staff     and      Officers’

Association
[(2004) 10 SCC 460]. In this judgment it has

been held:-
“23. We have already referred to the order of reference
        dated 17-2-1993 in paragraph supra. The dispute
        referred to by the order of reference is only in respect
        of workmen employed by the appellant Company. It
        is, therefore, clear that the Tribunal, being a creature
        of the reference, cannot adjudicate matters not within
        the purview of the dispute actually referred to it by
        the order of reference. In the facts and circumstances
        of the present case, the Tribunal could not have
        adjudicated the issue of salaries of the employees who
        are not workmen under the Act nor could it have
        covered such employees by its award. Even assuming,
        without admitting, that the reference covered the
        non-workmen, the Tribunal, acting within its
        jurisdiction under the Act, could not have adjudicated
        the dispute insofar as it related to the “non-
        workmen.”
16
14. As regards the lack of jurisdiction of the Tribunal to

determine or adjudicate the dispute between the appellants

and the workmen represented by the three Unions, perusal of

the award does not reveal that this point was pressed before

the Tribunal by the employer. We accept that the Tribunal

could not go beyond the disputes that were referred to it, as

held in the case of
Mukand Ltd.
(supra). But legality of the

order of reference was challenged by ONGC in Writ Petition(C)

No. 5045 of 2018. In the judgment of the Division Bench,

which we have already quoted, it was opined on the aspect of

jurisdiction of the Tribunal, that it was not open for the

petitioner to complain at such a belated stage that the

reference was not warranted. In the judgment of the High

Court under challenge before us, this question was dealt with

and it was held :-
“5. Apropos the first objection of Mr. Talsania, which,
        according to him, goes to the root of the matter, it
        must be noted at the very outset that the jurisdiction
        of the tribunal in the present case to adjudicate the
        reference was never questioned by ONGC on the
        ground that the workmen represented by the second
        party were not ‘workmen’ within the meaning of
section 2(s)
of the Act, particularly, because they were
        employees of contractors and not of ONGC. If this
        issue was not part of the lis before the reference court,
        there was no way it could be raised before the writ
        court. The issue is, after all, a mixed issue of law and
        facts; it would have to be adjudicated first before the
        trial court upon foundational pleadings in that behalf
        being led before it, before the writ court, in its scrutiny
17
of the order of the trial court, could be asked to go into
it.
6. Mr. Talsania, however, submits that the fact that
these workmen were employees of contractors is not
really in dispute; the reference itself termed them as
workmen engaged through contractors. The question
is not whether the workmen were engaged through
contractors. That may indeed be an apparent
position. The question is whether, by reason of
perennial nature of the work at the premises of the
principal employer, and having regard to the
circumstances bearing on their service and service
conditions, whether the workmen could be said to be
in reality employees of the principal employer despite
the apparent position that they were engaged through
contractors. Indeed, there was a clear statement on
the part of the workmen in the statement of claim of
the second party that they were in fact and in reality
workmen of ONGC and not of the contractors. No
doubt, in its written statement, ONGC contested this
position, and in their rejoinder second party No.2
union reiterated its statement that the contract/s
was/were sham and bogus. It is apparent from the
impugned award of the tribunal, however, that this
issue was not pressed by ONGC at the hearing. The
issue anyway reflected on the jurisdiction of CGIT to
adjudicate the reference and ONGC did not choose to
contest the jurisdiction on the issue. Had the issue
been pressed by ONGC before the reference court, the
second party would have led appropriate evidence in
support of its case in this behalf. It obviously chose
not to do so, because this question was not debated
by ONGC before the reference court. Could the second
party be then visited with the consequence of having
to deal with this issue merely on the basis of the
material available before this court at the stage of a
scrutiny under
Articles 226
or 227 of the Constitution
of India. The answer would be an emphatic “no”. The
second party would most certainly be seriously
inconvenienced if it were now required to sustain its
plea in the statement of claim of the workmen being
in reality employees of ONGC, without having had an
opportunity to lead evidence in support of such case
before trial court. For whatever reasons, ONGC found
it worth its while not to contest the jurisdiction of the
tribunal in the reference and this court, sitting as a
writ court, must leave the matter at that and not
scrutinize it any further.”
18
15. On the question of raising issue of lack of jurisdiction

before the Tribunal, the cases of
Rattan Lal Sharma vs.

Managing Committee, Dr. Hari Ram (Co-Education) Higher

Secondary School & Ors.
[(1993) 4 SCC 10], Secretary to

Govt. of India and Others vs. Shivram Mahadu Gaikwad

[(
1995) Supp (3) SCC 231] and Kalyani Sharp India Ltd. vs.

Labour
Court No.1, Gwalior & Anr. [(2002) 9 SCC 655] were

relied upon by the appellants. We accept, as a proposition of

law, that if irregularity or illegality committed by a Tribunal

touches upon the jurisdiction to try and determine over a

subject dispute is altogether beyond its purview, that question

would go to the root of the matter and it would be within the

jurisdiction of the superior court to correct such error.
In the

case of
Kalyani Sharp India Ltd.
(supra) raising a plea on

application of law was found permissible at the appellate stage

before this Court, but
in that case
no fresh investigation of

fact was required. But in the facts of the present case, it is

not the question of inherent lack of jurisdiction on the part of

the Tribunal. The question of jurisdiction, as held by the High

Court was a mixed question of fact and law.
Both the cases

of
Rattan Lal Sharma
(supra) and
Kalyani Sharp India Ltd.
(supra) arose out of admitted fact.
In the case of Shivram
19
Mahadu Gaikwad (supra) it was the limitation question which

went to the root of the matter. This case arose out of a

proceeding before the Central Administrative Tribunal. Point

was taken before the Tribunal by the Union of India but was

not addressed to in the judgment of the Tribunal. So far as

the present proceeding is concerned, as reflected in the

judgment under appeal, there was a clear statement on the

part of the workmen in the statement of the second party

(Union) before the Tribunal that in fact and reality, the

concerned workmen were employees of ONGC and were not of

the contractors. This was denied by the ONGC but in their

rejoinder the said Union reiterated their stand that the

contracts were sham and bogus. In the award, certain other

reference orders were cited which involved adjudication of the

question as to whether contracts between ONGC’s contractors

and workmen engaged by them were sham and bogus. (Ref.

No. CGIT I 16, 17, 18 and 19/2005) or not and if the said

workmen in reality were ONGC’s workmen only. In the case

of Steel Authority of India of 2001 (supra), it has been laid

down that in cases where plea is raised that a contract is

found to be sham and nominal, a camouflage to suppress the

actual status of a workman vis-à-vis who his employer is, the
20
veil could be pierced to find out the such status.
If to this

perspective is added the fact that earlier three MoUs were

entered into directly by ONGC with the Unions representing

contractors’ workmen, this question does not remain a

question of law alone, to be sustained with the aid of the ratio

of the cases of
Rattan Lal Sharma
(supra), Shivram Mahadu

Gaikwad (supra) and
Kalyani Sharp India Ltd.
(supra).

Signatories to the earlier MoUs were the appellants and the

Unions and
Section 30(2)
of the Contract Labour (Regulation

and Abolition) Act, 1970 permits contract labourers to enter

into   agreements   with   principal   employers.    Thus,   by

themselves, the aforesaid MoUs would not establish that the

contract workmen are workmen of the principal employer. But

the circumstances which we have narrated clearly point to the

relationship between the appellants and the workmen

represented by the respondent Unions in that direction. The

stand that the concerned workmen were employees of the

principal employer were not specifically outlined in the

reference, but was implicit therein. In the reference order the

dispute therein was between ONGC and the Union. The

Charter of Demand was also raised against ONGC. The

Tribunal examined the issue and returned its finding which
21
was upheld by the High Court. This was a finding of fact.
In

the case of
National Engineering Industries Limited vs.

State of Rajasthan & Ors.
[(2000) 1 SCC 371] it has been

held that the Industrial Tribunal is the creation of statute and

it cannot go into the question on validity of the reference. That

issue ought to be considered by the High Court, according to

the appellants. So far as the present proceeding is concerned,

the High Court has considered that question and we do not

find any error in the approach of the High Court in deciding

the jurisdiction question against the appellants.
16. Next comes the issue as to whether the settlement of 19th

September, 2016 was binding on the Unions who are before

us as respondents, having regard to the provisions of
Section

18(3) (d)
of the Act.
Section 18
of the Act stipulates:-
“18. Persons on whom settlements and
             awards are binding.- (1) A settlement arrived
             at by agreement between the employer and
             workman otherwise than in the course of
             conciliation proceeding shall be binding on
             the parties to the agreement.
(2)    Subject    to    the   provisions    of
             sub-section (3), an arbitration award which
             has become enforceable shall be binding on
             the parties to the agreement who referred the
             dispute to arbitration.
(3) A settlement arrived at in the course of
             conciliation proceedings under this Act or an
             arbitration award in a case where a
             notification has been issued under sub-
section (3A) of section 10A or an award of a
             Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal
22
which has become enforceable shall be
             binding on—
(a) all parties to the industrial dispute;
(b) all other parties summoned to appear in
             the proceedings as parties to the dispute,
             unless the Board, arbitrator, Labour Court,
             Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case
             may be, records the opinion that they were so
             summoned without proper cause;
(c) where a party referred to in clause (a) or
             clause (b) is an employer, his heirs,
             successors or assigns in respect of the
             establishment to which the dispute relates;
(d) where a party referred to in clause (a) or
             clause (b) is composed of workmen, all
             persons who were employed in the
             establishment or part of the establishment,
             as the case may be, to which the dispute
             relates on the date of the dispute and all
             persons who subsequently become employed
             in that establishment or part.”
17.
In the case of
Ramnagar Cane and Sugar Company

Ltd. vs. Jatin Chakravorty & Ors.
[(1960) 3 SCR, 968], the

binding nature of a settlement on all persons employed in an

establishment has been explained, having regard to
Section

18(3)(d)
of the Act.
This principle was reaffirmed in the case of
General Manager, Security Paper Mill, Hoshangabad vs.

R.S. Sharma and Others
[(1986) 2 SCC 151].
It has been
laid

down in
the case of
Ramnagar Cane and Sugar Company

Ltd.
(supra):-
“5. In appreciating the merits of the rival
             contentions thus raised in this appeal it is
             necessary to bear in mind the scheme of the
             Act. It is now well settled that an industrial
             dispute can be raised in regard to any matter
23
only when it is sponsored by a body of
workmen acting through a union or otherwise.
When an industrial dispute is thus raised and
is decided either by settlement or by an award
the scope and effect of its operation is
prescribed by
Section 18
of the Act. Section
18(1) provides that a settlement arrived at by
agreement between the employer and the
workman otherwise than in the course of
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the
parties to the agreement; whereas Section
18(3) provides that a settlement arrived at in
the course of conciliation proceedings which
has become enforceable shall be binding on all
the parties specified in clauses (a), (b), (c) and
(d) of sub-section (3).
Section 18(3)(d)
makes it
clear that, where a party referred to in clauses
(a) or (b) is composed of workmen, all persons
who were employed in the establishment or
part of the establishment, as the case may be,
to which the dispute relates on the date of the
dispute and all persons who subsequently
become employed in that establishment or
part, would be bound by the settlement. In
other words, there can be no doubt that the
settlement arrived at between the appellant
and the Employees' Union during the course
of conciliation proceedings on February 25,
1954, would bind not only the members of the
said Union but all workmen employed in the
establishment of the appellant at that date.
That inevitably means that the respondents
would be bound by the said settlement even
though they may belong to the rival Union. In
order to bind the workmen it is not necessary
to show that the said workmen belong to the
Union which was a party to the dispute before
the conciliator. The whole policy of
Section 18
appears to be to give an extended operation to
the settlement arrived at in the course of
conciliation proceedings, and that is the object
with which the four categories of persons
bound by such settlement are specified in
Section 18
, sub-section (3). In this connection
we may refer to two recent decisions of this
Court where similar questions under
Section
19(6)
and
Section 33(1)(a)
of the Act have been
24
considered.    (Vide: Associated       Cement
             Companies Ltd., Porbandar v. Workmen [ Civil
             Appeal No. 404 of 1958 decided on 3.3.1960]
             and New India Motors (P.)
Ltd. v. K.T. Morris.”


     Same
proposition of law was reiterated in the case of
Barauni Refinery Pragatisheel Shramik Parishad vs.

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd.
[(1991) 1 SCC 4].
18.
In the case of
ANZ Grindlays Bank Ltd. vs. Union of

India & Ors.
[(2005) 12 SCC 738], this Court, while testing a

reference found no subsisting industrial dispute and the

reference was set aside. This authority also does not assist the

appellants in the facts of the present case.
19. Now we shall test the appellants’ arguments on binding

effect of the settlement dated 19th September, 2016 on the

workmen whose cause the respondent Unions are espousing

before us. The High Court dealt with this question in the

following manner:-
“13. That brings us to the question as to whether the
        MoS of 19 September 2016, even if it were to be
        termed as a settlement in the course of a conciliation
        proceeding, could be said to be a fair settlement so
        as to bind workmen who were not party to it. The
        tribunal, in the present case, has arrived at an
        unequivocal finding that the settlement could not be
        termed as fair. It, particularly, has taken into
        account the fact that the MoS of 19 September 2016
        required the workmen concerned to withdraw their
        legitimate disputes and complaints on the issues of
        regularization, etc. as a condition of settlement. It is
25
important to bear in mind in this behalf that when
        the reference was made, there were about 1300
        workmen, covered by the earlier MoU 29 December
        2000, who were originally sought to be protected as
        against about 2000 of total number of contract
        employees with ONGC working in Mumbai, Panvel,
        Uran and Nhava. The other employees were not
        covered by the MoUs executed earlier by ONGC with
        the unions. If these other workmen and their
        union/s were to agree to a fair wage policy, which is
        not on the basis of the earlier MoUs executed
        between ONGC and the unions, such policy, on the
        basis of such agreement, cannot be termed as a fair
        policy for the workmen covered by the earlier MoUs
        and whose references or complaints for their
        legitimate demands were pending before various
        industrial adjudicators.
Anyway, on the facts
        available before this court, the conclusion of the
        Tribunal that the MoS of 19 September 2016 could
        not be termed as a fair settlement, particularly, for
        the workmen covered by the earlier MoUs, cannot be
        termed as perverse. This court cannot bring itself to
        hold that no reasonable person could have given any
        such finding. The finding is clearly supported by
        some evidence; it does take into account all relevant
        and germane circumstances and materials; and it
        does not consider any non-germane or irrelevant
        circumstance or material. It must
,
in that case
, pass
        muster as a possible conclusion, which is not
        amenable to judicial scrutiny either under
Article
        226
or 227 of the Constitution of India.”
20. The appellants’ case is that Unions representing above 77

percent of the workmen engaged by the contractors had agreed

to that settlement.
In the case of
Tata Engineering and

Locomotive Co. Ltd. vs. Their Workmen
[(1981) 4 SCC 627],

this Court permitted a settlement to be binding which was

assailed by a set of workmen. In that case, one set of Unions

had entered into a settlement which had been assented to by

564 out of 635 daily-rated workmen. The finding of the Tribunal
26
was that the settlement was not just and fair. This Court,

however, allowed the appeal of the employer and set aside the

award. But this judgment is not an authority for the proposition

that a different set of workmen cannot raise an industrial

dispute claiming to be workmen directly under the principal

employer. Recognition of such right of minority workmen would

be apparent from paragraph 12 of the said report [(1981) 4 SCC

627], which reads:-
“12. There is no quarrel with the argument
        addressed to us on behalf of the workers that mere
        acquiescence in a settlement or its acceptance by a
        worker would not make him a party to the
        settlement for the purpose of
Section 18
of the Act
        [vide
Jhagrakhan Collieries (P) Ltd. v. G.C. Agarwal,
        Presiding Officer, Central Government Industrial
        Tribunal-cum-Labour
Court, Jabalpur [(1975) 3 SCC
        613 : 1975 SCC (L&S) 63 : AIR 1975 SC 171 : (1975)
        2 SCR 873] ].
It is further unquestionable that a
        minority union of workers may raise an industrial
        dispute even if another union which consists of the
        majority of them enters into a settlement with the
        employer               (vide
Tata            Chemicals
        Ltd. v. Workmen
[(1978) 3 SCC 42 : 1978 SCC (L&S)
        418 : AIR 1978 SC 828 : (1978) 3 SCR 535] ). But
        then here the Company is not raising a plea that the
        564 workers became parties to the settlement by
        reason of their acquiescence in or acceptance of a
        settlement already arrived at or a plea that the
        reference is not maintainable because the Telco
        Union represents only a minority of workers. On the
        other hand the only two contentions raised by the
        Company are:
“(i) that the settlement is binding on
              all members of the Sanghatana
              including the 564 mentioned above
              because the Sanghatana was a party
              to it, and
(ii) that the reference is liable to be
              answered in accordance with the
27
settlement because the same is just
             and fair.”
21.
In the case of
ITC Ltd. Workers’ Welfare Association &

Anr. vs. Management of ITC Ltd. & Anr.
[(2002) 3 SSC 411],

it has been, inter-alia, held:-
“14. In answering the reference the industrial
      adjudicator has to keep in the forefront of his mind the
      settlement reached under
Section 12(3)
of the
      Industrial Disputes Act. Once it is found that the terms
      of the settlement operate in respect of the dispute
      raised before it, it is not upon to the Industrial Tribunal
      to ignore the settlement or even belittle its effect by
      applying its mind independent of the settlement unless
      the settlement is found to be contrary to the mandatory
      provisions of the Act or unless it is found that there is
      non-conformance to the norms by which the
      settlement could be subjected to limited judicial
      scrutiny….”
22. In the instant case we do not find the settlement of 19th

September, 2016 to be one which would be binding on the

minority Union. That was a settlement essentially between

the contractors and workmen engaged by the former. The

appellants were only consenting parties to the settlement.
This position of the appellants is apparent from the

description of the parties to the said settlement, which

records:-
“MEMORANDUM OF SETTLEMENT ARRIVED AT
        UNDER SECTION 12(3) OF THE INDUSTRIAL
        DISPUTES ACT, 1947 BEFORE SHRI B.B.
        BHATNAGAR, CONCILIATION OFFICER & DY.
        CLC(C), AS A RESULT OF AND IN THE COURSE OF
28
CONCILIATION     PROCEEDINGS    HELD   ON
        19.09.2016 AND SIGNED BY THE CONTRACTORS,
        EMPLOYERS OF CONTRACT WORKERS DEPLOYED
        FOR PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS IN ONGC
        LIMITED, WESTERN OFFSHORE UNIT MUMBAI
        INCLUDING PANVEL, URAN AND NHAVA, AND
        CONTRACT WORKERS REPRESENTED THROUGH
        TRANSPORT & DOCK WORKERS UNION-MUMBAI,
        ONGC     (BOP)   KARMACHARI    SANGHATANA
        PETROLEUM EMPLOYEES UNION, GENERAL
        EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION, ONGC GENERAL
        KAMGAR SANGHATANA AND NHAVA SHEVA PORT
        & GENERAL WORKERS UNION, AS MENTIONED
        BELOW     OVER    CHARTER   OF   DEMANDS,
        INCLUDING REVISION OF WAGES AND OTHER
        SERVICE CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT WORKERS
        IN WESTERN OFFSHORE UNIT.”
23.   The dispute out of which the present appeal arises

relates to the question as to whether the workmen engaged by

the contractors would be entitled to pay at par with other

workmen of the employer and demand to that effect was

raised with the appellants only. The respondent Unions

claimed to be, in reality, employees of ONGC and the demand

was raised upon the latter, and not on their contractors. The

nature of their demand was thus different particularly as

regards the status of the workmen, i.e., their claim to be

workmen of ONGC. Thus, the settlement of 19th September,

2016, in which the employers were the contractors cannot

bind the subject-dispute, where the appellants have been

found to be the employer on the basis of materials considered
29
by the High Court.     Their engagement by the contractors

cannot be the sole basis for determining their status as

workmen of contractors.
24. For    these   reasons,   we   accept   the   High   Court’s

affirmation of Tribunal’s finding that the settlement of 19th

September, 2016 did not bind the workmen whose cause the

respondent Unions are espousing. The finding of the Tribunal

that the settlement involving implementation of the FWP was

not just and fair, which finding has been sustained by the

High Court is essentially a finding on facts based on

appreciation of evidence. We are of the opinion that such

finding is not tainted by any element of perversity. The ratio

of the decision in the case of
ITC Ltd. Workers’ Welfare

Association
(supra) would not apply in the facts of the

present case.
25. Having held so, we would not like to interfere with the relief

directed to be given by the High Court. The scope of jurisdiction

of the Industrial Court is wide and in appropriate cases it has

the jurisdiction even to make a contract. In our opinion, the

directives issued by the Tribunal, as modified by the High Court

are reasonable and cannot be termed as perverse. In the case of

Steel Authority of India of 2006 (supra), referring to the
30
Contract Labour (Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970
it was

opined:-
“20. The 1970 Act is a complete code by itself. It not
           only provides for regulation of contract labour but
           also abolition thereof. Relationship of employer and
           employee is essentially a question of fact.
           Determination of the said question would depend
           upon a large number of factors. Ordinarily, a writ
           court would not go into such a question.”


So far as the judgment under appeal is concerned, the High

Court has taken a similar approach and we do not intend to take

a different view.      The principle of limited interference would

apply to a proceeding of this nature under the 1947 Act.
26. The appeal is accordingly dismissed and the impugned

judgment is sustained. Interim order, if any, shall stand

dissolved.
27. Other applications, if any, stand disposed of.
28. There shall be no order as to costs.
……........................J.
                                                (L. NAGESWARA RAO)




                                                 ……........................J.
                                                  (ANIRUDDHA BOSE)

NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 04, 2022
31