[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Omkar Singh vs Jaiprakash Narain Singh on 9 February, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.84 OF 2022


         Omkar Singh                                                ..Appellant(S)



                                               Versus


         Jaiprakash Narain Singh & Anr.                           ..Respondent(S)



                                          JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 15.03.2019 passed by the High

                         Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Criminal Appeal No.

                         304 of 1983 by which the High Court has allowed the said

                         appeal preferred by respondent No.1 herein – original

                         accused No.2 and has acquitted him for the offences
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2022.02.09
16:13:04 IST
punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the
Reason:
1
IPC
, the original informant – son of the deceased has

     preferred the present appeal.
2.   As per the case of the prosecution, one Omkar Singh son of

     Parasnath Singh lodged an FIR at Police Station Karanda,

     District Gazipur stating that due to the enmity going on

     between his family members with Udaibhan Singh and his

     father Jaiprakash Narain Singh @ Lala (original accused

     Nos.1 and 2) his father has been killed. As per the

     allegation, on 21.04.1982, there was marriage of daughter of

     one Kailashu Vishwakarma, who was his neighbour where

     he along with his Tau ­ Vikrama Singh and his cousin

     brother Indradeo Singh had gone. After taking meal at about

     12 in the night, he along with his Tau and cousin had gone

     on his pumping set for sleeping where his father Parasnath

     was lying from before. He and his cousin Indradeo Singh

     had slept on one cot whereas his Tau had slept on another

     cot. There was a lantern burning which was hanging on a

     stick. In between 2:30­3:00 am in the night, accused

     Udaibhan Singh came near his cot and pulled the bed­sheet

     on which he and his cousin woke up and his Tau also woke

     up. At that moment Jaiprakash Narain Singh @ Lala (A­2)
2
exhorted and stated that Paras is lying here come quickly

and shoot him on which Udaibhan Singh (A­1) went near

the cot of his father Parasnath and shot him with country

made pistol on his chest from a point­blank range and when

the   informant   and   the       witnesses   raised   alarm   then

Udaibhan Singh again reloaded his country made pistol and

threatened them on account of which they kept quiet.

Thereafter both the accused ran away towards North.

During the course of investigation, the Investigating Officer

(IO) recorded the statements of the concerned witnesses

including eye witnesses and also collected the relevant

evidences. On conclusion of the investigation, the IO filed

the chargesheet against both the accused for the offences

under
Sections 302
read with
Section 302
/
34
of the IPC. As

the case was exclusively triable by the learned Court of

Sessions, the case was committed to the sessions court.

Accused pleaded not guilty and therefore both of them came

to be tried by the learned Sessions Court for the offences

punishable under
Sections 302
and
302
/
34
of the IPC

respectively.
3
3.   In order to bring the guilt of the accused the prosecution

     examined PW­1 Omkar Singh – informant and PW­2

     Inderdeo Singh and PW­4 Vikram Singh (all eye witnesses)

     and PW­3 Dr. P.C. Srivastava who conducted the post

     mortem of the deceased and PW­5 SI Kamta Singh. On

     closure of the evidence on behalf of the prosecution, further

     statements of the accused under
Section 313
Cr.PC were

     recorded. That thereafter on appreciation of the entire

     evidence on record and believing PW­1, PW­2 and PW­4 (eye

     witnesses) the learned Trial Court convicted A­1 – Udaibhan

     Singh for the offences punishable under
Section 302
of the

     IPC and A­2 – Jaiprakash Narain Singh @ Lala for the

     offences punishable under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
of   the    IPC   and   sentenced    them   to   undergo   life

     imprisonment.
4.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and

     order of conviction and sentence passed by the learned Trial

     Court convicting the accused for the offences punishable

     under
Section 302
and
Section 302
/
34
of the IPC

     respectively, the accused preferred an appeal before the

     High Court. By the impugned judgment and order, the High
4
Court has though believed the eye witnesses – PW­1, PW­2

     and PW­4 so far as the A­1 – Udaibhan is concerned and

     has confirmed the judgment and order of conviction passed

     by the learned Trial Court convicting the A­1 – Udaibhan,

     has acquitted A­2 – Jaiprakash Narain Singh @ Lala mainly

     on the ground that the three prosecution witnesses had

     given him role of exhortation only and no overt act has been

     assigned   to   him    and   therefore   there   might   be   an

     exaggeration of his role and false implication by the

     witnesses in order to see that both the accused – father and

     son are put behind the bars because of the property dispute

     between the parties.
5.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

     judgment and order passed by the High Court acquitting

     respondent No.1 herein ­ original accused No.2, the original

     informant has preferred the present appeal.
6.   Shri D.P. Singh Yadav, learned counsel appearing on behalf

     of the appellant has vehemently submitted that in the facts

     and circumstances of the case, the High Court has

     committed a grave error while acquitting respondent No.1

     herein – original accused No.2.
5
6.1   It is vehemently submitted by learned counsel appearing on

      behalf of the appellant that as such respondent No.1 was

      named in the FIR. It is submitted that all the three eye

      witnesses – PW ­1, PW­2 & PW­4 named respondent No.1 –

      accused who went to the pumping set where the deceased

      was sleeping and that respondent No.1 with a common

      intention to murder the deceased accompanied his son –

      accused No.1 and on finding the deceased on a different cot

      exhorted his son to kill him and thereafter accused No.1

      killed the deceased with fire arm. It is submitted that

      therefore    the   learned   Trial    Court      rightly   convicted

      respondent No.1 – accused with aid of
Section 34
of the IPC.

6.2   It is further submitted that even as per the finding recorded

      by the High Court the motive has been established and

      proved      by   the   prosecution.    It   is    submitted     that

      unfortunately the High Court has acquitted respondent No.1

      – accused solely on the ground that overt act assigned to

      respondent No.1 – accused No.2 is of exhortation only and

      therefore, his involvement appears to be doubtful.
6
6.3   It is submitted that the said finding/observation is on

      surmises and conjectures and just contrary to the evidence

      on record. It is submitted that the presence of the accused

      has been established and proved by the prosecution by

      examining PW­1, PW­2 and PW­4, who are the eye witnesses

      and that their evidence has been believed by the High

      Court. It is submitted that therefore there is no reason to

      doubt the presence of the accused – respondent No.1 herein

      at the place of incident.
7.    Making the above submissions it is prayed to allow the

      present appeal.
8.    Shri Garvesh Kabra learned counsel appearing on behalf of

      the State has supported the appellant and has submitted

      that the High Court has erred in acquitting respondent No.1

      – accused No.2.
9.    The present appeal is opposed by Shri R.M. Sinha learned

      counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No.1 – accused

      No.2. It is submitted by learned counsel appearing on behalf

      of respondent No.1 – accused No.2 that cogent reasons have

      been given by the High Court while acquitting respondent

      No.1 – accused for the offence punishable under
Section
7
302
of the IPC, and therefore the same is not required to be

      interfered with by this Court in exercise of power conferred

      under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India.

9.1   It is further submitted that as rightly observed by the High

      Court all the three prosecution witnesses had given accused

      the role of exhortation only and no further overt act has

      been assigned to him and even as per the prosecution

      witnesses and even the prosecution the fire arm was used

      by accused No.1 and the only allegation against respondent

      No.1 herein – original accused No.2 was exhortation. The

      High Court has rightly acquitted respondent No.1 – accused

      for the offences punishable under
Section 302
/
34
of the

      IPC.
10.   Making the above submissions it is prayed to dismiss the

      present appeal.
11.   We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      respective parties at length.
12.   At the outset it is required to be noted that in the present

      case right from the very beginning the name of respondent

      No.1 was disclosed. Respondent No.1 – accused No.2 was

      named in the FIR. There are three eye witnesses to the
8
incident namely PW­1, PW­2 and PW­4 and all the

prosecution witnesses have named respondent No.1 –

accused No.2 and all of them have stated that both the

accused came at the pumping set where the deceased was

sleeping and at that time on finding the deceased sleeping

on the different cot, respondent No.1 herein – accused No.2

exhorted his son to kill the deceased and his son – accused

No.1 killed the deceased by fire arm. All the three

prosecution witnesses are consistent and fully supported

the case of the prosecution. Even the High Court has also

specifically observed and held that all the three prosecution

witnesses are reliable and trustworthy and there is no

reason to doubt them. Therefore, once even the High Court

also found all the three prosecution witnesses – PW­1, PW­2

and PW­4 trustworthy and reliable and in fact confirmed the

conviction of accused No.1 for the offence punishable under
Section 302
/
34
of the IPC, the High Court ought not to have

thereafter   doubted   the   presence   of   accused   No.2   –

respondent No.1 herein. Once the High Court has even

confirmed the conviction of accused No.1 relying upon all

the three eye witnesses, the High Court ought to have
9
confirmed the conviction of respondent No.1 – accused No.2

     also relying upon the three eye witnesses.

12.1 From the reasoning given by the High Court it appears that

     the High Court has acquitted respondent No.1 – accused

     No.2 just on the ground that all the three eye witnesses had

     given him the role of exhortation and no overt act has been

     assigned to him, this may be due to exaggeration of his role

     so as to falsely implicate him and see that the father and

     son are put behind bars. However, it is required to be noted

     that both the accused – father and son went together to the

     place/pumping set where the deceased was sleeping. Even

     as per the High Court the motive has been established and

     proved. The High Court has also observed that due to land

     dispute there was enmity between the parties. Therefore,

     the High Court ought to have appreciated that respondent

     No.1 – accused No.2 was rightly convicted with the aid of
Section 34
of the IPC as he with a common intention to kill

     the deceased accompanied his son and on finding the

     deceased sleeping on the different cot exhorted his son to

     kill him and thereafter his son killed the deceased by fire

     arm. Therefore, once his presence has been established and
10
proved and specific role of exhortation was assigned to him,

     the High Court ought to have confirmed the conviction of

     respondent No.1 – accused No.2 for the offence punishable

     under
Section 302
/
34
of the IPC.
12.2 It is also required to be noted that as such the High Court

     has upheld/confirmed the conviction of accused No.1 for

     the offence punishable under
Section 302
/
34
of the IPC.

     Therefore, once the conviction of accused No.1 for the

     offence punishable under
Section 302
/
34
of the IPC was

     upheld/confirmed,    the   High    Court     ought   to   have

     upheld/confirmed the conviction of accused No.2 who was

     also charged for the offence punishable under
Section

     302
/
34
of the IPC. Both the accused with a common

     intention went to the place of deceased at mid­night and as

     observed hereinabove the motive has been established and

     proved, the High Court has committed a grave error in

     acquitting respondent No.1 – accused No.2. The finding

     recorded by the High Court is just contrary to the evidence

     on   record.   The   impugned     judgment    and    order   is

     unsustainable both, on law and on facts.
11
13.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above the

      present appeal succeeds. The impugned judgment and order

      passed by the High Court acquitting respondent No.1 –

      original accused No.2 – Jaiprakash Narain Singh is hereby

      quashed and set aside and the judgment and order passed

      by the learned Trial Court convicting him for the offence

      punishable under
Section 302
/
34
of IPC and sentencing

      him to undergo life imprisonment is hereby restored. Now

      respondent No.1 – original accused No.2 to surrender within

      a period of four weeks to undergo life imprisonment.
…………………………………J.
                                       (M. R. SHAH)



                                      …………………………………J.
                                      (SANJIV KHANNA)
New Delhi,
February, 9th 2022
12