[Cites
40
, Cited by
10
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Up And Ors vs Ajay Kumar Sharma And Anr on 26 November, 2015
Author:
Vikramajit Sen
Bench:
Vikramajit Sen
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.  13727  OF 2015
                 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 36166 of 2014]

State of  U.P. & Ors.                              .. Appellants
                                   Versus
Ajay Kumar Sharma & Anr.                           .. Respondents
WITH
C.A. No. 13728 of 2015 [arising out of SLP(C) No. 1425 of 2015]


                               J U D G M E N T
VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.
1     Leave granted.
2     Applications for correcting the cause title and all  the  applications
for impleadment as party respondent are allowed.
3     In these Appeals, we are  concerned  with  the  renewal  as  also  the
appointment of District Government  Counsel  (Civil  and  Criminal)  in  the
Subordinate Courts across the State of  Uttar  Pradesh.  The  State  as  the
Appellant, has assailed the final judgment  and  order  dated  5.11.2014  in
Writ Petition being Misc. Bench No. 9127 of 2012 passed by a Division  Bench
of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench. The High  Court
in this impugned Order has  quashed  the  Orders  of  the  State  Government
terminating the appointment of District Government Counsel and  has  further
directed the State Government to reconsider their renewal. Indubitably,  the
appointments as well as the renewals would have to  be  in  consonance  with
Section 24
of the Code of Criminal Procedure (
Cr.P.C
. for brevity)  and  the
Legal Remembrancer Manual (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  ‘LR  Manual’)
applicable throughout the State of U.P. The Manual which came into force  in
1975 inter alia prescribes mandatory ‘consultation’ with the District  Judge
and the District Magistrate on the one side and the State on the other.
4     In August 2008, the then State Government, in terms of the  Government
Order dated 13.8.2008, had  amended  the  LR  Manual  thereby  removing  the
process of consultation with the  District  Judge  for  the  appointment  of
District Government Counsel; effectively, thereafter the LR Manual  required
the State to only consult with the District Magistrate. It was on the  basis
of the LR Manual as amended that  the  Respondents  before  us  came  to  be
appointed as District Government Counsel across the length  and  breadth  of
the State of U.P.   This is a noteworthy feature on which our decision  will
turn  in  some  measure.  The  State  Government’s  Order,  which  is  dated
13.8.2008, came to be assailed  before  the  High  Court  of  Judicature  at
Allahabad, Lucknow Bench in  a  bunch  of  more  than  100  writ  petitions,
including the lead petition U.P. Shaskiya Adhivakta Kalyan Samiti  v.  State
of U.P.   Writ Petition Misc. Bench No. 7851 of 2008 reported as (2012  (30)
LCD 1066).   By an Order dated 6.1.2012 passed  in  those  proceedings,  the
High Court directed the State to make fresh appointments expeditiously,  and
in the interregnum permitted the existing empanelled Advocates to  discharge
their duties.  Shortly thereafter, in Bishan Pal Saxena  v.  State  of  U.P.
Writ Petition Misc. Bench No. 8246 of 2011, in  terms  of  its  Order  dated
12.1.2012 the High Court directed  the  State  of  U.P.  to  reconsider  the
selection and appointment of Advocates to the “post of  Additional  District
Government Counsel, Assistant District  Government  Counsel,  Panel  lawyers
and  Sub  District  Government  Counsel”;  that  the  persons  appointed  in
pursuance of old provisions  would  continue  till  the  completion  of  the
reconsideration process; and, all fresh appointments would  be  carried  out
strictly in conformity  with  U.P.  Shaskiya  Adhivakta  Kalyan  Samiti  and
Sadhna Sharma v. State of U.P [Writ Petition Misc. Bench No. 7825 of  2011].
5     Aggrieved by the aforementioned Judgments, the State Government  filed
Special Leave Petitions No. 4042-4043 of 2012 titled State of  U.P.  &  Ors.
v. Sadhna Sharma, during the pendency of which there was  a  change  in  the
State Government.   Immediately thereupon, a prayer  was  made  before  this
Court for withdrawal of the Special Leave Petitions on the predication  that
the newly elected State Government had accepted the  assailed  judgments  of
the High Court of Allahabad and accordingly intended to implement it in  its
entirety.   In the course of disposing of these SLPs  this  Court  pointedly
and poignantly observed that  the  constitutional  validity  of
Section  24
Cr.P.C. had not been challenged.   This Court noted  the  unanimity  in  the
opinion that the assailed judgments of the High Court would be  implemented.
 Nevertheless, three “clarifications”  were  recorded.   Firstly,  that  the
appointments made in consultation with the High Court  and/or  the  District
and Sessions Judge  of  the  concerned  district  would  not  be  disturbed.
Secondly - “Against the existing vacancies the cases of all  the  appellants
herein, who are in service or are out of service  as  well  as  any  of  the
petitioners before the High Courts, whose services were  terminated  at  any
point of time including the persons who had filed the Writ Petitions in  the
High Court during the pendency of writ petition  and/or  the  present  civil
appeals shall be considered for renewal/reconsideration in  accordance  with
the  judgment  of  this  Court  within  a  period  of  three   months   from
today......”  Thirdly,  personal  responsibility   was   fastened   on   the
Secretary, Department of Law and Justice, Government  of  U.P.  to  complete
the above appointments.
Writ Petition No. 6069 of 2012 filed by Harsh  Gupta
and Others [titled
Harsh Gupta v. State of U.P
.]  was  disposed  of  by  the
High Court on 25.7.2012 in terms of the aforementioned Order of this  Court.
6     Consequent upon the passing of the above orders, the State  Government
issued  a  Government  Order  dated  11.6.2012  to  the  effect   that   the
appointment  of  all  District  Government  Counsels  should  be  cancelled.
However, the incumbents  were  permitted  to  continue  to  discharge  their
duties till fresh appointments were made.  The District Magistrates were  to
verify the number of vacancies on the Civil, Criminal and Revenue sides.
7     In terms of the Government  Order  dated  5.9.2012,  pursuant  to  the
Judgments of the Supreme Court dated 17.7.2012 and  of  the  High  Court  on
25.7.2012, the engagement of the Respondents was put to  an  end  and  their
renewal in the light of consultation reports was  awaited.    This  lead  to
the filing of writ petitions, including
Ajay Kumar Sharma &  Anr.  v.  State
of U.P. [Writ Petition Misc
. Bench No. 9127 of 2012], terming the  cessation
of the appointment as  arbitrary.  However,  this  Court  vide  Order  dated
13.11.2013 directed that  “the  cases  of  renewal  of  appointment  of  the
existing incumbent shall likewise  be  considered  in  accordance  with  the
provisions contained in LR Manual and the judgments  of  this  Court.
This
exercise shall be undertaken and completed within a period  of  four  months
from today.”  Eventually, in terms  of  the  final  Order  dated  5.11.2014,
which stands impugned before us, the High Court in
Ajay Kumar Sharma &  Anr.
v. State of U.P.
issued a Certiorari quashing the Orders  declining  renewal
of the Respondents; a Mandamus directing the State Government to  reconsider
their candidature. The High Court had also issued a Mandamus  directing  the
Government to set up a Directorate of Prosecution in  pursuance  of
Section
25-A
of Code of Criminal Procedure and lastly  passed  a  direction  to  the
District Judges and District Magistrates to ensure  that  no  person  having
criminal antecedents should be permitted  to  work  as  District  Government
Counsel.
8     The Learned Senior  Counsel  for  Appellant/State,  Mr.  Kapil  Sibal,
submits that the impugned order of the High  Court  of  Allahabad  seeks  to
perpetuate an illegality. He relies heavily  on  the  decision  of  a  Three
Judge Bench of this Court, namely,
State of U.P. v. Johri Mal
(2004)  4  SCC
714, to submit that an appointment to the post of a District  Counsel  is  a
professional appointment; no status of a public nature is conferred  on  the
incumbent; as also that the  LR  Manual  itself  contains  merely  Executive
instructions which do not contain the concomitants of
Article  166(3);
and
therefore the LR Manual is not law under
Article 13
of the  Constitution  of
India; and that in Johri Mal this Court has expressed  reservations  against
Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi v. State of UP
(1991) 1 SCC  212.  Mr  Sibal  has
also differentiated the facts before  us  from  those  in  Kumari  Shrilekha
Vidyarthi, where all government  counsel  were  terminated  en  masse  by  a
government order.  On the question of maintainability of a writ of  Mandamus
issued against the State in the impugned order, Mr Sibal contends  that  the
Respondents cannot lay claim to a legal right nor is the Government under  a
legal duty to continue their  engagement,  both  essential  elements  for  a
mandamus. He rightly concedes  that  a  particular  Respondent  may  seek  a
Certiorari with respect to the  cessation  of  his  individual  appointments
contrary to the norms of ‘Wednesbury reasonableness’.
Mr. Sibal  has  drawn
our attention to
State of UP v. State of UP Law Officers Association
(1994)
2 SCC 204 wherein this Court, while considering the  appointments  of  Chief
Standing Counsel, Standing Counsel and Government Advocates, has  held  that
those who are appointed under an arbitrary procedure ought not be  heard  to
complain if the termination of  their  appointments  is  equally  arbitrary.
Mr. Sibal further submits that the order presently  impugned  before  us  is
per incuriam for having not adhered to the judgments  rendered  by  the  co-
ordinate benches of the High  Court  of  Allahabad  prior  to  the  judgment
impugned before us. He further submits that the aforesaid judgments  of  the
co-ordinate benches, i.e.,
Ram Charan Singh Prajapati  v.  State  of  UP
in
writ petition (
c) 46350 of 2014 and Guru Prasad  v.  State  of  UP
in  writ
petition (c) 39935 of 2014 propound the correct  view  of  law,  inter  alia
that allowing renewals to appointments made null and void in law  amount  to
perpetuating  an  illegality.   In  parting,  learned  Senior  Counsel  also
contends that the argument on behalf of the Respondents predicated upon  the
applicability of de facto doctrine, is without merit.
9     Learned Senior  Counsel  for  the  Respondents,  Mr.  Aman  Lekhi  has
submitted that the State is misguided in its  approach,  inasmuch  as  Johri
Mal does not detract from  Kumari  Shrilekha  Vidyarthi  even  on  facts  as
renewal was a question before this Court even in the latter Two-Judge  Bench
judgment. The only reason why this Court intervened in Johri Mal, and  later
again in
State of UP v. Rakesh Kumar Keshri
(2011) 5 SCC  341,  was  because
in the former the recommendation was not in favour, and in  the  latter  the
incumbent was  incompetent.   Mr.  Lekhi  further  submits  that  the  State
Government cannot rely  upon  the  fact  that  the  appointments  were  void
because, firstly, the appointments were valid at that time and under  extant
Rules and also because the ‘de facto doctrine’ comes to  their  rescue.
He
has
placed reliance upon
Dr. A. R. Sircar v. State of UP (1993) Supp  2  SCC
734 to substantiate this submission.  Secondly, on the  application  of  the
doctrine of ‘comity of instrumentalities’, Mr. Lekhi learned Senior  Counsel
argues that the Executive  cannot  be  permitted  to  overreach  or  nullify
judicial pronouncements. Thirdly, that there is an element of continuity  in
these appointments as emphasised in Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi.
Mr.  Manoj
Goel  learned Counsel for some of  the  other  Respondents  further  submits
that on a proper perusal of
Andi Mukta Sadguru Shree Muktajee  Vandas  Swami
Suvarna Jayanti Mahotsav Smarak Trust v. V. R. Rudani
(1989) 2 SCC  691  and
the Constitutional Bench in
Zee Telefilms Ltd. v. Union of  India
(2005)  4
SCC 649, it is manifest that a mandamus cannot be denied on the ground  that
the duty to be enforced is not imposed by a statute and, in fact,  may  even
be passed in order to enforce a contract. He has emphasised that a  Mandamus
is the appropriate remedy in light of Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi  because  a
public element is involved in  the  appointment  of  DGCs  and  ADGCs  which
itself is ample reason to attract
Article 14
and judicial review  under  the
Constitution of India.
Our attention has also been drawn to
State of  UP  v.
Ashok Kumar Nigam
(2013) 3 SCC 372  where this  Court  has  reiterated  that
reasoning is the sine qua non for refusal under the concerned provisions  of
LR Manual which they claim is not a valid basis for en masse rejection.
On
the issue that the impugned Judgment of the Lucknow Bench is  per  incuriam,
Mr Lekhi has submitted that the  impugned  Order  has  rightly  ignored  the
decisions of  the  co-ordinate  Bench  at  Allahabad  in
Ram  Charan  Singh
Prajapati v. State of UP
and
Guru  Prasad  v.  State  of  UP
because  the
Allahabad Bench itself passed orders which are per incuriam.
Learned  Senior
Counsel, Mr. Jitendra Mohan Sharma also submits that  the  State  Government
has already agreed to reconsider the case of renewal of  government  lawyers
in SLP(C) 4042-43 of 2012, State of UP  v.  Sadhna  Sharma,  and  the  State
cannot take a different stand now.  However, it is  to  be  noted  that  the
State Government withdrew the appeal with a view to implement  the  judgment
of the High Court in UP Shaskiya Adhivakta Kayan Samiti and had  not  agreed
to reconsider the case of renewal of government lawyers as put forth by  Mr.
Sharma.
10    Time and again this Court has  emphatically  restated  the  essentials
and principles of ‘Precedent’ and of Stare  Decisis  which  are  a  cardinal
feature of the hierarchical character of all Common  Law  judicial  systems.
The doctrine of Precedent  mandates  that  an  exposition  of  law  must  be
followed and applied even by coordinate or co-equal  Benches  and  certainly
by all smaller Benches and  subordinate  courts.  That  is  to  say  that  a
smaller and a later Bench has no freedom other than to apply  the  law  laid
down by the earlier and larger Bench; that is the law which is said to  hold
the field.  Apart from
Article 141
, it is a policy of the  courts  to  stand
by precedent and not to disturb a settled point. The purpose  of  precedents
is to bestow predictability on judicial decisions and  it  is  beyond  cavil
that certainty in  law  is  an  essential  ingredient  of  rule  of  law.  A
departure may only be made when a coordinate or  co-equal  Bench  finds  the
previous decision to be of doubtful logic or efficacy  and  consequentially,
its judicial conscience is  so  perturbed  and  aroused  that  it  finds  it
impossible to follow the existing ratio. The Bench  must  then  comply  with
the discipline of requesting the  Hon’ble  Chief  Justice  to  constitute  a
larger Bench.
11    If binding precedents even of co-ordinate strength are  not  followed,
the roots of continuity and certainty  of  law  which  should  be  nurtured,
strengthened perpetuated  and  proliferated  will  instead  be  deracinated.
Although spoken in a totally different  context,  we  are  reminded  of  the
opening stanza of the poem 'The Second Coming' authored  by  William  Butler
Yeats. The lines obviously do not advert to the  principle  of precedent but
they are apposite in bringing out the wisdom of this ancient  and  venerable
principle.
“Turning and turning in  the  widening  gyre  The  falcon  cannot  hear  the
falconer;
Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold; Mere anarchy is loosed  upon  the
world.”

12    In the context of interminably citing all decisions delivered by  this
Court, the Constitutional Bench in
Union of India v. Raghubir  Singh
(1989)
2 SCC 754 has made the following enunciation of law:
“25. It is not necessary to refer to all the cases on the point.  The  broad
guidelines are easily deducible from what has gone before.  The  possibility
of further defining these guiding principles can be envisaged  with  further
juridical  experience,  and  when  common  jurisprudential  values   linking
different national systems of law may make a  consensual  pattern  possible.
But that lies in the future.
26. There was some debate on  the  question  whether  a  Division  Bench  of
Judges is obliged to follow the law
laid down  by
a  Division  Bench  of  a
larger number of Judges.
Doubt has arisen on the point  because  of  certain
observations made by Chinnappa Reddy, J. in
Javed Ahmed Abdul  Hamid  Pawala
v. State of Maharashtra
.
Earlier, a Division Bench of two  Judges,  of  whom
he was one, had expressed the view in
T.V. Vatheeswaran v.  State  of  Tamil
Nadu
that delay exceeding two years in the execution of a sentence of  death
should be considered sufficient to entitle a person under sentence of  death
to invoke
Article 21
of the Constitution and  demand  the  quashing  of  the
sentence of death. This would be so, he observed, even if the delay  in  the
execution was occasioned by the time necessary for filing an appeal  or  for
considering the reprieve of the accused or some other cause  for  which  the
accused himself may be responsible.
This view was found  unacceptable  by  a
Bench of three-Judges in
Sher Singh v. State of Punjab
,  where  the  learned
Judges observed that no hard and  fast  rule  could  be
laid  down  in
the
matter. In direct disagreement with  the  view  in  T.V.  Vatheeswaran,  the
learned Judges said that account had to be taken of  the  time  occupied  by
proceedings in the High Court and  in  the  Supreme  Court  and  before  the
executive authorities, and it was relevant to  consider  whether  the  delay
was attributable to the conduct of the  accused.
As  a  member  of  another
Bench of two Judges, in Javed Ahmed Abdul Hamid Pawala  Chinnapa  Reddy,  J.
questioned the validity of the observations made in Sher Singh and  went  on
to note, without expressing any concluded opinion on the point, that it  was
a serious question:
“Whether a Division Bench of three-Judges  could  purport  to  overrule  the
judgment of a Division Bench of two Judges merely because  three  is  larger
than two. The Court sits in Divisions of two and three-Judges for  the  sake
of convenience and it may be inappropriate for a Division  Bench  of  three-
Judges to purport to overrule the  decision  of  a  Division  Bench  of  two
Judges. (Vide Young v. Bristol Aeroplane  Co.  Ltd.)  It  may  be  otherwise
where a Full Bench or a Constitution Bench does so.”

It is pertinent to record here  that  because  of  the  doubt  cast  on  the
validity of the opinion in Sher Singh, the question of the effect  of  delay
on the execution of a death sentence was referred to  a  Division  Bench  of
five Judges, and in
Triveniben v. State of Gujarat
, the  Constitution  Bench
overruled T.V. Vatheeswaran.
27. What then should be the position in regard to  the  effect  of  the  law
pronounced by a Division Bench in relation to a case raising the same  point
subsequently before a Division Bench of a smaller number  of  Judges?  There
is no constitutional or statutory prescription in the matter, and the  point
is governed entirely by the practice in India of the  courts  sanctified  by
repeated affirmation over a century of time. It cannot be  doubted  that  in
order to promote consistency and  certainty  in  the  law
laid  down  by
a
superior Court, the ideal condition would be that the  entire  Court  should
sit in all cases to decide  questions  of  law,  and  for  that  reason  the
Supreme Court of the United States does so. But having regard to the  volume
of work demanding the attention of the Court, it has  been  found  necessary
in India as a general rule  of  practice  and  convenience  that  the  Court
should sit in Divisions, each Division being  constituted  of  Judges  whose
number may be determined by the exigencies of judicial need, by  the  nature
of the case including any statutory mandate relative thereto,  and  by  such
other considerations  which  the  Chief  Justice,  in  whom  such  authority
devolves by convention, may find most appropriate. It is in order  to  guard
against the possibility of  inconsistent  decisions  on  points  of  law  by
different Division Benches that the Rule  has  been  evolved,  in  order  to
promote consistency and certainty in the development  of  the  law  and  its
contemporary status, that the statement of the law by a  Division  Bench  is
considered binding on a Division Bench of  the  same  or  lesser  number  of
Judges. This principle has been followed in India by several generations  of
Judges. We may refer to a few of the recent cases  on  the  point.
In
John
Martin v. State of West Bengal
, a Division Bench of  three-Judges  found  it
right to follow the law declared in
Haradhan Saha v. State of  West  Bengal
,
decided by a Division Bench of five Judges, in preference to
Bhut Nath  Mate
v. State of West Bengal
decided by a Division Bench of two Judges.
Again  in
Indira Nehru Gandhi v. Raj Narain, Beg, J.
held that the Constitution  Bench
of five Judges was bound by the Constitution Bench  of  thirteen  Judges  in
Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala
.
In  Ganapati  Sitaram  Balvalkar  v.
Waman Shripad Mage, this Court expressly stated that the  view  taken  on  a
point of law by a Division Bench of four Judges of this  Court  was  binding
on a Division Bench of three-Judges of the Court. And in
Mattulal  v.  Radhe
Lal
, this Court specifically observed that where the view expressed  by  two
different Division Benches of  this  Court  could  not  be  reconciled,  the
pronouncement of a Division Bench of a larger number of  Judges  had  to  be
preferred over the decision of a Division  Bench  of  a  smaller  number  of
Judges.
This Court also
laid down in
Acharya  Maharajshri  Narandraprasadji
Anandprasadji Maharaj v. State of Gujarat
that even where  the  strength  of
two differing Division Benches consisted of the same number  of  Judges,  it
was not open to one Division Bench to decide the  correctness  or  otherwise
of the views of the other.
The principle was reaffirmed in
Union  of  India
v. Godfrey Philips India Ltd.
which noted  that  a  Division  Bench  of  two
Judges of this Court in
Jit Ram Shiv Kumar v. State of Haryana
had  differed
from the view taken by an earlier Division Bench of two  Judges  in
Motilal
Padampat Sugar Mills v. State of U.P.
on the point whether the  doctrine  of
promissory estoppel could be defeated by invoking the defence  of  executive
necessity, and holding that to do so was wholly unacceptable  reference  was
made to the  well  accepted  and  desirable  practice  of  the  later  Bench
referring the case to a larger Bench when the learned Judges found that  the
situation called for such reference.
28. We are of opinion that a pronouncement of law by  a  Division  Bench  of
this Court is binding on a Division Bench of the same or  a  smaller  number
of Judges, and in order that such decision be binding, it is  not  necessary
that it should be a decision rendered by the Full Court  or  a  Constitution
Bench of the Court. We would, however, like to think that  for  the  purpose
of imparting certainty and endowing due authority decisions  of  this  Court
in the future should be rendered by Division  Benches  of  at  least  three-
Judges unless, for compelling reasons, that is not conveniently possible.”

13    In a more recent decision of this  Court,  a  Bench  of  5  Judges  in
Chandra Prakash v. State of UP
(2002) 4 SCC  234  reaffirmed  the  principle
enunciated above in Raghubir Singh’s case, and reference may be had  to  the
following extract therefrom :
“22. A careful perusal of the above judgments shows  that  this  Court  took
note of the hierarchical character of the judicial system in India. It  also
held that it is of paramount importance that the law declared by this  Court
should be certain, clear and consistent. As stated in the  above  judgments,
it is of common knowledge that most of the decisions of this  Court  are  of
significance not merely because  they  constitute  an  adjudication  on  the
rights of the parties  and  resolve  the  disputes  between  them  but  also
because in doing so they embody a declaration of law operating as a  binding
principle in future cases. The doctrine of binding precedent  is  of  utmost
importance in  the  administration  of  our  judicial  system.  It  promotes
certainty  and  consistency  in  judicial  decisions.
Judicial  consistency
promotes confidence in  the  system,  therefore,  there  is  this  need  for
consistency in the enunciation of legal principles in the decisions of  this
Court. It is in the above context, this Court in the case of Raghubir  Singh
held that a pronouncement of law by  a  Division  Bench  of  this  Court  is
binding on a Division Bench of the same or smaller number of Judges.  It  is
in furtherance of  this  enunciation  of  law,  this  Court  in  the  latter
judgment of Parija held that: (SCC p. 4, para 6)
“But if a Bench of two learned Judges concludes that an earlier judgment  of
three learned Judges is so very incorrect that in no  circumstances  can  it
be followed, the proper course for it  to  adopt  is  to  refer  the  matter
before it to a Bench of three learned Judges setting out, as has  been  done
here, the reasons why it could not agree  with  the  earlier  judgment.  If,
then, the Bench of three learned Judges also comes to  the  conclusion  that
the earlier judgment of a  Bench  of  three  learned  Judges  is  incorrect,
reference to a Bench of five learned Judges is justified.” ”

Applying Sub-Inspector Rooplal v. Lt. Governor (2000) 1 SCC 644, this  Court
in
Government of Andhra Pradesh v. A. P. Jaiswal
, (2001) 1 SCC 748 has  said
that:
“Consistency is the cornerstone of the  administration  of  justice.  It  is
consistency which creates confidence in the system and this consistency  can
never be achieved without respect to the rule of  finality.  It  is  with  a
view to achieve consistency in  judicial  pronouncements,  the  courts  have
evolved the rule of precedents, principle of stare decisis etc. These  rules
and principles are based on public policy and if these are not  followed  by
courts then there will be chaos in the administration of justice,  which  we
see in plenty in this case.”
14    Sitting in a Division Bench of two, we at present  can  do  no  better
than apply the rules of precedent as have been left for us  to  follow.  The
law  pertaining  to  the  appointment  of  Additional  District   Government
Counsel, Assistant  District  Government  Counsel,  Panel  lawyers  and  Sub
District Government Counsel was directly in  issue  before  the  Three-Judge
Bench in
State of U.P. v. Johri Mal
(2004) 4 SCC 714 where the law has  been
comprehensively  clarified.  No  purpose  is  served  by  discussing  Kumari
Shrilekha Vidyarthi or any judgments rendered thereafter.
15    In Johri Mal, this Court perused the LR Manual as  also  the
Code  of
Criminal  Procedure
and  reiterated  that  the   District   Counsel   stood
professionally engaged; that the State Government was free to determine  the
course of action after being satisfied of their performance,  and  that  the
Courts must be circumspect in the exercise of  judicial  review  on  matters
which fell within the discretion of the State Government,  i.e.  appointment
of their counsel or advocates.  This  Court  reiterated  that  the  District
Counsels do not enjoy the statutory rights with respect to the  renewals  of
tenures and the State Government enjoyed the discretionary  powers  in  this
respect. The curial performance of the advocates  should  not  be  the  sole
criterion for their re-appointment as District Counsel and  that  the  State
Government must be free to repose trust and confidence in the  persons  whom
they choose to appoint as  their  advocates.   We  can  do  no  better  than
reproduce the following paragraphs from this judgment which  is  binding  on
us as also on any and every other Two-Judges Bench:
“40. So long as in appointing a counsel the procedures laid down  under  the
Code of Criminal Procedure
are followed and a reasonable or  fair  procedure
is adopted, the court will normally not interfere  with  the  decision.  The
nature of the office held by a lawyer  vis-à-vis  the  State  being  in  the
nature of  professional  engagements,  the  courts  are  normally  chary  to
overturn any decision unless an exceptional case is made out.  The  question
as to whether the State is satisfied with the performance of its counsel  or
not is primarily a matter between it and the counsel. The
Code  of  Criminal
Procedure
does not speak of renewal or extension of  tenure.  The  extension
of tenure of Public  Prosecutor  or  the  District  Counsel  should  not  be
compared with the right of renewal under a licence or permit  granted  under
a statute. The incumbent has no legal enforceable right as such. ...”
41.
In
Om Kumar v. Union of India
(2001) 2 SCC 386 it was  held  that  where
administrative  action   is   challenged   under
Article   14
as   being
discriminatory,  equals  are  treated  unequally  or  unequals  are  treated
equally, the question is for the Constitutional Courts as primary  reviewing
courts to consider the correctness of the level  of  discrimination  applied
and whether it is excessive and whether it has a nexus  with  the  objective
intended to be achieved by the administrator. For judging the  arbitrariness
of the order, the test of unreasonableness may be  applied.  The  action  of
the State, thus, must be judged with extreme  care  and  circumspection.  It
must be borne in mind that the  rights  of  the  Public  Prosecutor  or  the
District Counsel do  not  flow  under  a  statute.  Although,  discretionary
powers are not beyond the pale of judicial review, the courts, it is  trite,
allow the public authorities sufficient elbow space/play in the  joints  for
a proper exercise of discretion.
...
44. Only when good and competent counsel are appointed  by  the  State,  the
public interest would be safeguarded. The State while appointing the  Public
Prosecutors must bear in mind that for the purpose of upholding the rule  of
law, good administration of justice is imperative which in turn  would  have
a direct impact  on  sustenance  of  democracy.  No  appointment  of  Public
Prosecutors or District Counsel should, thus, be made either for pursuing  a
political purpose or for giving some undue advantage to  a  section  of  the
people. Retention of its counsel by the State must be weighed on  the  scale
of public interest. The  State  should  replace  an  efficient,  honest  and
competent lawyer, inter alia, when it is in a position  to  appoint  a  more
competent lawyer. In such an event, even a good performance by a lawyer  may
not be of much importance.
...
46. The
Code  of  Criminal  Procedure
does  not  provide  for  renewal  or
extension of a term. Evidently, the legislature  thought  it  fit  to  leave
such matters at the discretion of the State. It is no doubt true  that  even
in the matter of extension or renewal of the  term  of  Public  Prosecutors,
the State is required to act  fairly  and  reasonably.  The  State  normally
would  be  bound  to  follow  the  principles
laid  down   in
the   Legal
Remembrancer’s Manual.
...
75. In the matter of engagement of a District Government  Counsel,  however,
a concept of public office does not come into  play.  However,  it  is  true
that in the matter of counsel, the choice is  that  of  the  Government  and
none can claim a right to be appointed. That must necessarily be so  because
it is a position of great trust and confidence.  The  provision  of
Article
14
, however, will be attracted to a  limited  extent  as  the  functionaries
named in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
are public functionaries. They  also
have a public duty to perform. If the State fails to  discharge  its  public
duty or acts in defiance, deviation and departure of the principles of  law,
the court may interfere. The court may also interfere when the legal  policy
laid down by
the  Government  for  the  purpose  of  such  appointments  is
departed from  or  mandatory  provisions  of  law  are  not  complied  with.
Judicial review can also be resorted to, if a holder of a public  office  is
sought to be removed for reason dehors the statute. ”



16    It is beyond cavil that it is in the interest of the  dispensation  of
criminal justice that competent counsel possessing  integrity  should  alone
be appointed, since otherwise, there is a strong possibility of  miscarriage
of justice.  In choosing them, the State will not only have to be  satisfied
of their forensic competence, but also that they are bereft of any  criminal
antecedents.  This, however,  does  not  mean  that  the  persons  presently
discharging the duties of Additional District Government Counsel,  Assistant
District Government Counsel,  Panel  lawyers  and  Sub  District  Government
Counsel stand  appointed  to  civil  posts,  thereby  creating  a  right  of
continuity.  In our opinion, which is an echo of that articulated  in  Johri
Mal, the State, like any other litigant, must have the  freedom  to  appoint
counsel in whom they repose trust and confidence.  The only  expectation  is
that the choice made by the State should not be such  as  could  defeat  the
sacred and onerous responsibility of ensuring that the justice is meted  out
to all citizens.  In Johri Mal, this Court has  categorically  rejected  the
claim  of  an  advocate  to  continuous  renewal  or  re-appointment  as   a
Government Advocate.  We entirely agree with this  exposition  of  the  law.
We think that the correct approach is to ensure the competency of  advocates
being considered for appointment of Additional District Government  Counsel,
Assistant District  Government  Counsel,  Panel  lawyers  and  Sub  District
Government Counsel.  It seems to us that it would be an  incorrect  approach
to start this process  by  considering  the  re-appointment  or  renewal  of
existing Government Counsels since that  would  dilute,  nay,  dissolve  the
discretion  of  the  Government  to  appoint  advocates   whom   they   find
trustworthy.  The High Court has followed the  second  approach  leading  to
the dissatisfaction of the State Government and their resentment that  their
realm of discretion has been eroded for no justifiable reason.
17    The Appeals are allowed. The  impugned  Judgment  is  set  aside,  but
without imposition of costs.   Fresh appointments to be made expeditiously.
..................................................J.
(VIKRAMAJIT SEN)




...................................................J.
(ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE)
New Delhi,
November 26, 2015.
REPORTABLE  [

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                        CIVIL APPEAL No.  13727  OF 2015

                    (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) No. 36166/20

State of U.P. & Ors.                    …..….Appellant(s)



                             VERSUS



Ajay Kumar Sharma & Anr.          ……Respondent(s)

                                    WITH

                      CIVIL APPEAL No.  13728   OF 2015

                    (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) No.1425/2015)



                               J U D G M E N T

Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1.     I have had the benefit  of  reading  the  scholarly  judgment  of  my
learned Brother Justice Vikramajit Sen and  I  am  in  respectful  agreement
with his opinion. I, however, add only few words of concurrence.
2.      I entirely agree with my learned Brother that the issues  which  are
the subject matter of these appeals such as issues  relating  to  scope  and
interpretation of
Section 24
of  the Code of Criminal  Procedure,  1973  (in
short “
Cr.P.C
.”), the issues relating to appointment, renewal, extension  of
tenure of Public Prosecutor/District Government Counsel,  their  nature  and
lastly provisions of (UP Government)  Legal  Remembrance’s  Manual  and,  in
particular, provisions dealing with  such  appointment/renewal/extension  of
tenure etc.  remain no more res-integra and  stand  authoritatively  decided
by a Bench of three judges in  State of U.P. vs.  Johri  Mal  (2004)  4  SCC
714. This decision was followed consistently  by  this  Court  as  and  when
these issues arose for consideration (see
State of U.P. &  Ors.  vs.  Rakesh
Kumar  Keshari  &  Anr.
(2011)  5  SCC  341,  Centre  for
Public  Interest
Litigation & Ors. vs. Union of India  &  Ors.
,  (
2012)  3  SCC  117,  Deepak
Aggarwal vs. Keshav Kaushik & Ors.
(2013) 5 SCC 277  and  State  of  U.P.  &
Ors. vs. Satyavrat Singh (2014) 14 SCC 548).
3.
In  these  circumstances  and  keeping  in  view  the   authoritative
pronouncement rendered in
Johri Mal’
case (supra), there does not arise  any
occasion to again examine the  same  issues  more  so  when  in  these  very
proceedings though at the instance of some other persons, these  issues  had
reached to this Court on previous  occasions  as  mentioned  by  my  learned
Brother in the main judgment which also came to be decided by this Court.
4.
Indeed the principles of  "precedent" and "Stare Decisis"  command  us
to follow the law
laid down by
this Court and more so when it  was  rendered
by a Bench consisted of three judges.
5.    I am also of the view that  the  High  Court  though  dealt  with  the
issues but as aptly put by my learned Brother in paragraph 15  "incorrectly"
thereby calling our interference.
6.
In my considered opinion, therefore, the fresh appointments to be  now
made keeping in view the apt observations made especially  in  the  case  of
Johri Mal
(supra) (paras 40 to 44) and what  is  held  hereinabove  in  main
judgment.
..……..................................J.

                               [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]

New Delhi;
November  26, 2015.