[Cites
6
, Cited by
3
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Commissioner Of Income-Tax vs K. Subbaraju And Venkateswara Rao And ... on 26 November, 1987
Equivalent citations: [1989]175ITR307(AP)
JUDGMENT
 

  Y.V. Anjaneyulu, J.
1. The following four questions are referred by the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal for the consideration of this court under
section 256(1)
of the Income-tax Act, 1961 :
"(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal was correct in holding that the value of the stock written off by the assessee was an allowable deduction ?
(2) If the answer to the question No. (1) is in the affirmative, whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal was right in holding that the value of the stock was allowable for the assessment year 1975-76 ?
(3) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal was justified in holding that the contribution made to the welfare fund was deductible under
section 37(1)
?
(4) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was correct in law in holding that the interest due by the partners to the firm should be set off against the interest paid/payable to the partners by the firm for arriving at the amount to be disallowed under
section 40(b)
of the Income-tax Act, 1961 ?"
2. The matter relates to the assessment year 1975-76. The respondent-assesee is not represented. Learned standing counsel for the Revenue has drawn our attention to each one of the questions and pointed out that the questions are covered by earlier decisions. We have considered the decisions brought to our notice by learned standing counsel and were satisfied that the questions are fully covered one way or the other as we shall presently indicate.
3. Question No. (1) is covered by the principle upheld by this court in
Sri Satyanarayana Rice Mill v. CIT
[1985] 155 ITR 676. There is little doubt in the facts and circumstances of this case that the assessee was violating the law when it transported rice to Kerala in the guise of broken rice. Because of the violation of law, the confiscation was properly made. We accordingly answer the first question referred to us in the negative, that is to say, in favour of the Revenue and against the assessee.
4. In view of our answer to question to question No. (1), question No. (2) does not arise.
5. As regards question No. (3), it is covered in favour of the Revenue by the decision of this court in
CIT v. Kodandarama and Co.
[1983] 144 ITR 395.
6. Finally, question No. (4) is covered against the Revenue and in favour of the assessee by the decision of this court in
CIT v. T. V. Ramanaiah and Sons
[1986] 157 ITR 300.
7. We, accordingly, answer the four questions referred to us. There shall be no order as to costs.