[Cites
14
, Cited by
13
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Commissioner Of Income-Tax vs Bolla Ramaiah And Ors. on 26 March, 1987
Equivalent citations: [1988]174ITR154(AP)
Author:
B.P. Jeevan Reddy
Bench:
B.P. Jeevan Reddy
JUDGMENT
 

  Jeevan Reddy, J.
1. Identical questions are referred in these three cases. Though the assessees are different, the basic facts are identical. It would be enough if we set out the questions referred in R.C. No. 16 of 1982. The questions are :
"(1) Whether the acquisition of lands under the
Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952
, was completed before March 1, 1970 ?
(2) Whether the lands were agricultural lands on the date of acquisition ?
(3) Whether the benefit under
section 54B
of the Income-tax Act, was allowable in computing the capital gains in the event the acquisition was completed on March 12, 1970 ?"
2. The lands of the assessees in R.C. Nos. 16 of 1982 and 18 of 1982 are situated in Hakimpet village, which is included within the municipal limits of Hyderabad City. The lands of the assessee in R.C. No. 11 of 1982 are situated in Guddimalkapur village, which is situated within 8 kilometres of the local limits of the Hyderabad Municipal Corporation. These lands were requisitioned by the defence authorities under the provisions of the
Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952
. A few years later, i.e., in 1970, these lands were proposed to be acquired. The notification acquiring these lands under
section 7
of the said Act was published on March 12, 1970, though it is dated February 12, 1970. An award was passed and compensation was awarded to the assessees.
3. The income-tax authorities sought to tax the capital gains arising from the said acquisition. The assessees contested the taxability on three grounds, viz., (a) that the acquisition was complete before March 1, 1970, the date prescribed in clause (viii) of
section 47
of the Income-tax Act;. (b) that the lands were "agricultural lands" on the date of acquisition and hence did not constitute a "capital asset" as defined in clause (14)(iii) of
section 2
of the Income-tax Act; and (c) that, inasmuch as the assessees have purchased other agricultural lands within two years of the acquisition, they are entitled to the benefit of
section 54B
of the Income-tax Act. All the three contentions were negatived in all the three cases by all the authorities, whereupon they have asked for and obtained these references.
4. Prior to April 1, 1970 "agricultural land in India" was excluded from the definition of "capital asset" in clause (14) of
section 2
. The definition of "capital asset", in so far as it is relevant, read as follows :
"'capital asset' means property of any kind held by an assessee, whether or not connected with his business or profession, but does not include - ...
(iii) agricultural land in India ..."
Section 45
of the Income-tax Act levies capital gains tax. It says :
"Any profits or gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset effected in the previous year shall, save as otherwise provided in
section 53
,
54
,
54B
and
54D
, be chargeable to income-tax under the head 'Capital gains', and shall be deemed to be the income of the previous year in which the transfer took place."
Section 47
sets out certain transactions which shall not be regarded as transfer. There was no clause (viii) in this section prior to April 1, 1970.
5.
By the Finance Act, 1970
, the definition of "capital asset" was amended so far as it exempted agricultural lands in India. Clause (iii) in the said definition. after amendment, reads as follows :
"(iii) agricultural land in India, not being land situate -
(a) in any area which is comprised within the jurisdiction of a municipality (whether known as a municipality, municipal corporation, notified area committee, town area committee, town committee, or by any other name) or a cantonment board and which has a population of not less than ten thousand according to the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published before the first day of the previous year; or
(b) in any area within such distance, not being more than eight kilometres, from the local limits of any municipality or cantonment board referred to in item (a), as the Central Government may, having regard to the extent of, and scope for, urbanisation of that area and other relevant considerations, specify in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette."
6. It is important to notice that this amendment was made with effect from April 1, 1970.
7. By the same Act, clause (viii) was introduced in
section 47
. After introduction of clause (viii),
section 47
, in so far as it is relevant for our purposes, reads thus :
"47. Nothing contained in
section 45
shall apply to the following transfers :- ...
(viii) any transfer of agricultural land in India effected before the 1st day of March, 1970."
8. A reading of the above provisions yields the following position : Prior to April 1. 1970, agricultural lands in India-whether situated in urban areas or otherwise-did not constitute a "capital asset" and hence no capital gains tax was leviable on the transfer of such lands.
By the Finance Act, 1970
, however, agricultural land situated within the limits of a municipality, or within 8 kilometres of the limits of any municipality, was made a "capital asset" with effect from April 1, 1970. (The agricultural land not falling within items (a) and (b) of sub-clause (iii) of clause (14) of
section 2
continued to be not "capital asset" for the purpose of the Act.) Since the said amendment is brought into force on and from April 1, 1970, it is applicable to the assessment year 1970-71. Clause (viii) of
section 47
, however, exempted sale of agricultural lands effected before March 1, 1970 (the date of introduction of the Finance Bill in Parliament), which means that transfer of agricultural land, which is assessable to capital gains tax in the assessment year 1970-71 will be exempt from such tax, if the transfer has taken place before March 1, 1970. (It is wrong to contend, as has been done by learned standing counsel for the Revenue, that by virtue of clause (viii) of
section 47
, all transfers of agricultural lands, wherever situated, effected after March 1, 1970, became liable to capital gains tax. Such is not and could never have been the purport of the said clause. The clause has a limited purpose as indicated above and no more).
9. Before the assessing authority as well as both the appellate authorities, the main contention of the assessee has been that, inasmuch as the notification under
section 7
of the 1952 Act is dated February 12, 1970, and also because notices under the said Act were issued prior to March 1, 1970, the transfer must be deemed to have taken place prior to March 1, 1970. (This argument was advanced on the assumption that, if a transfer takes place after March 1, 1970, it is liable to capital gains tax). This contention of the assessee was, however, negatived, and in our opinion rightly, by all the authorities, following the decision of this court in Addl.
CIT v. G. M. Omarkhan
[1979] 116 ITR 950. The 1952 Act expressly says that, where a land under requisition is acquired, it vests in the State on the date of publication of the acquisition notification in the Official Gazette (vide
section 7 (2)
). In this case, the acquisition notification was published in the Official Gazette only on March 12, 1970, and that is the date of transfer, as held by this court in the decision
referred to above
. We must, therefore, answer the first question referred to us saying that the acquisition of the lands cannot be said to have been completed before March 1, 1970.
10. The next contention of the assessees was that these lands were "agricultural lands" on the date of acquisition. Their contention was that, when these lands were requisitioned, they were agricultural lands, under actual cultivation by them, and that the mere fact that after requisitioning the same, the defence authorities did not cultivate the said lands but put them to non-agricultural use, does not put an end to their agricultural character. It was contended by them that they intended to resume cultivation of these lands as and when they were derequisitioned. It was also contended that under the 1952 Act, the requisitioning authority is under an obligation to return the land in the same condition in which it was requisitioned, as and when they derequisition the land. In our opinion, however, it is unnecessary to go into the question whether these lands were agricultural lands on the date of acquisition, because, even if we agree with the assessees that they were agricultural lands on the date of acquisition, it would still not avail the assessees for the following reasons : the lands concerned herein are situated either within the municipal limits or within 8 kilometres of the local limits of the Hyderabad Municipal Corporation. Therefore, they fall within the exception to exception, introduced by the
Finance Act, 1970
. In other words, these lands constitute "capital asset", even though they are agricultural lands, for the reason that they are situated within the urban area specified in
section 2(14)(iii)
. The said amendment was brought into force with effect from April 1, 1970, which means that it is applicable for the assessment year 1970-71. The accounting year for the said assessment year would be the financial year 1969-70, or such other accounting year as may have been opted for by the assessees, so long as the accounts of the assessees are made up to a date within the said financial year. In the present case, however, there is no dispute that the financial year 1969-70 would be the "previous year" for the assessment year 1970-71 in the case of all the assessees herein. If so, it would follow that the capital gains made by these assessees during the said previous year, i.e., during the financial year 1969-70, would be assessable to capital gains tax in the assessment year 1970-71. It is in this connection that clause (viii) in
section 47
becomes relevant and meaningful. According to clause (viii) of
section 47
, any transfer of agricultural land effected before March 1, 1970 (the date on which the
Finance Act, 1970
, was introduced in Parliament) would be exempt from capital gains tax. In other words, transfers of those agricultural lands which become exigible to capital gains tax by virtue of the amendment of the definition of "capital asset" in
section 2(14)
are exempted to a large extent. Only those transfers which have taken place on or after March 1, 1970, i.e., after the introduction of the Finance Bill, 1970, in Parliament, are made liable to tax. On a combined reading of the above provisions, it is clear that inasmuch as the lands concerned herein have been transferred on March 12, 1970, they are liable to capital gains tax. Our answer to question No. (2), therefore, is that it is unnecessary to go into the question whether the lands concerned herein were agricultural lands or not, on the date of acquisition, because even if they were agricultural lands, they are not exempted from the capital gains tax. Being situate within the municipal limits, or within 8 kilometres of the municipal limits, they constitute "capital asset" for the purpose of the assessment year 1970-71 and having been transferred after March 1, 1970, they are also not entitled to the benefit of clause (viii) of
section 47
. In this view of the matter, it is unnecessary for us to refer to the test enunciated by the Supreme Court in CWT v. Officer-in-Charge (Court of Wards), Paigah  to find out whether a land is an agricultural land, or to apply the said tests to the lands concerned herein.
11. Now coming to the third question, the contention of the assessee is liable to fail on the simple ground that these lands were not being used by the assessee, or a parent of his, for agricultural purposes in the two years immediately preceding the date on which the transfer took place, as required by the said section. Unless this requirement is satisfied, the assessee cannot claim the benefit provided by
section 54B
, even though he may have purchased another agricultural land within two years of the transfer. Now, admittedly, in all these cases, the land concerned was not used by the assessee or his parent, for agricultural purposes. It was under requisition by the defence department and in their possession. For this reason, question No. 3 is to be answered in the negative, i.e., against the assessees and in favour of the Revenue.
12. For the above reasons, we answer all the three questions referred against the assessees and in favour of the Revenue. There shall be no order as to costs.