[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shailesh Kumar Singh Alias Shailesh R. ... vs State Of Uttar Pradesh on 14 July, 2025
1

                                                                                 REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 869
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2963/2025
        (@Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No.4880/2025)


        SHAILESH KUMAR SINGH ALIAS SHAILESH R. SINGH                       Appellant(s)

                                                        VERSUS

        STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ORS.                                      Respondent(s)

                                                     O R D E R
1.                  Leave granted.
2.                  This appeal arises from the order passed by the High Court of

        Judicature at Allahabad dated 7-3-2025 by which the High Court in a

        Writ Petition filed by the appellant – herein praying for quashing

        of the First Information Report lodged by the Respondent No.4 –

        herein for the offence punishable under Sections 60(b), 316(2) and

        318 (2) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (for short, “the BNS,

        2023”) directed the parties to go for mediation and simultaneously

        also directed the appellant – herein to hand-over a demand draft of

        Rs.25,00,0000/- (Rupees Twenty Five Lakh only) for the purpose of

        mediation to the Respondent No.4 (original complainant).
3.                  The impugned order passed by the High Court reads thus”-
“1. Heard Ms.          Sana Raees Khan, learned counsel for the
                      petitioner   and        learned A.G.A. appearing for   the State
                      respondents.
2. The petitioner, by means of this writ petition under
Article
                       226
of the Constitution of India, has invoked the inherent
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by jurisdiction  of this Court with prayer to quash the impugned
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.07.17
17:33:12 IST        First  Information Report dated 09.01.2025 registered as Case
Reason:
Crime No.12 of 2025 under Sections 60(b), 316(2) and 318(2) of
                       B.N.S., 2023, P.S. Hariparwat, District Agra. Further request is
                       made to issue direction to the respondents not to arrest the
                       petitioner.
2
3. Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the
petitioner is a co-founder and production head of M/s. Karma
Media and Entertainment LLP, which is primarily engaged in
production of motion picture. The respondent no.4 (informant) is
running the business under the name and style of M/s Polaroid
Media, which is engaged in the business of financing, co-
production and co- financing media projects. The informant has
lodged the impugned FIR by dragging a civil dispute inter-se the
parties into criminal case. A bare perusal of the impugned FIR,
no criminal offence is made out against the petitioner. It is
submitted that the Court must ensure that criminal prosecution
is not used as an instrument of harassment or for seeking
private vendetta or with an ulterior motive to pressurise the
accused. Even though the proceedings are pending and neither the
charge-sheet nor the final report has been submitted in the
present case.
In support of her submission she has placed
reliance on the judgements of Apex Court in
Delhi Race Club
(1940) Ltd. vs. State of Uttar Pradesh
(2024) 0 Supreme 689
(paras 25, 28, 29 and 30) and In the case of
Radheyshyam & ors
vs. State of Rajasthan & another
Criminal Appeal No.3020 of 2024
decided on July 22, 2024. She lastly submits that as there is a
commercial dispute and both the parties are reputed in the
society, instead of dragging the matter in the criminal
proceeding. it would be apt that the matter may be referred to
the   Mediation  and   Conciliation   Centre   of  this   Court.
4. In response to the aforesaid request, we have asked learned
counsel for the petitioner to seek instructions from the
petitioner for upfront payment to the informant so that the
matter may be referred to the Mediation and Conciliation Centre
and we have adjourned the proceeding. Later on, on the
instructions, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that
the petitioner is inclined to pay Rs.25 lakhs within three weeks
from                                                      today.
5. Accordingly, the matter is referred to the Mediation Centre
of this Court with the direction that after deposit of such
amount by the petitioner, the Mediation Centre shall make all
possible efforts to conclude the mediation and conciliation
proceedings expeditiously, preferably within a period of three
months.
6. Let the parties be present at the Mediation and Conciliation
Centre of this Court on 08.04.2025. The demand draft of Rs.25
lakhs would be handed over to the informant on the said date and
a separate draft of Rs.5000/ towards the mediation fee shall
also be deposited with the Mediation and Conciliation Centre.
7. List after expiry of aforesaid period before the appropriate
Bench along with the report of Mediation Centre.
8. Till the next date of listing, respondents are restrained to
arrest the petitioner pursuant to the impugned F.I.R. subject to
cooperation in the on-going investigation.
9. It is made clear that in case there occurs default by the
petitioner either in depositing the amount or in appearing
before the Mediation Centre on the date fixed, the interim order
3
shall cease to operate and the Mediation Centre shall
     immediately communicate with the office which in tum shall list
     the case within a week before the appropriate Bench for passing
     orders in the matter.”
4.    We heard Ms. Sana Raees Khan, the learned counsel appearing

for the appellant (accused), Mr. Anand Mishra, the learned counsel

appearing for the Respondent No.4 and and Mr. Shaurya Krishna, the

learned counsel appearing for the State of U.P.
5.    Section 60(b) of the BNS, 2023 reads thus:-
60. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with
     imprisonment.—


     “Whoever, intending to facilitate or knowing it to be
     likely that he will thereby facilitate the commission of an
     offence punishable with imprisonment, voluntarily conceals,
     by any act or illegal omission, the existence of a design
     to commit such offence, or makes any representation which
     he knows to be false respecting such design shall,—
(a) if the offence be committed, be punished with
     imprisonment of the description provided for the offence,
     for a term which may extend to one-fourth; and
(b) if the offence be not committed, to one-eighth, of the
     longest term of such imprisonment, or with such fine as is
     provided for the offence, or with both.
6.    Section 316(2) of the BNS, 2023 reads thus:-
316. Criminal breach of trust. (2) Whoever commits criminal
     breach of trust shall be punished with imprisonment of either
     description for a term which may extend to five years, or with
     fine, or with both.
7.    Section 318(2) of the BNS,2023 reads thus:-
318. Cheating. (2) Whoever cheats shall be punished with
     imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
     to three years, or with fine, or with both.
8.    We   called   upon   the        learned   counsel    appearing      for   the

Respondent   No.4   to   make    us    understand   in    what   manner   the   FIR
4
discloses commission of a cognizable offence. We also called upon

the learned counsel appearing for the Respondent No.4 to make us

understand in what manner his client could be said to have been

cheated so as to constitute the offence of cheating.
9.    What we have been able to understand is that there is an oral

agreement   between     the    parties.         The   Respondent     No.4     might    have

parted with some money in accordance with the oral agreement and it

may be that the appellant – herein owes a particular amount to be

paid to the Respondent No.4. However,                   the    question      is   whether

prima facie any offence of cheating could be said to have been

committed by the appellant.
10.   How many times the High Courts are to be reminded that to

constitute an offence of cheating, there has to be something more

than prima facie on record to indicate that the intention of the

accused was to cheat the complainant right from the inception. The

plain   reading   of    the     FIR    does       not    disclose     any    element    of

criminality.
11.   The entire case is squarely covered by a recent pronouncement

of this Court in the case of
“Delhi Race Club (1940) Limited vs.

State of Uttar Pradesh”
reported in (2024) 10 SCC 690. In
the said

decision
,   the   entire      law     as   to    what    constitutes        cheating   and

criminal    breach     of     trust    respectively           has   been    exhaustively

explained. It appears that this very decision was relied upon by

the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner before the High

Court. However, instead of looking into the matter on its own

merits, the High Court thought fit to direct the petitioner to go

for mediation and that too by making payment of Rs. 25,00,000/- to
5
the 4th respondent as a condition precedent. We fail to understand,

why the High Court should undertake such exercise. The High Court

may either allow the petition saying that no offence is disclosed

or may reject the petition saying that no case for quashing is made

out.   Why   should     the    High   Court      make   an     attempt    to    help     the

complainant to recover the amount due and payable by the accused.

It is for the Civil Court or Commercial Court as the case may be to

look into in a suit that may be filed for recovery of money or in

any other proceedings, be it under the
Arbitration Act, 1996
or

under the provisions of the IB Code, 2016.
12.    Why the High Court was not able to understand that the entire

dispute between the parties is of a civil nature.
13.    We also enquired with the learned counsel appearing for the

Respondent No.4 whether his client has filed any civil suit or has

initiated    any   other      proceedings       for   recovery    of     the   money.     It

appears that no civil suit has been filed for recovery of money

till this date. Money cannot be recovered, more particularly, in a

civil dispute between the parties by filing a First Information

Report and seeking the help of the Police. This amounts to abuse of

process of law.
14.    We could have said many things but we refrain from observing

anything     further.    If     the   Respondent        No.4     has     to    recover     a

particular amount, he may file a civil suit or seek any other

appropriate remedy available to him in law. He cannot be permitted

to take recourse of criminal proceedings.
15.    We are quite disturbed by the manner in which the High Court

has passed the impugned order. The High Court first directed the
6
appellant    to     pay      Rs.25,00,000/-         to       the    Respondent    No.4   and

thereafter      directed       him   to    appear        before       the   Mediation    and

Conciliation Centre for the purpose of settlement. That’s not what

is expected of a High Court to do in a Writ Petition filed under
Article   226
of   the     Constitution        or    a   miscellaneous       application

filed under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for

quashing of FIR or any other criminal proceedings. What is expected

of the High Court is to look into the averments and the allegations

levelled in the FIR along with the other material on record, if

any.   The   High      Court    seems     to   have      forgotten       the   well-settled

principles as enunciated in the decision of this Court in the
“State of Haryana & Others vs. Bhajan Lal & Others” Reported
in

1992 Supp.(1) SCC 335.
16.    In the result, this appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed.
17.    The impugned FIR stands quashed.
18.    We once again clarify that it shall be open for the Respondent

No.4 to avail appropriate legal remedy before the appropriate forum

in accordance with law for the recovery of the alleged amount due

and payable to him.
…………………………………………J
                                                                   (J.B. PARDIWALA)



                                                                   …………………………………………J
                                                                   (R. MAHADEVAN)
NEW DELHI
14TH JULY, 2025.