[Cites
21
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
K. Purushottam Reddy vs Union Of India on 25 July, 2025
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
Surya Kant
2025 INSC 894                                                                     REPORTABLE


                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                     WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 488 OF 2022


             K. Purushottam Reddy                                                    … Petitioner

                                                         Versus

             Union of India and Ors.                                             … Respondents

                                                         WITH

                                     WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 718 OF 2022



                                                      JUDGMENT
SURYA KANT, J.
1.             These two Writ Petitions, instituted under
Article 32
of the

                            Constitution of India, assail the legality of Notification Nos. SO No.

                            1015(E) dated 06.03.2020 (2020 Notification) and SO 1023(E)

                            dated 03.03.2021 (2021 Notification) (together referred to as

                            the Impugned Notifications) issued by the Union of India through

                            the Ministry of Law and Justice, Respondent No. 2, herein. It is the

                            case of the Petitioner(s) that, by way of the Impugned Notifications,

                            a delimitation exercise was conducted for the Union Territory of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT              Jammu and Kashmir, resulting in an increase in the number of
   Date: 2025.07.25
   16:01:09 IST
   Reason:
seats in the Legislative Assembly, albeit the States of Andhra
Page 1 of 26
Pradesh and Telangana were excluded in an arbitrary fashion. The

     Petitioner(s) consequently seek a direction to Respondent Nos. 1-2

     and 5 to similarly increase the number of seats in the Legislative

     Assemblies of the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana in terms

     of the applicable statutory provisions.
A.   FACTUAL MATRIX
2.   Before adverting to the issues and contentions raised by the

     parties, we deem it appropriate to briefly narrate the factual

     background leading to these Writ Petitions.
2.1.
The Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014
(AP Reorganisation

     Act) came into force with effect from 02.06.2014, leading to the

     bifurcation of the erstwhile State of Andhra Pradesh into two

     separate states, namely, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. Section

     26(1) of the AP Reorganisation Act inter alia provided that “subject

     to the provisions contained in
Article 170
of the Constitution and

     without prejudice of
Section 15
of this Act, the number of seats in

     the Legislative Assembly of the successor States of Andhra

     Pradesh and Telangana shall be increased from 175 and 119

     to 225 and 153, respectively, and delimitation of the

     constituencies may be determined by the Election Commission in

     the manner hereinafter provided.”
Page 2 of 26
2.2. Thereafter, the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019

    (J&K Reorganisation Act) came into force on 31.10.2019,

    bifurcating the then State of Jammu and Kashmir into two Union

    Territories: (i) Jammu and Kashmir; and (ii) Ladakh. Similar to the

    provision under the AP Reorganisation Act,
Section 60
of the J&K

    Reorganisation Act also provided that “without prejudice to sub-

    sections (3) of
section 14
of this Act, the number of seats in the

    Legislative Assembly of Union territory of Jammu and

    Kashmir shall be increased from 107 to 114, and delimitation

    of the constituencies may be determined by the Election Commission

    in the manner hereinafter provided.” For context, it may be added

    that while the J&K Reorganisation Act provided for the total

    number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the Union Territory

    of Jammu and Kashmir to be 107, in terms of
Section 14 (4) (a)
and (b) of the Act, 24 out of these 107 seats are not to be taken into

    account for reckoning the total membership of the Assembly or

    delimitation exercise until the area of the Union Territory of Jammu

    and Kashmir under the occupation of Pakistan ceases to be so

    occupied.
2.3. Thereafter, on 06.03.2020, Respondent No. 2 issued a Notification

    under
Section 3
of the Delimitation Act, 2002
(Delimitation Act
),

    constituting a Delimitation Commission for a period of one year, for
Page 3 of 26
delimitation of Assembly and Parliamentary constituencies in the

    Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, the States of Assam,

    Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Nagaland. Notably, the States of

    Andhra Pradesh and Telangana did not find any mention in the

    2020 Notification.
2.4. The 2020 Notification was, however, amended in 2021, thereby

    extending the term of the Delimitation Commission by one more

    year. More pertinently, this notification also clarified that the scope

    of the delimitation exercise would be restricted to the Union

    Territory of Jammu and Kashmir only, thereby excluding the States

    of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Nagaland.


2.5. The Delimitation Commission passed an order dated 05.05.2022,

    in respect of the delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly

    constituencies in the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir. It

    was determined that for elections to the Legislative Assembly, the

    Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir shall be divided into 90

    assembly constituencies (increased from 83 constituencies). As has

    already been stated, the remaining 24 seats earmarked for PoK did

    not form part of the delimitation process.
2.6. It is significant to note that the validity of the delimitation exercise

    carried out in the Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir, under the

    Impugned Notification, has already been subjected to judicial
Page 4 of 26
scrutiny before this Court in Haji Abdul Gani Khan & Anr. v.
Union of India & Ors.1 The petitioners in that matter inter alia

        challenged: (i) the provision regarding the increase in the number

        of seats in the Legislative Assembly of Union territory of Jammu

        and Kashmir; (ii) the modification to the 2020 Notification by

        deleting the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur and

        Nagaland from the purview of the Delimitation Commission; and
(iii)   the appointment of the Delimitation Commission allegedly

        usurping the jurisdiction of the Election Commission of India. It

        was therefore contended that the delimitation exercise undertaken

        therein was ultra vires to the provisions of sub-Sections (2) and (5)

        of Section 60 of the J&K Reorganisation Act; violative of Clause (3)

        of
Article 170
as well as
Articles 14
, 19
and
21
of the Constitution.


2.7. This Court did not find any substance in the contentions noted

        above and held that: (i) Under
Articles 2
, 3
, and
4
of the

        Constitution, Parliament has the power to create new States or

        Union territories and to make necessary provisions for their

        governance, including representation in Parliament and State

        Legislatures.
In exercise of these powers, the J&K Reorganisation

        Act created two new Union Territories and validly assigned the task

        of delimitation to the Commission under the
Delimitation Act
; (
ii)
1
Haji Abdul Gani Khan & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors.
, (2023) 11 SCC 432.
Page 5 of 26
The constitutional status of the Union Territory of Jammu and

     Kashmir is distinct from that of the four North-Eastern States

     excluded from the scope of delimitation by way of the 2021

     Notification. Unlike the latter,
Sections 4
and
9
of the Delimitation

     Act stood amended for Jammu and Kashmir to permit delimitation

     based on the 2011 Census. As there was no such amendment for

     the North-Eastern States, there cannot be a challenge regarding

     violation of
Article 14
, as it would amount to treating two unequals,

     equally.
2.8. However, the 2020 and 2021 Notifications have been impugned

     before us once again—this time, not on the basis of the

     constitutional reorganisation of Jammu and Kashmir, but because

     a similar delimitation exercise has not been undertaken in the

     States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. The challenge is thus

     premised on a claim of parity. According to the Petitioners, the

     exclusion of the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana from the

     scope of delimitation under the Impugned Notifications is

     discriminatory and undermines the statutory mandate envisaged

     under the AP Reorganisation Act.
B.   CONTENTIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER(S)
3.   Mr. Rao Ranjit, learned counsel for the Petitioner(s), argued that

     the non-inclusion of the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana
Page 6 of 26
in the delimitation process initiated through the 2020 Notification

     and restricting the delimitation exercise only for the Union Territory

     of Jammu and Kashmir is arbitrary, discriminatory and thus,

     unconstitutional.
4.   Mr. Ranjit canvassed the following grounds in support of his

     submissions:
(a) Excluding the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana from

         the scope of the delimitation exercise as contemplated under

         the 2020 Notification suffers from the vice of intelligible

         differentia and is thus violative of
Article 14
of the

         Constitution.
(b) The Delimitation Commission for the Union Territory of

         Jammu and Kashmir was the first Commission to be appointed

         after the AP Reorganisation Act came into force. Not only do

         the electorates of the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana

         have a legitimate expectation of delimitation, but Respondent

         Nos. 1-2 and 5 also have a constitutional responsibility to give

         effect to Section 26 of the AP Reorganisation Act, which they

         have failed to fulfil.
(c) The subsequent omission of the States of Assam, Arunachal

         Pradesh, Manipur, and Nagaland from the delimitation
Page 7 of 26
process, and limiting the exercise to the Union Territory of

         Jammu     and    Kashmir,   also   amounts    to   unreasonable

         classification, which is per se arbitrary and discriminatory.
(d) The power under the
Delimitation Act
must be exercised

         uniformly by the Union of India. In other words, if the

         delimitation was undertaken for the Union Territory of Jammu

         and Kashmir, there could be no plausible justification for

         denying the same to the States of Andhra Pradesh and

         Telangana.
C.   CONTENTIONS ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENTS
5.   Conversely, Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General of India,

     along with Mr. KM Nataraj, learned Additional Solicitor General of

     India, representing Respondent Nos. 1-2 have opposed the subject

     Writ Petitions, urging that there exists no enforceable right

     available to the Petitioner(s) and, as such, these Writ Petitions are

     wholly misconceived and erroneous.
6.   Their submissions may be summarised as follows:
(a) In terms of the provisos to
Articles 82
and
170
of the

         Constitution, no readjustment of seats or division of States

         into territorial constituencies can be undertaken until the

         relevant data from the first census conducted after 2026 is
Page 8 of 26
published. Consequently, no delimitation exercise can be

    undertaken in the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana

    prior to the availability of such post-2026 census data. In light

    of the clear constitutional bar, the relief sought by the

    Petitioner(s) is not maintainable and devoid of merit.
(b) The Constitutional and Statutory arrangements governing the

    delimitation of Union Territories stand on a distinct legal

    footing and cannot be equated with that applicable to the

    States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. Jammu and

    Kashmir, having been reconstituted as a Union Territory under

    the J&K Reorganisation Act, is governed by a separate

    constitutional   provision.   Consequently,   any   delimitation

    exercise undertaken for the Union Territory of Jammu and

    Kashmir, including through the Impugned Notifications,

    emanates from powers referrable to
Article 239A
of the

    Constitution that are materially different in scope and

    application in comparison to those pertaining to the State

    Legislatures under
Article 170
of the Constitution and other

    relevant provisions. The claim of parity, therefore, is legally

    unsustainable, as it overlooks the essential constitutional

    distinction between a Union Territory and a State, both in

    terms of legislative competence and institutional structure.
Page 9 of 26
(c) This Court in
Haji Abdul Gani Khan
(supra), while upholding

         the delimitation exercise conducted in Jammu and Kashmir,

         explicitly held that
Article 170
will have no application insofar

         as the Legislative Assembly of the Union Territory of Jammu

         and Kashmir is concerned, as the said provision only deals

         with State Legislatures.
7.   Mr. Maninder Singh, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

     Election Commission of India (Respondent No. 5), submitted that

     the Impugned Notifications have been issued by the Union of India,

     constituting the Delimitation Commission, as well as the scope of

     its mandate. The Election Commission, therefore, has no

     jurisdiction to opine on the vires or validity of these notifications.

     The Election Commission’s role is limited to facilitating the

     implementation of the delimitation process as prescribed.
8.   Nonetheless, the Election Commission has aligned with the

     position taken by the Union of India that, by virtue of the proviso

     to Clause (3) of
Article 170
of the Constitution, there exists a

     constitutional freeze on the readjustment of seats in State

     Legislative Assemblies until the publication of census figures

     following the first census conducted after the year 2026.
Page 10 of 26
D.   ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION
9.   Having traced the arc of relevant facts and the sequence of events,

     weighed the rival submissions, and after perusing the material on

     record, we find that the following key issues arise for determination:
(a)   Whether the exclusion of the States of Andhra Pradesh and

           Telangana (or any other State), from the scope of delimitation

           under the Impugned Notifications and limiting it only to the

           Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir is arbitrary and

           violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution?
(b)   Whether the failure of the Union of India to give effect to

           Section 26 of the AP Reorganisation Act has frustrated the

           legitimate expectation of the electorates of these States,

           thereby giving rise to a justiciable cause of action?
E.   ANALYSIS

E.1. Whether the exclusion of the States of Andhra Pradesh and

Telangana (or any other State), from the Impugned Notifications is

violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution?
10. At the heart of these proceedings lies the contention of the

     Petitioner(s) that the action of the Union of India, in excluding the

     States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana from the scope of the

     delimitation   exercise   as   envisaged    under    the   Impugned
Page 11 of 26
Notifications, is arbitrary, discriminatory and constitutionally

    impermissible.
11. The Petitioner(s) have placed specific reliance on Section 26 of the

    AP Reorganisation Act, which, according to them, unambiguously

    stipulates that the number of seats in the Legislative Assemblies of

    the successor States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana “shall be

    increased” from 175 and 119 to 225 and 153, respectively. It was

    thus argued that, despite this statutory mandate, no steps have

    been taken by the Union of India to notify the increased seats. The

    resultant inaction allegedly defeats both the legislative intent and

    the legitimate expectations of the electorate in the two States,

    thereby giving rise to an enforceable constitutional and statutory

    claim.
12. In opposition, the Union of India, as well as the Election

    Commission, have firmly contended that the Petitioner(s)’ claim is

    untenable in view of the overriding constitutional scheme. It is their

    case that Section 26 of the AP Reorganisation Act expressly begins

    with the words “subject to the provisions contained in
Article 170
of

    the Constitution,” and thus must yield to the constitutional embargo

    imposed under the proviso to
Article 170(3).
This proviso halts any

    readjustment of seats in State Legislative Assemblies until the

    publication of census data following the first census conducted
Page 12 of 26
after the year 2026. The Respondents have accordingly argued that

    the relief sought by the Petitioner(s) stems from a misreading of the

    statutory provision—one that isolates it from its constitutional

    context and fails to account for the mandatory inhibition laid down

    under
Article 170(3)
of the Constitution.
13. The Respondents have further contended that the Petitioner(s)’

    attempt to draw a comparison with the delimitation carried out in

    the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir is fundamentally

    flawed. It was asserted that Jammu and Kashmir, following its

    reorganisation, is governed not by
Article 170
but by
Article 239A
of the Constitution, as applicable to the Union Territories. The

    delimitation exercise undertaken for Jammu and Kashmir thus

    derives its legitimacy from an entirely different constitutional

    framework, and no claim of parity is sustainable under law.
14. In order to appreciate the rival submissions, we deem it appropriate

    first to extract the relevant provision of the Constitution and of the

    AP Reorganisation Act:
Article 170
of the Constitution:
“170. Composition of the Legislative Assemblies
           (1) Subject to the provisions of
Article 333
, the Legislative
           Assembly of each State shall consist of not more than five
           hundred, and not less than sixty, members chosen by direct
           election from territorial constituencies in the State.
           (2) For the purposes of clause (1), each state shall be divided
           into territorial constituencies in such manner that the ratio
           between the population of each constituency and the
Page 13 of 26
number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be
      the same throughout the State.
Explanation.--In this Clause, the expression “population”
      means the population as ascertained at the last preceding
      census of which the relevant figures have been published:
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last
      preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
      published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census
      taken after the year 2026 have been published, be
      construed as a reference to the 2001 census.
      (3) Upon the completion of each census, the total number of
      seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State and the
      division of each State into territorial constituencies shall be
      readjusted by such authority and in such manner as
      Parliament may by law determine:
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect
      representation in the Legislative Assembly until the
      dissolution of the then existing Assembly:
      Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect
      from such date as the President may, by order, specify and
      until such readjustment takes effect, any election to the
      Legislative Assembly may be held on the basis of the
      territorial constituencies existing before such readjustment:
      Provided also that until the relevant figures for the
      first census taken after the year 2026 have been
      published, it shall not be necessary to Readjust-
(i) the total number of seats in the Legislative
           Assembly of each State as readjusted on the basis
           of the 1971 census; and
(ii) the division of such State into territorial
           constituencies as may be readjusted on the basis
           of the 2001 census, under this clause”.
****
Section 26 of the AP Reorganisation Act:
“26. Delimitation of Constituencies
      (1) Subject to the provisions contained in
article 170
of the Constitution and without prejudice to section 15 of
          this Act, the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly
          of the successor States of Andhra Pradesh and
          Telangana shall be increased from 175 and 119 to 225
          and 153, respectively, and delimitation of the
          constituencies may be determined by the Election
          Commission in the manner hereinafter provided…”
                                      ****
                                             [Emphasis Supplied]
Page 14 of 26
15. A plain and harmonious reading of the statutory and constitutional

    provisions   makes    it   evident   that   Section   26   of   the   AP

    Reorganisation Act is expressly made “subject to” the mandate

    contained in
Article 170
of the Constitution. This qualifying phrase

    cannot be read as surplusage and must be given full legal effect.

    This prefatory clause is indeed non obstante and limits the

    independent operation of Section 26 of the AP Reorganisation Act.

    Any other construction of Section 26 would fall foul of both the

    language and the conception of
Article 170
of the Constitution.
16. The proviso to
Article 170(3)
unequivocally and overarchingly

    provides that it shall not be necessary to readjust the allocation of

    seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State, including the

    division of each State into territorial constituencies, until the

    relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2026 have

    been published. The Petitioner(s)’ reliance on Section 26 of the AP

    Reorganisation Act is misplaced, as the provision is not self-

    executing; it does not, by itself, mandate delimitation but merely

    declares a legislative framework for it, subject to the peremptory

    control of
Article 170
of the Constitution.
17. The Petitioner(s) have not placed on record any legal or factual basis

    to show how the constitutional precepts can be outbalanced,

    waived, or read down in the context of Andhra Pradesh and
Page 15 of 26
Telangana, especially when such an exception would amount to

    impermissible classification in the face of a uniform constitutional

    command applicable to all States.
18. What is even more compelling is the inevitable consequence

    that would follow if the reliefs sought in these Writ Petitions

    were to be granted. It would open the floodgates to similar

    demands from other States, each seeking early delimitation on the

    ground of parity or administrative convenience. Granting such

    relief in contravention of the constitutional timeline provided under
Article 170(3)
of the Constitution would not only destabilise the

    uniform electoral framework envisaged by the Constitution but also

    blur the clear demarcation between constitutional prescription and

    political discretion.
19. It would not be far-fetched to anticipate that granting the reliefs

    sought in the present Writ Petitions would prompt unabated

    challenges from other similarly situated regions. In particular, the

    four North-Eastern States—Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur,

    and Nagaland—which were expressly excluded from the scope of

    delimitation by way of the 2021 Notification, may justifiably

    question    the   legitimacy   and   fairness   of   such     selective

    implementation. Permitting delimitation in some States while

    denying it to others in comparable circumstances would breed
Page 16 of 26
inequality. This could open the door to a spate of litigation, thereby

    unsettling the finality and uniformity that the Constitution seeks

    to preserve in matters of electoral readjustment.
20. Permitting such isolated departures from the constitutional

    embargo would also amount to an impermissible deviation

    from the equality principle embedded in
Article 14
of the

    Constitution, and would amount to a facially discriminatory

    practice without any valid classification.
21. Furthermore, the delimitation process is, by design, a legislative

    and executive function. If this Court were to compel such an

    exercise through judicial fiat, it would likely be construed as an

    interference in the policy-making prerogative of the Executive. The

    constitutional edifice carefully balances institutional roles, and any

    disruption of that equilibrium would undermine both the legitimacy

    and functional integrity of the democratic process.
22. In view of the foregoing analysis, we hold that the constitutional

    mandate under
Article 170(3)
of the Constitution serves as a bar on

    any delimitation exercise concerning the States of Andhra Pradesh

    and Telangana, or any other State. The demand for immediate

    delimitation in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana runs contrary to

    both the letter and spirit of the constitutional design. The
Page 17 of 26
challenge, therefore, fails to establish any legally sustainable

    ground for intervention by this Court.
E.1.1. Whether the Petitioner(s) can claim parity with the

delimitation exercise undertaken in the Union Territory of Jammu

and Kashmir?
23. Notwithstanding the constitutional bar discussed above, we have

    also   carefully   assessed   the   submission    advanced    by    the

    Petitioner(s) that the omission to conduct delimitation in the States

    of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, while proceeding with the same

    in the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, constitutes an

    arbitrary and discriminatory classification which is violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution.
24. This submission seems legally untenable to us as it overlooks the

    well-settled constitutional distinctions that exist between the

    governance of States and Union Territories. The aforementioned

    plea of discrimination fails to appreciate that differential treatment,

    when founded upon constitutional classifications, does not

    automatically violate the equality clause contained in
Article 14.
25. The distinction drawn by the Respondents is not only rational but

    finds explicit recognition in the constitutional architecture. Jammu

    and Kashmir, having been reconstituted as a Union Territory under

    the J&K Reorganisation Act, is not governed by the provisions of
Page 18 of 26
Chapter III of Part VI of the Constitution, which pertains exclusively

    to State Legislatures. On the contrary, the governance and

    composition of Union Territory legislatures are regulated by

    Parliamentary Legislation enacted under
Article 239A
of the

    Constitution.
26. As a necessary corollary,
Article 170
of the Constitution, including

    the constitutional freeze on delimitation under clause (3), has no

    application to the Legislative Assembly of the Union Territory of

    Jammu and Kashmir.
In fact, this precise legal question has

    already been answered by this Court in
Haji Abdul Gani Khan
(supra), wherein the validity of the delimitation conducted in the

    Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir pursuant to the

    Notifications under scrutiny herein was upheld. In that decision,

    this Court, in no uncertain terms, held:
31. “Hence, as far as the Legislative Assembly of the Union
           territory of J&K is concerned,
Article 170
will have no
           application as it forms a part of Chapter III of Part VI
           which deals with only the State Legislature. It has no
           application to the Legislatures of Union Territories.
The reason is that the Legislative Assemblies of the
           concerned Union Territories will be governed by the
           law made by the Parliament in accordance
           with
Article 239A
and not by the provisions of
           Chapter III of Part VI. As
Article 170
is not applicable to
           the Legislature of the Union Territory of J & K, the main
           thrust of the argument that certain provisions of the J&K
           Reorganisation Act and actions taken thereunder are in
           conflict with
Article 170
and in particular Clause (3) thereof
           is clearly misconceived and deserves to be rejected.”
                                                [Emphasis Supplied]
Page 19 of 26
27. Given the express adjudication rendered by this Court in
Haji

    Abdul Gani Khan
(supra), there remains no ambiguity as to the

    inapplicability of
Article 170
to the Union Territory of Jammu and

    Kashmir. It logically follows that the Petitioner(s) cannot seek parity

    between the position of the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir

    and that of the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, the latter

    being governed by the constitutional scheme applicable to States.
28. The two States in question and the Union Territory of Jammu and

    Kashmir operate in distinct constitutional domains, and any

    delimitation exercise carried out in one cannot serve as a

    benchmark or ground of comparison for the other. The delimitation

    undertaken for the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir cannot

    be mechanically extended to States bound by the express embargo

    under
Article 170(3)
of the Constitution. As such, the invocation of
Article 14
, in this context, is wholly misplaced and does not

    withstand legal scrutiny.
29. Accordingly, in light of the settled position of law and the

    constitutionally distinct treatment accorded to States and Union

    Territories, we find no merit in the contention that the exclusion of

    the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana from the scope of the

    delimitation exercise under the Impugned Notification is arbitrary,

    discriminatory, or violative of
Article 14.
Page 20 of 26
E.2. Whether the failure of the Union of India to give effect Section

26 of the AP Reorganisation Act has frustrated the legitimate

expectation of the electorates of the States of Andhra Pradesh and

Telangana?
30. The second limb of contention advanced on behalf of the

    Petitioner(s) is that, independent of the legal enforceability of

    Section 26 of the AP Reorganisation Act, the electorates of the

    States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana harbour a legitimate

    expectation that the Union of India and the Election Commission

    would undertake delimitation and thereby give effect to the increase

    in the number of seats as envisaged in the aforesaid provision.
31. It was argued that the language employed in Section 26, coupled

    with the clear legislative intent to ensure proportional and adequate

    representation in the newly formed successor States, gave rise to

    an expectation that the Union of India would act in furtherance of

    that object within a reasonable time frame. The Petitioner(s)

    contended that such expectation constitutes a valuable interest

    that the Union Government is bound to consider and cannot defeat

    arbitrarily or indefinitely.
32. This submission has, however, been strongly rebutted by the Union

    of India. It is their case that the doctrine of legitimate expectation,

    while recognised in administrative law, is necessarily subject to
Page 21 of 26
constitutional limitations. In particular, it was contended that any

    expectation for delimitation and an increase in legislative seats

    must yield to the constitutional mandate under
Article 170(3)
of the

    Constitution.
33. The doctrine of legitimate expectation is a well-recognised principle

    in administrative law, rooted in the ideals of fairness, non-

    arbitrariness, and transparency in executive action. It arises when

    a public authority, either through a consistent past practice, an

    express promise, or a statutory policy, creates an expectation in the

    mind of an individual or class of persons that a certain course of

    action will be followed. While such expectation does not amount to

    a legal right in the strict sense, courts have consistently held that

    it may nonetheless warrant judicial protection where its denial

    results in manifest unfairness or arbitrariness, thereby violating

    the fundamental principles of natural justice.
34. However, it is equally well-settled that the doctrine of legitimate

    expectation cannot override an express provision of law or the

    Constitution. It must be borne in mind that the expectation must

    be legitimate, in the sense that it is not only reasonable but also

    legally sustainable within the structure of the governing statute or

    constitutional scheme. In the event of any conflict between an

    expectation and the existing legal framework, the expectation has
Page 22 of 26
to run hand in hand with the legal intent and not against it. The

    doctrine of legitimate expectation is not a rigid rule and must be

    conceded where a superseding public interest or a statutory or

    constitutional bar exists. Thus, while legitimate expectation may

    guide how discretionary powers are exercised, it cannot be invoked

    to compel an authority to act contrary to a binding legal or

    constitutional command.
35. Keeping this in view, we find substance in the objection raised by

    the Union of India. It is trite law that the doctrine of legitimate

    expectation, while forming an integral part of the jurisprudence on

    fairness in administrative action, does not clothe a party with an

    enforceable right in itself. It operates within the bounds of legality

    and must necessarily conform to constitutional and statutory

    mandates.
36. In the present case, any expectation arising from the text of Section

    26 of the AP Reorganisation Act cannot be viewed in isolation, but

    must be read in conjunction with the clear caveat engrafted in its

    opening phrase—“subject to the provisions contained in
Article 170
of the Constitution.” Once the applicability of
Article 170(3)
is

    established, which constitutionally defers the delimitation exercise

    until after the publication of the relevant figures of the 2026
Page 23 of 26
census, any contrary expectation stands eclipsed by this express

     constitutional limitation.
37. Thus, while the sentiment underlying the claim of the Petitioner(s)

     may not be without foundation—particularly given the passage of

     over a decade since the enactment of the AP Reorganisation Act—

     the legal threshold for invoking the doctrine of legitimate

     expectation has not been met. The Petitioner(s) cannot, in law,

     claim a right to delimitation in defiance of a constitutional

     mandate, nor can they invoke administrative fairness to defeat a

     clear constitutional prescription. In light of the above, we are

     unable to hold that the electorates of Andhra Pradesh and

     Telangana possess an enforceable legitimate expectation that can

     give rise to a justiciable cause of action under
Article 32
of the

     Constitution.
F.   CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS
38. In light of the foregoing discussion, it is evident that the exclusion

     of the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana from the purview of

     the delimitation process under the Impugned Notifications does not

     suffer from the vice of arbitrariness or discrimination. The

     distinction drawn is firmly anchored in the constitutional

     structure, particularly the proviso to
Article 170 (3)
, which

     expressly bars any readjustment in the total number of seats in the
Page 24 of 26
Legislative Assemblies of States until the first census after the year

    2026. The legislative and constitutional framework thus provides a

    clear and rational basis for such tailored administrative distinction.
39.
Article 170
has no application to Union Territories, including the

    Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir. The Petitioner(s),

    therefore, cannot claim parity between the position of Jammu and

    Kashmir and that of the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana,

    which remain subject to the constitutional scheme governing

    States. The delimitation exercise carried out in Jammu and

    Kashmir—being governed by a distinct constitutional and statutory

    regime—cannot be analogically extended to States that are

    explicitly bound by the constitutional restraint imposed under
Article 170(3).
The Impugned Notifications thus do not violate
Article 14
of the Constitution.
40. We have also found no merit in the Petitioner(s)’ reliance on the

    doctrine of legitimate expectation. In matters governed by express

    constitutional provisions and legislative policy, this doctrine cannot

    be invoked to claim an enforceable right contrary to the

    constitutional arrangement.
Page 25 of 26
41. Accordingly, the Writ Petitions being devoid of merit are dismissed.

    Pending interlocutory applications, if any, are also disposed of.
42. Ordered accordingly.
………..………………… J.
[SURYA KANT]



                              ……………………………..………………… J.
[NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH]

NEW DELHI

DATED: 25.07.2025
Page 26 of 26