[Cites
20
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Bansal Milk Chilling Centre vs Rana Milk Food Private Limited on 25 July, 2025
2025 INSC 899                                                                  REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.          OF 2025
                             (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO.15699 OF 2024)


                            Bansal Milk Chilling Centre                  …APPELLANT (S)

                                                          VERSUS

                            Rana Milk Food Private Ltd. & Anr.          …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                    JUDGMENT
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.     Leave granted.
2.     Procedure, it is said, is only a handmaiden and not a mistress

                            of justice. However, the said adage has been followed only in the

                            breach in this case. A simple issue of an amendment to a complaint

                            has held up a trial under
Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments

                            Act, 1881 (for short “the
NI Act
”) for the last nearly two years.
Signature Not Verified   BRIEF FACTS:
Digitally signed by
BORRA LM VALLI
3.     The appellant, on 08.04.2022, filed a complaint under
   Date: 2025.07.25
   17:23:33 IST
   Reason:
Section 138
of the NI Act, against the respondents. The complaint
1
averred that the respondents had purchased Desi Ghee (milk

products) and that cheques issued by them numbering three and

totaling to an amount of Rupees Fourteen Lakhs had been

dishonored. Summons was issued to the respondents and at the

stage when the complainant was yet to be cross-examined, an

amendment application to amend the complaint was moved by the

appellant. The appellant contended that due to a typographical

mistake it had been pleaded that the respondents had been

purchasing Desi Ghee (milk products) while it should have been

that the respondents were purchasing “milk”. The respondents

vehemently objected to the amendment. It was contended that no

amendment was permissible after cognizance is taken and that the

amendment sought, changed the nature of the complaint.
4.    By order dated 02.09.2023, the Trial Court held that since

the complainant was yet to be cross-examined, no prejudice would

be caused to the accused/respondents. It was also held that the

amendment was in the nature of a typographical error, moved at an

initial stage of the case. So holding the amendment was allowed.
2
5.     The respondents challenged the order under
Section 482
of

Code of Criminal Procedure (for short ‘the
Cr.P.C
.’).         It was

additionally contended that the amendment was not a typographical

error since even in the legal notice that preceded the filing of the

complaint, what was mentioned was “Desi Ghee (milk products)”. It

was further argued that the amendment is an attempt to avoid liability

under the
Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017
(for short the ‘GST’).
6.     By virtue of the impugned order, the High Court has

allowed the petition, holding that the amendment sought was not

in the nature of a typographical error, but it had a wider impact

upon the entire matter in dispute and, therefore, it changed the

nature of the complaint. The High Court also found merit in the

contention of the respondents that the amendment was sought, as

no GST was leviable on milk.
CONTENTIONS:
7.     We have heard Mr. Chritarth Palli, learned Counsel for the

appellant and Mr. Aabhas Kshetarpal, learned Counsel for the

respondents. We have also perused the records. Learned Counsels

reiterated the stand of the respective parties in the courts below.
3
8.        The issue, whether a criminal court has power to order

         amendment of a complaint filed under
Section 200
of the Cr.P.C.,

         is no longer res integra.
In
S.R. Sukumar v. S. Sunaad

         Raghuram1
, this Court held as under:-
“19. What is discernible from U.P. Pollution Control Board
               case is that an easily curable legal infirmity could be cured
               by means of a formal application for amendment. If the
               amendment sought to be made relates to a simple infirmity
               which is curable by means of a formal amendment and by
               allowing such amendment, no prejudice could be caused to
               the other side, notwithstanding the fact that there is no
               enabling provision in the Code for entertaining such
               amendment, the court may permit such an amendment to be
               made. On the contrary, if the amendment sought to be made
               in the complaint does not relate either to a curable infirmity
               or the same cannot be corrected by a formal amendment or
               if there is likelihood of prejudice to the other side, then the
               court shall not allow such amendment in the complaint.”
9.        The learned counsel for the respondents sought to

         distinguish the judgement in S.R. Sukumar’s case (supra) by

         contending that in the said case amendment was sought and

         allowed at the pre-cognizance stage and as such the said case can

         have no application here. We are unable to countenance the said

         submission.
1
(2015) 9 SCC 609
4
10.      A careful reading of the judgment in S.R. Sukumar’s case

         (supra) reveals that the said judgment followed the earlier

         judgment of this Court in
U.P. Pollution Control Board vs. Modi

         Distillery and Others2
.
In
Modi Distillery
(supra), after the

         process was issued to the respondents therein, a revision was filed

         by few of the accused and a Section 482 petition was filed by few

         other accused. Invoking the revisional jurisdiction, the High Court

         quashed the proceedings holding that vicarious liability could not

         be saddled on the Directors unless “Modi Industries Limited” was

         arrayed as accused. The Complainant
in that case
had arrayed

         “Modi Distillery”, an industrial unit and averred that Modi

         Distillery was a Company.          The High Court focusing on the

         technical flaw in the complaint quashed the proceedings on the

         premise that “Modi Industries Limited” was not made an accused.

         This Court, while allowing the appeal of the Complainant-U.P.

         Pollution Control Board, held as follows:-
“6. ……The learned Single Judge has focussed his attention
               only on the technical flaw in the complaint and has failed to
               comprehend that the flaw had occurred due to the
               recalcitrant attitude of Modi Distillery and furthermore the
2
(1987) 3 SCC 684
5
infirmity is one which could be easily removed by having
   the matter remitted to the Chief Judicial Magistrate with a
   direction to call upon the appellant to make the formal
   amendments to the averments contained in para 2 of the
   complaint so as to make the controlling company of the
   industrial unit figure as the concerned accused in the
   complaint. All that has to be done is the making of a formal
   application for amendment by the appellant for leave to
   amend by substituting the name of Modi Industries Limited,
   the company owning the industrial unit, in place of Modi
   Distillery. Although as a pure proposition of law in the
   abstract the learned Single Judge's view that there can be no
   vicarious liability of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman,
   Managing Director and members of the Board of Directors
   under sub-section (1) or (2) of
Section 47
of the Act unless
   there was a prosecution against Modi Industries Limited,
   the company owning the industrial unit, can be termed as
   correct, the objection raised by the petitioners before the
   High Court ought to have been viewed not in isolation but
   in the conspectus of facts and events and not in vacuum. We
   have already pointed out that the technical flaw in the
   complaint is attributable to the failure of the industrial unit
   to furnish the requisite information called for by the Board.
Furthermore, the legal infirmity is of such a nature which
   could be easily cured. Another circumstance which brings
   out the narrow perspective of the learned Single Judge is his
   failure to appreciate the fact that the averment in para 2 has
   to be construed in the light of the averments contained in
   paras 17, 18 and 19 which are to the effect that the
   Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Managing Director and
   members of the Board of Directors were also liable for the
   alleged offence committed by the Company.”

Further, it was held

   “7. ..….It would be a travesty of justice if the big business
   house of Modi Industries Limited is allowed to defeat the
   prosecution launched and avoid facing the trial on a
   technical flaw which is not incurable for their alleged
   deliberate and wilful breach of the provisions contained in
6
Sections 25(1)
and
26
made punishable under
Section 44
read with
Section 47
of the Act.”
                                            (Emphasis supplied)

This Court allowed the appeal and set aside the order of the High Court

and restored the order of the Chief Judicial Magistrate directing issue

of process and directed that the trial be proceeded expeditiously. What

is significant to notice is that
Modi Distillery
(supra) was a case where

cognizance was taken at a stage when the accused approached the High

Court and it was then that this Court observed that a formal application

for amendment for substituting the name would have cured the defect.
11. Reverting back to
S.R. Sukumar
(supra), it does not follow from

the judgment that post-cognizance, no amendment can be allowed. In

fact, a reading of the penultimate paragraph of the judgment clearly

brings out the fact that four distinct reasons were given: -
“20. In the instant case, the amendment application was
         filed on 24-5-2007 to carry out the amendment by adding
         Paras 11(a) and 11(b). Though, the proposed amendment
         was not a formal amendment, but a substantial one, the
         Magistrate allowed the amendment application mainly on
         the ground that no cognizance was taken of the complaint
         before the disposal of amendment application. Firstly, the
         Magistrate was yet to apply the judicial mind to the contents
         of the complaint and had not taken cognizance of the matter.
         Secondly, since summons was yet to be ordered to be issued
         to the accused, no prejudice would be caused to the accused.
         Thirdly, the amendment did not change the original nature
7
of the complaint being one for defamation. Fourthly, the
              publication of poem Khalnayakaru being in the nature of
              subsequent event created a new cause of action in favour of
              the respondent which could have been prosecuted by the
              respondent by filing a separate complaint and therefore, to
              avoid multiplicity of proceedings, the trial court allowed the
              amendment application. Considering these factors which
              weighed in the mind of the courts below, in our view, the
              High Court rightly declined to interfere with the order
              passed by the Magistrate allowing the amendment
              application and the impugned order does not suffer from
              any serious infirmity warranting interference in exercise of
              jurisdiction under
Article 136
of the Constitution.”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)

Hence, it is fallacious to contend that in no circumstance can

amendments to complaints be allowed after cognizance is taken.
12. Similarly, in Kunapareddy alias
Nookala Shanka Balaji vs.

Kunapareddy Swarna Kumari and Another3
, it was held that even in

criminal cases governed by the Code, Court is not powerless and may

allow amendments in appropriate cases.
The Court in
Kunapareddy
(supra) followed the holding in
S.R. Sukumar
(supra).
13.
In
Munish Kumar Gupta vs. Mittal Trading Company,4
while

disallowing an amendment seeking alteration in the date of the cheque

from 22.07.2010 to 22.07.2012, this Court, in para 9, held as under:-
3
(2016) 11 SCC 774
4
2024 SCC OnLine 1732
8
“9. In a matter of the present nature, where the date is a
        relevant aspect based on which the entire aspect relating to
        the issue of notice within the time frame as provided under
        the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881
, and also as to
        whether as on the date there was sufficient balance in the
        account of the issuer of the cheque would be the question,
        the amendment, as sought for, in the present circumstance,
        was not justified.”

That judgment is entirely distinguishable as the amendment sought had

a bearing on the time frame for issuance of notice of demand and on

the aspect of existence of balance in the account. Further, as is clear

from the facts, that amendment was sought after a long delay.
14. The term “complaint” is defined in
Section 2(d)
of the Code of

Criminal Procedure, 1973 [
Section 2(1)(h)
of the Bharatiya Nagarik

Suraksha Sanhita, 2023] which reads as follows:-
“2 (d) “complaint” means any allegation made orally or in
        writing to a Magistrate, with a view to his taking action under
        this Code, that some person, whether known or unknown,
        has committed an offence, but does not include a police
        report.”

As would be seen ordinarily, a complaint could even be oral. However,

dealing with a case under
Section 138
of the NI Act, we must notice

that
Section 142
of the NI Act states that to take cognizance of any

offence punishable under
Section 138
, a written complaint is

mandatory. Unless expressly prescribed, if to set a criminal case in
9
motion ordinarily an oral complaint would be sufficient, any question

about amendment of a written complaint should be considered by

giving the widest latitude. However, as was rightly pointed out in
S.R.

Sukumar
(supra), it should be ensured that no prejudice should be

caused to the accused.
15. It will be appropriate to observe that amendments/alterations are

not alien to the
Code of Criminal Procedure
.
Section 216
of the Cr.P.C.

deals with the power of Court to alter any charge and the concept of

prejudice to the accused. No doubt when a charge is altered, what is

altered is the legal provision and its application to a certain set of facts.

The facts per se may not be altered. However, the section does throw

some light in considering the issue of amendments.
16.
Section 216
and
217
of Cr.P.C [Section 239 and 240 of the

Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023] read as follows:-
“216. Court may alter charge.-
(1) Any Court may alter or add to any charge at any time
         before judgment is pronounced.
(2) Every such alteration or addition shall be read and
         explained to the accused.
(3) If the alteration or addition to a charge is such that
         proceeding immediately with the trial is not likely, in the
         opinion of the Court, to prejudice the accused in his defence
         or the prosecutor in the conduct of the case, the Court may,
10
in its discretion, after such alteration or addition has been
         made, proceed with the trial as if the altered or added charge
         had been the original charge.
(4) If the alteration or addition is such that proceeding
         immediately with the trial is likely, in the opinion of the
         Court, to prejudice the accused or the prosecutor as
         aforesaid, the Court may, either direct a new trial or adjourn
         the trial for such period as may be necessary.
         (5) If the offence stated in the altered or added charge is
         one for the prosecution of which previous sanction is
         necessary, the case shall not be proceeded with until such
         sanction is obtained, unless sanction has been already
         obtained for a prosecution on the same facts as those on
         which the altered or added charge is founded.
(Emphasis supplied)
217. Recall of witnesses when charge altered. - Whenever
         a charge is altered or added to by the Court after the
         commencement of the trial, the prosecutor and the accused
         shall be allowed –
(a) to recall or re-summon, and examine with reference to
         such alteration or addition, any witness who may have been
         examined, unless the court, for reasons to be recorded in
         writing, considers that the prosecutor or the accused, as the
         case may be, desires to recall or re-examine such witness
         for the purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating the
         ends of justice;
(b) also to call any further witness whom the Court may
         think to be material.”

It will be noticed that when a charge is altered, if there is no prejudice

to the accused, the trial can be proceeded with. Further, if it is likely to

prejudice, the Court may either direct a new trial or adjourn the trial to

such period.
Section 217
of the Cr.P.C. grants liberty to the prosecutor

and the accused to recall witnesses when charges are altered under the
11
conditions prescribed therein. The test of ‘prejudice to the accused’ is

the cardinal factor that needs to be borne in mind.
17. We have carefully perused the complaint and the application for

amendment.     The amendment was moved at a stage when after

summons being issued to the respondents, the chief examination of the

complainant had concluded and when cross-examination was awaited.

The amendment made is also only with regard to the products supplied.

According to the complainant, while what was supplied was “milk”, by

an inadvertent error “Desi Ghee (milk products)” was mentioned. The

error which occurred in the legal notice was carried in the complaint

also.
18. On the facts of the present case and considering the stage of the

trial, we find that absolutely no prejudice would be caused to the

accused/respondents. The actual facts will have to be thrashed out at

the trial. As to what impact the amendment will have on the existence

of debt or other liability is for the Trial Court to decide based on the

evidence. It was a curable irregularity which the Trial Court rightly

addressed by allowing the amendment. It could not be said that by
12
allowing the amendment at a stage when the evidence of the

complainant was incomplete, failure of justice would occasion.
19. The High Court completely mis-directed itself in delving into the

aspects of leviability of GST which would be the concern of the

appropriate authorities under the relevant statute. It could also not be

said that the amendment altered the nature and character of the

complaint.
20. For the reasons aforestated, the appeal is allowed. The judgment

and order of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in

CRM-M No. 53932 of 2023 (O&M) is set aside and that of the Trial

Court dated 02.09.2023 is restored. The Trial Court shall proceed

expeditiously and the parties will be at liberty to apply for recall of

witnesses already examined.
……….........................J.
                                          [B.V. NAGARATHNA]


                                         ……….........................J.
                                          [K. V. VISWANATHAN]
    New Delhi;
25th July, 2025
13