[Cites
41
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
L. Muruganantham vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 15 July, 2025
1

 2025 INSC 844                                                                                 REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9487 OF 2025
                                        [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 1785 OF 2023]


          L. MURUGANANTHAM                                                                    .... APPELLANT

                                                             VERSUS

          STATE OF TAMIL NADU & OTHERS                                                    .... RESPONDENTS

                                                       JUDGMENT
R. MAHADEVAN, J.
Leave granted.
2.             Being aggrieved and dissatisfied with the final order dated 29.11.2022

          passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras 1 in Writ Petition No. 22431 of

          2021, the appellant has preferred the present appeal. For the sake of clarity and

          specificity, the operative portion of the impugned order is reproduced below:
“37. The very casual manner in which the officer replied to our query, as to whether,
                         he had read the judgment in
Amesh Kumar v. State of Bihar and another
shocks us.
                         Such replies will reflect upon the entire Police force. We are constrained to point out
Signature Not Verified
that the compensation awarded by the State Human Rights Tribunal at Rs.1,00,000/-
                         is wholly insufficient and we enhance to Rs.5,00,000/-. We further direct that the
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.07.15
16:27:12 IST
Reason:
enhanced compensation of Rs.4,00,000/- shall be borne by the State as we find that
1
Hereinafter referred to as “the High Court”
2
there has been several acts of commissions and omissions by the Police Department
for which the 2nd respondent alone cannot be held liable. The other directions of the
State Human Rights Commission relating to recovery of the penalty of Rs.1,00,000/-
from the 2nd respondent and the direction to take disciplinary action against the
second respondent in WP No.22431 of 2021 would stand.
38. In fine WP No.22431 of 2021 will stand partly allowed to the extent indicated
above and WP. No.22527 of 2021 will stand dismissed. We also award cost of
Rs.25,000/- to the petitioner payable by the State.
39. Before parting with this ease, considering the material that has been placed
before us, we feel it is necessary to issue directions to the State Government to
effectively implement the provisions of the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities Act,
2016
. There will be a direction to the Additional Chief Secretary to Government of
Tamil Nadu, Home Department to ensure that the District wise Sensitization
programmes are conducted for Police Officers including Constables regarding the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Such programmes shall be so designed that they
throw enough light on the provisions of the enactment and the intendment of the
legislation. Guidelines should also be issued to the Police Officers as to how they
should handle such physically disabled persons. Similar guidelines are also to be
issued to the Government Doctors who come across such physically disabled persons
who run into conflict with law and brought before them for medical examination. We
remind the State that a statutory duty has been cast upon it by the provisions of the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act 2016, to ensure that such persons live with
dignity.
…
42 We therefore direct the Director General of Police to take steps to have a
periodical inspection of the CCTV Cameras in all Police Stations and ensure their
functioning. In order to achieve this, the Director General of Police is required to
make a District Level Officer in-charge of ensuring the functioning of CCTV
cameras in certain number of Police Stations in the District and such Officers will be
responsible for maintenance of the Cameras and if there is a failure on his part, he
should be held accountable for such failure. This effort if taken, will go a long way in
curing the malady of non-functioning CCTV Cameras. We hope that the above
directions would be complied with in their letter and spirit in the interest of the
Police Force itself. Consequently, the connected miscellaneous petition is closed.”
3
3.        The appellant, who is an advocate, is a physically challenged person

suffering from Becker Muscular Dystrophy, a progressively degenerative

locomotive disability. He was assessed to have 70% disability in 2013, which

increased to 80% in 2020. According to the appellant, he also suffers from autism

and mental illness.
4.        It is alleged by the appellant that due to a civil dispute, a false complaint was

lodged against him and his aged mother by one Selvakumar, a henchman of the

appellant’s paternal uncle, Dhandapani, and the same was registered as FIR in

Crime No. 108 of 2020 for offences under
Sections 294(b)
,
323
and
506(ii)
of the

Indian Penal Code, 18602. Based on the said FIR, the appellant was arrested on

29.02.2020 by Respondent No. 2, who allegedly harassed and tortured him. He was

thereafter, produced before the Judicial Magistrate, Udumalaipet, who remanded

him to judicial custody.
5.    The appellant further alleged that during his incarceration at the Central

Prison, Coimbatore, Respondent No.3 failed to provide proper food, medical

treatment, and care as required under the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act,

20163. The prison lacked infrastructure and facilities necessary for prisoners with

disabilities, and the officials were allegedly insensitive and ill-informed regarding
2
For short, “
IPC
”
3
For short, “the
RPwD Act, 2016
”
4
the rights of persons with disabilities. The appellant was released on bail on

10.03.2020.
6.        Subsequently, the appellant filed a complaint in SHRC No. 2745 of 2020

before the State Human Rights Commission4, seeking compensation of

Rs. 50,00,000/- for the deprivation of life and liberty during incarceration. He also

sought directions for the payment of Rs.2 crores to the Disability Rights Public

Fund under the
RPwD Act, 2016
for violations of his human, fundamental, and

statutory rights, and for action against the erring officials.
7.        After hearing all parties, the SHRC, by order dated 27.08.2021, disposed of

the complaint filed by the appellant, with the following recommendations:
“(i) The Government of Tamil Nadu shall pay a compensation of Rs.1,00,000/-
          (Rupees One Lakh only) to the Complainant. Thiru L. Muruganantham residing at
          No.1/16, Muthu Nagar, Kotapulipalayam Road, Dharapuram, Tiruppur District,
          within one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this Recommendation and the
          Government of Tamil Nadu may recover Rs.1,00,000/- from the 1st Respondent. The
          complaint against the 2nd Respondent is dismissed.
(ii) This Commission also recommends to initiate disciplinary action against the 1st
          Respondent as per the Rules.
(iii) This Commission further recommends that the Government of Tamil Nadu to
          make all the prisons in the State accessible for persons with disabilities as per the
          Rights of Persons with
Disabilities Act, 2016
and law declared by the Hon'ble
          Supreme Court of India in the case of
Rajiv Raturi vs. Union of India and others
on
          15.12.2017 which affirmed that "Right to life under
Article 21
has been held broad
          enough to incorporate the right to accessibility. All Government buildings providing
          any services to the public are to be made fully accessible by June, 2019 which has to
          be adhered to."
4
For short, “the SHRC”
5
8.        Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the SHRC, the appellant filed

W.P.No.22431 of 2021 before the High Court, seeking a Writ of Certiorarified

Mandamus to call for the records pertaining to SHRC Case No. 2745 of 2020 dated

27.08 2021, and to quash the same insofar as it dismissed the complaint against

Respondent No.3, failed to consider the complaint against Respondent No.1, and

partially allowed the complaint against Respondent No.2. The appellant also

sought a direction to Respondent Nos.1 to 3 to pay compensation of Rs.50,00,000/-

for the human rights violations committed against him, and for directions to

Respondent No.1 to implement the
RPwD Act, 2016
, and the United Nations

Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 2006 5 in relation to the

Police and Prison Departments in Tamil Nadu.
9.        Respondent No.2, on the other hand, claiming that no human rights violation

was committed against the appellant, and that the SHRC had erroneously held

otherwise, filed W.P.No.22527 of 2021 seeking to quash the SHRC’s order.
10.   The High Court, by the common order impugned herein, partly allowed the

writ petition filed by the appellant and dismissed the writ petition filed by

Respondent No.2. Aggrieved by the same, the appellant has preferred the present

appeal before this Court.
5
For short, “the UNCRPD”
6
11.   During the course of hearing, the appellant, appearing as a party-in-person,

made the following submissions:
11.1. That the appellant and his aged mother were falsely implicated in a criminal

case lodged at the behest of his paternal uncle through one Selvakumar.
Respondent No.2, acting in collusion with the said uncle, arrested the appellant

illegally and obtained remand on the basis of false and misleading representations.

The ulterior motive behind this was to coerce the appellant into transferring his

valuable properties to his uncle. Though a charge sheet was filed, it was ultimately

quashed by the High Court.
11.2. That the appellant suffers from Becker Muscular Dystrophy, Autism

Spectrum Disorder, and associated psychological conditions. During incarceration,

he was denied essential support such as physiotherapy, psychotherapy, protein-rich

nutrition (e.g., eggs, chicken, nuts), accessible sanitation facilities, ramps, a low

sensory environment for rest, and warm water for bathing. This lack of

accommodation caused further deterioration of his physical and mental health, as

evidenced by undisputed medical records showing his disability progressed from

70% in 2013 to 80% in 2020.
7
11.3. That the appellant repeatedly informed prison and medical authorities of his

health condition, yet no physiotherapy or psychotherapy was provided. Protein-rich

foods were denied, and milk was supplied on only 7 out of 10 days. The prison

lacked accessible toilets and ramps, including in the dispensary. Loud

announcements and continuous lighting aggravated his sensory distress. The

hostile environment worsened his Avoidant / Restrictive Food Intake Disorder

(ARFID), a condition recognized under DSM-5, leading to further mental and

physical deterioration.
11.4. That both the SHRC and the High Court concurrently found that Respondent

No.2, despite being aware of the appellant’s disability, acted in a callous and

inhumane manner with ulterior motives. The High Court further observed that

during incarceration, the appellant was denied proper medical care, food, and basic

amenities, amounting to a violation of his statutory rights. Such deprivation,

according to the appellant, constitutes a human rights violation under
Section 2(d)
of the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993, the
RPwD Act, 2016
, and
Articles 14
and
21
of the Constitution of India. However, the SHRC awarded a meagre sum of

Rs.1,00,000/- towards compensation, which was slightly enhanced to Rs.5,00,000/-

by the High Court.
11.5. That compensation has been granted only for the human rights violations

committed by the police, whereas no compensation has been granted for the
8
progressive deterioration of the appellant’s disability caused by inhumane prison

conditions. Such deterioration also constitutes a grave violation of his fundamental

and human rights.
11.6. That as a result of the violations suffered, the appellant now experiences

sleep deprivation, chronic pain, ulceration, and severe psychological trauma

requiring long-term medication with significant side effects. His deteriorated health

has also diminished his eligibility for advanced gene therapy – costing over Rs.16

crores – which should be considered while assessing compensation.

11.7. That Prisons are ill-equipped to provide reasonable accommodations to

persons with disabilities. Despite statutory mandates under
Sections 39
and
47(1)
(a) of the
RPwD Act, 2016
, no sensitization or awareness programmes have been

conducted for prison staff. RTI responses reveal that prison authorities maintain no

data on accessibility, accommodations, or compliance. Further, there is a failure to

publish disability-related statistics, as mandated by
Article 31
of the UNCRPD.

11.8. That the existing Prison Manual is non-compliant with the
RPwD Act, 2016
,

and fails to address the needs of persons with varying disabilities.
In
Shri Rama

Murthy v. State of Karnataka6
, this Court noted that the outdated
Prison Act, 1894
,

must be thoroughly overhauled. The appellant submits that systemic disregard for
6
(1997) 2 SCC 642
9
disability rights has led to irreversible harm to his health and dignity, and

endangers similarly placed prisoners.
11.9. The appellant further relies on the following judicial precedents:
(
i) Vikash Kumar v. Union Public Service Commission
7, where this Court held that
Section 3
of the RPwD Act, 2016, is a statutory embodiment of constitutional

guarantees under
Articles 14
, 19
, and
21
, and that denial of reasonable

accommodation constitutes discrimination;
(
ii) Jeeja Ghosh v. Union of India8
, which emphasized adopting a human rights-
based approach toward persons with disabilities;
(iii) Re: Inhuman Conditions in 1382 Prisons9, wherein this Court reiterated that

the right to life under
Article 21
includes the right to live with dignity, which

applies equally to prisoners.
11.10. In light of the above facts, documentary evidence, and legal principles, the

appellant prays for compensation and systemic reforms. The directions sought by

the appellant are as follows:
(a)    To direct the jail authorities to pay compensation for the violation of the

appellant’s rights during his incarceration;
7
(2021) 12 SCR 311
8
(2016) 4 SCR 638
9
(2016) 1 SCR 1090
10
(b)    To ensure provision of physiotherapy, psychotherapy, and all necessary life-
saving medical treatments for prisoners with disabilities;
(c)    To mandate the supply of a proper and nutritious diet to prisoners with

disabilities, tailored to their individual health needs;
(d)    To direct an access audit of all prisons in Tamil Nadu, in accordance with the

Harmonized Guidelines and Standards for Universal Accessibility in India – 2021;
(e)    To mandate full accessibility of prisons in Tamil Nadu as required under
Section 45
read with
Section 40
of the RPwD Act, 2016, Rule 15 of the Rights of

Persons with Disabilities Rules, 2017, and the above Guidelines;
(f)    To ensure provision of reasonable accommodations under
Section 3(5)
read

with
Section 2(h)
of the RPwD Act, 2016, and the principles
laid down in
Vikash

Kumar
(supra);
(g)    To conduct sensitization and training programs for prison authorities,

including medical staff, regarding the rights and needs of prisoners with

disabilities, as mandated under
Sections 39
and
47(1)(a)
of the RPwD Act, 2016;
(h)    To initiate review and amendment of the Prison Manual under
Section 80
of

the RPwD Act, 2016, in order to address and safeguard the rights of prisoners with

disabilities;
11
(i)   To ensure compliance with
Article 31
of the UNCRPD by maintaining and

disseminating   disaggregating    statistical   data   regarding   accessibility   and

accommodations for prisoners with disabilities on official websites, thereby

ensuring transparency and accountability.
12.   Denying the submissions made by the appellant, the learned counsel for the

respondents submitted as follows:
12.1. In connection with Crime No. 108/2020 registered at Dharapuram Police

Station for offences under
Sections 294 (b)
,
323
and
506(ii)
IPC, the appellant was

remanded by the Judicial Magistrate on 29.02.2020 and admitted to Central Prison,

Coimbatore on the same day. He was released on bail on 10.03.2020. Notably,

from the date of admission until his release, the appellant remained an inpatient in

the Prison Hospital throughout.
12.2. Subsequent to his release, the appellant lodged a complaint before the SHRC

which was registered as Case No. 2475/2020/C2. In this complaint, he alleged

custodial torture by Respondent No.2 during arrest and failure on the part of

Respondent No.3 (prison authorities) to provide basic facilities and adequate

medical treatment, taking into account his physical disability.
12
12.3. Upon consideration of the matter, the SHRC awarded compensation of

Rs.1,00,000/- and directed disciplinary action against the erring police officer

(Respondent No.2). However, it dismissed the complaint against Respondent No.3.
Aggrieved by the limited relief, the appellant filed Writ Petition No. 22431/21

before the High Court seeking enhanced compensation of Rs.50,00,000/- and

action against the prison authorities.
12.4. By its order dated 29.11.2022, the High Court partly allowed the writ

petition, observing that while the arrest and initial treatment of the appellant could

amount to a human rights violation, there was no evidence of any violation by the

jail authorities. The relevant portion of the order is extracted below:
“34…It is seen from the jail records that had been produced, the petitioner was
      always in the jail dispensary and certain special amenities were provided to him as a
      physically disabled person. Special diet which includes milk was supplied to him.
      Mere non provision of certain amenities which would amount to a statutory violation
      may not strictly amount of Human Rights violation. While arrest and incarceration of
      the petitioner could be said to be a Human Rights Violation, the non-provision of
      certain amenities or treatment during a short period of incarceration, in our opinion,
      will not amount to a serious Human Rights violation.”



12.5. Nonetheless, the High Court enhanced the compensation awarded by the

SHRC from Rs.1,00,000/- to Rs.5,00,000/-, of which Rs.4,00,000/- was to be paid

by the State and Rs.1,00,000/- recovered from Respondent No.2. Additionally,

Rs.25,000/- was awarded as costs to the appellant, payable by the State. In

compliance, the Government issued G.O.(D) No.270, Home (Police-HR)
13
Department Dated 07.03.2023, sanctioning Rs.5,25,000/- towards payment of

compensation. Thus, according to the respondents, the order of the High court has

already been complied with.
12.6. It is relevant to note here that the appellant was continuously housed as an

inpatient in the Prison Hospital from 29.02.2020 to 10.03.2020. This, according to

the respondents, indicates that the prison authorities took necessary steps to

address the appellant’s specific needs, including providing a cot with a mattress, a

special medical diet (milk and egg), psychiatric counselling, and assistance from

medical staff and co-prisoners for daily routines.
12.7. As per the medical history recorded on 01.03.2020 by the Prison Doctor, the

appellant was a known case of Becker’s Muscular dystrophy since the age of 27

and had a history of psychiatric illness, for which he was on anti-depressants.
However, no supporting medical records were produced by the appellant or his

family members at the time of admission. Based on clinical examination, the

Medical Officer recommended inpatient care, continued physiotherapy, psychiatric

counselling, and a special medical diet.
12.8. In accordance with Rules 196, 197, 198(iii), and 845 of the Tamil Nadu

Prison Rules, 1983, every new prisoner is examined by a Medical Officer and may

be placed under quarantine or admitted to the Prison Hospital, if required. These
14
procedures were duly followed in the appellant’s case. Furthermore, Rule 405 of

the Tamil Nadu Prison Manual Volume II provides that the medical diet of

hospitalized prisoners is under the full control of the Medical Officer. Accordingly,

the appellant was provided with appropriate medical attention and dietary support

during his period of incarceration.
12.9. The respondents submitted that Central and Special Prisons in Tamil Nadu

are equipped with wheelchairs, disabled-friendly toilets, and trained personnel to

attend to the needs of elderly, sick, and disabled inmates. All such facilities were

available to the appellant. The Medical Officer recorded all relevant details in the

prescribed proforma as per the guidelines issued by the National Human Rights

Commission.
12.10.      Ultimately, it was submitted that the prison authorities extended all

possible medical care and basic amenities to the appellant, and hence, the claim of

human rights violations during his incarceration is unfounded.

12.11. Therefore, the learned counsel submitted that the appeal is devoid of merit

and is liable to be dismissed.
13.      In reply, the appellant submitted that the prison records and the counter

affidavit filed by the respondents reveal inconsistencies and false claims regarding
15
the provision of treatment and accommodations. For instance, while certain records

assert that eggs were supplied, the prison food logs indicate otherwise. Similarly,

psychological   counselling    was     only   recommended,    but   never     actually

administered, contrary to the claims made by the respondents. Thus, according to

the appellant, the respondents failed to comply with the provisions of the
RPwD

Act, 2016
and other applicable laws.
14.   We have considered the submissions made by the appellant as party-in-

person and the learned counsel appearing for the respondents and carefully perused

the materials available on record.
15.   The two broad issues that arise for our consideration are as follows:
(A) Whether the order of the High Court enhancing compensation to Rs.5,00,000/-
for the alleged violations committed against the appellant, while dismissing the

complaint against Respondent No.3, and partly allowing the complaint against

Respondent No.2, calls for interference by this Court; and

(B) Whether adequate and appropriate facilities are being made available to

prisoners with disabilities during incarceration in the prisons of Tamil Nadu, in

compliance with the provisions of the
RPwD Act, 2016
and UNCPRD.
16
Order of the High Court
16.       It is not in dispute that the appellant was falsely implicated in a criminal case

at the behest of his paternal uncle, resulting in his illegal arrest and subsequent

harassment by Respondent No.2. Though an FIR was registered and a charge sheet

was filed pursuant thereto, the same was eventually quashed by the High Court.

However, by that time, the appellant had already undergone incarceration from

29.02.2020 to 10.03.2020.
17.       According to the appellant, during his incarceration, the prison authorities

failed to provide him with appropriate food, medical care, and other necessary

support considering his physical disability, which led to a deterioration in his

health. Consequently, he lodged a complaint before the SHRC seeking

compensation and initiation of actions against the erring officials for the alleged

violations committed against him. The respondents, however, contended that the

appellant was housed in the prison hospital throughout his custody, and was

provided with food, treatment, and care suited to his needs, and therefore, no

human rights violation could be attributable to the prison authorities.
18.       Upon a detailed examination of the records, the SHRC concluded that the

appellant’s arrest was in clear violation of the guidelines
laid down by
this Court in
Arnesh Kumar v. State of Bihar
10. However, it held that during the period of
10
(2014) 8 SCC 273
17
incarceration, the appellant had been admitted to the prison hospital and was

provided necessary medical treatment. Consequently, the SHRC found no specific

human rights violation attributable to the prison authorities during the appellant’s

custody. Accordingly, in the complaint filed by the appellant, the SHRC

recommended the payment of compensation of Rs. 1,00,000/- to the appellant, to

be paid by Respondent No.1 and recoverable from Respondent No.2. It also

recommended initiation of departmental disciplinary proceedings against

Respondent No.2.
19.   A similar view was taken by the High Court in the writ petition filed by the

appellant. However, pointing out that the compensation awarded by the SHRC was

inadequate given the nature and circumstances of the case, the High Court

enhanced the compensation to Rs.5,00,000/-, directing that Rs.4,00,000/- be paid

by the Government. The other directions of the SHRC including the imposition of

penalty of Rs.1,00,000/- on Respondent No.2 and the recommendation for

disciplinary action against him, were affirmed by the High Court. Additionally, the

High Court awarded costs of Rs.25,000/- to the appellant payable by the State. At

this juncture, it is relevant to note that the respondents have complied with the

directions of the High Court and have paid the entire amount of Rs.5,25,000/- to

the appellant.
18
20.    Both the SHRC and the High Court unequivocally held that the FIR, arrest,

and incarceration of the appellant were carried out at the behest of his paternal

uncle with the ulterior motive of usurping his property. The arrest was illegal and

did not comply with the safeguards prescribed by this Court. Importantly, the

authorities failed to consider the appellant’s disability status. These findings are

supported by documentary evidence, and we find no reason to depart from them.
21.    The next issue to be determined is whether the compensation of

Rs.1,00,000/- awarded by the SHRC, and later enhanced to Rs.5,00,000/- by the

High Court, merits further enhancement by this Court.
21.1. While it is evident that the appellant did not receive certain medical and

dietary facilities appropriate to his condition during incarceration, the records

indicate that he remained in the prison hospital throughout and was provided with

some special amenities recognising his disability. The absence of specific

provisions, such as protein-rich food or specialised medical interventions appears

to stem from institutional limitations within the prison system rather than from any

deliberate neglect or malice on the part of the prison authorities. Hence, these

shortcomings do not amount, per se, to a violation of human rights attributable to

the jail authorities.
19
21.2. The appellant specifically contended that he was not provided with adequate

protein-rich food, such as eggs, chicken and nuts, on a daily basis. While persons

with disabilities constitute a particularly vulnerable class and are entitled to

reasonable accommodations under domestic law and international conventions, the

mere non-supply of preferred or costly food items cannot ipso facto be treated as a

violation of fundamental rights. The right to life under
Article 21
of the

Constitution undoubtedly extends to all prisoners, including those with disabilities.

However, this does not confer a right to demand personalised or luxurious food

choices. The State’s obligation is to ensure that every inmate, including those with

disabilities, receives adequate, nutritious, and medically appropriate food, subject

to medical certification.
21.3. Prisons are correctional institutions – not extensions of civil society’s

comforts. The non-supply of non-essential or indulgent items does not amount to a

constitutional or human rights violation unless it results in demonstrable harm to

health or dignity. Considering the nature of the appellant’s disability (assessed at

80%), the progressive deterioration of his health during custody, and the ongoing

treatment, he requires, the High Court was justified in enhancing the compensation

from Rs.1,00,000/- to Rs.5,00,000/-. We find this amount to be fair, just, and

reasonable in the facts and circumstances of the case, and therefore, see no reason

to interfere with the same.
20
22.    As already indicated, the deficiencies in prison facilities may not be directly

attributable to the respondent authorities in the present case. Accordingly, they

cannot be held liable for the same. The direction issued by the High Court for

initiation of departmental proceedings against Respondent No.2, as well as the

dismissal of the complaint against Respondent No.3 (the prison authorities),

appears to be well-reasoned and based on a careful appreciation of the facts and

evidence on record. In contrast, no material was produced by the appellant to

establish wilful negligence or deliberate omission on the part of the prison

authorities to warrant a finding of human rights violation. Therefore, we find no

justification to disturb these conclusions reached by the High Court.



Adequate and Appropriate facilities for prisoners with disabilities
23.    Prisons are often regarded as the “tail-end” of the criminal justice system –

historically designed for rigid discipline, harsh conditions, and minimal liberties.

While modern penological principles advocate rehabilitation over retribution, the

current prison infrastructure and operational systems in India remain grossly

inadequate – especially when it comes to meeting the needs of prisoners with

disabilities.
24.    In the present case, though the deficiencies in prison facilities may not be

directly attributable to the respondent authorities, they highlight the urgent need for
21
prison      reforms,     particularly     the     implementation        of    disability-sensitive

infrastructure and protocols. This Court is conscious of the systemic neglect in

prison infrastructure, especially in relation to the needs of prisoners with

disabilities.
In
Rama Murthy
(supra), this Court referred to the Mulla Committee

Report and emphasised the dire conditions in Indian prisons, including inadequate

hygiene, insufficient medical care, and lack of accountability. The relevant

paragraphs of
the said decision
are usefully extracted below:
“35. The Mulla Committee has dealt with this aspect in Chapter 6 and 7 of its
         Report, a perusal of which shows the pathetic position in which most of the jails are
         placed insofar as hygienic conditions are concerned. Most of them also lack proper
         facilities for treatment of prisoners. The recommendations of the Committee in this
         regard are to be found in Chapter 29. We have nothing useful to add except pointing
         out that society has an obligation towards prisoners' health for two reasons. First,
         the prisoners do not enjoy the access to medical expertise that free citizens have.
         Their incarceration places limitations on such access; no physician of choice, no
         second opinions, and few if any specialists. Secondly, because of the conditions of
         their incarceration, inmates are exposed to more health hazards than free citizens.
         Prisoners therefore, suffer from a double handicap.
36. In `American Prison System' (supra) there is a discussion at pages 411-13 as to
         whether a prisoner can seek any relief from the Court because of neglect of medical
         treatment on the ground of violation of their constitutional right. Policy makers may
         bear this also in mind while deciding about the recommendations of the Mulla
         Committee Report, which they would so do within six months from today.
         Insubstantial food and inadequate clothing.
37. There is not much to doubt that the rules contained in concerned Jail Manual
         dealing with food and clothing etc. to be given to prisoners are not fully complied
         with always. All that can usefully he said on this aspect is the persons who are
         entitled to inspect jails should do so after giving shortest notice so that the reality
         becomes known on inspection. The system of complaint box introduced in Tihar Jail
         during some period needs to be adopted in other jails also. The complaint received
         must be fairly inquired and appropriate actions against the delinquent must be taken.
22
On top of all, prisoners must receive full assurance that whoever would lodge a
      complaint would not suffer any evil consequence for lodging the same.”



Despite clear directions, no comprehensive legal framework has yet been

developed to secure enforceable rights for disabled prisoners facing systemic

neglect.
25.   This Court expresses deep concern over the plight of incarcerated

individuals with disabilities, who are among the most marginalized and vulnerable

groups, within the justice system. The social and structural barriers they face in

society are only magnified within the prison environment. Unlike the minimal

safeguards afforded to women prisoners, there is currently no specific legal or

policy framework that guarantees dignity, accessibility, and protection for persons

with disabilities or for members of the transgender community in prisons. From the

stage of arrest through trial and incarceration, persons with disabilities face

systemic disadvantage due to the lack of training and sensitivity among police and

prison personnel.
26.   Most prison facilities are structurally inaccessible to individuals with

mobility,   sensory,   or   cognitive    impairments.     Institutional   routines      and

infrastructure are not designed to accommodate diverse needs, making it difficult –

or at times impossible – for such prisoners to use toilets, dining areas, libraries, or
23
health clinics. Additionally, due to the absence of trained caregivers or appropriate

custodial policies, persons with disabilities are often denied help with essential

daily activities such as bathing, dressing, or eating. This neglect results in

indignity, mental distress, and, at times, serious physical harm.
27.   Such inaccessibility and denial of basic care are not mere administrative

lapses; they amount to violations of fundamental rights enshrined under
Articles 14
and
21
of the Constitution of India. They also breach provisions of the
RPwD Act,

2016
– specifically
Sections 6
,
25
, and
38
– which mandate the State to ensure

healthcare and non-discriminatory treatment for persons with disabilities, including

those in custody. Furthermore, under
Article 15
of the UNCRPD, to which India is

a signatory, any cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment of disabled persons in

detention is strictly prohibited.
28.   Persons with disabilities must be provided healthcare equivalent to that

available in the general community. This includes access to physiotherapy, speech

therapy, psychiatric care, and assistive devices, such as wheelchairs, hearing aids,

or crutches. Prison authorities are under a duty to coordinate with public healthcare

systems to ensure uninterrupted care. Logistical or financial limitations cannot be

cited to justify a withdrawal of this obligation.
24
29.   International legal standards reaffirm these responsibilities. The United

Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (Nelson Mandela

Rules) prescribe prompt, adequate healthcare and specific attention to the needs of

prisoners with disabilities. Under Rule 2, the principle of non-discrimination

requires prison systems to proactively accommodate the unique vulnerabilities of

such individuals. Rule 5(2) mandates that reasonable accommodations must be

made so that persons with disabilities have full and effective access to prison life

on an equal basis with others.
30.   Lawful incarceration does not suspend the right to human dignity. The

punishment lies only in the restriction of liberty – not in the denial of humane

treatment or reasonable accommodations. Failure to meet these obligations inflicts

disproportionate suffering on disabled prisoners and betrays the constitutional role

of the State as a custodian – not a tormentor – of those it detains.
31.   Despite clear constitutional and statutory mandates, the lack of

disaggregated data on disability continues to hinder targeted policy intervention. In

response to a Parliamentary query in 2016, the Government acknowledged that it

does not maintain any data regarding disabled prisoners. The National Crime

Records Bureau (NCRB) – despite providing detailed information on caste, gender,

and religion – fails to record disability status. Its 2022 report, for instance, only
25
references 137 pending cases under the
Mental Health Act
, offering no insight into

the wider population of prisoners with disabilities.
32.       This data gap has far-reaching implications throughout the criminal justice

process. The unavailability of interpreters, accessible communication formats, or

assistive technologies during investigation and trial hinders the right to a fair

hearing. This results in miscommunication, delays, and the denial of justice. These

systemic omissions constitute indirect discrimination and disproportionately

burden persons with disabilities – entrenching their social exclusion.
33.       Most State prison manuals remain outdated and uninformed by

developments in disability law and rights-based discourse. They frequently

conflate sensory or physical disabilities with mental illness or cognitive decline,

thereby eroding the distinct legal right to reasonable accommodation. This

conflation promotes harmful stereotypes and obstructs disabled inmates from

claiming their lawful entitlements.
33.1. At this juncture, we also note with approval the judgment in People’s
Watch

v. The Home Secretary, Home Department, Prison Secretariat and others
11 which

incidentally also arose from the Madras High Court. The said judgment elaborates

on the urgent need for prison reforms and outlines concrete modalities for
11
(2023) 2 MLJ 478 : CDJ 2023 MHC 025
26
improving the quality of life of inmates. The following paragraphs from the

judgment are extracted hereunder for reference. The directives issued therein are

hereby re-emphasized, as their effective implementation would significantly

advance the objective of comprehensive prison reforms, aligned with the

constitutional vision of a welfare state that is attentive to the principles of

inclusivity, equality, and non-discrimination.
“15. The Model Prison Manual, 2016 came into existence, after multiple judicial
      interventions. The Hon’ble Supreme Court has repeatedly recommended an overhaul
      of prison administration by suggesting reforms in treatment of prisoners and
      management of prisons. The dehumanized existence of prisoners was reprimanded
      by Justice Krishna Iyer in
Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration
[1980 AIR 1579] and
      he called for an overhaul of Prison Manuals in compliance with constitutional ideals
      and human rights. He further emphasised on the need for an independent oversight
      mechanism for operationalizing prisoners’ rights and safeguards.
Subsequently,
      after the direction of the Hon’ble Supreme Court to examine the framing of new All
      India Jail Manual in
Rama Murthy v. State of Karnataka
, [(1997) 2 SCC 642], the
      government constituted a committee to draft a model prison manual in accordance
      with the rights jurisprudence and constitutional ideals. The Committee was entrusted
      with the responsibility to compare the state prison manuals, identify the gaps in
      provisions related to administration and management of prisons and recommend
      best practices. It examined the provisions relating to internal management of prisons
      and treatment of prisoners and devised a framework to ensure that the prisoners are
      treated in accordance with the recommendations made in the judgments of the
      Hon’ble Supreme Court, All India Committee on Jail Reforms (1980-1983) and
      international instruments. Thus, the Model Prison Manual came into being in the
      year 2003 after national-level deliberations and development of a consensus.
      However, only after the nudge from the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Inhuman
      Conditions in 1382 Prisons, In re, [(2017) 10 SCC 658], the Ministry of Home
      Affairs approved the Manual after 12 years in 2016. The Model Prison Manual and
      the system that it envisages, has to be understood as an outcome of the repeated
      clarion calls and demands to safeguard prisoners’ rights and prison reforms.
16. The Model Prison Manual, 2016 provides for a system of board of visitors. The
      visitation system is a pragmatic shift from isolation of prisoners under custody from
27
the outside world. Community interaction is a necessary postulate in transforming
prisons as correctional institutions. The board of visitors, which directly interacts
with the prisoners, is the driver of such transformation by acting as a connecting
thread between the authorities and prisoners. They are entrusted with the duty to
enquire into the prisoners’ grievances, develop suggestions for its redressal and
forward the suggestions to the concerned authorities. We may refer to the following
observation of the All India Committee for Jail Reforms (Mulla Committee), while
highlighting the importance of Board of Visitors:
“For long, the system of Board of Visitors in prison administration has been in
place. In a way, the system indicates corrections being a concern of one in all; and
correctional institutions do not have to be insular. These need to have a measure of
interaction with other sectors of criminal justice system and a substantive linkage
with community. The modality of Board of Visitors subserves these and similar
purposes. Should the Board function effectively, it will greatly help jail inmates in
redressing their grievances and in putting them on the path of reformation and
rehabilitation.”
17.(i) There is a catena of decisions dealing with prisoners’ rights. We may now
refer exclusively to the observations of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in relation to the
visitation system to understand the nature of responsibility of the prison visitors.
In
Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration
[AIR 1980 Supreme Court 1579], it was held by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court as follows:
"59.
The Prisons Act
and Rules need revision if a constitutionally and culturally
congruous code is to be fashioned. The model jail manual, we are unhappy to say
and concur in this view with the learned Solicitor General, is far from a model and
is, perhaps, a product of prison officials insufficiently instructed in the imperatives of
the Constitution and unawakened to the new hues of human rights. We accept, for
the nonce, the suggestion of the Solicitor General that within the existing statutory
framework the requirements of constitutionalism may be read. He heavily relies on
the need for a judicial agency whose presence, direct or by delegate, within the
prison walls will deal with grievances. For this purpose, he relies on the Board of
Visitors, their powers and duties, as a functional substitute for a Prison Ombudsman.
A controllerate is the desideratum for in situ reception and redressal of grievances.
…..
79. What we have stated and directed constitute the mandatory part of the judgment
and shall be complied with by the State. But implicit in the discussion and
conclusions are certain directives for which we do not fix any specific time-limit
28
except to indicate the urgency of their implementation. We may spell out four such
quasi-mandates.
1. The State shall take early steps to prepare in Hindi, a prisoner's handbook
and circulate copies to bring legal awareness home to the inmates. Periodical jail
bulletins stating how improvements and habilitative programmes are brought into
the prison may create a fellowship which will ease tensions. A prisoners' wallpaper,
which will freely ventilate grievances will also reduce stress. All these are
implementary of
Section 61
of the Prisons Act.
2. The State shall take steps to keep up to the Standard Minimum Rules for
Treatment of Prisoners recommended by the United Nations, especially those
relating to work and wages, treatment with dignity, community contact and
correctional strategies. In this latter aspect, the observations we have made of
holistic development of personality shall be kept in view.
3.
The Prisons Act
needs rehabilitation and the Prison Manual total
overhaul, even the Model Manual being out of focus with healing goals. A
correctional-cum-orientation course is necessitous for the prison staff inculcating
the constitutional values, therapeutic approaches and tension-free management.
4. The prisoners' rights shall be protected by the court by its writ jurisdiction
plus contempt power. To make this jurisdiction viable, free legal services to the
prisoner programmes shall be promoted by professional organisations recognised by
the court such as for example. Free Legal Aid (Supreme Court) Society. The District
Bar shall, we recommend, keep a cell for prisoner relief."
(ii) The Hon’ble Supreme Court in
Sanjay Suri v. Delhi Administration
[1988 Supp
SCC 160] emphasized the need for diversity in the board of visitors. It recommended
that members from different cross- sections of life be included in the visitors’ board
viz., social activists, women social workers, people involved in news media, retired
public servants from judiciary and executive. The relevant passage of
the said
decision
is extracted below:
"8. The Visitors' Board should consist of cross-sections to society; people with good
background, social activists, people connected with the news media, lady social
workers, jurists, retired public officers from the judiciary as also the executive. The
Sessions Judge should be given an acknowledged position as a visitor and his visits
should not be routine ones. Full care should be taken by him to have a real picture of
the defects in the administration qua to the resident prisoners and undertrials."
(iii) In
Rama Murthy v. State of Karnataka
[(1997) 2 SCC 642], the Hon’ble
Supreme Court noted that to know the real picture of prisoners and prison
administration, the jail visits must be done after giving the shortest notice. For better
appreciation, the relevant passage of
the said decision
is reproduced below:
29
"33. What we would rather state is that if what is being done to prisoners in the
above regard is to enforce prison discipline mentioned in various jail manuals, there
exists a strong need for a new All India Jail Manual to serve as a model for the
country, which manual would take note of what has been said about various
punishments by this Court in its aforesaid decisions. Not only this, the century-
old
Indian Prison Act, 1894
, needs a thorough look and is required to be replaced by
a new enactment which would take care of the thinking of Independent India and of
our constitutional mores and mandate. The National Human Rights Commission has
also felt that need for such exercise, mention about which has been made in paras
4.18 and 4.21 of the aforesaid Report.
Conclusion
51. We have travelled a long path. Before we end our journey, it would be useful to
recapitulate the directions we have given on the way to various authorities. These
are:
(1) To take appropriate decision on the recommendations of the Law
Commission of India made in its 78th Report on the subject of “Congestion of
undertrial prisoners in jail” as contained in Chapter 9
                                                                            (para 22).
(2) To apply mind to the suggestions of the Mulla Committee as contained in
Chapter 20 of Vol. I of its Report relating to streamlining the remission system and
premature release (parole), and then to do the needful
                                                                            (para 25).
(3) To consider the question of entrusting the duty of producing UTPs on
remand dates to the prison staff
                                                                            (para 29).
(4) To deliberate about enacting of new
Prison Act
to replace the century-old
Indian Prison Act, 1894
(para 33). We understand that the National Human Rights
Commission has prepared an outline of an all-India statute, which may replace the
old Act; and some discussions at a national level conference also took place in 1995.
We are of the view that all the States must try to amend their own enactments, if any,
in harmony with the all-India thinking in this regard.
(5) To examine the question of framing of a model new All India Jail Manual
as indicated in para 33.
(6) To reflect on the recommendations of the Mulla Committee made in
Chapter 29 on the subject of giving proper medical facilities and maintaining
appropriate hygienic conditions and to take needed steps
                                                                   (paras 37 and 38).
(7) To ponder about the need of complaint box in all the jails
                                                                            (para 39).
30
(8) To think about introduction of liberalisation of communication facilities
                                                                             (para 42).
(9) To take needful steps for streamlining of jail visits as indicated in
para 44.
(10) To ruminate on the question of introduction of open-air prisons at least
in the District Headquarters of the country
                                                                      (para 50)."
(iv) In
D.K. Basu v. State of W.B.
, [(2015) 8 SCC 744], the amicus curiae suggested
the Hon’ble Supreme Court to deal with the appointment of non-official visitors to
make surprise visits to prisons to check human rights violations. It was raised to
enable proper implementation of the
Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993
. After
noting that there is no harm in appointing non- official visitors, the Hon’ble Supreme
Court directed the state government to consider their appointment with a caveat that
the non-official visitors should not interfere with the ongoing investigations. The
relevant paragraphs are quoted below for ready reference:
"31. There are, apart from the above, few other recommendations made by the
Amicus like installation of CCTV cameras in all police stations and prisons in a
phased manner, and appointment of non-official visitors to prisons and police
stations for making random and surprise inspections. Initiation of human
proceedings under
Sections 302
/
304
IPC in each case where the enquiry establishes
culpability in custodial death and framing of uniform definition of custodial death
and mandatory deployment of at least two women constables in each district are also
recommended by the Amicus.
…
35. That leaves us with the appointment of non-official visitors to prisons and police
stations for making random and surprise inspection to check violation of human
rights. The Amicus points out that there are provisions in the Prison Manual
providing for appointment of non-official visitors to prisons in the State. These
appointments are made on the recommendations of the Magistrate of the District in
which the prison is situated. He urged that the provisions being salutary ought to be
invoked by the Governments concerned and non-official visitors to prisons in police
stations nominated including independent persons like journalist. There is, in our
opinion, no real harm or danger in appointment of non-official visitors to prisons
and police stations provided the visitors who are so appointed do not interfere with
the ongoing investigations, if any. All that we need say is that the State Governments
may take appropriate action in this regard keeping in view the provisions of the
Prison Manuals and the Police Acts and the Rules applicable to each State. …..
38. To sum up ......
31
38.7. The State Governments shall consider appointment of non-official visitors to
prisons and police stations in terms of the relevant provisions of the Act wherever
they exist in the Jail Manuals or the relevant Rules and Regulations."
(v) In Inhuman Conditions in 1382 Prisons, In re, [(2017) 10 SCC 658], the Hon’ble
Supreme Court opined that participation of members of the society as non-official
visitors in the Board of Visitors was of ‘considerable importance’ and directed the
state governments to constitute an appropriate board of visitors in terms of Chapter
XXIV of the Model Prison Manual, 2016 by 30.11.2017. The relevant passage can be
usefully extracted below:
"58. We are of the view that on the facts and in the circumstances before us, the
suggestions put forward by the learned Amicus and the learned counsel appearing
for the National Forum deserve acceptance and, therefore, we issue the following
directions:
58.1. The Secretary General of this Court will transmit a copy of this decision to the
Registrar General of every High Court within one week with a request to the
Registrar General to place it before the Chief Justice of the High Court. We request
the Chief Justice of the High Court to register a suo motu public interest petition
with a view to identifying the next of kin of the prisoners who have admittedly died
an unnatural death as revealed by the NCRB during the period between 2012 and
2015 and even thereafter, and award suitable compensation, unless adequate
compensation has already been awarded.
58.2. The Union of India through the Ministry of Home Affairs will ensure
circulation within one month and in any event by 31st October, 2017 of (i) the Model
Prison Manual, (ii) the monograph prepared by the NHRC entitled “Suicide in
Prison - prevention strategy and implication from human rights and legal points of
view”, (iii) the communications sent by the NHRC
referred to above
, (iv) the
compendium of advisories issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs to the State
Governments, (v) the Nelson Mandela Rules and (vi) the Guidelines on Investigating
Deaths in Custody issued by the International Committee of the Red Cross to the
Director General or Inspector General of Police (as the case may be) in charge of
prisons in every State and Union Territory. All efforts should be made, as suggested
by the NHRC and others, to reduce and possibly eliminate unnatural deaths in
prisons and to document each and every death in prisons – both natural and
unnatural.
58.3. The Union of India through the Ministry of Home Affairs will direct the NCRB
to explain and clarify the distinction between unnatural and natural deaths in
prisons as indicated on the website of the NCRB and in its Annual Reports and also
32
explain the sub-categorization ‘others’ within the category of unnatural deaths. The
NCRB should also be required to sub- categorize natural deaths. The sub-
categorization and clarification should be complied with by 31st October, 2017.

58.4. The State Governments should, in conjunction with the State Legal Services
Authority (SLSA), the National and State Police Academy and the Bureau of Police
Research and Development conduct training and sensitization programmes for
senior police officials of all prisons on their functions, duties and responsibilities as
also the rights and duties of prisoners. A copy of this order be sent by the Registry of
this Court to the Member-Secretary of each SLSA to follow-up and ensure
compliance.
58.5. The necessity of having counselors and support persons in prisons cannot be
over-emphasized. Their services can be utilized to counsel and advice prisoners who
might be facing some crisis situation or might have some violent or suicidal
tendencies. The State Governments are directed to appoint counselors and support
persons for counselling prisoners, particularly first-time offenders. In this regard,
the services of recognized NGOs can be taken and encouraged.

58.6. While visits to prison by the family of a prisoner should be encouraged, it
would be worthwhile to consider extending the time or frequency of meetings and
also explore the possibility of using phones and video conferencing for
communications not only between a prisoner and family members of that prisoner,
but also between a prisoner and the lawyer, whether appointed through the State
Legal Services Authority or otherwise.
58.7. The State Legal Services Authorities (SLSAs) should urgently conduct a study
on the lines conducted by the Bihar State Legal Services Authority in Bihar and the
Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative in Rajasthan in respect of the overall
conditions in prisons in the State and the facilities available. The study should also
include a performance audit of the prisons, as has been done by the CAG. The SLSAs
should also assess the effect and impact of various schemes framed by NALSA
relating to prisoners. We request the Chief Justice of every High Court, in the
capacity of Patron- in-Chief of the State Legal Services Authority, to take up this
initiative and, if necessary, set up a Committee headed preferably by the Executive
Chairperson of the State Legal Services Authority to implement the directions given
above.
58.8. Providing medical assistance and facilities to inmates in prisons needs no
reaffirmation. The right to health is undoubtedly a human right and all State
Governments should concentrate on making this a reality for all, including
33
prisoners. The experiences in Karnataka, West Bengal and Delhi to the effect that
medical facilities in prisons do not meet minimum standards of care is an indication
that the human right to health is not given adequate importance in prisons and that
may also be one of the causes of unnatural deaths in prisons. The State Governments
are directed to study the availability of medical assistance to prisoners and take
remedial steps wherever necessary.
58.9. The constitution of a Board of Visitors which includes non- official visitors is of
considerable importance so that eminent members of society can participate in
initiating reforms in prisons and in the rehabilitation of prisoners. Merely changing
the nomenclature of prisons to ‘Correction Homes’ will not resolve the problem.
Some proactive steps are required to be taken by eminent members of society who
should be included in the Board of Visitors. The State Governments are directed to
constitute an appropriate Board of Visitors in terms of Chapter XXIX of the Model
Prison Manual indicating their duties and responsibilities. This exercise should be
completed by 30th November, 2017.
58.10. The suggestion given by the learned Amicus of encouraging the establishment
of ‘open jails’ or ‘open prisons’ is certainly worth considering. It was brought to our
notice that the experiment in Shimla (Himachal Pradesh) and the semi- open prison
in Delhi are extremely successful and need to be carefully studied. Perhaps there
might be equally successful experiments carried out in other States as well and, if so,
they require to be documented, studied and emulated.
58.11. The Ministry of Women & Child Development of the Government of India
which is concerned with the implementation of
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection
of Children) Act, 2015
is directed to discuss with the concerned officers of the State
Governments and formulate procedures for tabulating the number of children (if
any) who suffer an unnatural death in child care institutions where they are kept in
custody either because they are in conflict with law or because they need care and
protection. Necessary steps should be taken in this regard by 31st December, 2017.
59. We expect the above directions to be faithfully implemented by the Union of India
and State Governments. In the event of any difficulty in the implementation of the
above directions, the Bench hearing the suo motu public interest litigation in the
High Court in term of our first direction is at liberty to consider those difficulties and
pass necessary orders and directions."
18. In the light of the aforesaid legal proposition, we now consider the provisions
concerning board of visitors under the Model Prison Manual, 2016, which show a
marked difference from the Tamil Nadu Prison Rules, 1983. The board of visitors is
34
presently required to monitor the correctional work in prisons, training and
effectiveness of infrastructure in prisons; and give suggestions to improve the
correctional work (para 29.02). Significantly, the role of the Board is not restricted
to being a messenger carrying grievances from the prisoners to the authorities. It is
now required to work on redressing their grievances in consultation with the prison
authorities (para 29.02(c)). The duties of the visitors under the Manual (para 29.22)
are reproduced below for the sake of specificity:
"a. Examine cooked food;
b. Inspect the barracks, wards, work-sheds and other buildings of the prison
generally;
c. Ascertain whether considerations of health, cleanliness and security are attended
to, whether proper management and discipline is maintained in every respect and
whether any prisoner is illegally detained, or is detained for undue length of time
while awaiting trial;
d. Examine prison registers and records, except secret records and records
pertaining to accounts;
e. Hear and attend to all representation and petitions made by or on behalf of the
prisoners;
f. Direct, if deemed advisable, that any such representation or petition be forwarded
to the Government; and
g. Suggest new avenues for improvement in correctional work"
Further, the duties and powers of visitors under the Tamil Nadu Prison Rules, 1983
are general i.e., to visit all parts to satisfy oneself that the rules are duly complied
with, give patient hearing to prisoners’ complaints, inspect the maintenance of
punishment books, and ensure that food is of good quality. There is a specific
provision dealing with visitors’ duty to attend to the quality and quantity of diet,
medical facilities, sanitation, literacy programme and library facilities available to
the prisoners (para 29.13). Thus, the duties of visitors under the Manual have
become more specific, including the duty to ascertain if any prisoner has been
detained illegally. The manual also provides for sensitization and training of non-
officials after their appointment (para 29.05). The remarks by visitors during the
course of inspection are forwarded to the Inspector General who shall then take
steps by either passing an order or forwarding the same to the government. The
Manual also recognizes the right of the prisoners to converse secretly with the
visitor, but within the sight of the prison officer (para 29.11). The details of what
transpired during the conversation is communicated to the Chairman of the Board
(i.e., District Judge), who shall take up the matter with the prison superintendent, if
found necessary. The manual has also brought changes to the non-official
membership of the Board. It is mandatory to have three Members of Legislative
Assembly (MLAs) (of which one has to be a woman), a nominee of the State Human
35
Rights Commission and two social workers of the district/sub-division (of which one
has to be a woman) as non-official members. This is a marked difference from the
present Prison rules, which does not give a mandatory specification rather only
specifies the people as a matter of preference. Thus, it is lucid that the State
government has still not incorporated changes to its Prison Rules in accordance with
the 2016 Model Prison Manual and it has also not implemented the visitation system
under the 1983 Rules diligently.
19. At this juncture, it is pertinent to refer to United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandala Rules). The mechanism
for informing the prisoners of their rights, standards of treatment in prisons and for
them to make complaints and requests regarding their treatment in prisons, has been
integral to the international standards for treatment of prisoners since 1955. It forms
a part of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners adopted by the
First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Prisoners. Rules 35-36 deal with information to and complaints by prisoners. Rule
55 specifically deals with inspections to ensure compliance with laws and
regulations. In 2011, attempts to review and revise these rules were made and an
open-ended inter-governmental expert group was established by the General
Assembly. With respect to information and complaints by prisoners, the revision
sought to strengthen the mechanism by ensuring prompt dealing of complaints and
requests. The inspection mechanism was revised by introducing a two-fold system of
internal inspection by prison administration and external inspection by an
independent body of persons. The revision also enabled the inspectors to perform
their tasks effectively, by granting them access to prison records, power to make
unannounced visits and conduct confidential interviews. The revised rules were
ultimately adopted by the UN General Assembly as the “United Nations Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners” vide resolution A/RES/70/175. The
General Assembly also approved the rules to be known as “the Nelson Mandela
Rules” in accordance with the recommendation of the expert group in his honour.
20. As per Rule 54 of the Nelson Mandela Rules, upon admission, every prisoner
shall be promptly provided with written information about the prison law and
regulations, his or her rights, including authorized methods of seeking information,
access to legal advice, etc., his or her obligations including applicable disciplinary
sanctions, and all other matters necessary to enable him / her to adapt himself or
herself to the life of the prison. Rule 55 provides that the information referred to in
Rule 54 shall be available in the most commonly used languages and shall be
provided with interpretation assistance for those who do not understand the
language. Rule 56 provides for an opportunity of making requests or complaints by
the prisoner or his / her legal advisor, to the prison director or prison staff,
36
regarding medical treatment to the central prison administration and to the judicial
or other competent authorities, etc. According to Rule 57, every request or complaint
shall be promptly dealt with and replied to without delay and if there is any undue
delay, the complainant shall be entitled to bring it before a judicial or other
authority. A prisoner or his / her legal advisor must not be exposed to any risk of
retaliation, intimidation or other negative consequences as a result of having
submitted a request or complaint. Allegations of torture or other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment of prisoners shall be dealt with immediately and
shall result in a prompt and impartial investigation conducted by an independent
national authority. Under Rule 83, there shall be a two-fold system for regular
inspections of prisons and penal services viz., internal inspections and external
inspections. Internal inspections are conducted by the central prison administration
and external inspections are conducted by an independent body. In both cases, the
objective is to ensure that prisons are managed in accordance with existing laws,
regulations, policies and procedures, with a view to bringing about the objectives of
penal and corrections services, and that the rights of prisoners are protected. As per
Rule 84, Inspectors shall have the authority, to access all information on the
numbers of prisoners and places and locations of detention, as well as all
information relevant to the treatment of prisoners, including their records and
conditions of detention; to freely choose which prisons to visit, including by making
unannounced visits at their own initiative, and which prisoners to interview; to
conduct private and fully confidential interviews with prisoners and prison staff in
the course of their visits; to make recommendations to the prison administration and
other competent authorities. External inspection teams shall be composed of
qualified and experienced inspectors appointed by a competent authority and shall
encompass health-care professionals. Due regard shall be given to balanced gender
representation. Rule 85 states that every inspection shall be followed by a written
report to be submitted to the competent authority. The rule also highlights that
endeavour must be made to make external inspections reports publicly available,
excluding any personal data on prisoners unless they have given their explicit
consent. The prison administration or other competent authorities, as appropriate,
shall indicate, within a reasonable time, whether they will implement the
recommendations resulting from the external inspection.
21. In this regard, it is pertinent to refer to the second report of the Commonwealth
Human Rights Initiative (CHRI), published in 2019 on the functioning of the board
of visitors and the appointment of non-official visitors. Analysing the compliance in
all the States (except Jammu and Kashmir) as against the respective state rules, the
report provides for certain recommendations for effective implementation of board of
visitors across the states. It recommends that the board of visitors must be
constituted within seven days of the appointment of non-official visitors, with the
37
District Magistrate as the Chairperson. It recommends for an assured minimum
        tenure of visitors for a period of one year to ensure continuity and prevent the
        erosion of institutional memory. It recommends bi-monthly joint inspections and
        quarterly meetings at the prison premises during which the Board shall also
        consider the visitors’ book and the action taken by the Superintendent on the
        remarks made in the visitors’ book and called for corresponding amendments to the
        rules. The report also recommends that non-official visitors must have genuine
        interest in the welfare of prisons and of the prisoners with experience and knowledge
        in law, criminology, psychiatry, healthcare etc., with observation and listening skills.
        Further, it emphasises on gender balance and equitable representation of both men
        and women in the board. It also makes several recommendations as to reporting
        mechanism to ensure time-bound action by the state, which includes the right of the
        visitors to communicate with any authority they believe, is appropriate without
        having to go through the jail administration at the first instance. The report further
        recommends for voluntary disclosure of the names of the non-official visitors and
        their rosters inside the prison premises to enable the prisoners to know the same and
        bats for the uploading of minutes of the board meetings on the official website of the
        state prison department. Besides that, it recommends for an yearly state level
        meeting of official and non-official visitors of all prisons, chaired by the State
        Human Rights Commission with the participation of officials of the prisons and
        correctional services department to deliberate on improvements based on the visiting
        notes of the Board of Visitors.
22. It is also relevant to refer to the visitorial systems prevailing in other countries.
        Mechanism for visiting prisons to ensure compliance with laws, handle complaints
        from prisons to check human rights violations, and recommending systemic and
        policy level changes to prison administration is in place in different jurisdictions. We
        may refer to three select frameworks viz., (i)Independent Visitor Service in Western
        Australia, (ii)Prison Ombudsman in United Kingdom and (iii)Directorate of
        Inspections/Complaints in Kenya. The first two are external and independent
        accountability mechanisms, while the third one is an internal mechanism to deal with
        complaints and recommend changes.
23.(i) In Western Australia12, there is an Independent Visitor Service (IVS) as an
        integral part of the state’s accountability mechanisms. Independent Prison Visitors
        are appointed by the Minister under the Inspector of Custodial Services Act, 2003 to
        ensure the prisons operate in a just and humane manner. They are required to visit
        the allotted prison every three months and make a report following the visit to the
12
http://www.oics.wa.gov.au/about-oics/independent-visitor-service/; Inspector of Custodial Services Act,
2003 available at: http://testweb.oics.wa.gov.au/wp-contempt/uploads/2013/11/Insepctor-of-Custodial-
Services-Act-2003.pdf
38
Inspector of the Custodial Services recording the details of the visit and any
       complaints made by the prison inmates. The Inspector is then bound to review such
       reports to identify issues with the prison systems; report to the Ministry; and take
       appropriate actions to improve the quality of prisons. The independent visitors thus
       play an important role in safeguarding the rights and wellbeing of prisoners; voicing
       out the concerns of prisoners to the authorities; aiding the prison reforms by
       documenting the state of prison management and grievances of the prisoners.
(ii) In the United Kingdom13, there is an independent office of the Prison and
       Probation Ombudsman, sponsored by the Ministry of Justice. Though sponsored by
       the Ministry, the ombudsman is independent from government services and carries
       out investigations on complaints filed by the prisoners, custodial deaths and deaths
       (except homicide), within 14 days of release. Through such investigations, the
       ombudsman examines whether any operational or policy changes are required in the
       management of prisons. The terms of reference between the Ombudsman and the
       Secretary of State concerning operation of Ombudsman, ensures confidentiality of
       communication by the prisoner-complainant and fixes a time limit for considering
       and investigating complaints. Every investigation results in a written report, which
       can recommend disciplinary action against any staff named in the complaints. The
       ombudsman is also required to prepare and publish an annual report and the same
       is laid before the Parliament for legislative scrutiny.
(iii) Kenya14 has a separate directorate called the Directorate of
       Inspections/Complaints under the Kenya Prisons Service. It inspects and audits
       penal institutions to check implementation and compliance with the
Prisons Act
,
       rules and regulations for penal institutions; sensitizes the prison staff. It is also
       conferred with the responsibility to handle complaints by establishing complaint
       handling offices in prisons and training the officers in complaint handling. It also
       recommends improvements, changes and introduction of new correctional
       programmes.
24. During the course of argument, the petitioner has brought to the notice of this
       court the existence of the Academy of Prisons and Correctional Administration
       (APCA) situated at Vellore, the objective of which is to regularly train prison and
       correctional officers in order to achieve the goals of reformation, rehabilitation and
       reintegration of prisoners into the society. It offers different types of courses to the
       officials involved in prison administration and correctional services including:
13
Terms    of    Reference     available  at:https://s3-eu-west-2-amazonaws.com/ppo-prod-storage-
1g9rkhijkjmgw/ uploads/2021/12/PPO-2021-Terms-of-Reference-with-cover.pdf
14
http://www/prisons.go.ke/inspectionsComplainsMonitoringandevaluation
39
(i) Basic Courses for different durations for prison officers, probation officers,
psychologists and welfare officers
(ii) In-service courses for prison officers
(iii) Refresher course for serving prison officers for mutual learning and updating
oneself with the latest developments in the subject
(iv) Computer course to appraise the officers regarding ICT applications
(v) Special courses in collaboration with renowned national and international
institutions and organizations.
These courses are organized for capacity building of the stakeholders and officials
involved to effectively implement the correctional works, rehabilitation of prisoners
and their reintegration into the society post incarceration.
25. Thus, the overall appreciation of the legal framework prevailing in the state,
central and international levels would necessitate us to observe that prison
administration and its reforms must be carried out by keeping the objective of the
prison system in the first place i.e., reformation of inmates, their rehabilitation and
successful reintegration into the society at the end of their incarceration. The prison
environment and culture among the inmates instilled by such an environment are
significant factors in determining the success of incarceration. Any reform in prison
management in order to achieve the said purpose must start with the department of
prisons and correctional services. Improving the culture among inmates and the
environment by certain administrative reforms will bring about a change in the
behaviour of the inmates ultimately leading to an effective incarceration system with
due regard for prisoner's rights.
26. Coming to the present case, it is seen from the documents filed in the form of
typed set of papers as well as the replies given by various authorities under the
RTI
Act
that for most of the applications, the Public Information Officer concerned has
either refused to divulge the information or stated that no such record exists to be
divulged. There are some replies where it was stated that the information sought for
is confidential in nature and therefore, it cannot be shared. In few replies, available
records have in fact been given to the applicant. As regards the applications
submitted to the Judiciary, information on dates of visits of the Judges has been
furnished. In several replies, the information was refused stating minutes of the
meeting could not be furnished in view of the order passed by this Court.
27. It is also seen that in case of applications filed before the District Collectorates
across the State, the information sought for was not furnished at all times on the
grounds of diversion of resources. For some applications, it was replied that no
record is maintained relating to the requests of prisoners. In another reply, it is
40
stated that the Chief Education Officers never visited and there are no records to be
furnished. However, from the replies filed along with the typed set of papers, it could
be seen that Fire and Rescue Services Department has furnished the copies of the
records maintained by them and they have also answered the queries relating to fire
service related provisions, periodical checking of fire extinguishers and other
provisions carried out in the prisons. In the case of Animal Husbandry Department,
the applications submitted were replied by stating that there was no visit by any
authority and therefore, no information could be furnished. Similar was the reply
given by the office of the Chief Inspector of Factories to the petitioner. Thus, it can
be inferred that no periodical visits had taken place and no remarks were made in
the visitors' book; and that, there is no clear-cut picture about the prison
administration and the facilities available to the prisoners in the prisons of the state
of Tamil Nadu.
28. As already observed, the state government has not incorporated changes to the
Tamil Nadu Prison Rules, 1983 in accordance with the Model Prison Manual, 2016
and has not effectively implemented the provisions relating to visitation system in the
Rules. It is noted earlier that the non-official visitors are appointed by the District
Collector of the concerned District by following the procedures as contemplated
under the Prison Rules. Such appointment is essential to continuously monitor the
physical conditions prevailing in the prison, compliance with basic and fundamental
rights of the prisoners, etc. Therefore, it is necessary for the respondents to not only
ensure the appointment of the non-official visitors and that, the duties and
responsibilities are discharged by them, but also ensure that there is no delay in
appointing a non-official visitor, after expiration of his or her tenure. It is evident
from the materials placed before us, that the tenure of the non-official visitors in
many districts expired and the appointment is not forthcoming even for several
months. When such being so, we are of the opinion that the visitors who interact with
prisoners and observe their conditions in close proximity, are indispensable for the
enforcement of fundamental rights of prisoners and therefore, non-official visitors
will have to be appointed with immediate effect. That apart, the prison
administration needs to be reformed for creating a better environment and prison
culture to ensure the prisoners enjoy their right to dignified life under
Article 21.
29. Therefore, we deem it fit and appropriate to issue the following directions to the
respondent authorities:
(i) To constitute a committee to ensure periodic appointment of non-official visitors
to all the prisons/jails within the State promptly upon expiry of the tenure of such
non-official visitor.
41
(ii) To constitute board of visitors in all prisons who could periodically review and
advise the prison authorities on various aspects of facilities training, correctional
work etc.
(iii) The minutes of the meeting of the board of visitors along with the suggestions to
the government shall be uploaded on the website, district/prison wise.
(iv) To amend the
Prison Act, 1894
and the Tamil Nadu Prison Rules, 1983 in
accordance with the Model Prison Manual, 2016 and the United Nations Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (‘the Nelson Mandela Rules’).
(v) To take appropriate measures to reduce overcrowding of prisoners in the prisons,
if not taken earlier.
(vi) To prepare a ‘Prisoners' Rights Handbook’ with information on their rights,
applicable laws and regulations, mechanism for raising grievances/complaints with
the board of visitors and other concerned authorities, expected behaviour from
prisoners and disciplinary action for violations and to provide each prisoner with a
copy of the same upon admission to the prisons. The same shall also be made
available online on the website of the prison department.
(vii) The Office of the Inspector General of Prisons shall prepare an annual report
with the remarks and suggestions of the visitors and board across the state, and the
corresponding action taken by the prison department. The annual report prepared by
the Inspector General containing the remarks and action taken must be published in
the website.
(viii) To make all the facilities viz., medical equipment, drinking water, hygienic food
available to the prisoners, at all times.
(ix) Regular training and refresher courses shall be conducted in collaboration with
the Academy of Prisons and Correctional Administration for officials and prison
staff, who directly interact with the inmates in order to create a sensitive and
dignified prison environment.
(x) To provide effective grievance redressal system with the provisions of complaint
box and CCTV cameras and alert system in the barracks of jails.
(xi) To ensure the effective functioning of visitorial system in reforming the prisons,
the state government shall organize a yearly conference under the aegis of the State
Human Rights Commission with the official and non-official visitors of the board of
visitors across the state, officials concerned with prison administration and
correctional services to consider the status of prison administration, deliberate on
the report of the board of visitors and recommend changes in the prison
administration.”
42
34.   The State has a constitutional and moral obligation to uphold the rights of

prisoners with disabilities. This includes not only ensuring non-discriminatory

treatment but also enabling their effective rehabilitation and reintegration into

society. This Court emphasizes that reasonable accommodations are not optional,

but integral to any humane and just carceral system. A systemic transformation is

urgently required – one grounded in compassion, accountability, and a firm

constitutional commitment to dignity and equality. The disabilities of incarcerated

individuals must not become a basis for further deprivation or suffering; rather, the

prison system must evolve to affirm their rights and provide the care necessary for

rehabilitation.
DIRECTIVES:
35.   In light of the foregoing findings and in furtherance of
Articles 14
and
21
of

the
Constitution of India, the RPwD Act, 2016
, and India’s international

obligations under the UNCRPD, the following directions are issued for immediate

and time-bound compliance:
1) All prison authorities shall promptly identify prisoners with disabilities at the

time of admission. Each prisoner shall be given an opportunity to declare any

disability and provide information about their specific needs.
43
1.1) All rules, regulations, and essential information about prison life shall be

provided to such prisoners in accessible and understandable formats (e.g., Braille,

large print, sign language, or simplified language).
2) All prison premises shall be equipped with wheelchair-friendly spaces,

accessible toilets, ramps, and sensory-safe environments to ensure universal

accessibility.
3) All prisons shall designate and maintain dedicated spaces for physiotherapy,

psychotherapy and other necessary therapeutic services.
4) A State-level access audit of all prisons in Tamil Nadu shall be completed within

six months by an expert committee comprising officials from the Social Welfare

Department, the Department for the Welfare of Differently Abled Persons, and

certified access auditors.
4.1) Periodic audits shall thereafter be conducted and updated regularly in

accordance with the Harmonized Guidelines and Standards for Universal

Accessibility in India (2021).
5) The prison authorities shall ensure complete compliance with
Sections 40
and
45
of the RPwD Act, 2016, Rule 15 of the 2017 Rules and the Harmonized

Guidelines, 2021 in all prison infrastructure and services.
44
6) The State shall provide healthcare for prisoners with disabilities equivalent to

that available in the community, including access to physiotherapy, speech therapy,

psychiatric services, and assistive devices (such as wheelchairs, hearing aids, and

crutches).
7) All prison medical officers shall be adequately trained and sensitized to address

disabling conditions, ensuring provision of appropriate accommodations and

treatment without discrimination or bias. Furthermore, regular awareness and

sensitization programmes shall be conducted in all prisons.
8) Every prisoner with a disability shall be provided a nutritious and medically

appropriate diet, tailored to their specific health and dietary needs.
9) Lifesaving treatments, including regular and need-based physiotherapy and

psychotherapy must be made available on-site or through linkage with government

health facilities.
10) All prison staff shall undergo comprehensive training on the rights of persons

with disabilities. This training shall include:
- awareness of equality and non-discrimination principles
- proper handling of disability-related challenges
- use of appropriate language and behaviour, as per the UN Handbook on Prisoners
with Special Needs.
45
11) The State Prison Manual shall be reviewed and appropriately amended within

six months to ensure conformity with the
RPwD Act, 2016
and the UNCRPD.
11.1) A specific section must be incorporated to prohibit discrimination against

prisoners with disabilities and promote equal treatment and reasonable

accommodation.
11.2) The revised Manual shall be prominently displayed in every prison

establishment.
12) The State shall undertake periodic consultations with civil society

organisations working in the disability sector to develop inclusive policies and

identify accommodations based on real needs.
13) The State shall constitute a monitoring committee to conduct periodic

inspections and submit compliance reports every three months.
14)The State shall maintain and update disaggregated data on the disability status

of prisoners, including records on accessibility, reasonable accommodations, and

medical requirements.
14.1) This is to ensure compliance with
Article 31
of the UNCRPD and the RPwD

Act, 2016.
46
14.2) The data shall be made available in the public domain, subject to privacy

safeguards.
15) The Director General of Prisons shall file a comprehensive compliance report

before the State Human Rights Commission within three months from the date of

this judgment, detailing all steps taken in furtherance of these directions.

35.1. We make it clear that these directions are issued in the larger public interest

to uphold the dignity, and healthcare rights of prisoners with disabilities in all

custodial settings. The obligations herein are rooted in India’s constitutional

guarantees, statutory mandates, and international human rights commitments.
36.   With the above directions, this appeal stands disposed of. No costs.

Connected Miscellaneous Application(s), if any shall stand closed.
…………………………J.
                                                             [J.B. Pardiwala]


                                                          …………………………J.
                                                              [R. Mahadevan]


NEW DELHI;
JULY 15, 2025.