[Cites
30
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Birka Shiva vs The State Of Telangana on 16 July, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Prashant Kumar Mishra
2025 INSC 863




                                                                       NON-REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.               OF 2025
                                        (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 1445 of 2025)


                            BIRKA SHIVA                               …APPELLANT(S)

                                                             Versus


                            THE STATE OF TELANGANA                    …RESPONDENT(S)




                                                           JUDGMENT
SANJAY KAROL, J.
Leave Granted.
2.      The present appeal arises from the final judgment and
                            order dated 26th June 2024 passed by the High Court for the State
Signature Not Verified
of Telangana at Hyderabad in Criminal Appeal No.384 of 2018,
Digitally signed by
NAVEEN D
which confirmed the judgment and order dated 29th January 2018
   Date: 2025.07.16
   18:11:56 IST
   Reason:
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                          Page 1 of 28
passed by the Court of the Special Sessions Judge for Fast
Tracking the Cases relating to Atrocities Against Women at
Karimnagar,1 in Sessions Case No.284 of 2014, whereby the
Appellant-convict, Birka Shiva2, was convicted under
Sections
376
,
363
, and
342
of the Indian Penal Code, 18603. However,
while upholding the order of conviction passed by the Trial
Court, the High Court vide the impugned judgment, and order
reduced the sentence awarded to the appellant and modified the
sentence in the following manner:
Section                  Trial Court        High Court
              363
IPC
5 Years           1 Year
              376
IPC
7 Years of R.I.   2 Years of R.I.
              342
IPC
6 Months of R.I.   6 Months of R.I.
3.       The prosecution case as emerging from the record, as also
set out by the Courts below, is as follows:
3.1.        The appellant, a friend of PW-4 (victim's brother),
       was a regular visitor to the house of PW-1 ( victim's mother).
       During such visits, he came in contact with the victim (PW-
3), who was pursuing 1st year of her graduation.
1
Hereinafter referred to as the 'Trial Court.'
2
Hereinafter referred to as the ‘appellant’
3
Hereinafter referred to as ‘
IPC
’
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                      Page 2 of 28
3.2.      On the morning of 4th August 2012, the appellant
      took the victim to Peddapalli, and from there to Hyderabad,
      where he tied a ‘pasupukommu’ (turmeric thread) around
      her neck, thereby creating an impression that they were
      married. The appellant then confined the victim in a room at
      Shadnagar, Hyderabad, and they started residing together as
      a couple, subjecting her to sexual intercourse, away from the
      parental home of the victim.
3.3.      On 8th August 2012, when the victim was
      untraceable, her mother (PW-1) lodged a missing
      complaint. Based on the said complaint, a case was
      registered as FIR No.85 of 2012 at PS Godavarikhani – II
      Town, District Karimnagar, under
Section 366(A)
of the
      IPC. PW-1 alleged that the appellant had lured and induced
      the victim and taken her away to some unknown place by
      taking the opportunity of her innocence.
3.4.      On 12th October 2012, when the appellant sustained
      injuries in a motorcycle accident, he was admitted to the
      hospital at Karimnagar. At that time, the victim came to her
      mother (PW-1) and narrated the ordeal to her family.
      3.5.      Upon her return, the victim's statement was
      recorded, and based on her statement,
Sections 342
,
376
,
      and
366
of the IPC were added. The victim was also
      examined by a doctor (PW-8), who took vaginal swabs and
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                            Page 3 of 28
sent them to the Regional Forensic Science Laboratory
         (RFSL), Karimnagar. After the surrender of the appellant,
         a potency test was conducted by a doctor (PW-9), who
         issued a certificate stating that the appellant was potent to
         commit a sexual act.
3.6.          After completing the investigation, chargesheet
         dated 30th January 2013 came to be submitted before the
         Judicial First Class Magistrate at Manthani, who committed
         the case to the Sessions Division at Karimnagar. The case
         was initially taken on file by the Sessions Court as S.C.
         No.284 of 2014 and then assigned to the Assistant Sessions
         Judge, Manthani. Charges under
Sections 366(A)
,
342
, and
376
of IPC were framed against the appellant, to which he
         pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. The case was
         subsequently transferred to the Special Court.
         3.7.          To bring home the guilt of the appellant, the
         prosecution examined 13 witnesses and exhibited 11
         documents. On behalf of the defence, Ex.D1, being a
         contradiction in the statement of victim (PW-3) recorded
         under
Section 161
of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
         19734, was marked. The details of the prosecution witnesses
         are summarised below :
4
‘
CrPC
’ for short
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                Page 4 of 28
PW                 Name                        Role/Relation
                1          B. Komuramma                 complainant/mother of
                                                               victim
                2               B. Raju                   brother of victim
                3                XXX5                             victim
                4          B. Sajjan Kumar                 brother of victim
                5        Akula Malllikarjun               owner of house at
                                                       Hyderabad in which the
                                                     appellant allegedly confined
                                                              the victim
                6          Akula Prasanth                   Panch witness
                7            Jula Ramulu                     Panch witness
                8            Dr. Lavanya              Doctor who examined the
                                                                 victim
                9       Dr. C.S. Mohan Rao            Doctor who conducted the
                                                     potency test of the appellant
               10          Sarwar Shareef             Investigating Officer6 who
                                                         recorded victim’s 161
                                                               statement
               11           Md. Fasiuddin               I.O. who registered the
                                                       missing report of victim
               12              R. Prakash                      Third I.O.
13      Bhagavathula Shanker               School Headmaster
4.      The Trial Court, after elaborate consideration, vide
judgment and order dated 29th January 2018, convicted the
appellant under
Sections 363
,
342
, and
376
of IPC; however,
acquitted him in relation to the offence committed under
Sections
366(A)
or 366
IPC
. The Court gave the following findings:
5
Name redacted as per the direction in
Nipun Saxena v. Union of India
, (2019) 2 SCC
703
6
‘I.O.’ for Short
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                               Page 5 of 28
(i)       Upon consideration of the testimonies of PW-1 to
      PW-5, no circumstances are elicited to discredit their
      testimony that PW-3 had been missing from her parental
      house since 4th August 2012. PW-1 to PW-4 confirmed the
      friendship between the appellant and PW-4, as well as the
      appellant's frequent visits to their house.
(ii)      PW-3 (victim) categorically deposed that the
      appellant took her away from her parent's house to
      Hyderabad, where she was confined at the home of PW-5
      for nearly two months. Her evidence also shows that the
      appellant had sexual intercourse with her.
(iii)     The contradictions in Ex.D1, i.e., the statement of
      PW-3 recorded under
Section 161
CrPC, was not proved by
      the defence in the cross-examination of the Investigation
      Officer concerned. Even if it is accepted, it would merely
      show that the appellant took the victim from her house, not
      discrediting the core allegation.
(iv)      Prosecution produced Ex.P11 (date of birth
      certificate) which clearly shows that PW-3 was born on 3rd
      November 1996, a fact which was recorded in the records
      of Zilla Parishad High School, where she studied from 6th to
      10th Class. Therefore, as of the date of the offence, the
      victim was under 16 years of age.
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                            Page 6 of 28
(v)       Considering the total circumstances, charges under
Section 376 (rape)
,
Section 363 (kidnapping)
, and
Section
      342
(wrongful confinement) were proved beyond a
      reasonable doubt. However, since the facet of forced
      marriage or seduction was not established, the appellant was
      acquitted under
Sections 366
or 366(A)
IPC
.
5.      Aggrieved by the said order of conviction, the appellant
preferred an appeal before the High Court for the State of
Telangana at Hyderabad, which vide the impugned judgment and
order dated 26th June 2024 confirmed the conviction of the
appellant, but however, modified the sentence awarded as set
forth in Paragraph 2. The relevant extract of the High Court
judgment is as follows:
"6. P.W.1 is the mother, P.Ws.2 and 4 are the brothers
            of the victim, P.W.3. In order to prove the age of the
            victim the prosecution produced Ex.P11 the date of birth
            certificate. As per Ex.P11 the date of birth of the victim
            is 03.11.1996 and she was aged only below 16 years at
            the time of incident. P.W.3 in his cross-examination has
            categorically admitted that she did not state to police that
            the accused forcibly kidnapped her and her evidence
            does not reveal that the accused used any force on her
            for having sexual intercourse. However, since she was
            aged below 16 years in view of the definition of rape
            under
Section 375
of IPC having sexual intercourse with
            a woman aged below 16 years with or without her
            consent amounts to rape. Apart from that the evidence of
            P.W.3 clearly established that the accused took away her
            to Hyderabad and confined in the house of P.W.5 and
            enjoyed her sexually. It is now well established that if
            the Court is satisfied from the evidence of the victim, a
            conviction can be solely based on such evidence without
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                       Page 7 of 28
looking for further corroboration. Same can be done
            because the prosecutrix is no more treated as an
            accomplice in the crime. An accused cannot cling to a
            fossil formulae and insist on corroborative evidence,
            even if taken as a whole, the case spoken to by the victim
            strikes a judicial mind as probable. Judicial response to
            human rights cannot be blunted by legal jugglery.
            Therefore, considering the evidence of P.W.3 the trial
            Court has rightly convicted the accused for the offences
            under
Sections 376
,
363
and
342
of I.P.C."
(Emphasis Supplied)
6.      Still aggrieved, the Appellant-convict, pleading his
innocence, is before us, challenging his conviction and sentence,
as referred to supra. We have heard learned counsel for the
parties and also perused the material on record. The issues that
arise for our consideration are:
(a)     Whether the prosecution has established
      beyond reasonable doubt that the victim (PW-1) was
      a minor (under sixteen/eighteen years of age) as on
      the date of the alleged incident, i.e., 4th August 2012;
(b)     Whether the appellant lured or enticed the
      victim away from the lawful guardianship of her
      parents without their consent, thereby committing the
      offence of kidnapping under
Section 363
of IPC;
(c)     Whether the appellant wrongfully confined
      the victim and prevented her from moving in any
      direction out of her volition; and
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                     Page 8 of 28
(d)    Whether the appellant forcefully had a
         physical relationship with the victim to constitute
         rape under
Section 376
of IPC.
OUR VIEW


         A)         Age of the Victim/Prosecutrix
7.         The prosecution has relied primarily on Ex.P11, the birth
certificate issued by the Zilla Parishad High School, to establish
that the victim was below the age of sixteen years on the date of
the alleged offence, i.e., 4th August 2012. According to Ex.P11,
the victim's date of birth was 3rd November 1996, which, if
accepted, would make her approximately 15 years 9 months old
at the relevant time.
8.         The evidentiary value of such an entry made in public or
official registers may be admissible in evidence under Section 35
of the Indian Evidence Act, 18727. However, admissibility is
distinct from probative value. While such documents may be
admitted into evidence, their evidentiary weight depends on
proof of their authenticity and the source of the underlying
information. Mere production and marking of a document as
exhibited by the Court does not amount to proof of its contents.
Its execution has to be proved by leading substantive evidence,
that is, by the ‘evidence of those persons who can vouchsafe for
7
Hereinafter referred to as the ‘
Evidence Act
’
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                             Page 9 of 28
the truth of the facts in issue’. [See:
Narbada Devi Gupta v.
Birendra Kumar Jaiswal8] We
may refer to a few judicial
pronouncements of this Court in this regard:
8.1.      This Court, in
Birad Mal Singhvi v. Anand
        Purohit9
, held that the entries contained in the school
        register are relevant and admissible but have no probative
        value unless the person who made the entry or provided the
        date of birth is examined. It was observed:
“14. … If entry regarding date of birth in the scholar's
               register is made on the information given by parents or
               someone having special knowledge of the fact, the same
               would have probative value. … The date of birth
               mentioned in the scholars' register has no evidentiary
               value unless the person who made the entry or who gave
               the date of birth is examined. The entry contained in the
               admission form or the scholar's register must be shown
               to be made on the basis of information given by the
               parents or a person having special knowledge about the
               date of birth of the person concerned. If the entry in the
               scholar's register regarding date of birth is made on the
               basis of information given by parents, the entry would
               have evidentiary value, but if it is given by a stranger or
               by someone else who had no special means of
               knowledge of the date of birth, such an entry will have
               no evidentiary value. …
15.
Section 35
of the Indian Evidence Act lays down that
               entry in any public, official book, register, record stating
               a fact in issue or relevant fact and made by a public
               servant in the discharge of his official duty specially
               enjoined by the law of the country is itself the relevant
               fact. To render a document admissible under
Section 35
,
               three conditions must be satisfied, firstly, entry that is
8
(2003) 8 SCC 745
9
1988 Supp SCC 604
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                          Page 10 of 28
relied on must be one in a public or other official book,
             register or record; secondly, it must be an entry stating a
             fact in issue or relevant fact; and thirdly, it must be made
             by a public servant in discharge of his official duty, or
             any other person in performance of a duty specially
             enjoined by law. An entry relating to the date of birth
             made in the school register is relevant and admissible
             under
Section 35
of the Act, but the entry regarding the
             age of a person in a school register is of not much
             evidentiary value to prove the age of the person in the
             absence of the material on which the age was
             recorded. … The courts have consistently held that the
             date of birth mentioned in the scholar's register or
             secondary school certificate has no probative value
             unless either the parents are examined or the person on
             whose information the entry may have been made is
             examined…"
(Emphasis Supplied)


      This decision has been consistently followed by this Court
      in
Pratap Singh v. State of Jharkhand10
;
Babloo Pasi v.
      State of Jharkhand11
;
Murugan v. State of T.N.12
;
State of
      M.P. v. Munna13
;
C. Doddanarayana Reddy v. C.
      Jayarama Reddy14
; and
Manak Chand v. State of
      Haryana15
.
8.2.      A coordinate Bench of this Court in
State of
      Chhattisgarh v. Lekhram16
, through S.B. Sinha, J., clarified
      that though entries in school registers are admissible under
10
(2005) 3 SCC 551
11
(2008) 13 SCC 133
12
(2011) 6 SCC 111
13
(2016) 1 SCC 696
14
(2020) 4 SCC 659
15
2023 SCC OnLine SC 1397
16
(2006) 5 SCC 736
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                        Page 11 of 28
Section 35
of the Evidence Act, their evidentiary value
         improves only when corroborated by oral testimony of
         persons who are aware of its content, such as parents or the
         person who made the entry at the time of admission. It held
         as under:
“12. A register maintained in a school is admissible in
                evidence to prove date of birth of the person concerned
                in terms of
Section 35
of the Evidence Act. Such dates
                of births are recorded in the school register by the
                authorities in discharge of their public duty. PW 5, who
                was an Assistant Teacher in the said school in the year
                1977, categorically stated that the mother of the
                prosecutrix disclosed her date of birth. The father of the
                prosecutrix also deposed to the said effect.
13. …The materials on record as regards the age of the
                prosecutrix were, therefore, required to be considered in
                the aforementioned backdrop. It may be true that an
                entry in the school register is not conclusive, but it has
                evidentiary value. Such evidentiary value of a school
                register is corroborated by oral evidence as the same was
                recorded on the basis of the statement of the mother of
                the prosecutrix."
8.3.      Similarly, this Court in
Satpal Singh v. State of
         Haryana17
, stated that though a document may be
         admissible, but to determine whether the entry contained
         therein has any probative value, may still be required to be
         examined in the facts and circumstances of a particular case.
It held as follows:
17
(2010) 8 SCC 714
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                         Page 12 of 28
“26.
In
Vishnu v. State of Maharashtra
[(2006) 1 SCC
                283 : (2006) 1 SCC (Cri) 217] while dealing with a
                similar issue, this Court observed that very often parents
                furnish incorrect date of birth to the school authorities to
                make up the age in order to secure admission for their
                children. For determining the age of the child, the best
                evidence is of his/her parents, if it is supported by
                unimpeccable documents. In case the date of birth
                depicted in the school register/certificate stands belied
                by the unimpeccable evidence of reliable persons and
                contemporaneous documents like the date of birth
                register of the municipal corporation, government
                hospital/nursing home, etc., the entry in the school
                register is to be discarded.
x              x                x
28. Thus, the law on the issue can be summarised that
                the entry made in the official record by an official or
                person authorised in performance of an official duty is
                admissible under
Section 35
of the Evidence Act but the
                party may still ask the court/authority to examine its
                probative value. The authenticity of the entry would
                depend as to on whose instruction/information such
                entry stood recorded and what was his source of
                information. Thus, entry in school register/certificate
                requires to be proved in accordance with law. Standard
                of proof for the same remains as in any other civil and
                criminal case.”


         8.4.
In
Madan Mohan Singh v. Rajni Kant18
, this Court
         held that the entries made in the official record may be
         admissible under
Section 35
of the Evidence Act, but the
         Court has a right to examine their probative value. The
         authenticity of the entries would depend on whose
18
(2010) 9 SCC 209
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                           Page 13 of 28
information such entries stood recorded. It was held as
         follows :
“20. So far as the entries made in the official record by
                an official or person authorised in performance of
                official duties are concerned, they may be admissible
                under
Section 35
of the Evidence Act but the Court has
                a right to examine their probative value. The authenticity
                of the entries would depend on whose information such
                entries stood recorded and what was his source of
                information. The entries in school register/school
                leaving certificate require to be proved in accordance
                with law and the standard of proof required in such cases
                remained the same as in any other civil or criminal cases.
21. … For determining the age of a person, the best
                evidence is of his/her parents, if it is supported by
                unimpeachable documents. In case the date of birth
                depicted in the school register/certificate stands belied
                by the unimpeachable evidence of reliable persons and
                contemporaneous documents like the date of birth
                register of the Municipal Corporation, government
                hospital/nursing home, etc., the entry in the school
                register is to be discarded. …”


         8.5.      This Court, in
Alamelu v. State19
, while dealing with
         a similar factual matrix, held that the prosecution had failed
         to prove that the girl was a minor at the relevant date since
         the transfer certificate of a Government School showing age
         was not duly proved by witnesses. It observed as under:
“40. Undoubtedly, the transfer certificate, Ext. P-16
                indicates that the girl's date of birth was 15-6-1977.
                Therefore, even according to the aforesaid certificate,
                she would be above 16 years of age (16 years 1 month
19
(2011) 2 SCC 385
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                         Page 14 of 28
and 16 days) on the date of the alleged incident i.e. 31-
7-1993. The transfer certificate has been issued by a
            government school and has been duly signed by the
            Headmaster. Therefore, it would be admissible in
            evidence under
Section 35
of the Evidence Act, 1872.
            However, the admissibility of such a document would be
            of not much evidentiary value to prove the age of the girl
            in the absence of the material on the basis of which the
            age was recorded. The date of birth mentioned in the
            transfer certificate would have no evidentiary value
            unless the person who made the entry or who gave the
            date of birth is examined.
41. We may notice here that PW 1 was examined in the
            Court on 9-8-1999. In his evidence, he made no
            reference to the transfer certificate (Ext. P-16). He did
            not mention the girl's age or date of birth. PW 2 was also
            examined on 9-8-1999. She had also made no reference
            either to her age or to the transfer certificate. It appears
            from the record that a petition was filed by the
            complainant under
Section 311
CrPC seeking
            permission to produce the transfer certificate and to
            recall PW 2. This petition was allowed. … In her cross-
            examination, she had merely stated that she had signed
            on the transfer certificate, Ext. P-16 issued by the school
            and accordingly her date of birth was noticed as 15-6-
            1977. She also stated that the certificate has been signed
            by the father as well as the Headmaster. But the
            Headmaster has not been examined. Therefore, in our
            opinion, there was no reliable evidence to vouchsafe for
            the truth of the facts stated in the transfer certificate.”

                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
9.      In the attending facts, we find that the evidentiary value
of Ex.P11 is significantly undermined in the absence of
corroborating material. We say so for the following reasons:
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                       Page 15 of 28
(i)       PW-13, who is the Headmaster of Zilla Parishad
      High School, Chandanapur, Peddapalli District (erstwhile
      Karimnagar District), stated that the victim studied in his
      school from 2007 to 2013, i.e., 6th Class to 10th Class and
      that the Admission Register records her date of birth as 3rd
      November 1996. However, in his cross-examination, he
      admitted that he had no personal knowledge as to the source
      or basis on which the date of birth was recorded therein or
      if the recorded date of birth was correct or not. The relevant
      part of his testimony is extracted hereunder:
“…In our school there is not clerk to maintain records. I
             did not produce any certificate pertaining to earlier
             school I, In which P.W.3 studies up to 5th Class. There
             must be basis for entering date of birth of a student in our
             school such as her earlier school record. I do not have
             personal knowledge as to what record was produced by
             parents of P.W. 3 as basis to enter her date of birth in our
             school as I was not Head Master in 2007.
I cannot say in which school P.W.3 studied up to 5th
             Class. In the nominal roll register of our school, the
             signature of P.W.3 was obtained. I do not have personal
             knowledge whether the said date of birth of P.W.3 was
             correct or not and I am giving evidence only on the basis
             of record.”

                                                  (Emphasis Supplied)
(ii)      The prosecution has failed to examine the person
      who had made the entry in the Admission Register to
      ascertain on what basis such an entry was made. More so,
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                        Page 16 of 28
the entry in respect of the date of birth of the victim in the
      primary school register, i.e., 1st Class to 5th Class, has not
      been produced and proved before the Courts below to verify
      the age as per its records. It is also not possible to ascertain
      from the records as to whether the date of birth was provided
      by the parents or simply entered at the behest of another
      party, without verification, at the time of admission to Zilla
      Parishad High School.
(iii)     The testimonies of PW-1, PW-2 and PW-3 are also
      telling that none of them mentioned the victim's age with
      specificity. There is no reference to Ex.P11, and no attempt
      was made by the prosecution to adduce corroborative
      testimony regarding the victim's date of birth from her
      family members.
Thus, while examining the issue at hand, on the anvil of the
principles elucidated above, it is essential to notice that the
prosecution has failed to toe the line of legal requisites. There is
nothing on record to corroborate the date of birth of the victim as
recorded in the birth certificate (Ex.P11) issued by the school.
Therefore, it cannot be relied upon to definitely determine the age
of the victim and held with certainty that the victim was below
sixteen/eighteen years of age.
10.     All three of the I.Os. are curiously silent on the aspect of
age of the alleged rape victim. This, in itself, raises credible
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                              Page 17 of 28
questions about the investigation since a charge of rape is
involved in which the age of the victim is an essential factor.
PW-11, the I.O. who registered the FIR, categorically states that
the mother (PW-1) and brothers (PWs 2 and 4) of the victim did
not give him particulars of her year of birth and age. PW-12, who
was the 3rd I.O., in his cross-examination admitted to not having
pursued the aspect of the victim's age sufficiently. The relevant
portion of his testimony is as under:
“As per Ex.P1 complaint P.W.3 was studying in S.R.K.
            Junior college, Godavarikhani. I have not visited the said
            college. I did not examine her classmates to enquire as
            to how P.W.3 was going to college. I did not enquire as
            to the birth place of P.W.3. It is true every
            Grampanchayath will maintain births and deaths
            register. I did not verify whether the date of birth of
            P.W.3 was got registered in the Grampanchayath. I did
            not enquire as to where P.W.3 completed her primary
            education. I did not investigation as to who got filled in
            the form of admission of P.W.3 in the school.”
11.     Furthermore, none of the victim's family members, i.e., her
mother and brothers have said anything about the age of the
victim in their depositions made in the Court. Even the victim is
effectively silent on this aspect, only stating that she and her
siblings were born approximately two years apart and thereby
making an estimation of their ages as well as her own.
Throughout her deposition, the victim has remained silent with
regard to her particular date of birth.
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                     Page 18 of 28
12.     Well, suffice it to say that Courts of law cannot make a
determination of guilt in thin air, based on estimations. In the
present facts and circumstances, the proof submitted by the
prosecution in the form of Ex.P11 (birth certificate issued by the
school) was not sufficient to arrive at a finding that the
prosecutrix was less than sixteen/eighteen years of age,
especially when such a document was not sufficiently
corroborated. Therefore, it was neither safe nor fair to convict
the appellant based on it, particularly in the context where the age
of the victim was such a pivotal factor.
B)      Kidnapping from Lawful Guardianship/
               Wrongful Confinement
13.     The prosecution has alleged that the appellant lured the
victim away from her lawful guardianship with the intent to
sexually exploit her, thereby attracting the offence under
Section
363
IPC. Further, it is alleged that she was wrongfully confined
by the appellant for a period of approximately two months in a
house, reportedly owned by PW-5 amounting to offence
punishable under
Section 342
IPC. However, on a close scrutiny
of the evidence, we find the claim to be wholly unsubstantiated
and improbable.
14.     From the record, it is unrefutably clear that the appellant,
being a friend of PW-4, was in constant contact with the victim
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                             Page 19 of 28
since he was a regular visitor at her parental house. PW-2
categorically states that – ‘the accused is friend my brother Sajan
Kumar. Accused Shiva used to come to my house daily.’ The
victim herself corroborated this in her examination-in-chief by
acknowledging that her acquaintance with the appellant arose
from his regular visits to her home.
15.     To sustain a charge of kidnapping from lawful
guardianship, the essential ingredients that must be satisfied
include – (i) taking or enticing a minor (under 18 years of age if
female); (ii) from the lawful guardianship of her parents or
guardians; and (iii) without their consent. However, the victim's
own deposition does not demonstrate that the appellant forcibly
removed or enticed her from the guardianship of her parents with
deceit or inducement. She admits to having voluntarily
accompanied the appellant on a motorbike on the morning of 4 th
August 2012 and having resided with him for nearly two months.
Furthermore, there is an unexplained delay of four days in
lodging the missing report. The victim was reportedly missing
since the morning of 4th August 2012, yet, the FIR was registered
only on 8th August 2012. Neither the mother (PW-1) nor the
brothers (PWs 2 and 4) of the victim offered any credible
explanation for such a delay. This silence in the face of the
alleged kidnapping raises legitimate doubts over the genesis of
the prosecution’s case.
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                            Page 20 of 28
16.     Turning now to the charge under
Section 342
IPC, which
penalises wrongful confinement, it must be established that the
accused voluntarily obstructed the victim in such a manner as to
prevent her from proceeding beyond certain circumscribed
limits. The testimony of the victim (PW-3) indicates that she
resided with the appellant for nearly two months. Notably, what
is absent from the record is any assertion that she was physically
restrained, or her movements were restricted. The victim admits
that the appellant left daily for work and that she remained alone
at the residence. Finally, it is suggested that the appellant used to
put a lock on the main door of the house. But this version appears
to be just an afterthought and not correct. For, there is no
indication that she attempted to flee, contact neighbours, or
otherwise signal her unwillingness to stay in that house. This
conduct stands in stark contrast to what one might expect of a
person wrongfully confined against his/her volition. For ready
reference, the relevant part of the statement of the victim is
extracted hereunder:
“Chief Examination :
P.W.1 is my mother, P.W.2 Raju and Sajjan Kumar are
            my brothers. On the date of incident I am studying inter
            1st year at S.R.K. college, Godavarikhani. On
            04.08.2012, I went to college in the morning. The
            accused came to the college and also said that he will
            marry me and took me to Shadnagar of Hyderabad by
            bike and kept me in one house. Accused is working as
            employee in Gas Cylinder Company at Hyderabad.
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                   Page 21 of 28
Accused me in the house locked the house, and went to
            the gas company for attending duties. Accused had
            sexual intercourse with me at Hyderabad. I was present
            in the house and locked the house and went to gas
            company for attending duties. Accused had sexual
            intercourse with me at Hyderabad. I was present in the
            house at Hyderabad for a period of two months. After
            two months accused met with an accident and admitted
            in a hospital at Secundrabad and thereafter he was
            shifted to Karimnagar by their parents. The brother-in-
            law by name Kumar came to Hyderabad along with
            others and took me to police station. Godavarikhani-II
            Town P.S. B incline colony. The police shifted me to
            hospital. I know the accused through my brother my
            name Sajjan Kumar. Hence, I got acquittance with him.
            The accused used to came to my parents house regularly.
            I can identify the accused who was present in the court
            hall. Police examined me.
Cross examination by Sri S. Bhasker Reddy. Advocate
            for the accused.
…My brother and mother came to P.S. when I was
            present at P.S. I was present at Secundrabad hospital for
            two days and also I came to Karimnagar hospital, again
            I went to P.S. I have not stated before the police about
            the said fact. It is not true to suggest that the police did
            not record my statement. I have not stated before the
            police about the location and name of the temple. The
            witness says I stated before the police that the accused
            married me. I do not know the name of the gas cylinder
            company. The doors were closed when the accused was
            present in the house. It is not true to suggest that there is
            a possibility for escaping from the house as well as to go
            to outside for contact through phones. I never talked with
            the neighbours.
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                       Page 22 of 28
Dt. 26.6.2015 witness recalled, sworn for further cross-
examination

            Cross-exam for accused, Sri S.B.R. Adv.,

                   It is true there is no mentioned in my 161
CrPC
statement that how much period I am having
            acquaintance with the accused. It is true in my 161
CrPC
statement there is no mentioned that the accused
            forciblykidnappedme. It is true I never mentioned the
            company and its motor cycle number. It is true I never
            mentioned that accused went to my college that I stated
            he intended to marry me. It is true that I never mentioned
            in my chief examination, that the accused locked in
            room. It is not true to say that I never mentioned in my
            161 statement the place of accident at Hyderabad. My
            elder brother is 22 yrs, my mother’s brother is age 20
            years, It is not true to say that there is gap of 2 yrs for
            every child begotten by the Mother. My date of birth is
            recorded in O.P. records. I produced my original in inter
            college. It is not true to say that I never accompanied
            with the accused on a motor cycle in Hyderabad. It is not
            true to say that I was not kept at Hyderabad by the
            accused.
It is not true to say that I never performed family affairs
            at Hyderabad. It is not true to say that I was not taken to
            Hanuman Temple and I got married. I did not produced
            any recording of marriage of temple to the Police
            Authority. It is not true to say that my marriage was not
            effected since no registration was at temple…”

Upon reading the above, it becomes evident that the victim
cohabited with the appellant for a considerable duration without
asserting that her presence was coerced, manipulated, or forced
through threats or deceit. It was only when the appellant met with
an accident on 12th October 2012 and was hospitalised, that the
victim returned home. Even when the appellant was hospitalised,
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                      Page 23 of 28
the victim stayed with him for two days at the hospital. These
circumstances strongly suggest that the victim was not staying
with the appellant against her own volition or will. We further
find the narrative provided by her during the trial, to be
improvised from her earlier statement recorded by the Police
under
Section 161
CrPC, which reads as:
“CASE DAIRY PART-II
                PS GDK -II TOWN      District: KARIMNAGAR

                FIR No. 85 / 2012         Date of examination: 17.10.2012

                      STATEMENT OF XXX20, 16 YEARS, GOLLA,
                       STUDENT INTERMEDIATE 1st YEARS R/O
                               SINGIREDDYPALLI

                I, am a resident of Singireddypalli, I am studying in S.R.K.
                Junior College, Godavarikahani in Intermediate 1st year,
                Birka Shiva S/o Madunaiah, 25 years, Tenugu is friend of my
                second elder brother Sajjan and he used to visit my house now
                and then for my brother and thus he was moving closely with
                me and he informed that he is in love with me and told that he
                will marry me, on 04.08.2012 in the morning hours he came
                to my house and took me on his motorcycle to Hyderabad and
                kept me in a house at Shadnagar. He tied a thread with
                turmeric nut in my neck in Hanumana Temple and since that
                day he was having sexual intercourse with me in the said room
                and he was working in a cylinder company. After one moth
                he took off the turmeric nut from my neck. On 12.10.2012 in
                the night hours at Ameerpet he slipped and fell down from his
                motor cycle and sustained injuries and now he is getting
                treatment at Vasudeva Hospital, Karimnagar.
Sd/-
Name: Sarvar Shareef
                                                           Rank: S.I. of Police,
                                                              GDK II Town.”
20
Name redacted as per the direction in
Nipun Saxena
(supra)
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                              Page 24 of 28
17.     Therefore, in this backdrop, we find that there is nothing
on record to show that the appellant forcibly took the victim away
from lawful guardianship of her parents without their consent or
wrongfully confined in a locked room. On the contrary, the
evidence indicates that the victim voluntarily accompanied the
appellant on a motorbike on 4th August 2012 and had a free access
to the house where both of them were residing. Therefore, the
charge of kidnapping from lawful guardianship under
Section
363
IPC and wrongful confinement under Section 342 is also not
made out.
C) Charge of Rape under
Section 376
IPC
18.     The prosecution has sought conviction of the appellant
under
Section 376
IPC, asserting that he had committed forcible
sexual intercourse with the victim. It is trite law that a conviction
for rape can be sustained solely on the testimony of the
prosecutrix/victim,        provided   that   her   evidence      inspires
confidence in the mind of the Court and appears to be natural and
truthful. However, if the version given by the prosecutrix is
inconsistent, unsupported by any medical evidence, or the whole
surrounding circumstances are highly improbable and believable
in the case set up by the prosecutrix, the Court shall not act on
the solitary evidence of the prosecutrix. [See: State of Punjab v.
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                  Page 25 of 28
Gurmit Singh21;
Vimal Suresh Kamble v. Chaluverapinake
Apal S.P.22
;
Sadashiv Ramrao Hadbe v. State of
Maharashtra23
;
Tameezuddin v. State (NCT of Delhi
)24;
Narender Kumar v. State (NCT of Delhi
)25; and
Mukesh v. State
(NCT of Delhi
)26]
19.     In the present case, we find that this charge has no legs to
stand on, for she only makes a positive statement about the
occurrence of sexual intercourse and does not even in the
slightest imply the same to be against her will. The absence of
consent is the sine qua non to sustain a charge under Section 376.
That cannot, in our opinion, be met as per the evidence on record.
20.     Further, PW-8, who was, at the relevant time, a Civil
Assistant Surgeon at Area Hospital, Godavarikhani, opined upon
examination of the victim that there was regular sexual
intercourse but gave no definite statement regarding the recent
occurrence. Our conclusion here is further fortified by the fact,
as discussed above, that for two months, they resided peacefully
together without even a hint of discomfort or desire on the part
of the victim to leave or escape from the house in Hyderabad.
21
(1996) 2 SCC 384
22
(2003) 3 SCC 175
23
(2006) 10 SCC 92
24
(2009) 15 SCC 566
25
(2012) 7 SCC 171
26
(2017) 6 SCC 1
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                             Page 26 of 28
21.     The responsibility of the prosecution is to prove the case
beyond reasonable doubt, which, in our considered view, it has
failed to do in the present case. It appears that the entire
prosecution story has been concocted for reasons best known to
the prosecution. Under the present facts and on the weight of the
evidence placed before the Trial Court, we are of the considered
opinion that no definite conclusion could be drawn about the age
of the victim. The prosecution, therefore, has not successfully
proved that the victim was less than sixteen/eighteen years of age
at the time of the alleged commission of crime, and thus, the
benefit ought to have been given to the appellant. Secondly, as
to the factum of kidnapping, wrongful confinement and rape, we
are convinced that no such offence is made out as it does not meet
the essential ingredients as defined in
Sections 342
,
363
and
376
IPC. We do not find any evidence which may suggest that the
appellant kidnapped the victim from lawful guardianship or
confined her, for approximately two months, against her volition
in a house at Hyderabad or had sexual intercourse with the victim
against her will or without her consent.
22.     In that view of the matter, consequently, the conviction of
the Appellant-convict under Sections 376, 363, and 342 is set
aside, and, therefore, he is entitled to be acquitted of all charges.
The impugned judgment and order of the High Court referred to
in Para 2, is set aside. The appeal is accordingly allowed.
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                              Page 27 of 28
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
..................................J.
                                               (SANJAY KAROL)



                                            ...................................J.
                                             (SANDEEP MEHTA)

New Delhi;
July 16, 2025.
Crl.A. @ SLP(Crl.) 1445/2025                                    Page 28 of 28