[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Esakkimuthu vs State Represented By The Inspector Of ... on 22 July, 2025
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
2025 INSC 880                                                            REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO…..………….OF 2025
                               (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL) NO. 1693 of 2025)

             ESAKKIMUTHU                                               …APPELLANT
                                                     VERSUS
             STATE REPRESENTED BY
             THE INSPECTOR OF POLICE                                 …RESPONDENT

                                                     WITH


                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO…….………….OF 2025
                               (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL) NO. 3816 of 2025)

             PITCHU MANI @ PITCHAI MANI                                …APPELLANT
                                                     VERSUS
             STATE REPRESENTED BY
             THE INSPECTOR OF POLICE                                 …RESPONDENT

                                               JUDGMENT
VIKRAM NATH, J.
1.             Leave granted.
2.             The instant appeals have been preferred by the accused-
appellants against the judgment dated 10.09.2024 passed by
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2025.07.22
the Madras High Court in Crl. A (MD) No. 218 of 2020 wherein
   15:35:17 IST

                            the High Court dismissed the criminal appeal(s) preferred by
   Reason:
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1693 and 3816 of 2025                             Page 1 of 13
the appellants and confirmed the conviction and sentence
        imposed by the Trial Court in a matter involving
Sections 302
and
34
of the Indian Penal Code, 18601.
3.      The brief facts forming the basis of the current appeals are as
        elucidated below. The case at hand involves two accused
        persons – Pitchu Mani @ Pitchai Mani [Accused No. 1/A1] and
        Esakkimuthu [Accused No. 2/A2]. As per the prosecution
        story, PW-1, Moses Livingston, son of the deceased, Edison
        Suvisedha Muthu2 was a resident of South Omanallur village
        in Tirunelveli district and is the de-facto complainant in the
        matter. Both the accused persons are also the residents of the
        same     village.    The        deceased   used   to   know     one
        Balasubramnian, father of A1, and in July, 2011, the deceased
        was informed to the jurisdictional police by the said
        Balasubramanian. This had allegedly given rise to a feud
        between the two parties and led the deceased to attack
        Balasubramanian, who sustained injuries on his left hand due
        to the said attack. This ongoing enmity has precisely been
        ascribed to be the motive by the prosecution behind the
        murder of the deceased by the appellants, A1 being the son of
        Balasubramanian and A2 being a relative of A1.
4.      It is further stated by the family members of the deceased
        himself, who deposed as PW-1 (son of the deceased) and PW-
        2 Santhi (wife of the deceased) that the deceased was a
        habitual drunkard and had several cases registered against

1
IPC
2 “Deceased”, hereinafter.
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1693 and 3816 of 2025                            Page 2 of 13
him. In fact, the deceased was detained under the Tamil Nadu
     Goondas Act, 19823 and was released from prison merely two
     months prior to the incident at hand.
5.   It is the case of the prosecution that on the day of the incident,
     i.e. on 14.04.2013 at around 12 noon, A2 went over to the
     residence of the deceased and asked him to accompany him to
     a TASMAC shop for consuming alcohol. The deceased and A2
     left for the said purpose on A2’s motorcycle. PW-1 and PW-2
     were at home and knew about the deceased’s departure with
     A2. However, it is alleged that they grew suspicious of A2’s
     conduct and decided to reach the said TASMAC shop in order
     to bring back the deceased. It is essential to note that,
     thereafter, PW-1 and PW-2 claim to have left their residence
     on a bicycle, reach the said shop and, from the south-entrance
     of the shop, saw the deceased person sitting and drinking with
     A2. At that point in time, A2 is said to have administered a
     threat to the deceased, gave a signal towards the north
     entrance of the shop/bar calling out A1 and asking him to
     finish off the deceased, whereupon A1 appeared and started
     attacking the deceased indiscriminately with a weapon, by way
     of retaliation to the injuries caused to Balasubramaniam by
     the deceased, in the past. The said occurrence is described to
     take place at 12.30 p.m., having allegedly been witnessed by
     PW-1 and PW-2. The two accused persons escaped from the




3 “
Goondas Act
”, hereinafter.
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1693 and 3816 of 2025                        Page 3 of 13
crime spot and the deceased succumbed to the multiple
     injuries at the spot itself.
6.   The prosecution, thereby, charged A1 for the offence under
Section 302
IPC and A2 for the offence under Section 302 r/w
     34 of the
IPC
. The charge under
Section 120B
of IPC was also
     framed against the two accused persons. Charges read out
     which were denied by the appellants and they claimed trial.
7.   During the course of trial, in order to prove its case and
     establish the guilt of the accused persons, the prosecution
     examined PW-1 to PW-22, marked Ex-P1 to Ex-P24, and also
     produced material objects, MO-1 to MO-8. The accused
     persons did not examine any witness or produce any
     document in defence.
8.   The Trial Court, vide judgment dated 04.03.2020, convicted
     A1 for offence under
Section 302
of IPC and sentenced him to
     undergo life imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs. 5,000/-, in
     default of which to undergo two years’ simple imprisonment.
     Similarly, A2 was convicted for the offence under Section 302
     r/w 34 of
IPC
and sentenced to undergo life imprisonment and
     to pay a fine of Rs. 5,000/-, in default of which to undergo two
     years’ simple imprisonment. The accused persons were held
     not guilty of charges under
Section 120B
of the IPC as the
     same remained unproven.
9.   The basis of the conviction by the Trial Court was the eye-
witness accounts of PW-1 and PW-2, which were considered to
     be natural, consistent, credible and unblemished, even though
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1693 and 3816 of 2025                      Page 4 of 13
the other witnesses had turned hostile. The criminal complaint
     was considered to be proved owing to the “I know” signature
     of PW-3 Backiyaraj. It was also held that the motive for the
     crime has been sufficiently established by the prosecution.
     Further, it was held that even though there are some
     contradictions between the evidence of village administrative
     officers and the investigative officers about obtaining the
     confession        statements       from   the   accused,   the    said
     contradictions were considered to have no effect on the
     prosecution case. The motorcycle of A2, on which A2 and the
     deceased had travelled to the liquor shop, and an “aruval”, the
     alleged weapon of offence, were recovered at the instance of
     accused persons, based on their respective confessional
     statement.
10. Both the accused persons preferred an appeal before the High
     Court challenging their conviction as well as sentence.
11. The High Court, vide the impugned order, dismissed the
     appeals, upheld the judgment of the Trial Court and affirmed
     the appellants’ conviction and sentence.
12. The High Court, while ruling out any due importance to minor
     discrepancies in the depositions of PW-1 and PW-2, held that
     there are no material lapses in the evidence of PW-1 and PW-
2. Therefore, it was concluded that involvement of A1 and A2
     in the murder of the deceased person has been established
     beyond reasonable doubt.
13. Aggrieved by the impugned order, the appellants are before us.
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1693 and 3816 of 2025                            Page 5 of 13
14. We have heard Mr. S. Nagamuthu, learned senior counsel
     appearing for the appellants and Mr. V. Krishnamurthy,
     learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent-state. We
     have also thoroughly perused the material on record.
15. The counsel for the appellants has primarily submitted that it
     is highly improbable that the distance of 16 kilometers
     between the house of the deceased and the liquor shop was
     covered by PW-1 and PW-2 on a bicycle within 30 minutes.
     Further, it has been contended that the conduct of PW-1 and
     PW-2 also does not inspire confidence since there was no
     occasion for them to have followed the deceased, provided that
     they had themselves stated A2 to be a good friend of the
     deceased.
16. Additionally, there were further unnatural behaviors pointed
     out on the part of the key witnesses, especially the fact that
     they both travelled back the entire distance to their home after
     the incident and chose not to give any information about the
     crime to a police station which fell on their way back.
     Therefore, it was submitted that the presence of PW-1 and PW-
     2 is highly doubtful, and their eye-witness accounts should be
     discarded in light of such improbability.
17. It has also been submitted that the evidence of the interested
     witnesses should be subjected to careful scrutiny and
     accepted with caution, and hence, PW-1 and PW-2’s
     statements should not be relied on unless duly corroborated
     by other witnesses. Reliance has been placed on the case of
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1693 and 3816 of 2025                      Page 6 of 13
Hari Obula Reddy and others v. State of Andhra Pradesh4
for the above argument.
18. On the other hand, it has been submitted by the counsel for
     the    respondent        that      the   prosecution   has   successfully
     established a clear motive for A1 to commit the murder in light
     of the ongoing enmity between the two parties and their
     families. Further, it has been argued that the direct and
     consistent testimony of the eye-witnesses, PW-1 and PW-2,
     who are the son and wife of the deceased respectively, have
     been held to be credible by the Trial Court as well as the High
     Court, and should not be discarded solely on the ground of
     their relationship or the factum of them being interested
     witnesses.
19. It has also been contended that the medical evidence,
     particularly the post-mortem report, strongly corroborates the
     ocular testimony regarding the fact that the deceased was
     actually taken to the TASMAC shop in order to consume
     liquor, as stated by PW-1 and PW-2, and the nature of injuries
     as described by these witnesses in their testimonies.
20. Therefore, it was submitted that the cumulative evidence,
     consisting       of    motive,      consistent   eyewitness     accounts
     corroborated by medical findings, recovery of the weapon and
     the established sequence of events, paint a clear picture of the
     complicity of both A1 and A2 in the commission of the offence.
     A2’s role in luring the deceased to the location and signaling


4 (1981) 3 SCC 675
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1693 and 3816 of 2025                                Page 7 of 13
A1 is established, while A1’s role as the principal assailant is
     evident from the testimony and the nature of injuries.
21. Having noted that the verdict of conviction by the Trial Court
     as well as the High Court is heavily based on their reliance on
     the statements of PW-1 and PW-2, and the fact that most of
     the other independent witnesses have been declared hostile by
     the prosecution, we have given keen consideration to the
     depositions of the key prosecution witnesses, i.e. PW-1 and
     PW-2.
22. It is of first and foremost importance to note that it is a well-
settled       principle       that      when        the      witnesses        are
     related/interested, their testimonies have to be scrutinized
     with greater care and circumspection.5                       In the case of
Gangadhar Behera v. State of Orissa,6
this Court held that
     the testimony of such related witnesses should be analysed
     with caution for its credibility.
23. In the instant case, the two key witnesses are the son and wife
     of the deceased, who are very well-interested witnesses in the
     case. Therefore, their testimonies shall have to be treated with
     great caution, required to be met with a stricter standard of
     proof and deserve to be scrutinized in order to rule out any
     embellishment.
24. Thereafter, we must note that there is admittedly a distance of
     about 16 kilometers between their house in Omanallur village


5
Mohamed Jabbar Ali & Ors. v. State of Assam, Criminal Appeal No.
1105 of 2010
6 AIR 2002 SC 3633
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1693 and 3816 of 2025                                       Page 8 of 13
and the liquor shop in Ponnakudi. The same has been stated
     by PW-1 himself.
25. The Trial Court has brushed aside the particular argument of
     the appellant(s), about the unlikelihood of two main witnesses
     having covered this distance in half an hour by bicycle,
     pointing out that on the date of the incident, PW-l was a young
     boy of 17 years and that both PW-1 and PW-2 were anxious
     about      the     safety     of   the   deceased,   who   was   their
     father/husband. It was held that, therefore, there was every
     possibility of them reaching the TASMAC shop within the said
     time period.
26. In the like manner, the High Court agreed with the view taken
     by the Trial Court and observed that PW-l, a young boy aged
     17 years, and in an agitated state of mind to protect his father,
     could have cycled at quite a speed to reach Ponnankudi
     TASMAC shop in the given time. Further, the High Court went
     ahead to presume that since the actual route and pathway and
     course of pathway had not been given, it is probable that PW-
     1 could have taken an alternate route which may have been
     less than 16 kilometers.
27. Firstly, it seems absurd to presume that the distance was less
     than almost 16 kilometers when PW-1 has himself deposed
     and agreed about the said distance range. Further, in our
     considered opinion, the appellants have rightly raised the
     contention regarding the improbability of PW-1 and PW-2
     covering a distance of 16 kilometers in a matter of barely thirty
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1693 and 3816 of 2025                            Page 9 of 13
minutes on a single bicycle. Even after affording due
     consideration to factors like an anxious state of mind, it seems
     highly unlikely that a boy of 17 years of age would be able to
     cover such a long distance, that too with his middle-aged
     mother as a pillion rider. It is the prosecution’s own account
     that the deceased had left the house with A2 at around 12
     noon on a motorcycle, and that the incident took place at
     around 12.30 p.m. This leaves PW-1 and PW-2 with a bare
     period of thirty minutes to reach the place of occurrence,
     encounter the deceased over there and subsequently witness
     the horrific incident. It seems exceedingly improbable and
     raises huge doubts about the presence of PW-1 and PW-2 at
     the crime spot. Once their presence at the scene becomes
     immensely doubtful, it renders the entire prosecution story
     highly unbelievable and lacks any substantial evidence about
     the appellants’ involvement in the crime.
28. As per their own testimony, PW-1 and PW-2 while being at the
     spot and actively witnessing the entire crime, do not make any
     attempt to save the deceased person while he was allegedly
     being indiscriminately attacked by the accused persons. Even
     if this behavior, which was certainly unnatural on their part,
     is not weighed adversely against the factum of their presence,
     considering that different people react differently in moments
     of danger, and that PW-2 was naturally worried about the
     safety of her young son amidst the occurrence and, thereby,
     thought it best not to interfere. Yet, we are unable to
     circumscribe to the account of events which led to PW1 and
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1693 and 3816 of 2025                     Page 10 of 13
PW2’s presence at the place of occurrence, i.e. having peddled
     on a bicycle for 16 kilometers within less than thirty minutes.
     This brings forth an inherent improbability in the prosecution
     story which goes to the root of the case altogether and cannot
     be overlooked.
29. Additionally, it also remains highly questionable as to why,
     after the incident, the two eye-witnesses travelled back the
     entire distance of 16 kilometers to their house first and went
     to the police station only subsequently thereafter, despite
     there being a police station en route from the liquor shop to
     their home. No satisfactory answer to such glaring loopholes
     in the prosecution story has been provided by the star
     witnesses.
30. Therefore, it becomes clear that even though heavy reliance
     has been placed by the Courts below on the testimonies of PW-
     1 and PW-2 in this case to bring home the guilt of the accused
     persons, their presence at the place of crime in itself is highly
     contentious and cannot be said to be proven definitely.
31. This improbability gains even more prominence in light of the
     fact that no other alleged eyewitness has supported the
     prosecution’s case. These alleged eyewitnesses include PW-4
     and PW-5, who were customers in the TASMAC shop and PW-
     6, who was the manager, and have been declared hostile by
     the prosecution. These eyewitnesses, during their depositions,
     had stated that four or five persons came and attacked the
     deceased. The post-mortem report identifies 26 injuries on the
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1693 and 3816 of 2025                      Page 11 of 13
body of the deceased, which in the facts and circumstances of
     the case, are unlikely to be caused by a sole assailant and is
     more probable to be a result of an attack by a group of
     individuals. The fact that the deceased was a habitual
     drunkard and a convicted criminal under the
Goondas Act
makes it highly probable that the deceased had enmities with
     multiple people who may have assaulted him and caused his
     death.
32. The above probable explanations for the crime are being listed
     to infer that these possibilities cannot be ruled out, and that
     the case at hand is certainly not the one where it has been
     proven beyond the shadow of doubt that in all human
     probability, the act must have been done by the accused only.
     On the contrary, there remains an impressionable question
     mark about the presence of the accused persons at the spot of
     the crime itself.
33. From the above discussion, it cannot be said that the
     prosecution has discharged its burden of establishing the guilt
     of the accused persons beyond reasonable doubt. In such
     circumstances, the accused persons have to be declared
     innocent and there is no alternative to such a conclusion.
34. Accordingly, the appeals are allowed. The impugned judgment
     dated 10.09.2024 passed by the Madras High Court, as well
     as the Trial Court’s judgment dated 04.03.2020, are hereby,
     quashed and set aside. The appellants are acquitted of the
     charges alleged against them, and are accordingly ordered to
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1693 and 3816 of 2025                     Page 12 of 13
be released forthwith unless required in connection with any
     other case.
35. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
…………………………..J.
                                              (VIKRAM NATH)



                                           …………………………..J.
                                             (SANDEEP MEHTA)

New Delhi
July 22, 2025
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1693 and 3816 of 2025                     Page 13 of 13