[Cites
45
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Daivshala vs The Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd on 29 July, 2025
2025 INSC 904                                                          REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6986 OF 2015
                         (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 16573 OF 2012)



            DAIVSHALA & ORS.                                         APPELLANT (s)


                                                  VERSUS


            ORIENTAL INSURANCE
            COMPANY LTD. & ANR.                                     RESPONDENT(s)



                                             JUDGMENT
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.              Shahu Sampatrao Jadhavar was employed as a watchman in the

            Respondent no. 2-Sugar Factory. His duty hours were from early

            morning 3 am to 11 am. On 22nd April 2003, he left home on his

            Motorcycle to report for duty. However, unfortunately, he never
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEETU SACHDEVA
reached his place of work. When he was 5 kms away from the factory,
   Date: 2025.07.29
   16:46:21 IST
   Reason:
1
his motorcycle was involved in a fatal accident. He left a large family

behind. A widow, four children and his mother.
2.   In a claim filed under the Employees’
Compensation Act, 1923
(hereinafter the ‘
EC Act
’) the employer and the insurance company set

up the defence that the accident had not arisen out of or in the course

of his employment, since the accident occurred outside the precincts of

the factory. Overruling the same, the Commissioner for Workmen’s

Compensation and Civil Judge, Senior Division, Osmanabad awarded

a sum of Rs 3,26,140/- along with interest @ 12 per cent per annum

from 22.05.2003 to the family members. The Insurance Company was

directed to deposit the amount since there was a valid Insurance Policy.

The employer was asked to pay 50 per cent of the awarded amount as

penalty. The employer and the Insurance Company were directed to

pay the amount of penalty and the awarded compensation within one

month from the date of the order.
3.   Aggrieved, the Insurance Company filed First Appeal No.2015 of

2011 before the High Court of Judicature of Bombay, Bench at

Aurangabad. The High Court has reversed the findings of the
2
Commissioner and set aside the order holding that since the deceased

was on his way to his employment, the accident cannot be said to have

its origin in the employment. The aggrieved family members are in

appeal by way of special leave.
4.   The High Court, to support its conclusion, relied on the judgment

dated 11.09.1996 of this Court rendered in
Regional Director, E.S.I.

Corporation & Another vs. Francis De Costa and Another
, (1996) 6

SCC 1. The said judgment arose under the Employees’
State Insurance

Act, 1948
(hereinafter the ‘
ESI Act
’). However, the crucial phrase

employed in the operating Section of both the ESI Act and the EC Act,

were the same. The Employees’
Compensation Act, 1923
was

originally known as the
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923
.
5.   We have heard Mr. Atul Babasaheb Dakh, learned counsel for the

appellants and Ms. Amrreeta Swaarup, learned counsel for the

respondent No.1-Insurance Company. Respondent No.2 employer,

though served, has not entered appearance.
6.   Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that looking to the

nature of the work of the deceased, the peril which he faced was not

something personal rather it was incidental to his employment.
3
Learned counsel contended that there was causal connection between

the employment and the accident. Learned counsel relied on the theory

of notional extension to support his plea. Learned counsel submitted

that the
EC Act
is a beneficial legislation intended for the welfare of

the employees. Learned counsel submitted that after the order of the

trial Court, the Insurance Company had deposited the compensation

with interest and the appellants were permitted to withdraw the

principal amount. Learned counsel submitted that subsequent to the

judgment in
Francis De Costa
(supra), Section 51E has been

introduced in the
ESI Act
and, as such, the judgment in
Francis De

Costa
(supra) can no longer govern the situation.
7.   Learned counsel for the respondent No.1-Insurance Company

submitted that the accident cannot be said to have its origin in the

employment. Learned counsel contended that the employment cannot

commence until the employee has reached the place of work and what

happened before that could not be said to be in the course of

employment. Learned counsel strongly relied on the judgment in
Francis De Costa
(supra) and certain judgments relied upon in
the said

judgment
.
Learned counsel distinguished the judgment in
General
4
Manager, B.E.S.T. Undertaking, Bombay vs. Mrs. Agnes
, (1964) 3

SCR 930 = 1963 SCC OnLine SC 252 and submitted that in the said

case the employee was given the facility to travel back home in the bus

by the employer therein and, as such, the theory of notional extension

was applied. According to the learned counsel, the said theory can have

no application to the facts of the present case. According to the learned

counsel, the employee was engaged in “a purely personal matter while

commuting to or from work”.
8.   We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned

counsel for the parties and perused the records.

QUESTIONS FOR CONSIDERATION:
9.   The primary question that arises for consideration in this case is

whether the accident which caused the death of the deceased could be

said to have arisen out of and in the course of employment?
10. Certain incidental questions also arise which have been set out

later in the judgment.
5
STATUTORY PROVISIONS: -
11. Before we advert to the holding in
Francis De Costa
(Supra), it

will be useful to refer to the relevant statutory provisions in the
EC Act
as well as the
ESI Act
.
Section 3
of the EC Act reads as under: -
“3. Employer's liability for compensation.- (1) If personal
      injury is caused to a employee by accident arising out of and in
      the course of his employment, his employer shall be liable to pay
      compensation in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter:
Provided that the employer shall not be so liable ……….”
12. Section 46(1)(d) (which deals with ‘Benefits’) and
Section 2(8)
(which deals with ‘Employment Injury’) in the
ESI Act
, are set out

hereinbelow: -
“
Section 46
. Benefits
      (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the insured persons,
      their dependants or the persons hereinafter mentioned, as the
      case may be, shall be entitled to the following benefits, namely,-
(d) periodical payments to such dependents of an insured
      person who dies as a result of an employment injury
      sustained as an employee under this Act, as are entitled to
      compensation under this Act (hereinafter referred to as
      dependants' benefit);
Section 2(8)
"employment injury" means a personal injury to
      an employee caused by accident or an occupational disease
      arising out of and in the course of his employment, being an
      insurable employment, whether the accident occurs or the
6
occupational disease is contracted within or outside the
      territorial limits of India.”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
13. It will be noticed that both under the
EC Act
and under the
ESI

Act
the entitlement arises to the employee for recompense if the

accident arises out of and in the course of his employment.

HOLDING IN
FRANCIS DE COSTA
(SUPRA): -
14.
In
Francis De Costa
(Supra) the employee met with an accident

when he was on his way to the place of employment, at a distance of

1 km, from the place of work. This Court found against the employee

by holding as under: -
“5. …… Therefore, the employee, in order to succeed in this
      case, will have to prove that the injury he had suffered arose out
      of and was in the course of his employment. Both the conditions
      will have to be fulfilled before he could claim any benefit under
      the Act. It does not appear that the injury suffered by the
      employee in the instant case arose in any way out of his
      employment. The injury was sustained while the employee
      was on his way to the factory where he was employed. The
      accident took place one kilometre away from the place of
      employment. Unless it can be said that his employment
      began as soon as he set out for the factory from his home, it
      cannot be said that the injury was caused by an accident
      “arising out of … his employment”. A road accident may
      happen anywhere at any time. But such accident cannot be
7
said to have arisen out of employment, unless it can be shown
that the employee was doing something incidental to his
employment.
6. In our judgment, by using the words “arising out of … his
employment”, the legislature gave a restrictive meaning to
“employment injury”. The injury must be of such an extent as
can be attributed to an accident or an occupational disease
arising out of his employment. “Out of”, in this context, must
mean caused by employment. Of course, the phrase “out of” has
an exclusive meaning also. If a man is described to be out of his
employment, it means he is without a job. The other meaning of
the phrase “out of” is “influenced, inspired, or caused by: out of
pity; out of respect for him” (Webster's Comprehensive
Dictionary — International Edition — 1984). In the context of
Section 2(8)
, the words “out of” indicate that the injury must be
caused by an accident which had its origin in the employment.
A mere road accident, while an employee is on his way to his
place of employment cannot be said to have its origin in his
employment in the factory. The phrase “out of the employment”
was construed in the case of South Maitland Railways Pty.
Ltd. v. James
[67 CLR 496] where construing the phrase “out of
the employment”, Starke, J., held
“the words ‘out of’ require that the injury had its origin in the
employment”.
7. Unless an employee can establish that the injury was caused
or had its origin in the employment, he cannot succeed in a claim
based on
Section 2(8)
of the Act. The words “accident … arising
out of … his employment” indicate that any accident which
occurred while going to the place of employment or for the
purpose of employment, cannot be said to have arisen out of his
employment. There is no causal connection between the
accident and the employment.
8. The other words of limitation in sub-section (8) of
Section 2
are “in the course of his employment”. The dictionary meaning
of “in the course of” is “during (in the course of time, as time
goes by), while doing” (The Concise Oxford Dictionary, New
Seventh Edition). The dictionary meaning indicates that the
accident must take place within or during the period of
8
employment. If the employee's work-shift begins at 4.30
      p.m., any accident before that time will not be “in the course
      of his employment”. The journey to the factory may have
      been undertaken for working at the factory at 4.30 p.m. But
      this journey was certainly not in the course of employment.
      If ‘employment’ beings from the moment the employee sets
      out from his house for the factory, then even if the employee
      stumbles and falls down at the doorstep of his house, the
      accident will have to be treated as to have taken place in the
      course of his employment. This interpretation leads to
      absurdity and has to be avoided.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)

ENACTMENT OF SECTION 51E WITH EFFECT FROM

01.06.2010 IN THE ESI ACT: -
15.
If Francis De Costa
(Supra) is to be applied as it is, the appellants

will be out of Court. However, a very important statutory intervention

happened on 01.06.2010 in the
ESI Act
, wherein
Section 51E
was

introduced.
Section 51E
reads as under: -
"51E. Accidents happening while commuting to the place of
      work and vice versa. - An accident occurring to an employee
      while commuting from his residence to the place of employment
      for duty or from the place of employment to his residence after
      performing duty, shall be deemed to have arisen out of and in
      the course of employment if nexus between the circumstances,
      time and place in which the accident occurred and the
      employment is established."
9
THE FURTHER INCIDENTAL QUESTIONS THAT ARISE IN

THE CASE:
16.
Section 51E
clearly neutralised the holding in
Francis De Costa
(Supra) when it provided that an accident occurring to an employee

while commuting from his residence to the place of employment for

duty or from the place of employment to his residence after performing

duty, shall be deemed to have arisen out of and in the course of

employment. The only condition was that nexus between the

circumstances, the time and place in which the accident occurred and

the employment had to be established.
17. In considering the applicability of
Section 51E
of the ESI Act to

the case of appellant certain threshold questions need to be addressed:-
(i) Does
Section 51E
of the ESI Act have retrospective effect so as to

cover an accident that has taken place on 22.04.2003 when the Section

was enacted on 01.06.2010?
(ii) Assuming
Section 51E
of the ESI Act applies, would the said

interpretation enure to the benefit of the appellants whose claim arises

under the
EC Act
?
10
(iii) Lastly, assuming both the above questions are answered in favour

of the appellants are the ingredients of
Section 51E
attracted to the facts

of the present case?
BENEFICIAL NATURE OF THE ESI ACT 1948: -
18.
The ESI Act
was enacted to provide for certain benefits to

employees in case of sickness, maternity and employment injury as

well as for making provisions for certain other matters in relation

thereto.
Section 46
deals with the benefits that the insured persons, their

dependents and other persons mentioned in the Act are entitled to. This

Court in
Bombay Anand Bhavan Restaurant v. Deputy Director,

Employees’ State Insurance Corporation and Another
, (2009) 9 SCC

61, while rightly characterizing the
ESI Act
as a beneficial legislation

and a law intended to provide for social security, held as follows: -
“20.
The Employees' State Insurance Act
is a beneficial
       legislation. The main purpose of the enactment as the Preamble
       suggests, is to provide for certain benefits to employees of a
       factory in case of sickness, maternity and employment injury
       and to make provision for certain other matters in relation
       thereto.
The Employees' State Insurance Act
is a social
       security legislation and the canons of interpreting a social
       legislation are different from the canons of interpretation of
       taxation law. The courts must not countenance any subterfuge
       which would defeat the provisions of social legislation and the
11
courts must even, if necessary, strain the language of the Act in
       order to achieve the purpose which the legislature had in placing
       this legislation on the statute book.
The Act
, therefore, must
       receive a liberal construction so as to promote its objects.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
19. It was further held that the Act was intended to ameliorate various

risks and contingencies which the employees face while working in an

establishment or factory. This Court held that the Act was intended to

promote the general welfare of the workers and, as such, called for a

liberal interpretation: -
“21. This     Court     (sic The      High     Court),   in ESI
       Corpn. v. Jayalakshmi Cotton and Oil Products (P) Ltd. [1980
       Lab IC 1078 (A.P.)] has observed that the
ESI Act
is a social
       security legislation and was enacted to ameliorate the various
       risks and contingencies which the employees face while working
       in an establishment or factory. It is thus intended to promote
       the general welfare of the workers and, as such, is to be
       liberally interpreted.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
20. What is important to note is that the
ESI Act
applies to all

factories, including factories belonging to the Government and also to

establishments or class of establishments, industrial, commercial,

agricultural or otherwise notified in the official gazette under
Section
12
1(5)
of the Act. In fact, the principal difference between the ESI Act

and the EC Act is that while the
ESI Act
applied to the employees of

factories and notified establishments as mentioned above, the
EC Act
applied to employees under all other employers as defined.
21. The 62nd report of the Law Commission on the EC Act submitted

under the chairmanship of former Chief Justice of India, Justice P.B.

Gajendragadkar, in Para 1.11, rightly noticed the distinction as under:
“1.11. After the passing of the
Employees' State Insurance Act
,
       the area of application of the
Workmen's Compensation Act
has
       diminished, to a certain extent.
But the Employees' State
       Insurance Act
applies only to (i) factories, and (ii) notified
       establishments, and in the rest of the cases the
Workmen's
       Compensation Act
still holds the field.”


BENEFICIAL NATURE OF THE EC ACT: -
22.
The EC Act
was enacted to provide for the payment by certain

classes of employers to their employees of compensation for injury by

accident.
Section 3
, as set out earlier, provides that if personal injury is

caused to an employee by accident arising out of and in the course of

his employment, his employer shall be liable to pay compensation in

accordance with the provisions of the Act.
Section 4
sets out that where
13
death results from the injury an amount equal to 50 per cent of the

monthly wages of the deceased employee multiplied by the relevant

factor ought to be paid.
23.
The EC Act
is also a beneficial piece of legislation.
In 2016, this

Court in
Jaya Biswal & Others v. Branch Manager, IFFCO Tokio

General Insurance Company Limited & Another
, (2016) 11 SCC 201,

while holding that the
EC Act
was a social welfare legislation meant to

benefit the workers and their dependents and to give the employees a

sense of security held as under: -
“20.
The EC Act
is a welfare legislation enacted to secure
      compensation to the poor workmen who suffer from injuries
      at their place of work. This becomes clear from a perusal of the
      preamble of the Act which reads as under:
“
An Act
to provide for the payment by certain classes of
         employers to their workmen of compensation for injury by
         accident.”
         This further becomes clear from a perusal of the Statement of
         Objects and Reasons, which reads as under:
“… The growing complexity of industry in this country,
         with the increasing use of machinery and consequent
         danger to workmen, along with the comparative poverty of
         the workmen themselves, renders it advisable that they
         should be protected, as far as possible, from hardship
         arising from accidents.
An additional advantage of legislation of this type is that,
         by increasing the importance for the employer of adequate
14
safety devices, it reduces the number of accidents to
         workmen in a manner that cannot be achieved by official
         inspection. Further, the encouragement given to employers
         to provide adequate medical treatment for their workmen
         should mitigate the effects to such accidents as do
         occur. The benefits so conferred on the workman added to
         the increased sense of security which he will enjoy, should
         render industrial life more attractive and thus increase the
         available supply of labour. At the same time, a
         corresponding increase in the efficiency of the average
         workman may be expected.”
21. Thus, the EC Act is a social welfare legislation meant to
      benefit the workers and their dependants in case of death of
      workman due to accident caused during and in the course of
      employment should be construed as such.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
24. At this stage, it is important to notice one provision in the
ESI Act
which bars receiving or recovering compensation under any other law

if compensation has been received under the
ESI Act
, viz.
Section 53
,

which is extracted hereinbelow: -
“53. Bar against receiving or recovery of compensation or
      damages under any other law. -
An insured person or his dependants shall not be entitled to
      receive or recover, whether from the employer of the insured
      person or from any other person, any compensation or damages
      under the
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923
or any other law
      for the time being in force or otherwise, in respect of an
      employment injury sustained by the insured person as an
      employee under this Act.”
15
This is only set out to demonstrate how the ESI Act and the EC Act

operate in close tandem.
IS SECTION 51E OF THE ESI ACT CLARIFICATORY?
25. It is in this background that the question whether
Section 51E
,

enacted on 01.06.2010, will have retrospective application needs to be

decided. Thereafter, the further question of applying the said meaning

to the
EC Act
will have to be addressed. Unless we find that
Section

51E
is clarificatory and declaratory in character, the question of

applying it retrospectively will not arise. A declaratory Act is one

which is enacted to remove doubts existing as to common law or the

meaning or effect of any statute. Was
Section 51E
enacted to clarify

and set at rest any serious doubt that obtained earlier? It has been held

by this Court that an Act will be declaratory if it is intended to remove

doubts and if its object was to supply an obvious omission or to clear

up any ambiguity as to the meaning of a previously existing statute. In

such an event, this Court has held that the said statute being declaratory

and clarificatory in nature, it can be given retrospective effect.
16
26. In the classic work, Justice G.P. Singh’s Principles of Statutory

Interpretation (14th Edition), the following passage occurs to describe

what declaratory statutes are. It will be useful to extract the same:-
“(i) Declaratory statutes
             The presumption against retrospective operation is not
      applicable to declaratory statutes. As stated in CRAIES and
      approved by the Supreme Court: "For modern purposes a
      declaratory Act may be defined as an Act to remove doubts
      existing as to the common law, or the meaning or effect of
      any statute. Such Acts are usually held to be retrospective.
      The usual reason for passing a declaratory Act is to set aside
      what Parliament deems to have been a judicial error,
      whether in the statement of the common law or in the
      interpretation of statutes. Usually, if not invariably, such an
      Act contains a preamble, and also the word 'declared' as well as
      the word 'enacted'. " But the use of the words 'it is declared' is
      not conclusive that the Act is declaratory for these words may,
      at times, be used to introduce new rules of law and the Act in the
      latter case will only be amending the law and will not necessarily
      be retrospective. In determining, therefore, the nature of the Act,
      regard must be had to the substance rather than to the form. If a
      new Act is 'to explain' an earlier Act, it would be without object
      unless construed retrospective. An explanatory Act is
      generally passed to supply an obvious omission or to clear
      up doubts as to the meaning of the previous Act. It is well
      settled that if a statute is curative or merely declaratory of the
      previous law retrospective operation is generally intended. The
      language 'shall be deemed always to have meant' or 'shall be
      deemed never to have included' is declaratory, and is in plain
      terms retrospective. In the absence of clear words indicating that
      the amending Act is declaratory, it would not be so construed
      when the pre-amended provision was clear and unambiguous.
      An amending Act may be purely clarificatory to clear a meaning
      of a provision of the principal Act which was already implicit.
      A clarificatory amendment of this nature will have retrospective
17
effect and, therefore, if the principal Act was existing law when
      the constitution came into force, the amending Act also will be
      part of the existing law.”
27. The said passage has been quoted with approval in several

judgments of this Court, namely,
Commissioner of Income Tax,

Bombay and Others vs. Podar Cement Pvt. Ltd. and Others
, (
1997) 5

SCC 482 and State Bank of India vs. V.Ramakrishnan and Anr.
,

(2018) 17 SCC 394.
28. It has also been held in
Podar Cement Pvt. Ltd.
(supra) applying

the said interpretation as under:-
“54. From the circumstances narrated above and from the
     memorandum explaining the Finance Bill, 1987 (supra), it is
     crystal clear that the amendment was intended to supply an
     obvious omission or to clear up doubts as to the meaning of
     the word “owner” in
Section 22
of the Act. We do not think
     that in the light of the clear exposition of the position of a
     declaratory/clarificatory Act it is necessary to multiply the
     authorities on this point. We have, therefore, no hesitation to
     hold that the amendment introduced by the Finance Bill, 1988
     was declaratory/clarificatory in nature so far as it relates to
Section 27(iii)
, (iii-a) and (iii-b). Consequently, these
     provisions are retrospective in operation. If so, the view taken
     by the High Courts of Patna, Rajasthan and Calcutta, as noticed
     above, gets added support and consequently the contrary view
     taken by the Delhi, Bombay and Andhra Pradesh High Courts
     is not good law.
(Emphasis supplied)
18
29. Equally so, in
K. Govindan and Sons vs. CIT, Cochin
, (2001) 1

SCC 460 holding an explanation to sub-section (8) of
Section 139
of

the Income Tax Act introduced with effect from 01.04.1986 to be

applicable to Assessment Year 1984-85, this Court held as under:-
“22. The view taken by us that a first or initial assessment under
Section 147
of the Act is a “regular assessment” within the
     meaning of
Section 139(8)
of the Act, has been the position of
     law even before the explanation in Section 139(8) was added
     by amendment. In that view of the matter the explanation
     merely clarified the position taking it beyond the pale of doubt.
     Parliament thought it necessary to add the explanation with
     a view to remove the doubt raised in certain decisions of
     different High Courts in which a contrary view was taken.
     Thus the explanation is merely a clarificatory provision and has
     application to the period of assessment in the case i.e.
     Assessment Year 1984-85.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
30. It is now time to apply the said principle to the case at hand to

examine whether
Section 51E
is clarificatory in character or not. The

question whether any accident occurring while commuting from the

residence to the place of work and vice versa constituted an accident

arising out of and in the course of employment has vexed the Courts

for very long, resulting in diverse findings based on individual facts.
19
31. As early as in 1958, this Court had to grapple with the said issue

in
Saurashtra Salt Mfg. Co. v. Bai Valu Raja & Ors.
, 1958 SCC

OnLine SC 131.        This Court recognized the theory of notional

extension and set out the statement of law as under: -
“7. As a rule, the employment of a workman does not
       commence until he has reached the place of employment and
       does not continue when he has left the place of employment,
       the journey to and from the place of employment being
       excluded. It is now well-settled, however, that this is subject
       to the theory of notional extension of the employer's
       premises so as to include an area which the workman passes
       and repasses in going to and in leaving the actual place of
       work. There may be some reasonable extension in both time and
       place and a workman may be regarded as in the course of his
       employment even though he had not reached or had left his
       employer's premises. The facts and circumstances of each
       case will have to be examined very carefully in order to
       determine whether the accident arose out of and in the
       course of the employment of a workman, keeping in view at
       all times this theory of notional extension.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
Thereafter, on facts, it was held as under: -
“8.…..A workman is not in the course of his employment
       from the moment he leaves his home and is on his way to his
       work. He certainly is in the course of his employment if he
       reaches the place of work or a point or an area which comes
       within the theory of notional extension, outside of which the
       employer is not liable to pay compensation for any accident
       happening to him. In the present case, even if it be assumed that
       the theory of notional extension extends upto point D, the theory
       cannot be extended beyond it. The moment a workman left point
       B in a boat or left point A but had not yet reached point B, he
20
could not be said to be in the course of his employment and any
      accident happening to him on the journey between these two
      points could not be said to have arisen out of and in the course
      of his employment. Both the Commissioner for Workmen's
      Compensation and the High Court were in error in supposing
      that the deceased workmen in this case were still in the course
      of their employment when they were crossing the creek between
      points A and B. The accident which took place when the boat
      was almost at point A resulting in the death of so many workmen
      was unfortunate, but for that accident the appellant cannot be
      made liable.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
32. On facts, the claim for compensation was declined. What is

however, significant is that this Court recognized the theory of notional

extension which is to be applied to an area outside the precincts of the

office premises. However, it was left to be determined in each case as

to whether the area fell within the notional extension or not.
33. Jurists across the world were also grappling with this difficult

question. Lord Denning in his inimitable style in Regina V. National

Insurance Commissioner, Ex Parte Michael, (1977) 1 WLR 109

graphically described the scenario thus:-
“So we come back, once again, to those all too familiar words
      ‘arising out of and in the course of his employment’. They have
      been worth, to lawyers, a king's ransom. The reason is because,
      although so simple, they have to be applied to facts which vary
      infinitely. Quite often the primary facts are not in dispute; or
21
they are proved beyond question. But the inference from them is
      matter of law. And matters of law can be taken higher. In the old
      days they went up to the House of Lords. Nowadays they have
      to be determined, not by the courts, but by the hierarchy of
      tribunals set up under the National Insurance Acts.”
34. Thereafter, the learned Judge recognized that the phrase “in the

course of his employment” will include doing something which was

reasonably incidental to the employment, when he held as under in Ex

Parte Michael (supra).
“11. Construing the meaning of the phrase “in the course of his
      employment”, it was noted by Lord Denning that the meaning
      of the phrase had gradually been widened over the last 30
      years to include doing something which was reasonably
      incidental to the employee's employment. The test of
      “reasonably incidental” was applied in a large number of
      English decisions. But, Lord Denning pointed out that in all
      those cases the workman was at the premises where he or she
      worked and was injured while on a visit to the canteen or
      other place for a break. Lord Denning, however, cautioned
      that the words “reasonably incidental” should be read in
      that context and should be limited to the cases of that kind.
      Lord Denning observed:
“Take a case where a man is going to or from his place of
      work on his own bicycle, or in his own car. He might be said
      to be doing something ‘reasonably incidental’ to his
      employment. But, if he has an accident on the way, it is well
      settled that it does not ‘arise out of and in the course of his
      employment’. See Alderman v. Great Western Rly. Co. [(1937)
2 All ER 408 : 1937 AC 454] ; Netherton v. Coles [(1945) 1 All
      ER 227] . Even if his employer provides the transport, so that
      he is going to work as a passenger in his employer's vehicle
      (which is surely ‘reasonably incidental’ to his employment),
22
nevertheless, if he is injured in an accident, it does not arise
      out of and in the course of his employment:
see Vandyke v. Fender [(1970) 2 All ER 335, 340 : (1970) 2
      QB 292, 305] . It needed a special ‘deeming’ provision in a
      statute to make it ‘deemed’ to arise out of and in the course
      of his employment (see
Section 8
of the 1965 Act).”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
35. It will be noticed that, in the extract above, towards the end a

mention is made of special deeming provision which covered cases of

accidents happening while travelling in employer’s transport. This

scenario is very similar to
Section 51C
of the ESI Act which deals with

accidents happening while on employer’s transport, which was

introduced with effect from 28.01.1968.
36. However, before we discuss
Section 51C
of the ESI Act, we need

to discuss the judgment of this Court dated 10.05.1963 in
Agnes
(Supra).
In
Agnes
(Supra), one Nanu Raman a bus driver of the

appellant company therein after finishing his work boarded another bus

to go to his residence. That bus was involved in an accident resulting

in his death. Agnes - his widow sued for compensation under the
EC

Act
and contended that her husband died in an accident arising out of

and in the course of employment. This Court, while affirming the
23
judgment of the High Court, which granted compensation by a majority

held as under: -
“12. Under
s. 3 (1)
of the Act the injury must be caused to the
      workman by an accident arising out of and in the course of his
      employment. The ques-tion, when does an employment begin
      and when does it cease, depends upon the facts of each case.
      But the Courts have agreed that the employment does not
      necessarily end when the "down tool" signal is given or when
      the workman leaves the actual workshop where he is
      working. There is a notional extension of both the entry and
      exit by time and space. The scope of such extension must
      necessarily depend on the circumstances of a given case. An
      employment may end or may begin not only when the
      employee begins to work or leaves his tools but also when he
      uses the means of access and egress to and from the place of
      employment……
14. ……….As the free transport is provided in the interest of
      ser-vice, having regard to the long distance a driver has to
      traverse to go to the depot from his house and vice versa, the
      user of the said buses is a proved necessity giving rise to
      an implied obligation on his part to travel in the said buses as a
      part of his duty. He is not exercising the right as a member of the
      public, but only as one belonging to a service. The entire Greater
      Bombay is the field or area of the service and every bus is an
      integrated part of the service. The decisions relating to accidents
      occur-ring to an employee in a factory or in premises be-longing
      to the employer providing ingress or egress to the factory are not
      of much relevance to a case where an employee has to operate
      over a larger area in a bus which is in itself an integrated part of
      a fleet of buses operating in the entire area. Though the
      doctrine of reasonable or notional extension of employment
      developed in the context of specific workshops, factories or
      harbours, equally applies to such a bus service, the doctrine
      necessarily will have to be adapted to meet its peculiar
      requirements. While in a case of a factory, the premises of the
      employer which gives ingress or egress to the factory is a limited
      one, one, in the case of a city transport ser-vice, by analogy, the
24
entire fleet of buses forming the service would be the
      "premises". An illustration may make our point clear. Suppose,
      in view of the long distances to be covered by the employees,
      the Corporation, as a condition of service, provides a bus for
      collecting all the drivers from their houses so that they may reach
      their depots in time and to take them back after the day's work
      so that after the heavy work till about 7 p.m. they may reach their
      homes without further strain on their health. Can it be said that
      the said facility is not one given in the course of employment? It
      can even be said that it is the duty of the employees in the interest
      of the service to utilize the said bus both for coming to the depot
      and going back to their homes. If that be so, what difference
      would it make if the employer, instead of providing a
      separate bus, throws open his entire fleet of buses for giving
      the employees the said facility? They are given that facility
      not as members of the public but as employees; not as a grace
      but as of right because efficiency of the service demands it.
We would, therefore, hold that when a driver when going
      home from the depot or coming to the depot uses the bus,
      any accident that happens to him is an accident in the course
      of his employment.”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
37.
In
Mackinnon Mackenzie and Co. (P) Ltd. vs. Ibrahim

Mahmmed Issak
, (1969) 2 SCC 607, this Court dealing with the phrase

“arising out of and in the course of employment” held as under:-
“5. To come within the Act the injury by accident must arise both
     out of and in the course of employment. The words “in the course
     of the employment” mean “in the course of the work which the
     workman is employed to do and which is incidental to it.” The
     words “arising out of employment” are understood to mean that
     “during the course of the employment, injury has resulted from
     some risk incidental to the duties of the service, which, unless
     engaged in the duty owing to the master, it is reasonable to believe
25
the workman would not otherwise have suffered.” In other words
      there must be a causal relationship between the accident and the
      employment. The expression “arising out of employment” is
      again not confined to the mere nature of the employment. The
      expression applies to employment as such — to its nature, its
      conditions, its obligations and its incidents. If by reason of any
      of those factors the workman is brought within the zone of special
      danger the injury would be one which arises ‘out of employment’.
      To put it differently if the accident had occurred on account of a
      risk which is an incident of the employment, the claim for
      compensation must succeed, unless of course the workman has
      exposed himself to an added peril by his own imprudent act….”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
Here again, the court used the phrase to mean nature, condition,

obligation and incidents of employment. It will be noticed that this

Court in
Agnes
(supra) too, while applying the theory of notional

extension, adapted it in its application to the facts of the said case.
38.
Agnes
(supra) was delivered on 10.05.1963. By an amendment

with effect from 28.01.1968 (added by Act 44 of 1966),
Section 51C
was introduced in the
ESI Act
in the following terms:-
“51C. Accidents happening            while    travelling    in
     employer's transport.
(1) An accident happening while an employee is, with the
     express or implied permission of his employer, travelling as
     a passenger by any vehicle to or from his place of work shall,
     notwithstanding that he is under no obligation to his
     employer to travel by that vehicle, be deemed to arise out of
     and in the course of his employment, if
26
(a) the accident would have been deemed so to have arisen
     had he been under such obligation; and
(b) at the time of the accident, the vehicle
(i) is being operated by or on behalf of his employer or some
     other person by whom it is provided in pursuance of
     arrangements made with his employer, and
(ii) is not being operated in the ordinary course of public
     transport service.
(2) In this section Vehicle includes vessel and an aircraft.”
39. It will be noticed that a law which came to be
laid down in
Agnes
(supra) while interpreting the phrase “arising out of and in the course

of employment” in the
EC Act
was given effect by a statutory

recognition in the
ESI Act
. This is set out to demonstrate the cognate

nature of the EC Act and the ESI Act. Both the statutes seek to

ameliorate the conditions of workmen and provide them social security

benefits and improve their conditions of service.
40. The 62nd Report of the Law Commission of India on the EC Act

was submitted in October, 1974 under the Chairmanship of Chief

Justice (Retired) P.B. Gajendragadkar. As rightly set out in the Report,

the purpose of Workmen’s Compensation laws was to eliminate the

hardship experienced under the common law system by providing for
27
payment of benefits regardless of fault and with a minimum of legal

formality. Further, the Law Commission Report analyzed several

provisions of the
ESI Act
including
Section 51A
,
51B
,
51C
and
51D
.

In para 3.3 of the Report, while discussing
Section 51C
of the ESI Act,

the following crucial observations were made:-
“Having carefully considered all aspects of the matter, we are of
      the view that
Section 51C
of the ESI Act should be adopted with
      modification that it should not be necessary that the transport
      of provided by the employer if the workman is travelling
      directly to or from the place of employment.”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
41. These observations were made after exhaustive analysis of the

legal position prevailing in different jurisdictions on the issue of

accidents occurring outside the employer’s premises while the

workman is on his way to and from his work. The Law Commission

Report also discussed the International Labour Convention of 1964 for

compensation on way to work accidents.
42. The High Courts in India were also engaged with this issue about

the interpretation of the phrase “arising out of and in the course of

employment” with regard to accidents occurring while proceeding to
28
the place of work by the employee.
In Sadgunaben Amrutlal vs. ESI

Corporation, 1981 Lab 1C 1653 a judgment doubted by this Court in
Francis De Costa
(supra), the Division Bench of the Gujarat High

Court took the view that the theory of notional extension is an elastic

and flexible formula to be applied in a purposeful manner. The High

Court
in that case
extended the benefits to the dependents of the

employee even though the death occurred at a public bus stop while the

employee was boarding the bus to reach the workplace.
43. Earlier in
Bhagubai vs. Central Railway
, (1954) 2 LLJ 403 even

though the employee was proceeding to the workplace, since he was

proceeding through the premises belonging to the employer, where he

was stabbed the dependents were given the benefit.
This Court in
Francis De Costa
(supra) did not adversely comment on
the said

judgment
.
44. This parade of case law is only to highlight that there was

considerable doubt and ambiguity surrounding the phrase “accident

arising out of and in the course of employment” insofar as cases

concerning accident occurring to employees while proceeding to work
29
and vice versa, and different rulings had, depending on facts, interpreted

them differently. Even the theory of notional extension had its own

peculiarities. It was to clarify and put beyond doubt the meaning of the

phrase “accident arising out of and in the course of employment”

insofar as accidents occurring to employees while proceeding to the

workplace and vice versa that
Section 51E
was enacted in the
ESI Act
.

In view of that, we have no manner of doubt that the said amendment

is clarificatory in character and will have retrospective effect.

MEANING OF THE PHRASE “DEEMED TO HAVE” IN

SECTION 51E OF THE ESI ACT: -
45. There is one more aspect to be dealt with here. The words

“deemed to have” used in
Section 51E
is not in the context of legal

fiction. It is well settled that the expression “deemed” is sometimes

used to impose for the purpose of a statute an artificial construction for

a word or phrase that would not otherwise prevail. Very often, it is also

used to put beyond doubt a particular construction that might otherwise

be uncertain. Sometimes it is used to give a comprehensive description

that it includes what is obvious, what is uncertain and what is, in the
30
ordinary sense, impossible.       [See
Hira H. Advani vs. State of

Maharashtra
, (1969) 2 SCC 662]
46.
In
St. Aubyn vs. Attorney-General
, (1951) 2 All ER 473, Lord

Radcliffe felicitously explained the concept as under:-
“The word ‘deemed’ is used a great deal in modern legislation.
     Sometimes it is used to impose for the purposes of a statute an
     artificial construction of a word or phrase that would not
     otherwise prevail. Sometimes it is used to put beyond doubt a
     particular construction that might otherwise be uncertain.
     Sometimes it is used to give a comprehensive description that
     includes what is obvious, what is uncertain and what is, in the
     ordinary sense, impossible.”
      It is very clear that the word “deemed” in
Section 51E
is employed to

put beyond doubt a particular construction, that hitherto was uncertain.
STATUTES ‘IN PARI MATERIA’: -
47. The question further remains whether assuming
Section 51E
is

retrospective would the interpretation flowing out of 51E of the ESI

Act be imported into the
EC Act
to interpret the phrase “accident

arising out of and in the course of employment” to decide whether it

will include accidents happening to employees while commuting to the

place of work and vice versa. Before we answer the question, we would

make it absolutely clear that it is not our endeavour to import Section
31
51E of the ESI Act into the EC Act. All that we are examining here is

whether a meaning given to the phrase “arising out of and in the course

of employment” insofar as it dealt with accidents happening while

commuting to the place of work and vice versa in the
ESI Act
, could

be said to be the same for the phrase “accident arising out of and in the

course of employment” occurring in
Section 3
of the EC Act.
48. First of all, the operative phraseology occurring in
Section 3
of

the EC Act is the same as the one that it occurs in
Section 2(8)
of the

ESI Act which defines, ‘employment injury’. Secondly, as held by this

Court and as noticed hereinabove, both Acts are beneficial legislations

intended as social security measures to ameliorate the conditions of

employees.       As   rightly   noticed   by   Chief    Justice   (Retd.)

Ganjendragadkar in the 62nd Law Commission Report the only

difference between the two statutes was that while the
ESI Act
applied

to factories and notified establishments, the
EC Act
applied to other

employers, as defined. The case law, as noticed hereinabove, also

indicates how
Saurashtra Salt
(supra) and
Agnes
(supra) which were

under the
EC Act
was applied in
Francis De. Costa
(supra), a case

arising under the
ESI Act
.
Equally, the High Court of Gujarat in
32
Sadgunaben Amrutlal (supra) a case under the
ESI Act
, had discussed

the ratio in
Saurashtra Salt
(supra) which arose under the
EC Act
.
49. It is well settled that where statutes in pari materia serve a

common object in absence of any provision indicating to the contrary,

it is permissible for a court of law to ascertain the meaning of the

provision in the enactment by comparing its language with the other

enactment relating to the same subject matter.
50. In Justice G.P. Singh’s Principles of Statutory Interpretation (14th

Edition), dealing with statutes in pari materia, the following passage

finds mention:-
“Statutes in pari materia
           It has already been seen that a statute must be read as a
      whole as words are to be understood in their context. Extension
      of this rule of context permits reference to other statutes in
      pari materia, i.e. statutes dealing with the same subject-
      matter or forming part of the same system. VISCOUNT
      SIMONDS in a passage already noticed conceived it to be a
      right and duty to construe every word of a statute in its
      context and he used the word context in its widest sense
      including "other statutes in pari mate-ria". As stated by
      LORD MANSFIELD: "Where there are different statutes in
      pari materia though made at different times, or even
      expired, and not referring to each other, they shall be taken
      and construed together, as one system and as explanatory of
      each other.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
33
51.
In the
State of Madras vs. A. Vaidyanatha Iyer
, 1958 SCR 580,

this Court held as under:-
“… Therefore where it is proved that a gratification has been
     accepted, then the presumption shall at once arise under the
     section. It introduces an exception to the general rule as to the
     burden of proof in criminal cases and shifts the onus on to the
     accused. It may here be mentioned that the legislature has
     chosen to use the words ‘shall presume’ and not ‘may
     presume’ the former a presumption of law and latter of
     fact. Both these phrases have been defined in the
Indian
     Evidence Act
, no doubt for the purpose of that Act, but
s.4
of the Prevention of Corruption Act is in pari materia with
     the
Evidence Act
because it deals with a branch of law of
     evidence, e.g. presumptions, and therefore should have the
     same meaning….”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
52. In Craies on Legislation (9th Edition) dealing with statutes in pari

materia has the following observation in para 20.1.26.
“Statutes in pari materia
      Two Acts are said to be in pari materia if taking all their
      circumstances into account it is natural to construe them as if
      they formed part of a single code on a particular matter. Where
      this is found to be the case the result is that definitions in one
      may be applied to expressions found in another, and decided
      cases setting out principles of application to one will be
      applied to the other.
The fact that two statutes have the same titles may be
      indicative of their being in pari materia. As Bridge L.J. said in
      R. v Wheatley-
"Looking at the two statutes [the
Explosives Act
1875 and the
Explosive Substances Act
1883], at the nature of the
34
provisions which they both contain, and in particular at the
      short and long titles of both statutes, it appears to this court
      that clearly they are in pari materia, and that conclusion alone
      would seem to us to be sufficient to justify the conclusion
      which the judge reached that the definition of the word
      'explosive' found in the 1875 Act is available to be adopted
      and applied under the provisions of the 1883 Act."
53.
In
State of Assam and Another vs. Deva Prasad Barua &

Another
, (1969) 1 S.C.R. 698, this Court while construing
Section 19
of the Assam Agricultural Income-tax Act, 1939 gave it the

construction given to
Section 22
of the Indian Income-tax Act and held

as under:-
“… Moreover
s.19
is in pari materia with
s.22
of the Income-
      tax Act and the law which has been
laid down by
this Court,
      while interpreting the provisions of that section, must govern
      the construction of the provisions of
s.19
as well.”
54. In AG vs. Prince Ernest Augustus of Hanover, Lord Viscount

Simonds observed as follows:-
“For words, and particularly general words, cannot be read in
     isolation: their colour and content are derived from their context.
     So it is that I conceive it to be my right and duty to examine every
     word of a statute in its context, and I use “context” in its widest
     sense, which I have already indicated as including not only other
     enacting provisions of the same statute, but its preamble, the
     existing state of the law, other statutes in pari materia, and the
     mischief which I can, by those and other legitimate means,
     discern the statute was intended to remedy.”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
35
55. Applying the above principle, we interpret the phrase “accident

arising out of and in the course of his employment” occurring in
Section

3
of the EC Act to include accident occurring to an employee while

commuting from his residence to the place of employment for duty or

from the place of employment to his residence after performing duty,

provided the nexus between the circumstances, time and place in which

the accident occurred and the employment is established.
56. The following undisputed facts emerge in this case: -
a) The deceased – Shahu Sampatrao Jadhavar was employed with

     the respondent No.2-Sugar factory;
b) He was employed as watchman and his duty hours on 22.04.2003

     was 3 AM to 11 AM.
c) It is undisputed that he was proceeding to his workplace when the

     accident occurred at place which was 5 kms (approx.) from the

     workplace while the employee was proceeding towards the

     workplace.
In view of the above, considering that the deceased was a night

watchman and was dutifully proceeding to his workplace to be well on
36
time, there was a clear nexus between the circumstances, time and place

in which the accident occurred and his employment as watchman. The

accident having clearly arisen out of and in the course of employment,

the Commissioner for Workmen’s Compensation and Civil Judge,

Senior Division, Osmanabad was justified in ordering the claim under

the
EC Act
by his judgment of 26.06.2009.
57. The appeal is allowed and the judgment of the High Court of

Judicature at Bombay, Bench at Aurangabad dated 01.12.2011 in First

Appeal No. 2015 of 2011 is set aside and the judgment of the

Commissioner for Workmen’s Compensation and Civil Judge, Senior

Division, Osmanabad in Workmen’s Compensation Application No. 28

of 2005 dated 26.06.2009 is restored. No order as to costs.
……….........................J.
                                        [MANOJ MISRA]


                                        .……….........................J.
                                        [K. V. VISWANATHAN]
New Delhi;
28th July, 2025
37