[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Manjusha vs United India Assurance Company Ltd on 25 July, 2025
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
2025 INSC 896


                                                                       Non-Reportable

                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                           Civil Appeal No……………. of 2025
                                       (@Special Leave Petition (C) No.5885 of 2019)


                                  MANJUSHA & ORS.
                                                                       ...APPELLANTS
                                                             VERSUS
                                  UNITED INDIA ASSURANCE
                                  COMPANY LIMITED & ANR.
                                                                      …RESPONDENTS

                                                          JUDGEMENT
K. VINOD CHANDRAN, J.
1.        Leave granted.
2.        The question arising in this appeal is as to
                                  whether the family of the brother of the owner of the
                                  vehicle, who died in the accident when the tyre of the
                                  car he was driving burst, is entitled to claim
                                  compensation under the Motor Vehicles Act, 19881. It
                                  is trite that the insurer has no statutory liability to
                                  cover the risk of the owner, or as in this case the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
babita pandey
Date: 2025.07.25
17:02:18 IST
Reason:                  1 For brevity ‘the
MV Act
’
Page 1 of 11
CA @SLP (C) No.5885 of 2019
driver of the vehicle, who steps into the shoes of the
     owner, when the statutory liability is restricted to
     third party liabilities.
3.       In the present case the claimants, who are the
     widow, minor children and the parents of the
     deceased, approached the Tribunal, which granted
     an amount of Rs.25,82,000/- based on the income of
     the deceased and the amounts, incurred for
     transportation, loss of consortium as also travelling
     and funeral expenses. The insurance company filed
     an appeal essentially on the ground that there was
     negligence on the part of the driver, thus absolving
     the insurer from the liability to indemnify, since the
     driver, who steps into the shoes of the owner, is the
     tortfeasor. The High Court looked into the policy and
     found no case for imposing a statutory liability but
     found the comprehensive policy with additional
     premium, to cover only a liability to the extent of
     Rs.2,00,000/- as against any injury/death caused to
     the owner/driver. The High Court reduced the
     liability to Rs.2,00,000/-.
4.       Mr. Amit Kumar Singh, learned Counsel for the
     respondent-insurance company relied on a number
     of decisions to substantiate the claim of the insurance
Page 2 of 11
CA @SLP (C) No.5885 of 2019
company before the Tribunal. It was also argued that
     the guidelines of the insurance company clearly
     indicates the limited liability insofar as the policy
     taken by the insurer, the owner of the vehicle.
     Learned Counsel for the claimants/respondent,
     however, contended that such a ground was never
     taken before the Tribunal or before the High Court. It
     was also contended that the guidelines were never
     produced in evidence nor was any witness examined
     on the part of the insurance company. The claimant
     had mounted the box, but no cross-examination was
     addressed upon the contentions now raised.
5.       On facts, suffice it to notice that the deceased
     and the owner along with their families were
     travelling in the car when the right rear tyre burst,
     resulting in the car going out of control. The vehicle
     toppled and the driver of the vehicle suffered head
     injury, to which he succumbed. There is hence no
     negligence of the driver nor can any fault be
     attributed to him. The owner of the vehicle, the
     brother of the deceased, his wife and the wife of the
     deceased who were travelling in the car sustained
     injuries. It was categorically stated before the
     Tribunal that the car was driven safely, in moderate
Page 3 of 11
CA @SLP (C) No.5885 of 2019
speed with due diligence and caution and the
     accident occurred only on account of the tyre
     bursting. On the claim being raised, the owner of the
     vehicle admitted the accident and asserted that the
     driver had a valid driving licence to claim coverage
     under the comprehensive insurance policy.
6.       The insurance company filed a written
     statement alleging no valid licence for the driver,
     resulting in breach of the conditions of policy by the
     owner and the negligence of the driver. The Tribunal
     framed five issues, the first of which was regarding
     the accident which was admitted to have taken place,
     in which the driver met his end, which was the second
     issue; not in dispute. The insurance cover, the third
     issue was also proved and so was the fourth issue
     regarding the age of the deceased and his income.
     The claimant's right to entitlement for compensation
     and interest was also found in favour. Insofar as the
     third issue regarding the insurance of the vehicle, the
     Tribunal found that the vehicle was covered by a
     comprehensive policy wherein premium of personal
     accident to owner-cum-driver was paid. The High
     Court on the other hand, found on a reading of the
     policy that the additional premium remitted, only
Page 4 of 11
CA @SLP (C) No.5885 of 2019
covered the liability to the owner-cum-driver to the
      extent of Rs.2,00,000/-.
7.       Immediately we have to notice that the
      insurance policy is not produced in the records of the
      S.L.P, though, it is said to have been marked before
      the Tribunal as Ex. P56. Nor is the written statement
      of the insurance company produced in the records of
      the S.L.P. to establish that such a contention
      regarding limited liability was taken before the
      Tribunal; which from the reading of the award of the
      Tribunal does not seem to have been taken.
8.       We will first look at the decisions placed on
      record by the learned Counsel appearing for the
      insurance company.
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v.
      Rajni Devi
2 arose from a claim on the death of a
      person riding a motorcycle, along with another. The
      insurance company resisted the claim contending
      that although the owner of the vehicle deposited an
      extra amount of Rs.50 covering his personal
      insurance, the same would not cover the case of the
      pillion rider and in any event, the owner        of the
      vehicle is not a third party within the meaning of


2 (2008) 5 SCC 736
Page 5 of 11
CA @SLP (C) No.5885 of 2019
Section 147
of the Act. The claim was under
Section
      163A
of the MV Act wherein was discussed a number
      of cases regarding the precise liability arising under
      a no fault liability claim filed under the said provision.
In
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Jhuma Saha3
, the
      owner of the vehicle himself was to be blamed for the
      accident, in which event it was held; under
Section
      166
of the MV Act, the insured itself cannot be
      fastened with any liability giving rise to no question
      of the insurer indemnifying the insured.
Dhanraj v.
      New India Assurance Co. Ltd. & Anr.
4 found that
Section 147
of the MV Act does not require an
      insurance company to assume risk for death or bodily
      injury to the owner of the vehicle. The comprehensive
      policy taken therein assured a premium of Rs.4,989/-
      having been paid under own damage; which was
      found to cover only the liability arising from damage
      caused to the vehicle and non-electrical accessories
      and not the injury caused to the owner itself. It was
      observed that an owner of the vehicle can raise a
      claim validly, if there is a personal accident insurance
      taken out; which was not available in the said case.
In



3 (
2007) 9 SCC 263
4 (2004) 8 SCC 553
Page 6 of 11
CA @SLP (C) No.5885 of 2019
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Laxmi Narain Dhut5
,
      the own damage claim was held to be possible of
      adjudication only by a forum under the
Consumer
      Protection      Act
,    wherein   the   cause   could      be
      adjudicated by the insured, the owner of the vehicle,
      against the insurer, without the junction of the
      claimants.
9.
Ramkhiladi v United India Insurance Co.
6 ,
Ningamma v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd.7
and
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Sadanand Mukhi8
were all cases under
Section 163A
of the MV Act, in
      which it was held that a borrower of a vehicle, who
      was driving, cannot raise a claim under no fault
      liability, since the driver of the vehicle steps into the
      shoes of the owner. In Ramkhiladi6, the accident was
      caused by the collision of two motor bikes, and the
      claim was raised by the family of the deceased
      against the owner and insurance company of the bike
      which was driven by the deceased.
10.      These are all cases with respect to the statutory
      liability, and we have to emphasise the personal


5 (2007) 3 SCC 700
6 (2020) 2 SCC 550
7 (2009) 13 SCC 710
8 (2009) 2 SCC 417
Page 7 of 11
CA @SLP (C) No.5885 of 2019
accident insurance cover, highlighted in one of the
     above cited decisions, which is relevant here. What
     assumes significance in the present case is that it is
     not the statutory liability, but the contractual liability
     of a personal accident cover which forms the basis of
     the claim raised. Admittedly, there was a personal
     accident cover taken. The question is only as to
     whether the liability was limited or not. As we
     noticed, neither the insurance policy is before us nor
     do we see a contention of limited liability having
     been taken, from the order of the Tribunal which
     notices the contentions taken in the written statement.
     The written statement as we observed has not been
     produced in the records of the case. However, we
     have the benefit of the memorandum of appeal filed
     before the High Court by the insurance company
     which is produced as Annexure P2. We do not see any
     such ground of a limited liability having been taken.
     The grounds taken from 1-8 are all with respect to the
     negligence of the driver and absence of a valid and
     effective driving licence. There is also a ground taken
     regarding the monthly income determination which
     obviously was not pressed before the High Court. The
     ground regarding absence of a valid licence was also
     not pressed.
Page 8 of 11
CA @SLP (C) No.5885 of 2019
11.      When the contention of limited liability was
     neither taken before the Tribunal nor even in the
     memorandum of appeal filed, there was no reason for
     the High Court to look into the policy document to
     find limited liability; which again is urged before us
     on the basis of an extract of the Indian Motor Tariffs,
     termed to be a guideline issued, with respect to
     insurance policies, by the Tariff Advisory Committee.
     By the guidelines it is intended that a comprehensive
     regulatory framework governing the structure,
     terms, conditions and premium rates applicable to
     Motor Vehicle policies in India is created. It is stated
     that the IMT is binding on all general insurance
     companies, operating in the Country and ensures
     uniformity and fairness in underwriting motor
     insurance risk. No doubt, the guidelines issued by the
     Tariff Advisory Committee regulates the issuance of
     the policies by the insurers but unless it is specified
     in the insurance policy, it cannot bind the insured.
12.      Specific reference was also made to IMT 16
     which has the nominal heading ‘personal accident to
     unnamed passengers other than insured and paid
     driver and the cleaner’, which is stated to be limited
     to the amounts specified therein. Under IMT 16, there
Page 9 of 11
CA @SLP (C) No.5885 of 2019
is a tabular form which enables 100% compensation
     with respect to various injuries inter alia of death. It is
     in the proviso that there is a limit provided with
     specification that the Capital Sum Insured (CSI) per
     person is to be inserted. Whether such sum was
     inserted in the policy and whether such a contention
     was taken before the Tribunal is most relevant in the
     adjudication of the instant case.
13.      In   this       context,   we   cannot     but    notice
     Ramkhiladi6, in which there was a contention taken
     by the claimant that the deceased was employed by
     the owner of the vehicle, the motor bike. It was held
     in paragraph 9.3 that no evidence was led by the
     claimants to prove that the deceased driver was an
     employee of the owner. Pleadings and proof of such
     pleadings; by valid evidence led, is the crux and core
     of any adjudicatory process. Trite is the principle that
     there can be no proof offered without specific
     pleadings. The limited liability was not pleaded, by
     the insurance company, either before the Tribunal, as
     we see from the award made, nor in the appeal filed
     before the High Court as we see from the
     memorandum of appeal filed before the High Court.
Page 10 of 11
CA @SLP (C) No.5885 of 2019
14.      We find absolutely no reason to sustain the
     High Court order, which we set aside. We restore the
     order of the Tribunal and direct the amounts awarded
     to be paid within a period of two months from today
     with interest @ 8% per annum as ordered by the
     Tribunal and whatever amounts have already been
     paid shall be deducted. The appellant shall provide
     the bank account details to the Insurance Company
     who shall transfer the amount online within the period
     specified hereinabove.
15.      The appeal stands allowed as above.
16.      Pending applications, if any, shall stand
     disposed of.
………….……………………. J.
(SUDHANSHU DHULIA)




                              ………….……………………. J.
(K. VINOD CHANDRAN)

     NEW DELHI;
JULY 25, 2025
Page 11 of 11
CA @SLP (C) No.5885 of 2019