[Cites
28
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Hyatt International Southwest Aisa Ltd vs Additional Director Of Income Tax on 24 July, 2025
1


 2025 INSC 891                                                      REPORTABLE

                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9766 OF 2025
                              (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 5710 of 2024)

          HYATT INTERNATIONAL
          SOUTHWEST ASIA LTD.                                     ...APPELLANT(S)

                                              VERSUS

          ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR OF
          INCOME TAX                                             ...RESPONDENT(S)

                                             WITH

                               CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9767 OF 2025
                           (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 20019 of 2025)
                         (Arising out of SLP(C) Diary No. 14972 of 2024)

                                             WITH
                              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9768 OF 2025
                           (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 10152 of 2024)

                                             WITH

                              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9769 OF 2025
                           (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 10157 of 2024)
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
CHANDRESH
                                             WITH
Date: 2025.07.24
17:47:51 IST
Reason:


                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9770 OF 2025
                           (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 10798 of 2024)
                                                                                2


                                           WITH

                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9771 OF 2025
                          (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 10800 of 2024)

                                            WITH
                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9772 OF 2025
                          (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 10796 of 2024)

                                           WITH

                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9773 OF 2025
                          (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 10797 of 2024)




                                        JUDGMENT
R. MAHADEVAN, J.
Leave granted.
2.        All these appeals arise out of the common judgment and order dated

22.12.2023 passed by the High Court of Delhi1 in the Income Tax Appeals preferred

by the appellant / assessee, in respect of the Assessment Years 2009-10, 2010-11,

2011-12, 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15, 2016-17 and 2017-18. The details of the

impugned orders before this Court, before the High Court and before the Income
1
For short, “the High Court”
3
Tax Appellate Tribunal, along with the corresponding tax effect involved in each

case, are tabulated below:
Case No.       High Court            ITAT              AO         Tax effect
                                                                       evolved
 SLP (C) No.    ITA No.216/2020 579/Del/2013      21.11.2012       85,14,156/-
 5710 of 2024   Order      dated Order      dated AY 2009-10
                22.12.2023       04.12.2019

 SLP (C) No. ITA No.219/2020 1762/Del/2015     28.01.2015          2,98,96,262/-
 10152    of Order      dated Order      dated AY 2011-12
 2024        22.12.2023       04.12.2019

 SLP (C) No.    ITA No.217/2020    957/Del/2016       18.12.2015   2,85,75,313/-
 10157    of    Order      dated   Order      dated   AY 2012-13
 2024           22.12.2023         04.12.2019
 SLP (C) No.    ITA No.201/2023    6363/Del/2019      19.06.2019   4,05,14,966/-
 10796    of    Order      dated   Order      dated   AY 2016-17
 2024           22.12.2023         20.12.2022

 SLP (C) No. ITA No.215/2023 712/Del/2021      13.04.2021          4,05,14,966/-
 10797    of Order      dated Order      dated AY 2017-18
 2024        22.12.2023       20.12.2022

 SLP (C) No. ITA No.140/2021 727/Del/2017      24.11.2016          2,91,07,664/-
 10798    of Order      dated Order      dated AY 2013-14
 2024        22.12.2023       12.03.2021

 SLP (C) No. ITA No.36/2022   6179/Del/2017    28.07.2017          3,05,12,883/-
 10800    of Order      dated Order      dated AY 2014-15
 2024        22.12.2023       27.07.2021

 SLP      (C) ITA No.218/2020 779/Del/2014      28.11.2013         2,98,96,262/-
 Diary    No. Order      dated Order      dated AY 2010-11
 14972     of 22.12.2023       04.12.2019
2024
4
3.     The necessary facts leading to the filing of the present appeals, as culled out

from the impugned orders, are as follows:
3.1.   The appellant is a company incorporated under the Companies Law, Dubai

International Financial Centre Law No.3 of 2006, in the United Arab Emirates2. It is

a tax resident of the UAE under
Article 4
of the Agreement between the Government

of India and the UAE for the avoidance of Double Taxation3.
3.2.   On 04.09.2008, the appellant entered into two Strategic Oversight Services

Agreements4 with Asian Hotels Limited5, India – one for AHL, Delhi and another

for AHL, Mumbai. Under the SOSA, the appellant agreed to provide strategic

planning services and “know-how” to ensure that the hotel was developed and

operated as an efficient and a high-quality international full-service hotel.
Subsequently, AHL underwent reorganization and its name was changed to Asian

Hotels (North) Limited, which continued to own the hotel. On 18.07.2010, the SOSA

was partially amended.
3.3.   For the Assessment Year 2009-10, the appellant filed its return of income

declaring ‘Nil’ income and claiming a refund of Rs.87,99,091/-. After scrutiny, the

Assessing Officer issued a notice dated 20.08.2010 under Section 142(1) read with
2
For short, “UAE”
3
For short, “DTAA”
4
For short, “SOSA”
5
For short, “AHL”
5
Section 143(3) of the Income Tax Act, 19616. In response, the appellant submitted a

reply dated 25.08.2011, asserting that its income was not taxable under the Act as

there was no specific Article under the DTAA for taxing Fees for Technical Services.

It further stated that it did not have any fixed place of business, office, or branch in

India, and that the presence of its employees in India during the relevant previous

year did not exceed the nine-month threshold under
Article 5(2)
of the DTAA.

Therefore, the appellant claimed that it did not have a Permanent Establishment (PE)

in India and that its business income was not taxable under
Article 7
of the DTAA.

3.4.         On 28.12.2011, the Assessing Officer passed a draft assessment order under

Section 143(3) read with Section 144C of the Act, holding inter alia that the

appellant’s activities constituted
(i)       a business connection under Section 9(1)(i) of the Act;
(ii)      a PE under
Article 5
of the DTAA;

      (iii)     royalties and fees for technical services under Section 9(1)(vi)/(vii) of the
                Act; and
      (iv)      royalties under
Article 12
of the DTAA.
3.5.         The appellant filed its objections dated 22.01.2012 before the Dispute

Resolution Panel (DRP), which rejected the objections and upheld the Assessing

Officer’s findings. Consequently, the Assessing Officer passed a final assessment
6
For short, “the Act”
6
order dated 21.11.2012, for the assessment year 2009-10. Similar assessment orders

were passed for the Assessment Years 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13.

3.6.     Challenging the above assessment orders, the appellant filed four appeals

before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (ITAT). By a common order dated

04.12.2019, the ITAT rejected the appellant’s contention that it did not have a PE in

India and dismissed the appeals.
In doing so, the ITAT relied on the decision of this

Court in
Formula One World Championship Limited v. Commissioner of Income

Tax, International Taxation-3, Delhi & Anr.7
and held that the appellant had a fixed

place of business in India, thereby constituting a PE under
Article 5(1)
of the DTAA.

Aggrieved by the said order, the appellant filed further appeals under Section 260A

of the Act before the High Court.
3.7.     In the meanwhile, the Assessing Officer passed a similar assessment order

dated 24.11.2016 for the Assessment Year 2013-14, which the appellant challenged

by filing ITA No.727/Del/2017 before the ITAT. By order dated 12.03.2021, the

ITAT dismissed the appeal, following its earlier order dated 04.12.2019. Aggrieved,

the appellant preferred ITA No.140 of 2021 before the High Court.

3.8.     Similarly, the appellant challenged the assessment orders for the Assessment

Years 2014-15, 2016-17, and 2017-18 by filing appeals before the ITAT. By
7
(2017) 15 SCC 602
7
separate orders dated 27.07.2021 and 20.12.2022, the ITAT dismissed the appeals

again, following its earlier order dated 04.12.2019. Aggrieved by these orders, the

appellant filed ITA Nos.36 of 2022, 201 of 2023, and 215 of 2023 before the High

Court.
3.9.     The High Court heard all eight appeals together and framed the following

substantial questions of law for consideration:
(i)Whether the Tribunal misdirected itself both in law and on facts in holding that
         service charges received by the appellant under the various SOSA agreement were
         taxable as royalty?
(ii)Whether the appellant has Permanent Establishment in India within the meaning
         of the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement?
(iii)Whether the findings recorded by the Tribunal, in paragraphs 56, 57 and 59 are
         perverse and contrary to the terms of the Strategic Oversight Services Agreement
         (SOSA)?
(iv)Is
article 7(1)
of the DTAA at all applicable to the appellant, having regard to
         the fact that it has incurred losses in the relevant financial years?
3.10. By a common judgment and order dated 22.12.2023, the High Court answered

the first question in favour of the appellant / assessee, and referred the fourth

question to a larger Bench. However, it answered questions (ii) and (iii) against the

appellant holding that the appellant, being a company incorporated in Dubai and a

tax resident of the UAE, had a Permanent Establishment (PE) in India in the form of

a fixed place of business. Aggrieved by this part of the High Court’s judgment, the

appellant has preferred the present appeals.
8
4.       Challenging the findings of the High Court regarding the existence of a

Permanent Establishment (PE) in the form of a fixed place of business in India under

the Indo-UAE DTAA, the learned Senior Counsel for the appellant / assessee

vehemently contended that the appellant is a Dubai based company engaged in

rendering hotel consultancy and advisory services from Dubai to hotels in the Hyatt

Group of Hotels, including several located in India. These services are rendered

under a SOSA entered into with each hotel owner individually. The SOSA explicitly

stipulates that the appellant shall render its services from Dubai and is not obligated

to send or station any employee in India. However, the agreement permits at the

appellant’s sole discretion, occasional and temporary visits by its employees to

India.
4.1.     It was further submitted that the income of the appellant is not taxable in India

under the provisions of the Act, as there is no specific Article in the DTAA enabling

taxation of Fees for Technical Services (FTS). Furthermore, the appellant does not

maintain a fixed place of business, office, or branch in India. The limited and

occasional presence of its employees in India, did not exceed the threshold of nine

months under
Article 5(2)(i)
of the DTAA, thereby excluding the existence of a PE.

4.2.     The learned Senior Counsel argued that the High Court erroneously

disregarded the two essential conditions
laid down in
Formula One
(supra) and
9
Assistant Director of Income Tax-1, New Delhi vs. M/s. E-Funds IT Solutions

Inc..8, which are essential for the existence of a fixed place of business PE viz.,
(a) There must be a specific, fixed, and identifiable physical location in India; and
(b) Such location must be at the disposal of the foreign enterprise for use in

         carrying out its own business activities.
4.3.     It was further submitted that there was no designated space or office at the

hotel premises in Delhi or Mumbai that was either specifically reserved for or placed

at the disposal of the appellant. The appellant exercised no control or dominion over

any part of the premises. Mere involvement in policy decisions or enforcement of

brand standards does not amount to a fixed place of business PE. Ownership and

operational control of the hotel remained entirely with the Indian entity, as

reaffirmed by
Article 1
, Section 3 of the SOSA.
4.4.     The learned Senior Counsel further contended that the role of the appellant

under the SOSA, was limited to strategic guidance, brand compliance, and long-term

planning. The day-to-day operations of the hotel were carried out by Hyatt India Pvt.

Ltd, under a separate Hotel Operating Services Agreement (HOSA) entered into with

the hotel owner. The appellant had no involvement in such daily management.

However, the High Court erred in conflating the two separate legal agreements – the
8
(2018) 13 SCC 294
10
SOSA entered into by the appellant and the HOSA entered into by Hyatt India Pvt.

Ltd. – and mistakenly attributed the day-to-day control of hotel operations to the

appellant. According to the learned Senior Counsel, Hyatt India Pvt. Ltd. is a distinct

legal entity, taxable independently under Indian law, and its operational activities

cannot be attributed to the appellant for the purpose of determining PE under the

DTAA.
4.5.   It was also submitted that the High Court laid undue emphasis on the fact that

six employees of the appellant visited India and stayed at the hotel premises during

the relevant years. These visits, however, were brief and routine in nature and the

same executives visited other Hyatt hotels across India including those in Goa,

Bengaluru, Kochi, and Chennai. These oversight visits were intended to ensure

brand uniformity and quality compliance. The short duration spread across multiple

locations, and lack of exclusive use or control over any space do not satisfy the legal

requirement of a fixed place of business PE. Furthermore, the Department failed to

produce documentary evidence to establish that any such designated space was ever

placed at the disposal of the appellant.
4.6.   It was submitted that the High Court incorrectly inferred that the absence of

an express prohibition in the SOSA on decision-making by appellant’s employees

during their stay at the hotel implies a right of disposal. In law, a fixed place of

business PE cannot be presumed from the mere absence of a restriction; there must
11
be an affirmative grant of a right to use a specific physical location to carry on the

enterprise’s own business.
4.7.   Ultimately, the learned senior counsel submitted that the High Court’s

findings are legally untenable and factually erroneous. The essential legal

requirements for the constitution of a fixed place of business PE were not satisfied

in the present case.
4.8.   Accordingly, it was prayed that the findings of the High Court regarding the

existence of a fixed place of business PE be set aside and a declaration be made to

the effect that the appellant does not have a PE in India under
Article 5
of the Indo-

UAE DTAA, and that its income is not taxable in India under
Article 7
of the said

DTAA.
5.     Per contra, the learned Additional Solicitor General of India appearing for the

respondents submitted that on 04.09.2008, the appellant entered into SOSA with

AHL, an Indian company and the owner of the Hyatt Regency Delhi, for providing

oversight services in relation to the hotel for a period of 20 years. Under the SOSA,

they had more than mere access to the hotel premises – the premises were at the

appellant’s full and unconditional disposal.
5.1.   According to the learned Senior Counsel, the appellant’s business was carried

on through the employees stationed at the hotel, thereby satisfying the criteria of a
12
fixed place of business Permanent Establishment (PE) under
Article 5
of the Indo-

UAE DTAA.
5.2.   It was further submitted that
Article 5(1)
of the DTAA defines a PE as a “fixed

place of business through which the business of an enterprise is wholly or partly

carried on”. This definition is echoed in Section 92F(iii-a) of the
Income Tax Act,

1961
.
Article 7(1)
of the DTAA provides that profits of an enterprise are taxable

only in the State of residence unless the enterprise carries on business through a PE

in the other State. If a PE exists, then the profits attributable to the PE are taxable in

the source country.
5.3.   Referring to the various Clauses of the SOSA, it was submitted that the

appellant’s role extended beyond high-level policy formulation and into the domain

of actual implementation. The appellant was involved in the appointment and

training of staff, monitoring daily operations, exercising financial oversight, and

influencing procurement and operational decisions – all of which demonstrate

managerial and functional control, particularly through the General Manager, who

reported to the appellant.
5.4.   The learned Senior Counsel pointed out the documentary evidence mentioned

in the impugned orders, which include records of names, roles, and durations of stay

of the appellant’s employees posted at the hotel. Some individuals remained in India

for up to nine months and were involved in substantive hotel operations, clearly
13
indicating operational presence in line with the terms of the SOSA. In view of the

same, it was submitted that the appellant had full and effective control over the hotel

premises and that the premises were indeed at its disposal for conducting its

business. Therefore, the hotel satisfies the definition of a fixed place of business PE

under
Article 5(1)
of the DTAA. Consequently, in terms of
Article 7(1)
of the

DTAA, the profits attributable to such PE are liable to be taxed in India and the

appellant be taxed in India on the income derived from such activities.

5.5.   To substantiate his contention, the learned Senior Counsel placed reliance on

the decision of this Court in
Formula One
(supra). In that case, the assessee (FOWC)

incorporated in the UK, entered into a Race Promotion Contract (RPC) with Jaypee

Sports International Ltd. to host the Formula One Grand Prix in India. The Court

had to determine whether Jaypee constituted a fixed place PE of FOWC in India

under the terms of the RPC. The Court held in paragraphs 74 and 76.5 of the

judgment that for a fixed place PE to exist, two conditions must be met: (a) there

must be a fixed place of business, and (b) through that place, the business of the

enterprise must be wholly or partly carried on. Although FOWC’s claimed, it only

had access to the race circuit for three days a year, the Court noted that the contract

term extended to five years (renewable to ten), and FOWC had full control during

the race period. Therefore, the premises were held to constitute a PE. The Court also

referred to the OECD Commentary [paragraph 40(c) and 40(d)] to clarify that the
14
duration of access is not determinative in itself – the right of disposal and conduct

of business through the premises are the core tests. It further emphasized three key

features of a PE: stability, productivity, and dependence.

5.6.   Applying these principles to the present case, the learned Senior Counsel

contended that the appellant – Hyatt International Southwest Asia Ltd – has entered

into a long-term agreement (20 years) under which it enjoys broad and continued

control over the hotel’s key functions, including staffing, operations, strategic

policy, and financial oversight. This arrangement reflects the three core

characteristics of a PE: stability (20-year term), productivity (fee linked to business

outcomes), and dependence (reliance on hotel infrastructure and staff to carry out its

business).
5.7.   It was further submitted that the decision in E-Funds (supra), is factually

distinguishable and therefore, not applicable to the present case.

5.8.
In view of the foregoing submissions, particularly the principles laid down in
Formula One
(supra), the learned Senior Counsel submitted that the appellant’s

operation satisfies all conditions for the existence of a fixed place of business PE

under
Article 5(1)
of the Indo-UAE DTAA. The appellant’s plea of lacking day

to-day control is untenable given the pervasive control and continuous nature of its

involvement.
15
5.9.    Accordingly, it was submitted that the hotel premises constitutes a fixed place

of business of the appellant in India, and in terms of
Article 7(1)
of the DTAA, the

profits attributable to such PE are liable to tax in India. Therefore, the present appeals

are liable to be dismissed.
6.      We have heard the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant and the

learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the respondents and also perused

the materials available on record.
7.      On 16.05.2024, when these matters were taken up for consideration, this Court

passed the following interim order:
“We have heard learned senior counsel for the petitioner and learned Additional
       Solicitor General for the respondent-department.
It is stated at the Bar that the tax demand has been fully met by the petitioners
       (under protest). However, the apprehension is with regard to the initiation of penalty
       proceedings pending consideration of the matter before this Court.
It was submitted that the petitioner has a good case on merits and therefore,
       initiation of penalty proceedings and the demand made thereon would ultimately be
       prejudicial to the petitioner herein.
Per contra, learned Additional Solicitor General submitted that having regard
       to the fact that three authorities, including the High Court, having held against the
       petitioner herein on the basis of the judgments of this Court, there is no reason as to
       why the penalty proceedings should be stayed or frustrated at this stage.
However, we find that since notices have been issued in these matters pending
       consideration of these special leave petitions and bearing in mind the fact that the tax
       demand has been made by the petitioners herein, the penalty proceedings shall remain
       stayed till the next date of hearing.
List the matters on 23.09.2024.”
16
7.1.   On 23.09.2024, the aforesaid interim order was directed to be continued until

further orders of this Court.
8.     It is not in dispute that the appellant is a company incorporated in Dubai, and

is a tax resident of the UAE within the meaning of
Article 4
of the Agreement

between the Government of India and the UAE for the Avoidance of Double

Taxation. The appellant is engaged in rendering consultancy services in the hotel

sector. It entered into two SOSAs both dated 04.09.2008 with ASL, India – one in

respect of the Delhi hotel and the other, for the Mumbai hotel. For the relevant

assessment years, the Assessing Officer passed assessment orders taxing the hotel

related services rendered by the appellant, inter alia, on the ground that the appellant

has a Permanent Establishment (PE) in India in the form of a place of business under
Article 5(1)
of the DTAA. These findings were affirmed by the ITAT.
9.     As noted earlier, the High Court, at the time of final hearing of the appeals,

framed four substantial questions of law, whereby it answered three of them, and

referred the fourth question to a Larger Bench. Aggrieved by the finding of the High

Court that the appellant has a Permanent Establishment in the form of a place of

business in India as contemplated under
Article 5(1)
of the DTAA, the present

appeals have been filed before this Court.
17
10.   The principal issue that arises for determination herein is whether the

appellant – Hyatt International Southwest Asia Ltd., a tax resident of the UAE, has

a Permanent Establishment (PE) in India under
Article 5(1)
of the Indo – UAE

Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement (DTAA), and consequently, whether its

income derived under the Strategic Oversight Services Agreement (SOSA) is taxable

in India.
11.   At the outset, it is necessary to analyse the relevant clauses of the DTAA and

the SOSA for effective adjudication. The concept of ‘Permanent Establishment’ is

well defined under
Article 5
of the DTAA, and similar provisions are found in

international models such as the UN Model Double Taxation Convention (2021) and

the OECD Model Tax Convention (2017). These model conventions provide an

inclusive yet exhaustive definitions of PE, with the precise scope depending upon

the terms of the bilateral DTAA.
Article 5(1)
of the India – UAE DTAA defines a

PE as “a fixed place of business through which the business of an enterprise is wholly

or partly carried on”. This is consistent with the definition provided in
Section

92F
(iii-a) of the
Income Tax Act, 1961
. For better appreciation,
Article 5
of the India

– UAE DTAA is extracted below:
18
“PERMANENT ESTABLISHMENT
1. For the purposes of this Agreement, the term "permanent establishment" means a
fixed place of business through which the business of an enterprise is wholly or partly
carried on.
2. The term "permanent establishment" includes especially:
(a) a place of management ;
(b) a branch;
(c) an office;
(d) a factory;
(e) a workshop;
(f) a mine, an oil or gas well, a quarry or any other place of extraction of
natural resources;
(g) a farm or plantation;
(h) a building site or construction or assembly project or supervisory activities
in connection therewith, but only where such site, project or activity continues
for a period of more than 9 months;
(i) the furnishing of services including consultancy services by an enterprise
of a Contracting State through employees or other personnel in the other
Contracting State, provided that such activities continue for the same project
or connected project for a period or periods aggregating more than 9 months
within any twelve-month period.
3. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this Article, the term "permanent
establishment" shall be deemed not to include:
(a) the use of facilities solely for the purpose of storage, display or delivery of
goods or merchandise belonging to the enterprise;
(b) the maintenance of a stock of goods or merchandise belonging to the
enterprise solely for the purpose of storage, display or delivery;
(c) the maintenance of a stock of goods or merchandise belonging to the
enterprise solely for the purpose of processing by another enterprise;
(d) the maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for the purpose of
purchasing goods or merchandise, or of collecting information, for the
enterprise;
(e) the maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for the purpose of
carrying on, for the enterprise, any other activity of a preparatory or auxiliary
character.
19
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (1) and (3), where a person - other
      than an agent of independent status to whom paragraph (5) applies - is acting on
      behalf of an enterprise and has, and habitually exercises in a Contracting State an
      authority to conclude contracts on behalf of the enterprise, that enterprise shall be
      deemed to have a permanent establishment in that State in respect of any activities
      which that person undertakes for the enterprise, unless the activities of such person
      are limited to the purchase of goods or merchandise for the enterprise.
5.An enterprise of a Contracting State shall not be deemed to have a permanent
      establishment in the other Contracting State merely because it carries on business in
      that other State through a broker, general commission agent or any other agent of
      an independent status, provided that such persons are acting in the ordinary course
      of their business. However, when the activities of such an agent are devoted wholly
      or almost wholly on behalf of that enterprise, he will not be considered an agent of
      independent status within the meaning of this paragraph.”




11.1.
Article 7
of the DTAA governs the taxation of business profits.
Article 7(1)
provides that the profit of an enterprise shall be taxable only in the State of its

residence, unless the enterprise carries on business in the other Contracting State

through a permanent establishment (PE) situated therein. In such a case, only so

much of the profits as is attributable to that PE may be taxed in the other State. The

provision reads as follows:
“Article 7 - Business profits

      (1) The profits of an enterprise of a Contracting State shall be taxable only in that
      State unless the enterprise carries on business in the other Contracting State through
      a permanent establishment situated therein. If the enterprise carries on business as
      aforesaid, the profits of the enterprise may be taxed in the other State but only so
      much of them as is attributable to that permanent establishment.”
20
12.   Insofar as the SOSA is concerned, the relevant clauses have already been

extracted by the High Court in the impugned order; hence, we do not consider it

necessary to reproduce them here once again. However, for contextual clarity, it may

be noted that
Section 4
of Article I of the SOSA deals with the ‘title to the hotel’. It

provides that if the hotel owner desires to obtain financial assistance for the

construction or refinancing of the hotel – or if the hotel is to be used as collateral for

any borrowing unrelated to the hotel business – the owner is required to obtain a

non-disturbance and attornment agreement from the lender, which must be

acceptable to the assessee. This provision ensures that the assessee can perform its

obligation under the SOSA and realise its fees without interference but also.

12.1. Article II of the SOSA pertains to operating terms. As per
Sections 1
and
2
of

Article II, the SOSA is to remain in force for a term of twenty years from the

effective date, with a possibility of extension by ten years through mutual agreement.


12.2. Article III governs the operation of the hotel.
Section 1
stipulates that the hotel

shall be operated in accordance with standards comparable to those prevailing in

international hotels operated by Hyatt International and its subsidiaries. The assessee

is responsible for providing strategic plans, policies, procedures, and guidelines to

ensure adherence to the ‘Hyatt Operating Standards’. There is also an obligation to

use reasonable efforts to avoid conflicts between Hyatt branded hotels and the

subject hotel. Under
Section 2
, the assessee is vested with complete control and
21
discretion in formulating and establishing the strategic plan for all aspects of hotel

operations, including branding, marketing, product development, and daily

operations.
Section 3
further empowers the assessee to assign employees (either its

own or its affiliates) to India without needing prior approval from the hotel owner

or management. The assessee is also responsible for formulating policies relating to

human resources, procurement, guest admittance, use of premises, pricing, sales and

marketing, and reservations.
Section 4
authorizes the assessee to formulate policies

governing the hotel’s operating bank accounts.
Section 7
authorizes the assessee to

identify, recruit and assist in appointing non-local hotel employees – including the

General Manager, key personnel, and members of the Executive Committee – on

behalf of the hotel owner. The assessee is further required to align the hotel’s human

resource policies with Hyatt Operating Standards. It may also temporarily assign its

own employees to serve as full-time executive staff at the hotel.

12.3.
Section 1(a)
and
1(b)
of Articles V of the SOSA sets out the assessee’s

entitlement to “Strategic Fees” for the services provided. The consideration is not a

fixed fee; instead, it is calculated as a percentage of room revenue and other revenues

and income – whether directly or indirectly derived from the hotel’s operations – as

well as cumulative gross operating profit. This remuneration structure clearly

reflects an active commercial involvement, linking the assessee’s income to the

financial and operational performance of the hotel.
22
12.4. From the contractual provisions detailed above, it is evident that the

appellant’s role was not confined to mere policy formulation. On the contrary, the

SOSA conferred upon the appellant a continuing and enforceable right to implement

its policies and ensure compliance in all operational aspects of the hotel. The degree

of control and supervision exercised by the appellant clearly transcends a mere

advisory capacity and aligns with the criteria for a Fixed Place Permanent

Establishment (PE) under
Article 5(1)
of the India – UAE DTAA.
13.   The question of what constitutes a “place of business” under
Article 5(1)
of

the DTAA is no longer res integra.
In
Formula One
(supra), this Court

unequivocally held that for a Permanent Establishment (PE) to exist, two essential

conditions must be satisfied: (i)the place must be “at the disposal” of the enterprise,

and (ii)the business of the enterprise must be carried on through that place. The
Court

further held
that a PE must demonstrate the three core attributes of: stability,

productivity, and a degree of independence. Among these, the “disposal test” is

pivotal, meaning thereby the enterprise must have a right to use the premises in such

a way that enables it to carry on its business activities. This test is to be applied

contextually, taking into account the commercial and operational realities of the

arrangement. The relevant paragraphs from the judgment are extracted below for

better appreciation:
23
“29. Philip Baker explains that the concept of PE is important for several articles of
the Conventions; the concept, or its cognate, also appears in the domestic law of
some countries. According to him, the concept marks the dividing line for businesses
between merely trading with a country and trading in that country; if an enterprise
has a PE, its presence in a country is sufficiently substantial that it is trading in
the country. He has quoted the following passage from the judgment of the Andhra
Pradesh High Court, authored by Justice (Retd.) Jagannadha Rao (as his Lordship
then was, later Judge of this Court) in
CIT v. Visakhapatnam Port
Trust [CIT
v. Visakhapatnam Port Trust, 1983 SCC OnLine AP 287: (1983) 144 ITR
146]: (SCC OnLine AP para 54)
    “54. … the words “permanent establishment” postulate the existence of a
    substantial element of an enduring or permanent nature of a foreign
    enterprise in another country which can be attributed to a fixed place of
    business in that country. It should be of such a nature that it would amount
    to a virtual projection of the foreign enterprise of one country into the soil
    of another country.”
30. Emphasising that as a creature of international tax law, the concept of PE has a
particularly strong claim to a uniform international meaning, Philip Baker discerns
two types of PEs contemplated under
Article 5
of OECD Model. First, an
establishment which is part of the same enterprise under common ownership and
control—an office, branch, etc., to which he gives his own description as an
“associated permanent establishment”. The second type is an agent, though legally
separate from the enterprise, nevertheless who is dependent on the enterprise to the
point of forming a PE. Such PE is given the nomenclature of “unassociated
permanent establishment” by Baker. He, however, pointed out that there is a
possibility of a third type of PE i.e. a construction or installation site may be
regarded as PE under certain circumstances. In the first type of PE i.e. associated
permanent establishments, primary requirement is that there must be a fixed place
of business through which the business of an enterprise is wholly or partly carried
on. It entails two requirements which need to be fulfilled: (a) there must be a
business of an enterprise of a contracting State (FOWC in the instant case); and
(b) PE must be a fixed place of business i.e. a place which is at the disposal of the
enterprise. It is universally accepted that for ascertaining whether there is a fixed
place or not, PE must have three characteristics: stability, productivity and
dependence. Further, fixed place of business connotes existence of a physical
location which is at the disposal of the enterprise through which the business is
carried on.
……..
24
33. The principal test, in order to ascertain as to whether an establishment has a
fixed place of business or not, is that such physically located premises have to be
“at the disposal” of the enterprise. For this purpose, it is not necessary that the
premises are owned or even rented by the enterprise. It will be sufficient if the
premises are put at the disposal of the enterprise. However, merely giving access to
such a place to the enterprise for the purposes of the project would not suffice. The
place would be treated as “at the disposal” of the enterprise when the enterprise has
right to use the said place and has control thereupon.
34.2. In a case generally referred to as Hotel Manager [Bundesfinanzhof, 3-2-1993,
IR 80-81/91, IStR 1993, p. 226, (1993) BStBl, II, 462], the Bundesfinanzhof held that
a UK hotel management company had a PE in Germany when it entered into a 20
year contract with a limited partnership which owned a hotel. The agreement
required the UK company to supply a general manager: the general manager's
office constituted the PE (and not the entire hotel) since the UK company had a
secured right to use this office for the purposes of the agreement.
….
35. According to Philip Baker, the aforesaid illustrations confirm that the fixed
place of business need not be owned or leased by the foreign enterprise, provided
that it is at the disposal of the enterprise in the sense of having some right to use
the premises for the purposes of its business and not solely for the purposes of the
project undertaken on behalf of the owner of the premises.
36. Interpreting the OECD
Article 5
pertaining to PE, Klaus Vogel has remarked
that insofar as the term “business” is concerned, it is broad, vague and of little
relevance for the PE definition. According to him, the crucial element is the term
“place”. Importance of the term “place” is explained by him in the following
manner:
“In conjunction with the attribute “fixed”, the requirement of a place reflects
     the strong link between the land and the taxing powers of the State. This
     territorial link serves as the basis not only for the distributive rules which are
     tied to the existence of PE but also for a considerable number of other
     distributive rules and, above all, for the assignment of a person to either
     contracting State on the basis of residence (
Article 1
, read in conjunction with
Article 4
OECD and UN MC).”
37. We would also like to extract below the definition to the expression “place” by
Vogel, which is as under:
25
“A place is a certain amount of space within the soil or on the soil. This
     understanding of place as a three-dimensional zone rather than a single point
     on the earth can be derived from the French version (installation fixe) as well
     as the term “establishment”. As a rule, this zone is based on a certain area
     in, on, or above the surface of the earth. Rooms or technical equipment above
     the soil may qualify as a PE only if they are fixed on the soil. This
     requirement, however, stems from the term “fixed” rather than the term
     “place”, given that a place (or space) does not necessarily consist of a piece
     of land. On the contrary, the term “establishment” makes clear that it is not
     the soil as such which is the PE but that the PE is constituted by a tangible
     facility as distinct from the soil. This is particularly evident from the French
     version of
Article 5(1)
OECD MC which uses the term “installation” instead
     of “place”.
The term “place” is used to define the term “establishment”. Therefore, “place”
includes all tangible assets used for carrying on the business, but one such tangible
asset can be sufficient. The characterization of such assets under private law as real
property rather than personal property (in common law countries) or immovable
rather than movable property (in civil law countries) is not authoritative. It is rather
the context (including, above all, the terms “fixed”/“fixe”), as well as the object and
purpose of
Article 5
OECD and UN MC itself, in the light of which the term “place”
needs to be interpreted. This approach, which follows from the general rules on
treaty interpretation, gives a certain leeway for including movable property in the
understanding of “place” and, therefore, assume a PE once such property has been
“fixed” to the soil.
For example, a work bench in a caravan, restaurants on permanently anchored river
boats, steady oil rigs, or a transformator or generator on board a former railway
wagon qualify as places (and may also be “fixed”).
In contrast, purely intangible property cannot qualify in any case. In particular,
rights such as participations in a corporation, claims, bundles of claims (like bank
accounts), any other type of intangible property (patents, software, trademarks,
etc.) or intangible economic assets (a regular clientele or the goodwill of an
enterprise) do not in themselves constitute a PE. They can only form part of PE
constituted otherwise. Likewise, an internet website (being a combination of
software and other electronic data) does not constitute tangible property and,
therefore, does not constitute a PE.
Neither does the mere incorporation of a company in a contracting State in itself
constitute a PE of the company in that State. Where a company has its seat,
26
according to its bye-laws and/or registration, in State A while the POEM is situated
in State B, this company will usually be liable to tax on the basis of its worldwide
income in both contracting States under their respective domestic tax law. Under
the A-B treaty, however, the company will be regarded as a resident of State B only
[
Article 4(3)
OECD and UN MC]. In the absence of both actual facilities and a
dependent agent in State A, income of this company will be taxable only in
State B under the 1st sentence of
Article 7(1)
OECD and UN MC.
There is no minimum size of the piece of land. Where the qualifying business
activities consist (in full or in part) of human activities by the taxpayer, his employees
or representatives, the mere space needed for the physical presence of these
individuals is not sufficient (if it were sufficient,
Article 5(5)
OECD MC and
Article
5(5)(a)
UN MC and the notion of agent PEs were superfluous). This can be
illustrated by the example of a salesman who regularly visits a major customer to
take orders, and conducts meetings in the purchasing director's office. The OECD
MC Comm. has convincingly denied the existence of a PE, based on the implicit
understanding that the relevant geographical unit is not just the chair where the
salesman sits, but the entire office of the customer, and the office is not at the disposal
of the enterprise for which the salesman is working.”
38. Taking cue from the word “through” in the article, Vogel has also emphasised
that the place of business qualifies only if the place is “at the disposal” of the
enterprise. According to him, the enterprise will not be able to use the place of
business as an instrument for carrying on its business unless it controls the place
of business to a considerable extent. He hastens to add that there are no absolute
standards for the modalities and intensity of control. Rather, the standards depend
on the type of business activity at issue. According to him, “disposal” is the power
(or a certain fraction thereof) to use the place of business directly. Some of the
instances given by Vogel in this behalf, of relative standards of control, are as under:
“The degree of control depends on the type of business activity that the taxpayer
carries on. It is therefore not necessary that the taxpayer is able to exclude others
from entering or using the POB.
The painter example in the OECD MC Comm. (No. 4.5 OECD MC Comm. on Article
5) (however questionable it might be with regard to the functional integration test)
suggests that the type and extent of control need not exceed the level of what is
required for the specific type of activity which is determined by the concrete business.
By contrast, in the case of a self-employed engineer who had free access to his
customer's premises to perform the services required by his contract, the Canadian
27
Federal Court of Appeal ruled that the engineer had no control because he had
access only during the customer's regular office hours and was not entitled to carry
on businesses of his own on the premises.
Similarly, a Special Bench of Delhi's Income Tax Appellate Tribunal denied the
existence of a PE in the case of Ericsson. The Tribunal held that it was not sufficient
that Ericsson's employees had access to the premises of Indian mobile phone
providers to deliver the hardware, software and know-how required for operating a
network. By contrast, in the case of a competing enterprise, the Bench did assume an
Indian PE because the employees of that enterprise (unlike Ericsson's) had exercised
other businesses of their employer.
The OECD view can hardly be reconciled with the two court cases. All three
examples do indeed shed some light onto the method how the relative standards for
the control threshold should be designed. While the OECD MC Comm. suggests that
it is sufficient to require not more than the type and extent of control necessary for
the specific business activity which the taxpayer wants to exercise in the source State,
the Canadian and Indian decisions advocate for stricter standards for the control
threshold.
The OECD MC shows a paramount tendency (though no strict rule) that PEs
should be treated like subsidiaries [cf.
Article 24(3)
OECD and UN MC], and that
facilities of a subsidiary would rarely be unusable outside the office hours of one
of its customers (i.e. a third person), the view of the two courts is still more
convincing.
Along these lines, a POB will usually exist only where the taxpayer is free to use the
POB:
— at any time of his own choice;
— for work relating to more than one customer; and
— for his internal administrative and bureaucratic work.
In all, the taxpayer will usually be regarded as controlling the POB only where he
can employ it at his discretion. This does not imply that the standards of the control
test should not be flexible and adaptive. Generally, the less invasive the activities
are, and the more they allow a parallel use of the same POB by other persons, the
lower are the requirements under the control test. There are, however, a number of
traditional PEs which by their nature require an exclusive use of the POB by only
one taxpayer and/or his personnel. A small workshop [cf.
Article 5(2)(e)
OECD and
28
UN MC] of 10 or 12 sq m can hardly be used by more than one person. The same
holds true for a room where the taxpayer runs a noisy machine.”
39. OECD commentary on Model Tax Convention mentions that a general definition
of the term “PE” brings out its essential characteristics i.e. a distinct “situs”, a
“fixed place of business”. This definition, therefore, contains the following
conditions:
(i) the existence of a “place of business” i.e. a facility such as premises or, in certain
instances, machinery or equipment.
(ii) this place of business must be “fixed” i.e. it must be established at a distinct place
with a certain degree of permanence;
(iii) the carrying on of the business of the enterprise through this fixed place of
business. This means usually that persons who, in one way or another, are dependent
on the enterprise (personnel) conduct the business of the enterprise in the State in
which the fixed place is situated.
40. The term “place of business” is explained as covering any premises, facilities or
installations used for carrying on the business of the enterprise whether or not they
are used exclusively for that purpose. It is clarified that a place of business may also
exist where no premises are available or required for carrying on the business of the
enterprise and it simply has a certain amount of space at its disposal. Further, it is
immaterial whether the premises, facilities or installations are owned or rented by
or are otherwise at the disposal of the enterprise. A certain amount of space at the
disposal of the enterprise which is used for business activities is sufficient to
constitute a place of business. No formal legal right to use that place is required.
Thus, where an enterprise illegally occupies a certain location where it carries on
its business, that would also constitute a PE. Some of the examples where premises
are treated at the disposal of the enterprise and, therefore, constitute PE are: a place
of business may thus be constituted by a pitch in a market place, or by a certain
permanently used area in a customs depot (e.g. for the storage of dutiable goods).
Again the place of business may be situated in the business facilities of another
enterprise. This may be the case for instance where the foreign enterprise has at its
constant disposal certain premises or a part thereof owned by the other enterprise.
At the same time, it is also clarified that the mere presence of an enterprise at a
particular location does not necessarily mean that the location is at the disposal of
that enterprise.”
29
14.
In
Union of India & Anr. v. U.A.E Exchange Centre9
, this Court had

occasion to clarify the scope of “permanent establishment” in the context of cross-

border taxation under the India – UAE DTAA. The issue involved was whether the

liaison offices (LOs) of the UAE Exchange Centre in India constituted a PE. The

Court held in the negative, as the LOs performed only preparatory and auxiliary

activities, and there was no right of disposal or control over a fixed placed through

which core business was carried on. The following paragraph from the judgment is

especially pertinent in this regard:
“13. And again, whilst analysing the scope of
Articles 5
and
7
of the DTAA in para
         12 of the impugned judgment [
UAE Exchange Centre Ltd. v. Union of India
, 2009
         SCC OnLine Del 337: (2009) 313 ITR 94], the High Court noted thus:
“12. … In the case of DTAA under consideration in the present case under
Article 5
read with
Article 7
, profits of an enterprise are liable to tax in India
             if an enterprise were to carry on business through permanent establishment,
             meaning thereby fixed place of business through which business of an
             enterprise is wholly or partly carried on. Under
Article 5(2)(c)
, amongst
             others, permanent establishment includes an office. However,
Article 5(3)
which opens with a non obstante clause, is illustrative of instances where—
             under the DTAA various activities have been deemed as ones which would
             not fall within the ambit of the expression “permanent establishment”. One
             such exclusionary clause is found in
Article 5(3)(e)
which is: maintenance of
             fixed place of business solely for the purpose of carrying on, for the
             enterprise, any other activity of a preparatory or auxiliary character. The
             plain meaning of the word “auxiliary” is found in Black's Law Dictionary,
             7th Edn. at p. 130 which reads as “aiding or supporting, subsidiary”. The
             only activity of the liaison offices in India is simply to download information
             which is contained in the main servers located in UAE based on which
             cheques are drawn on banks in India whereupon the said cheques are
             couriered or dispatched to the beneficiaries in India, keeping in mind the
9
(2020) 9 SCC 329
30
instructions of the NRI remitter. Can such an activity be anything but
auxiliary in character. Plainly to our minds, the instant activity is in “aid” or
“support” of the main activity. The error into which, according to us, the
Authority has fallen is in reading
Article 5(3)(e)
as a clause which permits
making a value judgment as to whether the transaction would or would not
have been complete till the role played by liaison offices in India was fulfilled
as represented by the petitioner to their NRI remitter. According to us, what
has been lost sight of, is that, by invoking the clause with regard to
permanent establishment, we would, by a deeming fiction tax an income
which otherwise neither arose nor accrued in India — when looked at from
this point of view, the exclusionary clause contained in
Article 5(3)
and in
this case in particular, sub-clause (e) have to be given a wider and liberal
play. Once an activity is construed as being subsidiary or in aid or support
of the main activity it would, according to us, fall within the exclusionary
clause. To say that a particular activity was necessary for completion of the
contract is, in a sense saying the obvious as every other activity which an
enterprise undertakes in earning profits is with the ultimate view of giving
effect to the obligations undertaken by an enterprise vis-à-vis its customer.
If looked at from that point of view, then, no activity could be construed as
preparatory or of an “auxiliary” character. On this aspect of the matter, the
Supreme Court in CIT v. Morgan Stanley & Co. Inc. [(2007) 7 SCC 1]
amongst other issues was called upon to decide as to whether back office
operations carried on by Morgan Stanley Company for one of its Morgan
Stanley Advantages Services Pvt. Ltd. would qualify as having a permanent
establishment in India. The Supreme Court, while holding that back office
operations fall within the exclusionary clause
Article 5(3)(e)
of Indo-US
Double Taxation DTAA, which is, identical to DTAA under consideration in
the present case, came to the conclusion that back office operations came
within the purview of
Article 5(3)(e).
It is laid down by the Supreme Court
in CIT v. Morgan Stanley & Co. Inc., [(2007) 7 SCC 1] that in ascertaining
what would constitute a “permanent establishment” within the meaning of
Article 5(1)
of the Indo-US DTAA, one had to undertake what is called a
functional and factual analysis of each of the activities undertaken by an
establishment. In that case, the Supreme Court came to the conclusion that
the entity located in India which was engaged in only supporting the front
office functions of Morgan Stanley & Co., a non-resident, in fixed income and
equity research and information technology enabled services such as data
processing support centre , technical services and reconciliation of accounts
being back office operators would not fall with
Article 5(1)
of the Indo-US
DTAA.”
31
15.      Evidently, under DTAAs, the taxing rights of the source State over the

business profits of a foreign enterprise are contingent upon the existence of a

Permanent Establishment in the source country. One of the sine qua non for a fixed

place PE is that the place through which the business is carried on must be 'at the

disposal' of the enterprise – a principle commonly referred to as the "disposal test".

It is noteworthy that the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

does not rigidly define this test, but provides illustrative examples. There is no strait-

jacket formula applicable to all cases. Typically, trading operations require a

continuously used fixed place, whereas service-oriented business may not. Some

jurisdictions consider mere use of a place sufficient, while others require legal or

operational control over the premises. In our view, determining whether a Fixed

place PE exists must involve a fact-specific inquiry, including: the enterprise’s right

of disposal over the premises, the degree of control and supervision exercised, and

the presence of ownership, management, or operational authority.
16.      In the present case, a detailed review of the SOSA executed between the

appellant and AHL demonstrates that the appellant exercised pervasive and

enforceable control over the hotel’s strategic, operational, and financial dimensions.

Specifically, the agreement vested the appellant with powers to:
- Appoint and supervise the General Manager and other key personnel,
- Implement human resource and procurement policies,
32
- Control pricing, branding, and marketing strategies,
- Manage operational bank accounts,
- Assign personnel to the hotel without requiring the owner’s consent.
These rights go well beyond mere consultancy and indicate that the appellant

was an active participant in the core operational activities of the hotel.
17.      The appellant’s contention that the absence of an exclusive or designated

physical space within the hotel precludes the existence of a PE, is misconceived. In

Formula One, this Court expressly held that exclusive possession is not essential –

temporary or shared use of space is sufficient, provided business is carried on

through that space. The actual role of the appellant is not just advisory in nature but

extends to various other administrative roles. In this case, the 20-year duration of the

SOSA, coupled with the appellant’s continuous and functional presence, satisfies the

tests of stability, productivity and dependence. From the nature of functions carried

out by the appellant, it cannot be said that they were performing merely “auxiliary”

functions. Rather, the functions performed by the appellant, through its staff

operating from the hotel premises, were not just limited for setting up a pattern of

activities for the hotel, but were core and essential functions, clearly establishing

their control over the day to-day operations of the hotel. Moreover, they were to be

continuously performed over a period of twenty years, under an agreement that
33
included revenue sharing. Therefore, the hotel premises clearly satisfy the criteria

required to be classified as a “fixed place of business” or PE.
18.   The argument that the absence of a specific clause in the SOSA permitting the

conduct of business from the hotel premises negates the existence of a PE is also

without merit. As held in Formula One, the test is not whether a formal right of use

is granted, but whether, in substance, the premises were at the disposal of the

enterprise and were used for conducting its core business functions.
19.   The appellant’s further submission that daily operations were handled by

Hyatt India Pvt Ltd., a separate legal entity, does not decisively support its case. It

is well established that legal form does not override economic substance in

determining PE status. The extent of control, strategic decision-making, and

influence exercised by the appellant clearly establish that business was carried on

through the hotel premises, satisfying the conditions under
Article 5(1).
20.   Additionally, the reliance placed by the appellant on E-Funds is wholly

misplaced. That decision is distinguishable on facts. In that case, the Indian

subsidiary merely provided back-office support and was compensated on an arm’s

length basis, with no involvement in core business functions. In contrast, in the

present case, the hotel itself was the situs of the appellant’s primary business
34
operations, carried out under its direct supervision and aligned with its commercial

interests.
21.    It is undisputed that the appellant’s executives and employees made frequent

and regular visits to India to oversee operations and implement the SOSA. The

findings of the assessing officer, based on travel logs and job functions, establish

continuous and coordinated engagement, even though no single individual exceeded

the 9-month stay threshold. Under
Article 5(2)(i)
of the DTAA, the relevant

consideration is the continuity of business presence in aggregate – not the length of

stay of each individual employee. Once it is found that there is continuity in the

business operations, the intermittent presence or return of a particular employee

becomes immaterial and insignificant in determining the existence of a permanent

establishment.
22.    Accordingly, the High Court was correct in concluding that the appellant’s

role was not confined to high-level decision making, but extended to substantive

operational control and implementation. The appellant’s ability to enforce

compliance, oversee operations, and derive profit-linked fees from the hotel’s

earnings demonstrates a clear and continuous commercial nexus and control with

the hotel’s core functions. This nexus satisfies the conditions necessary for the
35
constitution of a Fixed Place Permanent Establishment under
Article 5(1)
of the

India – UAE DTAA.
23.   At this juncture, we also note the reference made to a Larger Bench of the

Delhi High Court in
Hyatt International Southwest Asia Ltd v. Additional Director

of Income Tax
, where it was held that profit attribution to a PE in India is

permissible even if the overall foreign enterprise has incurred losses. Accordingly,

the question no.(iv) referred was answered in the affirmative, reinforcing the

principle that taxability is based on business presence and not the global profitability

of the enterprise. The relevant paragraph is profitably reproduced below:
“66. On an overall consideration of the above, we come to the firm conclusion that
      the submission of global income being determinative of the question which stood
      referred, is wholly unsustainable. The activities of a permanent establishment are
      liable to be independently evaluated and ascertained in the light of the plain
      language in which
article 7
stands couched. The fact that a permanent establishment
      is conceived to be an independent taxable entity cannot possibly be doubted or
      questioned. The wealth of authority referred to hereinabove clearly negates the
      contention to the contrary and which was commended for our consideration by the
      appellants. Bearing in mind the well-established rule of source which applies and
      informs the underlying theory of taxation, we find ourselves unable to countenance
      the submission of the source State being deprived of tis right to tax a permanent
      establishment or that right being dependent upon the overall and global financials
      of an entity. The Division Bench in these appeals rightly doubted the correctness of
      taxation being dependent upon profits or income being earned at the “entity level”.
      The decision of the Special Bench in
Motorola Inc. v. Dy. CIT
2005 SCC OnLine
      ITAT 1 : (2005) 95 ITD 269 (Delhi) has clearly been misconstrued and it, in any
      case, cannot be viewed to be an authority for the proposition which was canvassed
      on behalf of the appellants.
Article 7
cannot possibly be viewed as restricting the
      right of the source State to allocate or attribute income to the permanent
36
establishment based on the global income or loss that may have been earned or
      incurred by a cross border entity.”
24.   In view of the foregoing analysis, we affirm the findings of the High Court

that the appellant has a fixed place PE in India within the meaning of
Article 5(1)
of

the DTAA, and that, the income received under the SOSA is attributable to such PE

and is therefore taxable in India.
25.   We find no merit in the appeals. Accordingly, all the appeals are dismissed.

There shall be no order as to costs.
26.   Consequently, connected miscellaneous application(s), if any, shall stand

closed.
………………………… J.
[J.B. PARDIWALA]



                                                           …………………………J.
                                                             [R. MAHADEVAN]

NEW DELHI;
JULY 24, 2025.