[Cites
22
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sukdeb Saha vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh on 25 July, 2025
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
2025 INSC 893




                                                             REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S).               OF 2025
                                 (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024)


                            SUKDEB SAHA                                          ….APPELLANT(S)

                                                              VERSUS

                            THE STATE OF ANDHRA
                            PRADESH & ORS.                                   ….RESPONDENT(S)


                                                       JUDGMENT
Mehta, J.
Table of Contents
                            I. INTRODUCTION .......................................................... 2
                            II. PART A: - ................................................................. 10
(i). Facts of the Case: - .............................................. 10
(ii). Submissions on behalf of the Appellant: - ............ 16
(iii). Submissions on behalf of the Respondents: - ...... 23
(iv). Discussion & Analysis: -...................................... 27
(v). Conclusion: - ....................................................... 42
                            III. PART B:.................................................................. 44
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEETU KHAJURIA
(i) Background: - ........................................................ 44
   Date: 2025.07.25
   15:56:33 IST
   Reason:
1
(ii) Right to Mental Health ......................................... 47
(iii) Guidelines: -........................................................ 50
(iv) Directions:- ......................................................... 59



I. INTRODUCTION
1.     Heard.
2.     Leave granted.
3.     The present appeal arises from the judgment
and order dated 14th February, 2024, passed by the
High Court of Andhra Pradesh at Amravati1 in Writ
Petition No. 25381 of 2023, whereby the High Court
rejected the appellant’s prayer, seeking transfer of
the investigation of FIR No. 148 of 2023 to the Central
Bureau of Investigation.2                   The aforesaid FIR was
registered following the tragic, unnatural death of the
appellant’s 17-year-old daughter, Ms. X, who was
undergoing coaching for the National Eligibility-cum-
Entrance Test (NEET) examination at Aakash Byju’s
Institute, Vishakhapatnam. She was staying in a
Hostel when the unfortunate incident occurred on
14th July, 2023, leading to her untimely death.
1 Hereinafter being referred to as ‘Andhra Pradesh High Court’.
2 Hereinafter being referred to as “CBI.”
2
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
4.     Before delving into the factual background and
issues of the present case, this Court deems it
appropriate to reflect upon the broader underlying
generational societal issue, namely, the growing
crisis    of    student     suicides      in   the    context      of
contemporary         education.           As     articulated      by
numerous philosophers across history, the purpose
of education was never confined to mere academic
success        or   professional      advancement.          Rather,
education was envisioned as a means for holistic
development, intellectual, emotional, ethical, and
spiritual. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, in his prominent
treatise “Émile, or On Education”3, emphasised that
education must be adapted to the developmental
needs of the child and should cultivate reason,
autonomy, and emotional well-being. He warned
against an educational system that neglects the
individuality of the learner in pursuit of rigid societal
expectations.
5.   Jiddu Krishnamurti, in his book “Education and
the Significance of Life,”4 noted that the function of

3 Jean-Jacques Rousseau, “Emile, or Education”, (Ed. and Trans.) Allan
Bloom (New York: Basic Books, 1979).
4 Jiddu Krishnamurti, “Education and the Significance of Life”, San

Francisco, CA: Harper & Row, 1953.
3
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
education is to create human beings who are
integrated and therefore intelligent. Krishnamurti
cautioned against turning education into a system of
conformity and performance, warning that the mind
of a child must not be conditioned by fear,
competition, or compulsion. These philosophical
foundations remind us that education is meant to
liberate, not burden the learner, and that its true
success lies not in grades or rankings but in the
holistic growth of a human being capable of living
with dignity, confidence, and purpose.
6. Contrary to these ideals, the contemporary
academic framework, particularly in the context of
competitive examination systems, often subjects
students to relentless psychological pressure. The
very soul of education appears to have been distorted.
Increasingly, education is perceived as a high-stakes
race, a pressure-laden path toward narrowly defined
goals of achievement, status, and economic security.
The joy of learning has been replaced by anxiety over
rankings,      results,      and     relentless   performance
metrics. Students, especially those preparing for
competitive examinations, are often caught in a web
4
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
that rewards conformity over curiosity, output over
understanding, and endurance over well-being.
7.     In this paradigm, life becomes a series of tests,
and failure is seen not as a part of growth but as a
devastating end. In a system driven by performance
metrics,     competition,        and     institutional    rigidity,
students       are      often     subjected      to      immense
psychological strain, particularly in environments
geared         towards           high-stakes          competitive
examinations.
8.     In the recent past, multiple reports have
emerged of student suicides in premier educational
institutions and, more particularly, coaching centres,
pointing to a pattern of despair that demands
collective introspection. These young individuals,
often far away from home, isolated in demanding
academic environments, find themselves without
adequate emotional or institutional support. The
culture of silence around mental health, coupled with
insufficient safeguards in educational institutions,
exacerbates their vulnerability. The gravity of this
crisis cannot be overstated, and any incident
involving the death of a student under such
5
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
circumstances warrants the utmost seriousness, not
just as an isolated tragedy, but as part of a larger
systemic malaise that threatens the future of the
young generation.
9. The statistics published by the National Crime
Records Bureau (‘NCRB’) in its 2022 report titled
“Accidental Deaths and Suicides in India”5 paint
a deeply distressing picture. India recorded 1,70,924
reported suicide cases in the year 2022 (an increase
from 2021 data, i.e., 1,64,033 reported suicide
cases), of which 7.6%, approximately 13,044, were
student suicides. Notably, 2,248 of these deaths were
attributed directly to failure in examinations. As per
NCRB data, the number of suicides among students
in the last two decades has increased from 5,425 in
2001 to 13,044 in 2022. In the decade beginning from
2012, male student suicides surged to 99% and
female student suicides jumped to 92%. Because of
the    non-recognition          of    transgender/non-binary
students in the previous NCRB Reports, the data of
the third gender is totally lacking from the statistics.
5 National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) Chapter-2 Suicides in India
Accidental Deaths and Suicides in India, 2022. Available here.
<https://ncrb.gov.in/uploads/files/AccidentalDeathsSuicidesinIndia202
2v2.pdf>.
6
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
However, their underrepresentation should not be
disregarded, as it reflects a systemic failure to
acknowledge and address the challenges faced by
transgender        and      non-binary          students     within
educational       institutions.      Needless      to     say,   the
abovementioned figures are not just statistical data,
but precious lives lost, young minds prematurely
silenced by pressures they were unable to bear.
These figures, taken in conjunction with emerging
patterns of distress in educational institutions,
coaching       centres,      and     residential     educational
institutions, point to a systemic failure in addressing
students’ emotional and mental health needs. It must
be acknowledged that student suicides, particularly
those related to exam failure, are rarely the result of
a single cause. Multiple factors, both individual and
systemic, direct and indirect, contribute to such
outcomes. These include low self-esteem, unrealistic
academic       expectations        (both       self-imposed      and
externally      driven),     impulsivity,       social    isolation,
learning and cognitive disabilities, and, in some
tragic cases, past trauma such as physical or sexual
abuse. Equally concerning are suicides of students
precipitated      by    experiences        of    sexual    assault,
7
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
harassment, ragging, bullying, or discrimination on
the basis of caste, gender, sexual orientation, or
disability, which continue to remain underreported
and     inadequately         addressed.        Each   of   these
vulnerabilities may be exacerbated in high-pressure
environments that lack adequate emotional support
and psychological safeguards.
10.       The Law Commission of India, in its 210th
Report, has recognised suicide as one of the most
tragic and preventable forms of death in our society.6
This Court has taken judicial notice of the disturbing
trend of suicides among students enrolled in
educational institutions, where intense academic
competition often combines with emotional isolation,
caste-based discrimination, financial stress, sexual
harassment, and systemic indifference.
In
Amit
Kumar v. Union of India7
, this Court addressed the
issue of student suicides across the country and
employed the phrase “suicide epidemic” to describe
the alarming rise of students’ suicide incidents in
educational institutions. The Court observed that a


6 Law Commission of India, Report No. 210 on the Humanisation and
Decriminalisation of Attempt to Suicide, Para 1.5 (October 2008).
7 2025 SCC OnLine SC 631.
8
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
majority of these deaths were attributed to failure in
examinations and the unbearable pressure imposed
upon      students       by     institutional   and   societal
expectations.
11. This Court is therefore of the view that the
present case must not be viewed in isolation, but
rather in the context of this deepening crisis. While
the legal and factual question before us concerns the
unnatural/suicide death of a student, the broader
social context in which such cases of suicide occur
cannot be ignored.
12. It is in this light that the matter assumes not
just legal but also moral, societal and institutional
significance. Accordingly, this judgment is structured
in two parts to address the issues in their entirety.
Part A sets out the factual circumstances of the
present case and adjudicates on the merits of the
case. Part B sets out immediate interim guidelines,
aimed at laying down a preventive, remedial, and
supportive framework for mental health protection
and prevention of suicides by students across all
educational institutions.
9
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
                            II. PART A: -
(i). Facts of the Case: -
13. The background facts essential for disposal of
the instant appeal are:
13.1.        The appellant resides in West Bengal with
  his family. In May 2022, the appellant’s 17-year-
old daughter, Ms. X, took admission at a coaching
  institute,             namely,              Aakash         Byju’s
  Class/Respondent no. 68 in Vishakhapatnam,
  Andhra Pradesh, to prepare for the National
  Eligibility-cum-Entrance                      Test       (‘NEET’)
  examination.           She      got     a     rented   residential
  accommodation                   in          Sadhana        Ladies
  Hostel/Respondent No. 49 on the recommendation
  of Aakash Institute and took admission into
  Achiever’s Junior College for Class XII studies,
  concurrently pursuing her NEET preparation.
13.2.        On 14th July 2023, at around 11:54 pm,
  the appellant received a phone call from Ravikanth,
  Assistant Branch Manager (Operations) of Aakash


8 Hereinafter being referred to as “Aakash Institute.”
9 Hereinafter being referred to as “Sadhana Hostel.”
10
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
     Institute, informing the appellant that his daughter
     had fallen from the 3rd floor of the building of
     Sadhana Hostel at about 10:20 pm and had
     sustained severe injuries and that she had been
     taken to Venkataramana Hospital/Respondent No.
     510    for     medical       treatment.         The    appellant
     immediately called his daughter’s friend, who
     informed him that all the students had been locked
     inside a room and that she couldn’t tell what
     exactly      happened.          The      appellant’s     friend,
     Bapandas,        who      hails    from      Vishakhapatnam,
     visited the Venkataramana Hospital on 15th July,
     2024, around 1:15 am and found the child, Ms. X,
     conscious and talking. The appellant immediately
     took the first available flight to Vishakhapatnam
     (Andhra Pradesh) and reached the Venkataramana
     Hospital on 15th July, 2023, at 1:50 pm, where he
     found his daughter unconscious and on ventilator
     support. The management of Venkataramana
     Hospital told the appellant that his daughter had
     suffered a heart attack around 4:00 am on 15th
     July, 2023, but couldn’t receive proper treatment


10   Hereinafter referred to as “Venkatramana Hospital.”
11
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
   due to the unavailability of a specialist medical
   faculty, and thus, she was placed on a ventilator.
   Being dissatisfied with the care and medical
   treatment being provided to his daughter at
   Venkataramana Hospital, the appellant shifted her
   to Care Hospital/Respondent No. 711 for better
   treatment. On 16th July, 2023, approximately
   12:00 (noon), the appellant’s daughter, while
   undergoing medical treatment, passed away. On
   the same day, the statement of the appellant was
   recorded, and thereafter, an FIR12 was registered by
   IV Town Police Station under
Section 17413
of the
   Code of Criminal Procedure.14 Subsequently, an
   Inquest Report was prepared on 17th July 2023,
   and the body of the deceased was sent for
   postmortem examination.
13.3.       Aggrieved             by         the         suspicious
   circumstances surrounding the medical treatment
   provided to his daughter and dissatisfied with the
   authorities'        apparent        reluctance      to     properly


11 Hereinafter being referred to as “Care Hospital.”
12 FIR No. 177 of 2023.
13 Corresponding
Section 194
of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita,

2023.
14 Hereinafter being referred to as “
CrPC
.”
12
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
  investigate the matter, the appellant approached
  the Andhra Pradesh High Court, by way of Writ
  Petition No. 20387 of 2023 under
Article 226
of the
  Constitution of India, seeking a Writ of Mandamus,
  questioning the inaction of the Commissioner of
  Police and the SHO in collecting CCTV footage and
  other material evidence from Sadhana Hostel,
  Venkataramana Hospital, and Care Hospital in
  relation to the suspicious death of his daughter.
  Further,       the      appellant    sought   consequential
  directions       for    the   appointment     of   a   Court
  Commissioner to collect the CCTV footage. The
  Andhra Pradesh High Court vide Order dated 10th
  August 2023, appointed Ms. K. Priyanka Lakshmi
  as Advocate Commissioner to collect and verify the
  CCTV footage for the period from 1st July, 2023 to
  31st July, 2023 in the presence of the appellant.
  The above-mentioned Writ Petition was disposed of
  by the High Court vide Order dated 12th February,
  2024.
13.4.       On 20th August 2023, the appellant lodged
  a formal FIR15 under
Sections 302
and
120
of the
15 FIR No. 148 of 2023.
13
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
Indian Penal Code
, 186016, at Police Station Netaji
   Nagar, Kolkata, West Bengal, against Aakash
   Institute, Sadhana Hostel, and Venkataramana
   Hospital and others.
13.5.         The Assistant Commissioner of Police17
   (East Sub-Division) Andhra Pradesh, on 27th
   August 2023, took up the investigation and, after
   concluding the same, he filed an Alteration Memo
   on 29th August 2023, before the Magistrate for
   applying
Section 304
Part-II of the
IPC
to the case.
   In this memo, the following individuals were
   arrayed as accused persons:-
S. No.         Name of the Accused Position

    Accused        M.s Gannu Kumari            Hostel Warden
No. 1
Accused        Yecheral Surya Kumar Owner of the Hostel
No. 2
Accused        Gangumalla            Naga Assistant    Branch
    No. 3          Venkata              Durga Manager
                   Ravikanth                  (Operations)      of
                                              Aakash        Byju’s
                                              Vishakapatnam

    Accused        Gundu          Rajeshwari Branch Manager of
    No. 4          Rao                       Aakash      Byju’s
                                             Vishakapatnam
16 Hereinafter, being referred to as ‘
IPC
.'
17 For Short, ‘ACP.’
14
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
  13.6.        On 25th September, 2023, the appellant
  filed a second Writ Petition No. 25381 of 2023
  under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India,
  before the Andhra Pradesh High Court, seeking
  directions to transfer the investigation of the case
  to the CBI.
13.7.      On 10th November 2023, the appellant filed
  third Writ Petition No. 29622 of 2023 under
Article
  226
of the Constitution of India, before the Andhra
  Pradesh High Court, seeking a Writ of Mandamus,
  with a declaration that the authorities' failure to
  properly evaluate forensic samples from the
  deceased's body and their classification of the
  suspicious death as suicide was illegal, arbitrary,
  and totally unjustified.
13.8.       The Andhra Pradesh High Court, vide
  Order dated 14th February 2024, disposed of the
  third writ petition by directing the concerned SHO
  to send preserved forensic samples of the deceased,
  along with samples collected from the appellant to
  AIIMS,       New      Delhi,     for     DNA   testing   and
15
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
  determination of the cause of death, with the entire
  exercise to be completed within two months.
  13.9.         The Andhra Pradesh High Court vide
  Impugned Order dated 14th February, 2024,
  disposed of the second Writ Petition No. 25381 of
  2023 and held that since there are two FIRs
  registered in two different States i.e., State of
  Andhra Pradesh and State of West Bengal, the
  prayer seeking transfer of the case to CBI, was
  beyond the jurisdiction of the Court.
13.10. The aforesaid order dated 14th February,
  2024, of the Andhra Pradesh High Court is assailed
  by the appellant in this appeal with special leave.
(ii). Submissions on behalf of the Appellant: -
14. Learned counsel representing the appellant,
vehemently and fervently urged that the High Court
gravely erred in rejecting the prayer of the appellant,
seeking transfer of the case to the CBI. In this regard,
he     has      advanced         the      following   pertinent
submissions:
14.1. The investigation into the unnatural and
suspicious death of the appellant’s daughter, Ms. X,
was    conducted in          a manifestly arbitrary and
16
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
perfunctory manner by the local police authorities.
Despite repeated oral and written representations
made by the appellant to the Station House Officer,
IV Town Police Station, Visakhapatnam, seeking
registration of an FIR and fair investigation, the police
authorities willfully neglected their statutory duties.
Further, it was submitted that after the statement of
the appellant was recorded on 16th July, 2023, and
inquest proceedings were registered under
Section
174
of    the    CrPC,      without         conducting   proper
investigation and inquiry, the SHO/respondent No. 3
hastily concluded that the appellant’s daughter had
committed suicide. This conclusion was drawn
despite the fact that the appellant was repeatedly and
categorically asserting that his daughter's death was
a case of unnatural death, warranting investigation
under
Section 302
of the IPC. The appellant even
disclosed the names of potential accused persons in
his statement, yet these leads were deliberately
ignored by the investigating authorities, who were
determined to classify the case as suicide from the
outset, foreclosing any possibility of a proper and fair
investigation.
17
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
14.2.       The      doctors        and        management   of
Venkataramana Hospital acted in gross dereliction of
their duty by initiating treatment without informing
either the police or the family members, and by
placing the deceased on ventilation without obtaining
the consent of the parents. When the appellant’s
daughter, Ms. X, was admitted to Venkataramana
Hospital on 15th July, 2023 at 10:30 pm, she was
conscious and even asked for water, as witnessed at
approximately 1:15 am on 16th July, 2023, by the
appellant's friend namely, Bapandas. Despite her
precarious condition, the doctors and other staff at
Venkataramana Hospital failed to provide proper
medical treatment that could have saved her life. The
deceased was in a condition fit for communication.
However, no effort was made by police authorities to
get the statement of Ms. X, which manifests total
apathy on the part of the local authorities.
14.3.     The directions issued by the Andhra Pradesh
High Court in Writ Petition No. 20387 of 2023,
whereby an Advocate Commissioner was appointed
to secure CCTV footage and relevant records, were
not complied with in the true letter and spirit. The
18
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
Advocate Commissioner, appointed by the Andhra
Pradesh High Court, attempted to collect CCTV
footage and documents as directed by the Court vide
order dated 10th August, 2023, but the police officials
failed to cooperate fully. They neither seized the hard
disk of the CCTV footage from the adjacent shop, i.e.,
Sanghvi Lamination Shop, near which the incident
occurred, nor marked the spot of the incident, nor
collected forensic samples from the said place. The
appellant submits that these material omissions
indicate a deliberate attempt to protect the interests
of the respondents, particularly Aakash Institute,
Sadhana       Hostel,      and     Venkataramana   Hospital
thereby casting a grave doubt on the bona fides and
fairness of the local police officers.
14.4.       The CCTV footage, from Sadhana Hostel
shows a girl in salwar/trousers going upstairs toward
the terrace at approximately 10:25 pm on 14th July,
2023, whereas the footage from Sanghvi Lamination
Shop from 14th July, 2023, at 10:46 pm, shows a girl
in blue half pants and a T-shirt lying down on the
floor. This glaring discrepancy in apparel indicates
that the girl going upstairs in the hostel footage may
19
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
not have been the appellant’s daughter, Ms. X. The
police failed to properly scrutinise and verify the
CCTV footage to confirm the identity of the said girl,
yet they have hastily concluded the case to be one of
suicide. These serious lapses establish beyond doubt
that the investigation is neither fair nor effective.
14.5.         The conduct of senior police officials,
including      the    statement         made     by    the     Police
Commissioner during the press conference on 24th
August,      2023,      is    contrary     to    the   truth    and
demonstrates the authorities' intent to shield the
actual      culprits.        In   the    press     release,      the
Commissioner stated that the inquest report was
authored by the appellant's blood relatives, whereas
in reality, the Circle Inspector of IV Town Police
Station dictated the report and pressured the
appellant      not      to    interfere.       Furthermore,      the
Commissioner's          statement        that    there   was      no
evidence related to Aakash Institute is in gross
disregard to the fact that the appellant had enrolled
his daughter in Aakash Institute for competitive
exam preparation, and it was on the instruction and
recommendation of the management people from
20
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
Aakash Institute that she was accommodated in
Sadhana Hostel. As such, Aakash Institute was the
guardian and custodian of Ms. X and cannot abdicate
its responsibility in this matter.
14.6.          In the autopsy report dated 17th July,
2023, under column D (Abdomen), there is explicit
mention of a “suspicious smell” in the stomach
contents of the deceased. Despite this finding, neither
the chemical analysis report dated 4th September,
2023, conducted by Andhra Pradesh                      Regional
Forensic Science Laboratory18, Visakhapatnam, nor
the final opinion on the cause of death by Autopsy
Doctor P. Venkataramana Rao dated 21st September,
2023, has been procured and placed on record. The
deliberate withholding of these vital forensic reports
strongly suggest an attempt to conceal evidence that
may contradict the theory of suicide hastily advanced
by the investigating authorities.
14.7.          The formation and functioning of the
Medical        Committee          constituted   to   investigate
potential medical negligence suffer from grave


18 Hereinafter being referred to as ‘RFSL’.
21
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
irregularities. While the Superintendent of King
George Hospital, Visakhapatnam, formed a five-
member committee of doctors, strangely enough, Dr.
P. Venkataramana Rao, the autopsy doctor who had
already       been      involved       in       the    postmortem
examination, was also included as a sixth member
without proper notification. This triple role of the said
doctor as an autopsy surgeon, chemical analyst, and
committee member represents an egregious conflict
of interest and compromises the independence and
integrity of the medical investigation. Moreover, the
Medical        Committee         itself        acknowledged      its
limitations, stating in its report that it “has only
perused the documents submitted in the said matter
without any interaction with the doctors who have
treated the patient or the relatives of the deceased,”
and that it lacked “knowledge about the medical
facilities,   qualifications      of      treating    doctors   and
infrastructure of the hospitals where the deceased
was treated.”

14.8.         The appellant contends that the pathetic
failure of the local police authorities in conducting
proper        investigation       and          the    lackadaisical
22
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
arraignment of certain individuals for criminal
negligence is manifested in the conflicting narratives
emerging from the CCTV footage, medical records,
and eyewitness accounts. It is thus urged that a fair,
impartial, and independent investigation can only be
ensured by transferring the matter to the CBI. The
appellant has made several representations to the
State Government for the same, which have remained
unacknowledged. Furthermore, the High Court at
Calcutta in Criminal Revision No. 3541 of 2023 vide
Order dated 9th October 2023, had also stayed the
second FIR filed at Police Station Netaji Nagar,
Kolkata, West Bengal.
On these grounds, learned counsel appearing
for the appellant implored the Court to accept this
appeal, set aside the impugned judgment and direct
the transfer of the investigation to the CBI, in the
interest of justice and to uphold the rule of law.
(iii). Submissions on behalf of the Respondents: -
15. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents,
vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions
advanced on behalf of the appellant and advanced
the following pertinent submissions imploring this
23
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
Court to dismiss the present appeal and reject the
prayer to transfer the investigation to CBI:-
15.1.         Investigation into the unfortunate death of
the appellant’s daughter, Ms. X, has been conducted
diligently and in accordance with the law by the local
police     authorities.        Respondent        No.    3,    the
Investigating Officer, acted promptly upon receiving
the      medico-legal        case      report    (MLC)       from
Venkataramana Hospital and recorded the same in
the General Diary. Statements of the attending doctor
were recorded, the scene of the occurrence was
inspected, CCTV footage was reviewed, and over 40
witnesses       were      examined.        Material    evidence,
including digital footage, was seized and sent to the
Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL).                    An offence
alteration memo was filed before the jurisdictional
Magistrate based on emerging evidence to alter the
charge to
Section 304
Part-II of the
IPC
, reflecting the
seriousness with which the investigation has been
pursued.
15.2.         All   necessary       medical     treatment    was
rendered to the deceased in line with standard
medical protocols at the Venkataramana Hospital.
24
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
The treatment details have been recorded in the case
sheet, and the patient was referred to another
Hospital      i.e.,   Care      Hospital,        only   after     due
consultation and with the appellant’s consent. The
allegations that the hospital failed in its duty of care
and proper treatment are baseless. The CCTV footage
in question was seized by the authorities and
forwarded for forensic recovery; however, due to
automatic overwriting, certain footage could not be
retrieved directly by the Venkataramana Hospital.
Nevertheless, full cooperation was extended to the
Advocate        Commissioner           during       the    inquiry
proceedings.
15.3.         The appellant is attempting to attribute
vicarious liability to Aakash Institute without any
legal or factual basis. The said Institute was only
responsible for academic instructions and had no
control       or      supervisory         role      over        hostel
accommodation. The deceased was residing in
Sadhana Hostel, chosen voluntarily by her family
members. Two employees of Sadhana Hostel, who
were arrested, have since been enlarged on bail, as
25
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
the High Court found no evidence connecting them to
the incident.
15.4.        There     was     no    medical   negligence   or
misconduct on the part of Care Hospital. When the
deceased was admitted in the said facility, no
discharge summary or medical records were provided
to the Hospital. Despite the patient arriving in a
critical, vegetative state, all necessary steps were
taken to revive her. Care Hospital has placed all
medical records before the competent authorities and
cooperated fully with the Advocate Commissioner.
15.5.      It is submitted that mere dissatisfaction or
suspicion on the part of the complainant does not
constitute a valid ground to invoke the extraordinary
jurisdiction of this Court so as to transfer the
investigation to the CBI. It has been consistently held
by this Court that such power must be exercised
sparingly and only in rare and exceptional cases
where there is clear evidence of bias, mala fide intent,
or deliberate inaction on the part of the investigating
agency. Learned counsel in this regard has
placed
reliance upon
the decision of this Court in the cases
26
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s).
6378 of 2024
of
Arnab Ranjan Goswami v. Union of India19
to
urge that in the present case, no such material has
been placed on record to even create a doubt that the
ongoing investigation suffers from institutional bias
or legal infirmity so as to warrant intervention.
On these grounds, the learned counsel for the
respondents implored the Court to dismiss the
present appeal and affirm the judgment of the High
Court.
(iv). Discussion & Analysis: -
16. We have given our thoughtful consideration to
the submissions advanced at the bar and have gone
through the impugned judgment. With the assistance
of the learned counsel for the parties, we have
perused the material placed on record.
17. At the outset, we may like to note that the power
to transfer an investigation to the CBI is not to be
exercised as a matter of course. This Court has
consistently held that such a course of action is
exceptional and the extraordinary jurisdiction should
be invoked to this end only in rare and compelling

19 (2020) 14 SCC 12.
27
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
circumstances where the interest of justice so
demands. A Constitution Bench in
State of West
Bengal & Others v. Committee
for Protection of
Democratic         Rights,      West      Bengal   (CPDR)   &
Others20, examined the circumstances under which
Constitutional Courts may invoke their jurisdiction
to direct a CBI investigation. The Court held that
such extraordinary jurisdiction may be invoked to
ensure a fair and impartial investigation where State
machinery appears to be ineffective, biased, or
complicit. The relevant paragraph of the judgment is
extracted below:
“70. Before parting with the case, we deem it
         necessary to emphasise that despite wide
         powers conferred by
Articles 32
and
226
of the
         Constitution, while passing any order, the
         Courts must bear in mind certain self-imposed
         limitations    on    the    exercise   of  these
         constitutional powers. The very plenitude of the
         power under the said articles requires great
         caution in its exercise. Insofar as the question
         of issuing a direction to CBI to conduct
         investigation in a case is concerned,
         although no inflexible guidelines can be laid
         down to decide whether or not such power
         should be exercised but time and again it has
         been reiterated that such an order is not to
         be passed as a matter of routine or merely
         because a party has levelled some
         allegations against the local police. This
         extraordinary power must be exercised
20 (2010) 3 SCC 571.
28
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
         sparingly, cautiously and in exceptional
         situations where it becomes necessary to
         provide credibility and instil confidence in
         investigations or where the incident may
         have       national     and       international
         ramifications or where such an order may be
         necessary for doing complete justice and
         enforcing the fundamental rights. Otherwise
         CBI would be flooded with a large number of
         cases and with limited resources, may find it
         difficult to properly investigate even serious
         cases and in the process lose its credibility and
         purpose with unsatisfactory investigations.”

                                       (Emphasis Supplied)
18. This Court in the case of
Arnab Ranjan
Goswami v. Union of India
(supra), held that:
“52. [.]. An individual under investigation has a
        legitimate expectation of a fair process which
        accords with law. The displeasure of an accused
        person about the manner in which the
        investigation proceeds or an unsubstantiated
        allegation (as in the present case) of a conflict of
        interest against the police conducting the
        investigation must not derail the legitimate
        course of law and warrant the invocation of the
        extraordinary power of this Court to transfer an
        investigation to CBI. Courts assume the
        extraordinary jurisdiction to transfer an
        investigation in exceptional situations to ensure
        that the sanctity of the administration of
        criminal justice is preserved. While no inflexible
        guidelines are laid down, the notion that such a
        transfer is an “extraordinary power” to be used
        “sparingly” and “in exceptional circumstances”
        comports with the idea that routine transfers
        would belie not just public confidence in the
29
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
        normal course of law but also render
        meaningless the extraordinary situations that
        warrant the exercise of the power to transfer the
        investigation. .[.].”
19. The settled principle of law that emerges from
the abovementioned decisions is that the power to
transfer the investigation of a criminal case to the CBI
is   an extraordinary measure, which must be
exercised with great caution, and only in rare and
exceptional circumstances. This jurisdiction is not to
be invoked lightly or in a routine manner, but only
where the facts of the case disclose a compelling
necessity      to    ensure      fairness      in    investigation,
preservation         of     public      confidence        in     the
administration         of    justice,     and       protection    of
fundamental rights of the parties involved.
In
examining the prayer made by an aggrieved person
seeking transfer of investigation to the CBI, the Court
must necessarily be guided by the strict parameters
laid down in
binding precedents.
20. These parameters inter alia include, instances
where the State police authorities appear to be biased
or complicit, where the investigation has been tainted
30
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
by delay, irregularity, or suppression of material
facts, or where the complexity and inter-state
ramifications        of        the        matter    necessitate    the
involvement of a central agency.
21.     In the present case, while we refrain from
commenting on the fairness of the investigation
conducted thus far, the ineffectiveness of the local
police officials is clear and undeniable. The following
compelling       factors,        when        considered       together,
conclusively demonstrate the failure of the local
investigation and highlight the imminent need for an
impartial investigation by the CBI:
21.1.         The attempt of the respondents to paint
the unfortunate incident as one of suicide, relying
upon vague references to the deceased being
“agitated” on the evening of 14th July, 2023, is wholly
unsubstantiated. The original and consistent version
disclosed to the appellant, both by Aakash Institute’s
personnel and local police, was that the appellant’s
daughter had fallen from the terrace. At no point was
the suicide theory mentioned to the appellant in real
time,     either     orally          or     through     any    written
communication.            It    is    only     in     hindsight   that
31
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
respondents have sought to paint the deceased as
mentally perturbed.             If this was truly a case of
suicide, it is inexplicable that no suicide note was
recovered, no psychological history was documented,
and no statements of her friends, classmates or
roommates were recorded to establish any alleged
suicidal     tendencies.        Moreover,      no   medical   or
psychiatric records have been produced to support
such a claim. The belated and unsubstantiated
narrative of suicide appears to be a post-facto
justification aimed at diluting the gravity of the
incident and shielding institutional lapses.
21.2.      A description of the CCTV footage collected
by the Advocate Commissioner (in the report) reveals
glaring contradictions that remain unaddressed by
the investigating agency. The footage from Sadhana
Hostel shows a girl walking up the stairs at around
10:25      pm     on     14th     July     2023,    wearing   a
salwar/trousers and a T-shirt. In stark contrast, the
footage of around 10:46 pm from the adjacent
building, i.e., Sanghvi Lamination shop, which
allegedly captures the fall, shows a girl dressed in
blue half-pants and a t-shirt. This fundamental
32
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
inconsistency has not been reconciled by the
Investigating Officers. No attempt whatsoever has
been made to verify whether the girl who was seen
going upstairs was none other than the deceased (Ms.
X) who was found lying on the floor. No forensic/DNA
analysis      or    witness       identification        has    been
attempted. This discrepancy severely undermines the
credibility of the claim that the deceased herself went
upstairs and jumped off the terrace.
21.3.         The respondents’ claim that the young girl
(Ms. X) was in an irreversible critical state from the
moment of the fall stands completely contradicted by
their own records, the AIIMS Medical Board Report,
and independent evidence on record. While the
Investigation      Officer,     Sadhana        Hostel    and    the
Venkataramana Hospital have categorically taken a
stand that the young girl (Ms. X) was unconscious
when brought to the hospital, the AIIMS Medical
Board has clearly noted that the young girl (Ms. X)
was admitted to the hospital in a conscious and
irritable state, with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)
score of 10/15, indicating that she was neurologically
responsive at the time of admission. This observation
33
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
of the AIIMS Medical Board is further corroborated by
the statement of the appellant, who stated that at
approximately 1:15 am on 15th July, 2023, his friend
saw the young girl (Ms. X) moving and verbally asking
for    water,      a     clear     indication   of   retained
consciousness and lucidity. Despite this, when the
appellant arrived at Venkataramana Hospital later
that day, he found that his daughter was placed on a
ventilator. No consent, written or oral, was obtained
from the appellant, any family member, or a
responsible person prior to this critical medical
intervention. Furthermore, at no point was the
appellant or even his friend, who was physically
present in Visakhapatnam, informed about the
occurrence of a heart attack or deterioration of Ms.
X’s condition during the night. If the deceased was
indeed conscious, there was sufficient time and
opportunity to record her statement, which would
have been crucial in uncovering the circumstances
surrounding the incident. The failure to do so,
despite the documented conscious state of Ms. X,
reflects not only gross medical negligence but also a
possible suppression of key evidence that could have
aided the unravelling of the truth.
34
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
21.4.         A   deeply      troubling        and    questionable
aspect of the present case is the consolidation of
three critical forensic roles with the same medical
officer (namely, Dr P. Venkata Ramana Rao) who
functioned simultaneously as the autopsy surgeon
while      conducting          post-mortem            examination,
chemical analyst for forensic/DNA examination and
a member of the post-incident internal inquiry
committee. Each of these roles, by the very nature of
their functions, require institutional independence,
objectivity, and professional detachment. There
appears to be no justification for inclusion of the
autopsy surgeon in all these roles, which create a
great deal of doubt in the mind of the Court.
21.5.         The     premature         destruction       of   the
deceased’s viscera, ordinarily the cornerstone of any
postmortem DNA comparison, before completing the
court-mandated           investigation,         has    irrevocably
compromised the proceedings. Acting on the High
Court’s order dated 14th February, 2024, in W.P. No.
29622       of    2023,      the     (then)     ACP     (East)/IO,
Visakhapatnam, wrote to RFSL, Visakhapatnam, on
24th February, 2024, to confirm whether the viscera
35
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
he had sent on 16th August, 2023, remained
preserved        after      chemical           analysis.     RFSL,
Visakhapatnam acknowledged the receipt of the
viscera and assured to issue a written reply on 26th
February, 2024. Anticipating that response, the ACP
(East)/IO collected the appellant’s blood sample on
25th February, 2024, at King George Hospital, sealed
it in a thermocol box and documented the process
with     photographs        and     video.      However,     RFSL,
Visakhapatnam, vide letter dated 26th February,
2024, informed the ACP that it had destroyed the
viscera “after analysis,” citing the IO’s note in the
Letter    of    Advice      that     preservation      was    “not
necessary.” By failing to ensure the preservation of
this critical forensic material before securing the DNA
match ordered by the High Court, the ACP and RFSL
have undermined the investigation’s integrity and
foreclosed any possibility of conclusively establishing
the cause of death.
21.6.          In the autopsy report dated 17th July,
2023, under Column D (Abdomen), it has been
explicitly recorded that approximately 80 grams of
semi-digested rice like brown, yellow, and white
36
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
coloured food particles were present in the stomach
contents of the deceased, along with a “suspicious
smell.” This observation assumes critical importance
when juxtaposed with the fact that Ms. X was
allegedly placed on a ventilator from the early hours
of    15th     July,     2023,       and       remained        in    an
unconscious/vegetative state until her demise on
16th July, 2023. The presence of semi-digested food
in the stomach, as noted in the autopsy report, is
irreconcilable with the claim that the deceased was
on continuous ventilatory support from the early
hours of 15th July, 2023. Under normal conditions,
solid foods get digested and move from the stomach
to the intestine within approximately 2½ to 6 hours,
with carbohydrate-rich meals leaving even sooner;
liquids pass almost immediately. In a state of shock
or coma, gastric motility is markedly impaired, often
delaying emptying of the stomach far beyond the
normal window, but cannot leave a “suspicious
smell” and undigested rice nearly 48 hours later.21
There is no accepted protocol for feeding solid rice to
a patient on mechanical ventilation. This stark


21 Modi JP and others, A Textbook of Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology
(Lexis Nexis Butterworths Wadhwa Nagpur 2011).
37
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
mismatch between Ms. X’s autopsy/viscera’s report
and the hospital’s narrative strongly suggests that
either the ventilator timeline was misrepresented or
additional, and yet undisclosed, events occurred after
the last proper meal taken by Ms. X.

21.7.         In     particular,       two      documents          of
foundational        evidentiary       value,        the   Chemical
Analysis Report of the viscera and the final opinion
on the cause of death, have not been placed on
record. These documents are not ancillary but form
the core forensic backbone of any investigation into
unnatural death. The Chemical Analysis Report, for
instance, could conclusively determine whether the
deceased was administered poison, sedatives, or any
narcotic agent that may have contributed to her fall
from the terrace or deterioration of her vitals. The
final   cause      of    death     report      is    essential    for
understanding whether death was a result of
accidental         trauma,        deliberate         assault,      or
complications arising from medical intervention. The
appellant      has      made      multiple      attempts,        both
personally and through counsel, to obtain copies of
these documents. Even the Advocate Commissioner
38
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
appointed by the High Court noted during the site
visits and interactions that these records were not
handed over, either to the Commissioner herself or to
the    appellant’s      representatives.       The   resistance
exhibited by the respondents in providing such
critical information cannot be viewed as a mere
administrative lapse and creates a grave doubt on the
bona fides of their actions.
21.8.         Furthermore, the assessment conducted
by the Medical Board constituted at the All-India
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, a
premier and impartial medical authority, lends
significant weight to the appellant’s contentions. The
Board, after a detailed examination of the submitted
medical records and documents, found that the
deceased was admitted to Venkataramana Hospital
in a conscious and irritable state, with a Glasgow
Coma Scale E3V2M5-Score of 10/15. The Glasgow
score, which is scored between 3 and 15 (Score 3
being the worst, and Score 15 being the best) is
internationally recognised as an indicator of a
patient's neurological activity. A score in this range
suggests that the patient was neurologically active
39
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
and semi-alert, and not comatose at the time of
hospital admission.22 The deceased had sustained
multiple severe grade injuries, including traumatic
brain injury, pneumothorax, skull fractures, and
fractures of the spine, pelvis, and limbs. These
findings confirm that the deceased was critically
injured but was not beyond the scope of meaningful
medical intervention. Importantly, the AIIMS Medical
Board       observed        that     the     patient’s       condition
deteriorated over time, ultimately dropping to a
Glasgow       Coma        Scale     E1VTM1-Score             of   3/15,
suggesting that a medical or neurological failure
occurred during hospitalisation. The Board explicitly
stated that while it could not opine definitively on
medical negligence owing to lack of access to the
treating doctors and hospital infrastructure, its
observations         were      strictly     based      on     objective
documentation.
22.     The      foregoing        facts     and      circumstances,
including the glaring inconsistencies in the medical


22 Teasdale, G., & Jennett, B. (1974). Assessment of coma and impaired

consciousness. A practical scale. Lancet (London, England), 2(7872), 81–
84. Also See, Golden, K., Bodien, Y. G., & Giacino, J. T. (2024). Disorders
of Consciousness: Classification and Taxonomy. Physical medicine and
rehabilitation clinics of North America, 35(1), 15–33.
40
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
records, the autopsy report indicating suspicious
contents of stomach despite the deceased allegedly
being on ventilatory support, the unexplained lapses
in seizure and preservation of critical forensic
evidence, and the contradictory statements by
authorities,       collectively      highlight      a   case   of
exceptional complexity and concern. These elements
are not indicative of mere procedural irregularities
but point towards a potentially deeper malaise in the
investigational process.            In such a situation, it
becomes imperative to ensure that the sanctity of the
administration of justice is preserved, and public
confidence is upheld. Criminal investigation must, in
all circumstances, be both fair and effective to uphold
the rule of law. It is in these rare and extraordinary
circumstances that the intervention of this Court is
warranted, and the transfer of the investigation to the
CBI becomes not only justified but essential.
23.    The appellant and the other family members of
the deceased, who reside in West Bengal, face
substantial      logistical     and     practical   barriers   in
engaging with the authorities in Visakhapatnam,
Andhra Pradesh. Yet, they have persistently sought
41
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
justice, showing faith in the constitutional system
and legal process. In light of the constant and
deliberate non-cooperation by the local authorities,
contradictory public statements by police officials,
and allegations of suppression of material evidence,
this Court is of the considered view that the
investigation into the unnatural death of Ms. X has
to be entrusted to the CBI. Such a transfer is
necessary not only to ensure a comprehensive and
impartial investigation but also to restore public
confidence and address the legitimate concerns of the
bereaved family, and ultimately, to ensure that the
actual perpetrators of the crime, if any, are brought
to justice.
(v). Conclusion: -
24.      In view of the above discussion, the Impugned
Order dated 14th February, 2024, passed by the High
Court of Andhra Pradesh in Writ Petition No. 25381
of 2023, rejecting the appellant’s prayer for transfer
of investigation to the CBI, is hereby quashed and set
aside.
25. We direct that the investigation into the
unnatural death of Ms. X shall be transferred to the
42
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
CBI      forthwith.       The     Investigating        Officer   and
concerned authorities of the IV Town Police Station,
Visakhapatnam, shall hand over the entire case
records, including all relevant papers, documents,
CCTV footage, forensic reports, and any material
evidence, to the office of Director, CBI without undue
delay.        The      Director,      CBI,     shall   ensure    the
immediate registration of an RC and assign the
investigation of the same to a team of competent
officials under the supervision of the jurisdictional
Superintendent, CBI.
26. We clarify that the observations made above are
not intended to touch the merits of the case at hand,
and they shall have no bearing on the investigation
conducted by the CBI or the trial, as the case may be.
None of the above observations shall prejudice the
defence of the person/s, who may be arrayed as an
accused in this case. The concerned officials of CBI
shall conduct an extensive and comprehensive
investigation into the matter and, upon conclusion,
submit a report under
Section 193(2)
of the Bharatiya
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 202323, before the


23 Formerly,
Section 173(2)
of the CrPC.
43
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
competent Court having jurisdiction, within four
months from the date of receiving the record.
III. PART B:
(i) Background: -
27. Considering the above factual circumstances
and the foregoing situation of an increasing number
of suicides in educational institutions, inter alia,
including schools, coaching institutes, colleges, and
training centres, we feel obliged to acknowledge and
address the gravity of the mental health crisis
afflicting students in educational institutions across
the country. The continued loss of young lives, often
due to preventable causes rooted in unattended
psychological distress, academic overburden, social
stigma, and institutional insensitivity, reflect a
systemic failure that cannot be ignored. The above-
mentioned data24, as reported in the National Crime
Records Bureau, reveal a distressing pattern of rising
student suicides.
28. The Union Government, so far, has taken
several preventive steps to check and correct the

24 Refer to Para 9 of this Judgment.
44
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
situation.     At    the     school     level,   the    UMMEED
(Understand,          Motivate,        Manage,         Empathise,
Empower, and Develop) Draft Guidelines for the
Prevention of Student Suicide were released by the
Ministry of Education in 2023. These guidelines aim
to sensitise schools, identify students at risk, and
provide institutional responses and community-
based interventions. For a broader reach, the
Ministry of Education launched MANODARPAN,
mental health and well-being of students during the
COVID-19 pandemic and beyond, under the Atma
Nirbhar Bharat Abhiyaan Yojna, providing tele-
helplines, live sessions with counsellors, a directory
of trained professionals, and digital content to
promote emotional well-being. Likewise, the National
Suicide Prevention Strategy, released by the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare in 2022, outlines a
multi-sectoral approach towards suicide prevention
with a specific focus on youth.
29. Recently, taking cognizance of the suicide
epidemic in educational institutions, this Court in
Amit Kumar
(supra), directed the constitution of a
National Task Force on Mental Health Concerns of
45
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
Students and the Prevention of Suicides in Higher
Educational Institutions, under the chairpersonship
of Hon’ble Justice (Retd.) Shri Ravindra Bhat. The
Task      Force        includes     eminent    experts   from
psychiatry, child development, education, public
health, and civil society, and has been entrusted with
identifying the root causes of student suicides,
evaluating the effectiveness of current policies, and
recommending institutional and regulatory reforms.
We have been informed that the Task Force has
convened its first and second meetings, constituted
working groups, and is in the process of gathering
inputs from stakeholders to formulate a robust and
comprehensive framework.
30.     While the final report of the Task Force is
awaited, and the framework is under preparation, the
immediacy         of    the   crisis     demands   immediate
institutional safeguards to prevent further loss of life
and to establish accountability criterion. In such a
context, the Court is not only empowered but
constitutionally obligated to step in.
46
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
(ii) Right to Mental Health
31. Mental health is an integral component of the
right to life under
Article 21
of the Constitution of
India. This Court has, in a consistent line of
precedents, affirmed that the right to life does not
mean mere animal existence, but a life of dignity,
autonomy, and well-being. Mental health is central to
this vision.
In
Shatrughan Chauhan v. Union of
India25
and
Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of
India26
, this Court recognised mental integrity,
psychological          autonomy,        and           freedom   from
degrading treatment as essential facets of human
dignity under
Article 21
of the Constitution of India.
Further, the Mental Healthcare Act, 201727, a rights-
based      legislation,       reinforces       this    constitutional
mandate by recognising every person’s right to access
mental healthcare and protection from inhuman or
degrading treatment in mental health settings.
Section 18 of the MH Act guarantees mental health
services to all, and Section 115 of the MH Act
explicitly        decriminalises           attempted         suicide,


25 (2014) 3 SCC 1.
26 (2018) 10 SCC 1.
27 Hereinafter referred to as MH Act.
47
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
acknowledging the need for care and support rather
than punishment. These provisions read with judicial
precedents reflect a broader constitutional vision that
mandates a responsive legal framework to prevent
self-harm      and      promote      well-being,    particularly
among vulnerable populations such as students and
youth.
32. Under International Law, India’s obligations
under     various       human rights           instruments   and
treaties reinforce the above constitutional imperative
to   protect      and     promote       mental     health.   The
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, to which India is a State Party, under
Article 12
recognises the right to the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health.
The United Nations Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, in its General Comment No. 14,
has affirmed that this right includes timely access to
mental health services and prevention of mental
illness, including suicide. Similarly, under the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
2006, mental health conditions are recognised within
the scope of psychosocial disabilities, and States are
48
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
under an obligation to provide accessible, non-
discriminatory mental health care to the vulnerable
individuals. Further, the World Health Organisation’s
Mental Health Action Plan, such as the WHA66.8
Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013-
2020, have identified suicide prevention as a public
health priority, calling upon States to reduce suicide
mortality rates through national strategies, school-
based      interventions,        and     community     support
mechanisms. These evolving international norms
reinforce the view that suicide prevention is not
merely a policy objective but a binding obligation
flowing from the right to life, health, and human
dignity.
33. Despite these constitutional and international
obligations, there remains a legislative and regulatory
vacuum in the country with respect to a unified,
enforceable framework for suicide prevention of
students      in    educational        institutions,   coaching
centres, and student-centric environments. Given
the pressing nature of the crisis, particularly in cities
like     Kota,      Jaipur,       Sikar,       Vishakhapatnam,
Hyderabad, and Delhi (NCR), etc., where students
49
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
migrate       in       large   numbers           for    competitive
examinations           and     face    intense         psychological
pressure, immediate interim safeguards are the call
of the day.
34. This Court has, in the past, experienced a
similar     vacuum        in   matters         concerning    sexual
harassment of women in the workplace. Recognising
the urgent need for institutional safeguards, this
Court, in
Vishaka v. State of Rajasthan28
, laid
down guidelines and norms under
Article 141
of the
Constitution of India, which came to be known as the
celebrated ‘Vishaka Guidelines.’ These guidelines and
norms subsequently formed the basis of statutory
enactment in the form of the Sexual Harassment of
Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and
Redressal) Act, 2013.
(iii) Guidelines: -
35. Keeping in view of the above, and in exercise of
the powers conferred upon this Court under
Article
32
of the Constitution of India for the enforcement of
fundamental             rights,       and         treating      this


28 (1997) 6 SCC 241.
50
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
pronouncement as law declared by this Court under
Article 141
, we hereby issue the following guidelines,
which shall remain in force and be binding until such
time     as    appropriate        legislation    or   regulatory
frameworks are enacted by the competent authority.
The Guidelines are prescribed as under:
I.     All educational institutions shall adopt and
        implement a uniform mental health policy,
        drawing       cues     from     the     UMMEED    Draft
        Guidelines, the MANODARPAN initiative, and
        the National Suicide Prevention Strategy. This
        policy shall be reviewed and updated annually
        and made publicly accessible on institutional
        websites and notice boards of the institutes.
 II.    All educational institutions with 100 or more
        enrolled students shall appoint/engage at least
        one qualified counsellor, psychologist, or social
        worker with demonstrable training in child and
        adolescent mental health. Institutions with
        fewer students shall establish formal referral
        linkages       with      external       mental   health
        professionals.
51
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
III.    All   educational        institutions       shall   ensure
        optimal          student-to-counsellor              ratios.
        Dedicated mentors or counsellors shall be
        assigned to smaller batches of students,
        especially during examination periods and
        academic transitions, to provide consistent,
        informal, and confidential support.
IV.     All educational institutions, more particularly
        the coaching institutes/centres, shall, as far as
        possible, refrain from engaging in batch
        segregation based on academic performance,
        public shaming, or assignment of academic
        targets       disproportionate          to      students’
        capacities.
V.     All educational institutions shall establish
        written protocols for immediate referral to
        mental health services, local hospitals, and
        suicide prevention helplines. Suicide helpline
        numbers, including Tele-MANAS and other
        national      services,      shall     be    prominently
        displayed in hostels, classrooms, common
        areas, and on websites in large and legible
        print.
52
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
 VI.     All teaching and non-teaching staff shall
         undergo mandatory training at least twice a
         year, conducted by certified mental health
         professionals,         on    psychological          first-aid,
         identification of warning signs, response to
         self-harm, and referral mechanisms.
VII.     All educational institutions shall ensure that
         all teaching, non-teaching, and administrative
         staff are adequately trained to engage with
         students from vulnerable and marginalised
         backgrounds in a sensitive, inclusive, and non-
         discriminatory manner. This shall include, but
         not be limited to, students belonging to
         Scheduled Castes (SC), Scheduled Tribes (ST),
         Other Backward Classes (OBC), Economically
         Weaker           Sections          (EWS),           LGBTQ+
         communities, students with disabilities, those
         in out-of-home care, and students affected by
         bereavement,           trauma,         or   prior    suicide
         attempts,         or        intersecting        form       of
         marginalisation.
VIII.    All educational institutions shall establish
         robust,        confidential,            and     accessible
         mechanisms for the reporting, redressal, and
53
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
        prevention       of    incidents       involving   sexual
        assault, harassment, ragging, and bullying on
        the basis of caste, class, gender, sexual
        orientation, disability, religion, or ethnicity.
        Every such institution shall constitute an
        internal committee or designated authority
        empowered to take immediate action on
        complaints and provide psycho-social support
        to victims. Institutions shall also maintain zero
        tolerance      for    retaliatory      actions     against
        complainants or whistle-blowers. In all such
        cases, immediate referral to trained mental
        health professionals must be ensured, and the
        student's safety, physical and psychological,
        shall be prioritised. Failure to take timely or
        adequate action in such cases, especially
        where such neglect contributes to a student’s
        self-harm or suicide, shall be treated as
        institutional         culpability,        making      the
        administration liable to regulatory and legal
        consequences.
IX.     All educational Institutions shall regularly
        organise sensitisation programmes (physical
        and/or online) for parents and guardians on
54
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
        student mental health. It shall be the duty of
        the institution to sensitise the parents and
        guardians to avoid placing undue academic
        pressure, to recognise signs of psychological
        distress, and to respond empathetically and
        supportively. Further, mental health literacy,
        emotional regulation, life skills education, and
        awareness of institutional support services
        shall be integrated into student orientation
        programmes and co-curricular activities.
 X.     All educational institutions shall maintain
        anonymised records and prepare an annual
        report indicating the number of wellness
        interventions,        student          referrals,   training
        sessions, and mental health-related activities.
        This report shall be submitted to the relevant
        regulatory authority, which may be the State
        Education        Department,           University   Grants
        Commission (UGC), All India Council for
        Technical Education (AICTE), Central Board of
        Secondary Education (CBSE), or as otherwise
        indicated.
XI.     All educational institutions shall prioritise
        extracurricular activities, including sports,
55
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
         arts, and personality development initiatives.
Examination patterns shall be periodically
         reviewed to reduce academic burden and to
         cultivate a broader sense of identity among
         students beyond test scores and ranks.
XII.     All     educational         institutions,    including
         coaching centres and training institutes, shall
         provide regular, structured career counselling
         services for students and their parents or
         guardians. These sessions shall be conducted
         by qualified counsellors and shall aim to
         reduce unrealistic academic pressure, promote
         awareness          of     diverse      academic   and
         professional pathways, and assist students in
         making informed and interest-based career
         decisions. Institutions shall ensure that such
         counselling is inclusive, sensitive to socio-
         economic and psychological contexts, and does
         not reinforce narrow definitions of merit or
         success.
XIII.    All residential-based educational institutions,
         including       hostel      owners,     wardens   and
         caretakers, shall take proactive steps to ensure
         that campuses remain free from harassment,
56
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
        bullying,       drugs,        and       other       harmful
        substances, thereby ensuring a safe and
        healthy living and learning environment for all
        students.
XIV.    All residential-based institutions shall install
        tamper-proof ceiling fans or equivalent safety
        devices, and shall restrict access to rooftops,
        balconies, and other high-risk areas, in order
        to deter impulsive acts of self-harm.
XV.     All coaching hubs, including but not limited to
        Jaipur, Kota, Sikar, Chennai, Hyderabad,
        Delhi,     Mumbai,        and     other    cities    where
        students       migrate      in    large   numbers       for
        competitive examination preparation, shall
        implement          heightened           mental       health
        protections and preventive measures. These
        regions, having witnessed disproportionately
        high incidents of student suicides, require
        special attention. The concerned authorities,
        namely, the Department of Education, District
        Administration,           and          management        of
        educational institutions, shall ensure the
        provision of regular career counselling for
        students and parents, regulation of academic
57
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
          pressure        through        structured          academic
          planning,         availability           of     continuous
          psychological support, and the establishment
          of institutional mechanisms for monitoring
          and     accountability        to       safeguard      student
          mental well-being.
36.      The    above      guidelines        shall      apply    to   all
educational institutions across India, including public
and private schools, colleges, universities, training
centres, coaching institutes, residential academies, and
hostels, irrespective of their affiliation. We may clarify
that these guidelines are not in supersession but in
parallel to the ongoing work of the National Task Force
on Mental Health Concerns of Students and are being
issued to provide an interim protective architecture in
the interregnum. We believe that these guidelines shall
be read as complementary to the ongoing work of the
National Task Force and would inform and assist the
National Task Force in the development of a more
comprehensive and inclusive framework.
58
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
(iv) Directions:-
37.      All States and Union Territories shall, as far as
practicable, notify rules within two months from the
date of this judgment mandating registration, student
protection norms, and grievance redressal mechanisms
for all private coaching centres. These rules shall
require compliance with the mental health safeguards
prescribed herein.
38.      A district-level monitoring committee shall be
constituted in each district under the chairpersonship
of the District Magistrate or Collector. The committee
may include representatives from the departments of
education, health, and Child protection, civil society
and      shall      oversee        implementation,         conduct
inspections, and receive complaints.
39.      Having regard to the serious and continuing
nature of the concerns addressed herein, we direct the
Union of India to file a compliance affidavit before this
Court within a period of 90 days from the date of this
judgment. The affidavit shall detail the steps taken to
implement        these      guidelines,          the   coordination
mechanisms established with State Governments, the
59
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
status of regulatory rulemaking with respect to
coaching centres, and the monitoring systems put in
place. The affidavit shall also indicate the expected
timeline    for    the    completion        of   the    report     and
recommendations of the National Task Force on Mental
Health Concerns of Students.
40.      Let a copy of this judgment be circulated to the
Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, Ministry of Law and Justice, University Grants
Commission, National Council of Educational Research
and Training, Central Board of Secondary Education,
All India Council for Technical Education, and the Chief
Secretaries of all States and Union Territories for
immediate compliance and necessary action.
41.      The present appeal is disposed of, accordingly.
42.      In view of the disposal of the above appeal, no
further orders are required to be passed on the
application(s)      seeking      impleadment           as   well    as
application (I.A. No. 63866/2025) seeking direction to
produce chemical/medical reports, hence, the same
stands disposed of as infructuous.
60
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024
43.      Pending application(s), if any, shall also stand
disposed of accordingly.
44.      List again on 27th October, 2025, for receiving
the compliance report.
….……………………J.
                                             (VIKRAM NATH)


                                            ...…………………….J.
                                             (SANDEEP MEHTA)
  NEW DELHI;
JULY 25, 2025.
61
Crl. Appeal @SLP (Crl.) No (s). 6378 of 2024