[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Konde Nageshwar Rao vs A. Srirama Chandra Murty on 23 July, 2025
Author:
B. R. Gavai
Bench:
B. R. Gavai
2025 INSC 886


                                                                               NON-REPORTABLE


                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 555 OF 2018

                                 KONDE NAGESHWAR RAO                            … APPELLANT

                                                                  VERSUS

                                 A. SRIRAMA CHANDRA
                                 MURTY & ANR.                               … RESPONDENTS


                                                      JUDGMENT
AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH, J.
1.    This Appeal questions the judgment passed by the
                                  Single Judge of the High Court for the State of Telangana
                                  and the State of Andhra Pradesh dated 15.10.2014,
                                  whereby Petition under
Section 482
of Code of Criminal
                                  Procedure (
CrPC
) preferred by Respondents No. 1 and 2,
                                  who were Accused 1 and 2 respectively in P.R.C. No. 25
                                  of 2004, pending before the Court of II Additional Munsif
                                  Magistrate, Eluru for the offences under
Section
                                  3(1)(viii)
, (ix) & (3)(2)(vii) of the
Scheduled Castes and the
                                  Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
,
Signature Not Verified         (SC/ST Act)       was       allowed   by quashing the said
Digitally signed by
proceedings against the Respondents No. 1 and 2 herein.
   SWETA BALODI
   Date: 2025.07.23
   18:22:17 IST
   Reason:
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 555 of 2018                            Page 1 of 13
2.    The origin of this case is from a land allotment dispute
       in Duvva village, where the Appellant herein alleged that
       Respondent No. 2, who was the Mandal Revenue Officer
       (MRO) at the behest Accused No. 3, the proprietor of
       Ramakrishna        Cine      Theatre     of   the    same    village,
       manipulated the allotment of two plots to the upper
       caste   individuals       related   to    him,      earmarked     for
       Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe beneficiaries.
3.     This allotment was objected by the Appellant, because of
       which it is alleged that he was falsely implicated in a
       criminal case as part of a conspiracy in retaliation, owing
       to the action initiated against Respondent No. 2 on the
       complaint of the Appellant relating to the wrongful
       allotment of the plots. It would not be out of place to
       mention here that the Appellant was working as a Junior
       Accountant in Government Printing Press at Hyderabad
       and, because of the criminal case, he was placed under
       suspension. Thereafter, on a representation submitted
       by him in the criminal case, it was found that he was not
       even present in the village when the offence had taken
       place, in which he had been roped in by Respondent No.
       1 at the asking of Respondent No. 2 and Accused No. 3.
4.     The criminal proceedings initiated against the Appellant
       were based upon a clash that occurred on 15.05.1995
       between     the two         groups of Scheduled Caste in
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 555 of 2018                                   Page 2 of 13
Kothamalapalli village. The case was registered as Crime
       No. 40 of 1995 for the offence under Sections 148, 452,
       324 r/w 149
IPC
at Tanuku Rural Police Station.
5.     Respondent No. 1 was the Sub-Inspector of Police, and
       the Investigating Officer in this case. It was further
       alleged that the Appellant was not named initially in the
       FIR, but his name figured subsequently at the time of
       the filing of the charge sheet.
6.     What was alleged was that this action of wrongful
       involvement in the case was on account of his belonging
       to the Scheduled Caste, and it was for that reason that
       he was being prosecuted with a malicious intent. After
       the report was submitted by the Competent Authority,
       he was found innocent and thereafter the criminal
       proceedings which were initiated against him were
       dropped.
7.     After the prosecution against the Appellant had been
       withdrawn, a complaint was filed by the Appellant
       against Respondents No. 1 and 2, along with Accused
       No. 3. It was alleged that at the behest of Respondent
       No. 2, the MRO, who bore a grudge against the
       Appellant, as well as Accused No. 3, whose relatives were
       the beneficiaries of such allotment, Respondent No. 1
       was instigated, and all three, in conspiracy with each
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 555 of 2018                        Page 3 of 13
other, implicated the Appellant and his brother.
Allegations regarding humiliation, harassment and the
       commission of offences under the Scheduled Caste and
       Scheduled Tribe (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989,
       were made, which upon investigation by a Deputy
       Superintendent of Police were found to be substantiated.
       A complaint was then filed, after obtaining proper
       sanction for prosecution against Respondents No. 1 and
       2 before the Magistrate, which led to the filing of the
       petition under
Section 482
CrPC before the High Court.
8.     The Private Respondents herein filed Writ Petitions No.
       25527 and 24608 of 2000 before the High Court, which
       were ultimately disposed of by order dated 06.01.2003,
       by observing that upon completion of the investigation
       by the Inspector General of Police (PCR Cell), if the
       commission of offences is revealed, a charge sheet may
       be filed before the appropriate court as per law. Upon
       such filing of the charge sheet, it was open to the
       respondents to appear before the court and place all
       materials in support of their case to prove their
       innocence, and until the case is finally disposed of, the
       Appellant shall not be arrested.
9.     An appeal was preferred against this order before a
       Division Bench by the Appellant as well as the State of
       Andhra     Pradesh,     whereupon   the   Division    Bench
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 555 of 2018                            Page 4 of 13
proceeded to dispose of the same by setting aside the
       order of the Single Judge to the extent of directing no
       arrest of the respondents till the finalization of the case.
10.    After the investigation was completed, the competent
       court took cognizance of the charge sheet that was filed,
       and the same was numbered as PRC No. 25/2014,
       pending committal to the Special Court for the trial of
       cases under the SC and ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act,
       1989. It was at this stage that a challenge was posed to
       these    proceedings        initiated   against   the    private
       respondents by filing a petition under
Section 482
CrPC
       seeking quashing thereof.
11.    As stated above, the High Court proceeded to allow the
       petition so preferred, by quashing the proceedings,
       leading to the filing of the present appeal.
12.    It is the contention of the learned counsel for the
       appellant that the High Court erred in exercising its
       jurisdiction under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal
       Procedure, 1973. There was overwhelming evidence in
       the form of 39 witnesses and substantial incriminating
       material against the respondents, establishing a strong
       prima facie case under
Section 3(1)(viii)
, (ix) & (3)(2)(vii)
       of the SC/ST Act. The scope of Section 482, according to
       the counsel, is limited and should be invoked only in
       cases where no alternative remedy is available to the
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 555 of 2018                               Page 5 of 13
accused. The Trial Court, at the stage of framing of the
       charge, would be competent to assess the prima facie
       evidence and discharge the accused if the material is
       insufficient. The High Court exceeded its jurisdiction by
       engaging in a roving inquiry into the prosecution case
       instead of confining itself to determining whether the
       allegations    disclosed     a cognizable offence.    Proper
       appreciation      of   the    material   gathered    by    the
       investigating agency was not carried out and, in any
       case, the same should have been left to the trial court.
       The High Court has overstepped its authority while
       exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction by approaching
       the case in a manner of evaluating the evidence, which
       is impermissible by way of a superficial reading of the
       case record, which has led to erroneous conclusions that
       undermine the incriminating evidence on record. The
       credibility of the witness statements and merits of the
       prosecution case cannot be adjudged by the High Court
       at the pre-trial stage. The Court should have left the
       assessment of the veracity of the evidence of the
       witnesses and the prosecution case to the trial court.
13.    On the other hand, Learned Counsel for the Private
       Respondent No. 2, the MRO, has submitted that there
       was no mala fide intention on the part of the private
       respondents as they were performing the duties
       assigned to them by following the government guidelines
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 555 of 2018                            Page 6 of 13
and instructions from their superiors. The allegations
       against them are false, motivated, and time barred.
       Rather, it is the mala fide intention on the part of the
       Appellant to seek revenge because of the evidence
       collected regarding his involvement in the group clash.
       Reliance has been placed on the report of the Sub-
       Collector, Kovvur, who returned a finding that there was
       no mala fide intention on the part of the private
       respondents, especially the MRO. The action taken by
       him with regard to the allotment of the plots, were
       according to the government instructions, leading to the
       dropping of the departmental proceedings initiated
       against Respondent No. 2 by the department.
14.    As regards the evidence which had been collected
       against the Appellant during the investigation of the
       criminal case of the year 1995 relating to the group
       clash, statements were recorded of the injured parties
       who had named him, establishing his presence. The
       arrest of the Appellant and his family members was
       made only after the directions were issued by the Sub-
       Collector and the SDM, Kovvur, to the Station House
       Officer. Submission has also been made that the
       withdrawal of prosecution against the Appellant by the
       government at the very initial stage, as ordered, does not
       reflect that the Appellant was wrongly implicated as an
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 555 of 2018                        Page 7 of 13
accused, as evidence of none of the witnesses and their
       veracity was tested before the court.
15.    That apart, he has supported the High Court judgment,
       and    the    observations    made   therein    which    also
       acknowledges        that    the   respondents    acted    on
       instructions from their superiors. The factum of there
       being a complaint on 16.06.2003, whereas the incident
       occurred in May 1995, reflects upon the ill-intention on
       the part of the Appellant, as it is delayed and time-
       barred. His further submission is that, for invoking
       provisions under the SC/ST Act, the mala fide intention
       should have been reflected at the very outset, whereas
       the same was not present.
16.    Going by the contents of the complaint itself, it would
       reflect that the same could not be sustained for the
       reason that the dispute occurred between two Scheduled
       Caste groups, and the same was not driven by caste-
       based malice. No independent discretion was exercised,
       nor was it with any mala fide intent, either for issuance
       of the Pattas or for arresting the Appellant, rather the
       same was based upon the official directives from the
       Sub-Collector and the District Collector.
17.    As regards Respondent No. 2, it is asserted that there
       was no substantive evidence on record to reflect
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 555 of 2018                          Page 8 of 13
involvement in the matter beyond the complainant’s
       time-barred assertions. The delay itself casts doubt on
       the credibility of the allegations made against them.
       Counsel states that the High Court has not considered
       the evidence as such, but has, on the basis of justifiable
       and well-reasoned conclusions, rendered its judgments
       in favour of the respondents. He therefore pressed for
       dismissal of the present appeal.
18.    Before we proceed to decide the case on merits, it would
       be appropriate to mention here that during the pendency
       of the present appeal, Accused No. 1 had expired and
       vide   order    dated       12.04.2019   passed   in    IA    No.
       25309/2019, the name of Respondent No. 1 stands
       deleted from the array of parties at the request of the
       Appellant and upon his application. The present appeal,
       therefore, cannot proceed qua Appellant No. 1.
19.    Having considered the submissions made by the counsel
       for the parties, and with their assistance having gone
       through the pleadings and upon consideration of the
       documents placed on record, we are not inclined to
       accept the present appeal.
20.    The    facts   as    narrated    above    indicate     that   the
       prosecution initiated against the private respondents
       was based upon a complaint filed by the Appellant on
       the dropping of and the withdrawal from prosecution in
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 555 of 2018                               Page 9 of 13
criminal case qua him. It is at this stage that the
       allegations of mala fide and wrongful prosecution at the
       behest of Respondent No. 2, the MRO, and Accused No.
       3, proprietor of Ramakrishna Theatre, who is alleged to
       have colluded with Respondent No. 1, the Sub-Inspector
       of Police, who was the Investigating Officer. Respondent
       No. 1 falsely implicated the Appellant and his younger
       brother as accused in the rioting case relating to the
       clash between two groups belonging to the Scheduled
       Caste. The basis for the mala fide is the complaint which
       has been lodged by the Appellant against Respondent
       No. 2 for wrongfully allotting two house sites Pattas to
       the Kapu community related to Accused No. 3, whereas
       the same were reserved for the Scheduled Caste
       category.
21.    It is an admitted position that, on the complaint,
       initially, it was prima facie observed to be correct but on
       detailed inquiry and on clarification, it turned out that
       the allotment made by Respondent No. 2 was as per the
       government instructions. In any case, the cancellation
       of allotment had taken place. Therefore, there was no
       reason as to why Respondent No. 2 would proceed to
       malafidely involve the Appellant and his family in the
       case. That apart, since it was admittedly a dispute
       between two groups belonging to the Scheduled Caste,
       and the clash was not with any other community, rather
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 555 of 2018                         Page 10 of 13
intra-caste, involvement of the Appellant because of him
       being a Scheduled Caste in the criminal case does not
       arise, what to say of mala fide. No evidence has been
       brought on record which would indicate mala fide
       intention on the part of Respondent No. 2 or any
       connivance. The bald allegations against the Appellant
       would not in itself be sustainable.
22.    Perusal of the complaint would also indicate that the
       grievance was not really relatable to the false and
       malicious involvement in the criminal proceedings
       against the Appellant and his family members because
       of them belonging to Scheduled Caste. The very intent
       being absent, the offences for which the prosecution has
       been launched are not made out. That apart, merely
       because a number of cases and various litigations are
       pending between the Appellant and Respondent No. 2,
       in itself cannot be a ground for presuming that the
       prosecution initiated against the appellant was at the
       behest of and with a false and malicious intent, by now
       deceased Respondent No. 1. For attracting the offences,
       as alleged to have been committed by the private
       respondents, specific instances and incidents supported
       by evidence are required to be present, which is missing
       in this case.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 555 of 2018                       Page 11 of 13
23.
In
Masumsha Hasanasha Musalman v. State of
           Maharashtra1
, this Court has emphasized that merely
           because the complainant belongs to the Scheduled
           Castes or Scheduled Tribes cannot be the sole ground
           for prosecution. The offences alleged must have been
           committed solely on the basis of the victim’s caste
           status. Misuse of the statute to settle personal scores or
           to harass individuals cannot be permitted if it is
           apparent. The Court should in such situation be not
           hesitant to step in and stop the said misuse.
Prosecution
           needs to be quashed at an early stage to prevent undue
           harassment of the accused where there is clear legal
           infirmity    in   the   prosecution   case,   such   as   the
           allegations, even if taken at their face value, do not
           disclose an offence or the entire case is a bad faith
           exercise weaponized to settle personal scores, rather
           than seeking justice (
Ravinder Singh v. Sukhbir Singh
and others2’).
24.        This court in Dr. Subhash Kashinath Mahajan v.
State of Maharashtra and another3 had also observed
           that there has been an alarming increase in false
           complaints under the SC/ST Act, particularly against
1
(2000) 3 SCC 557
2
(2013) 9 SCC 245
3
(2018) 6 SCC 454
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 555 of 2018                                Page 12 of 13
public servants and judicial officers with an oblique
       motive to settle personal scores or to harass individuals.
       Such acts cannot be allowed to be perpetuated and need
       to be stopped at the very outset so that there is no
       miscarriage of justice.
25.    The observations and conclusions arrived at by the High
       Court are based upon the proper appreciation of the
       pleadings, the correct reading and application of law and
       thus, cannot be faulted with. The impugned order dated
       15.10.2014 as passed by the High Court being in
       accordance with law does not call for any interference.
26.    The appeal is accordingly dismissed.
27.    Pending application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed
       of.
……...……….……………………..CJI.
[ B. R. GAVAI ]




                                     ……..………..……………………..J.
                                    [ AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH ]

 NEW DELHI;
JULY 23, 2025.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 555 of 2018                        Page 13 of 13