[Cites
35
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Mandeep Singh vs State Of Punjab on 14 July, 2025
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
,
Aravind Kumar
2025 INSC 834
                                                                      REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                      CIVIL APPEAL NO(S)._______________ OF 2025
               [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO(S). 23141 OF 2024]



      MANDEEP SINGH & ORS.                                           …APPELLANTS
                                                     Versus
      STATE OF PUNJAB AND ORS.                                      …RESPONDENTS


                                                     WITH


                      CIVIL APPEAL NO(S)._______________ OF 2025
               [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO(S). 23324 OF 2024]


                                                     AND
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO(S)._______________ OF 2025
                   [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO(S). 907 OF 2025]

                                              JUDGMENT
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.
1.Leave granted.
2.The appellants before this Court have challenged the judgment

                            dated 23.09.2024, of the Division Bench of Punjab and
Signature Not Verified
Haryana High Court which has reversed the findings of the
Digitally signed by
Nirmala Negi
Date: 2025.07.14
17:57:09 IST
Reason:
learned Single Judge and has thereby upheld the selections
1
made by the State of Punjab for the posts of Assistant

     Professors and Librarians in Government Degree colleges of

      Punjab.
3.The brief facts of the case are as follows:
a. In January 2021, the State of Punjab had sent separate

          requisitions to the Punjab Public Service Commission

          (hereinafter referred to as ‘Commission’), for recruitment

          of 931 Assistant Professors (dated 15.01.2021) and 50

          Librarians (dated 29.01.2021), in Government Degree

          Colleges in the State. Consequent to this and based on

          correspondences exchanged, the Commission engaged 24

          subject   experts   to   prepare   the   syllabus   for   the

          competitive examinations and honorarium was paid to

          them.
b.   Later, an additional 160 posts of Assistant Professors

          and 17 posts for Librarians were created and sanctioned

          for newly established colleges, and on 15.09.2021, the

          State’s Department of Higher Education (hereinafter

          referred to as ‘the Department’) sought Commission’s

          consent to fill these posts through the Departmental

          Selection Committee rather than the Commission.
     c.   The Commission replied by letter dated 16.09.2021,

          expressing their inability to respond on the ground of the
2
Chairman having retired and the new appointment

     having not taken place. The Government then by a

     memorandum         dated       17.09.2021       approved     the

     recruitment of 160 and 17 posts of Assistant Professors

     and   Librarians    respectively,     through      Departmental

     Selection Committees which though had to follow the

     University    Grants     Commission         (hereinafter   ‘UGC’)

     guidelines or regulations.
d.   A change in Government happened on 20.09.2021 after

     which on 09.10.2021, the selection process was reviewed

     in a meeting chaired by the Secretary, Department of

     Higher Education. In this meeting, the entire process of

     recruitment was changed and it was decided that

     selection would now be made only on the basis of a

     Written Test, which will be conducted by two separate

     selection committees of two State Universities: (a) Punjab

     University,   Patiala,   and    (b)   the   Guru    Nanak    Dev

     University, Amritsar. Further, it was decided that all the

     1091 posts (931 plus 160 posts) of Assistant Professors

     and 67 posts (50 plus 17 posts) of Librarians; and not

     just the posts recently created, are to be filled through
3
these departmental selection committees. This decision

     was placed for approval before the Chief Minister on

     12.10.2021,    with   the      observation   that   it   shall

     subsequently be placed for approval before the Council of

     Ministers; latter approval was never obtained.
e.   On 18.10.2021, Government issued a memorandum

     conveying   to Director       Public Instructions (Colleges)

     (hereinafter ‘DPI’) the decision for recruitment of 1091

     Assistant Professors and 67 Librarians on the basis of

     two departmental selection committees of two State

     Universities. On 19.10.2021, advertisements for the

     above posts were issued.
f.   In a little over a month, the exam was conducted and the

     result was announced on 28.11.2021. Meanwhile, in the

     first week of November, Writ Petitions were filed before

     the High Court, challenging the memorandum dated

     18.10.2021 and advertisements dated 19.10.2021. On

     26.11.2021 in CWP No. 22446 of 2021, before the results

     were published, while issuing notice, it was clarified that

     the selection shall be subject to the result of the writ

     petition.
4
g.    Vide order dated 08.08.2022, the learned Single Judge

           allowed the Writ Petitions and quashed the entire

           recruitment      process     for   being    in   violation    of    law

           inasmuch as the Commission not having been excluded

           as per procedure prescribed and State having not

           followed the UGC guidelines and adopting an arbitrary

           process for the recruitment.
h.    Against the order of the learned Single Judge, the State

           of    Punjab     as   well   as    the     candidates    who       were

           selected/appointed filed intra-court appeals. Vide the

           impugned order dated 23.09.2024, the Division Bench of

           the High Court allowed these intra-court appeals and

           upheld the recruitment by quashing the order passed by

           the learned Single Judge. Assailing the same, appellants

          are before us.
4.Before the learned Single Judge, the Division Bench as well as

     before this Court, the appellants’ have been consistent in

     their submission that the recruitment process was vitiated

     on more than one count. Most importantly the recruitment

     was        made   in   violation   of    UGC     Regulations       of    2010

     (hereinafter ‘2010 UGC Regulations’) which were adopted by

     the State of Punjab on 30.07.2013, and which mandated an
5
entirely different criterion and procedure for recruitment.
Further the selection to these posts ought to have been made

     through the Commission, as admittedly these were the posts

     within the purview of Commission [under
Article 320
of the

     Constitution of India read with Punjab Public Service

     Commission (Limitation of Functions) Regulations, 1955

     (hereinafter ‘the 1955 Regulations’)]. In any case, the entire

     process is arbitrary and was followed not in the interest of

     the State or for the cause of higher education but for narrow

     political gains.
5.The State and the private respondents would though argue that
Article 320(3)
is directory and not mandatory in nature. They

     would submit that the State government is empowered to

     decide its own method and procedure of recruitment for the

     posts of Assistant Professors and Librarians in Degree

     colleges under the State government; and it is not bound to

     make these selections through the Commission.
6.We have heard Senior Advocates Mr. Raju Ramchandran, Mr.

     Nidhesh Gupta, Mr. Preetesh Kapur and Mrs. Rekha Palli

     appearing for the appellants, and Senior Advocates Mr. Kapil

     Sibal, Mr. Rakesh Dwivedi and Mr. P.S. Patwalia for the

     private respondents. We have also heard Mr. Shadan Farasat,
6
Additional Advocate-General appearing on behalf of the State

       of Punjab.
7.It is first necessary to narrate the sequence of events and their

      context as this would give us a better perspective. A large

      number of posts of Assistant Professor and Librarians in

      Degree Colleges remained unfilled for the last 20 years or so

      in Punjab. The last selection to these posts was only made in

      the year 2002, and this too got into trouble due to allegations

      of corruption which led to a protracted litigation. Later,

      another recruitment was attempted in the year 2008 for 265

      posts which was again stuck in litigation for many years. The

      issue of large unfilled vacancies in Punjab had come earlier

      before this Court by the guest/part-time faculties where a

      Three-Judge Bench of this Court vide its order dated

      02.12.2014   had    directed       the   Commission   to   fill   the

      sanctioned vacant posts as soon as possible. The relevant

      portion of that order reads as under:
“4. We do not intend to keep these Special
            Leave Petitions on board. Accordingly, we
            dispose of the Special Leave Petitions with an
            observation that the Punjab Public Service
            Commission, Patiala will take all effective
            steps to fill up all the sanctioned posts of the
7
lecturers in the State of Punjab as
           expeditiously as possible, at any rate, within
           12 months’ time from today.”

     The argument of the State is that the main reason for these

     vacancies remaining unfilled for all these years was that

     these posts were within the purview of the Commission

     which had failed to fill these posts and hence the decision

     taken by the State to remove these posts from the purview of

     the Commission and to expedite the process of selection was

     in public interest.
8.The Commission has a duty to make selections for different

     services   in   response   to   the   requisition   of   the   State

     government. In the present case, in January 2021, the State

     government had sent two requisitions for the recruitment of

     931 Assistant Professors and 50 Librarians respectively, yet

      no decision had been taken by the Commission.
9.Article 320(3) of the Constitution provides that the Commission

     shall be consulted in the recruitment of different services.
The relevant portion of
Article 320
of the Constitution reads

     as follows:
“Article 320: Functions of Public Service
           Commissions-
(1)...
(2)...
8
(3) The Union Public Service Commission or
the State Public Service Commission, as the
case may be, shall be consulted—
(a) on all matters relating to methods of
     recruitment to civil services and for civil
     posts;
(b) on the principles to be followed in
     making appointments to civil services
     and posts and in making promotions
     and transfers from one service to
     another and on the suitability of
     candidates for such appointments,
     promotions or transfers;
(c) on all disciplinary matters affecting a
     person serving under the Government of
     India or the Government of a State in a
     civil capacity, including memorials or
     petitions relating to such matters;
(d) on any claim by or in respect of a
     person who is serving or has served
     under the Government of India or the
     Government of a State or under the
     Crown in India or under the Government
     of an Indian State, in a civil capacity,
     that any costs incurred by him in
     defending legal proceedings instituted
     against him in respect of acts done or
     purporting to be done in the execution of
     his duty should be paid out of the
     Consolidated Fund of India, or, as the
     case may be, out of the Consolidated
     Fund of the State;
(e) on any claim for the award of a
     pension in respect of injuries sustained
     by a person while serving under the
     Government of India or the Government
9
of a State or under the Crown in India or
           under the Government of an Indian
           State, in a civil capacity, and any
           question as to the amount of any such
           award, and it shall be the duty of a
           Public Service Commission to advise on
           any matter so referred to them and on
           any other matter which the President, or,
           as the case may be, the Governor of the
           State, may refer to them:
Provided that the President as respects the all-
      India services and also as respects other
      services and posts in connection with the
      affairs of the Union, and the Governor, as
      respects other services and posts in
      connection with the affairs of a State, may
      make regulations specifying the matters in
      which either generally, or in any particular
      class of case or in any particular
      circumstances, it shall not be necessary for a
      Public Service Commission to be consulted.”


Public Service Commission at the Union and at the State

levels are constitutional bodies. There is a purpose for which

these institutions have been created, which we shall discuss

in a while. All the same, it is not necessary that all posts in

the States or Union must be filled through Commission. It is

not mandatory. But there is a method prescribed under the

law to take out these posts from the purview of the
10
Commission. This has been violated in the present case; is

      the argument. But first, for the role of the Commission.
10.   Impartiality, fairness and recognition of merit while selecting

      Public     Servants       are     absolutely      necessary        in   modern

      democracies. The basic purpose of a Union Public Service

      Commission or State Public Service Commission(s) for that

      matter, is to remove impartiality and political influence while

      making selection on Public Posts. It is necessary to have an

      impartial Public Service Commission in a Democracy, or

      everything will be reduced to a mere scramble for jobs 1. The

      concept is not new. It goes back to the Government of India

      Act, 1919, and even earlier to the pre 1857 era. The East

      India Company, which had under its administration a vast

      area, felt the need to               replace the system based on

      recommendations and nominations to a merit-based system,

      which was also the recommendation of the Macaulay

      Committee Report2. A Civil Service Commission was then

      established in 1854 to conduct competitive examinations

      which were held for the first time in the year 1855.
1 Dr. Naresh Chandra Roy, The Working of the Public Service Commission in Bengal, Indian
 Political Science Conference, Third Session, Mysore, Dec 1940, p.192.
 2 See Macaulay Report on the Indian Civil Service 1854.
11
11.   It was the Government of India Act, 1919 that formally

      introduced the concept of Public Service Commissions in

      India. Section 96C3 provided for the establishment of a

      Central Public Service Commission in India. But the Public

      Service Commission was not set up immediately till its need

      was emphasized by the Lee Commission in its report of 1924:
“Wherever democratic institutions exist,
               experience has shown that to secure an
               efficient Civil Service it is essential to protect it
               so far as possible from political or personal
               influences and to give it that position of
               stability and security which is vital to its
               successful working as the impartial and
               efficient instrument by which Governments, of
               whatever political complexion, may give effect
               to their policies. In countries where this
               principle has been neglected, and where the
               “spoils system” has taken place, an inefficient
               and disorganized Civil Service has been the
               inevitable result and corruption has been
               rampant. In America a Civil Service
               Commission has been constituted to control
               recruitment of the Services, but, for the
               purposes of India it is from the Dominions of
3 Section 96C: Public Service Commission- (1) There shall be established in India a
 public service commission, consisting of not more than five members, of whom one shall be
 chairman, appointed by the Secretary of State in Council. Each member shall be removed
 before the expiry of his term of office, except by order of the Secretary of State in Council.
 The qualifications for the appointment, and the pay and pension (if any) attaching to the
 office of chairman and member, shall be prescribed by rules made by the Secretary of State
 in Council.
(2) The public service commission shall discharge, in regard to recruitment and
 control of the public services in India, such functions as may be assigned thereto by rules
 made by the Secretary of State in Council
12
the British Empire that more relevant and
               useful lessons can perhaps be drawn.
Canada, Australia and South Africa now
               possess Public or Civil Services Acts regulating
               the position and control of the Public Services,
               and a common feature of them all is the
               constitution of a Public Service Commission, to
               which the duty of administering the Acts is
               entrusted. It was this need which framers of
               the
Government of India Act
had in mind
               when they made provision in Section 96C for
               the establishment of a Public Service
               Commission to discharge “in regard to
               recruitment and control of the Public Services
               in India such functions as may be assigned
               thereto by rules made by the Secretary of
               State in Council”. Since the passing of the Act,
               a prolonged correspondence, extending over
               nearly four years, has been passed between
               the Secretary of State, the Government of
               India, and Local Governments, regarding the
               function and machinery of the body to be set
               up. No decisions have, however, been arrived
               at, and the subject has been referred to this
               Commission for consideration”4
12.   It was based on the recommendation of the Lee Commission

      that the Commission was formed as contemplated under the

      Government of India Act, 1919. The Central Public Service

      Commission was thus established in the year 1926, and its

      functions were governed by the Public Service Commission

 4 Report of the Royal Commission on Superior Civil Services in India, dated 27th March,
 1924 at pp.13-14 and 16.
13
(Function) Rules, 1926. Till this stage, the role of a similar

      Commission at Provincial level was not much in discussions.
13.   It was only with the Simon Commission Report that we have

      an official recommendation for the first time for the setting

      up of Provincial Public Service Commissions.                           It is well-

      known that the formation of the Simon Commission was

      resented by the leaders of the Indian freedom struggle,

      primarily because it had no Indian representative, and

      because senior officials of the British Raj had questioned the

      very ability of Indians to draft a Constitution. In response, an

      all-party committee under the chairmanship of Congress

      stalwart Motilal Nehru was formed, which was tasked with

      drafting a Constitution for India.                 The report submitted by

      this committee (which came to be known as the Nehru

      Report) also favoured the creation of a Permanent Public

      Service Commission to deal with issues such as the

      recruitment, appointment, emoluments etc. of civil servants

      in India.
14.   Finally, a Federal Public Service Commission and Public

      Service Commissions for Provinces were established under
Section 2645
of the Government of India Act, 1935 and their
 5 264.Public Service Commission: (1) Subject to the provisions of this Section, there shall
 be a Public Service Commission for the Federation and a Public Service Commission for
 each Province.
14
functions were given in
Section 266
, which was pari materia

      to
Article 320
of the Constitution.
15.   While the Constituent Assembly was busy in drafting the

      Constitution for free India, the Public Service Commission at

      the Centre and in some of the States were already

      functioning.
16.   During discussion on Public Service Commissions in the

      Constituent          Assembly          Debates,        Dr.     P.S      Deshmukh

      highlighted the purpose and importance of the Public Service

      Commissions in these words:
“...these Commissions are said to be a
               necessity of a modern State. These
               Commissions are primarily meant to keep
               appointments away from day to day politics,
               party preferences and influences and the
               attempt is made, by having recourse to these
               Commissions, that the appointments shall be
               as far as possible on merit and there shall be
               no interference in their choice or in their
               selection from day to day by the executive
               authorities of the State.”


         (2) Two or more Provinces may agree-
(a) that there shall be one Public Service Commission for that group of
         Provinces; or
(b) that the Public Service Commission for one of the Provinces shall serve
         the needs of all the Provinces,
         and any such agreement may contain such incidental and consequential provisions
 as may appear necessary or desirable for giving effect to the purposes of the agreement and
 shall, in the case of an agreement that there shall be one Commission for a group of
 Provinces, specify by what Governor or Governors the functions which are under this Part
 of this Act to be discharged by the Governor of a Province are to be discharged.
(3) The Public Service Commission for the Federation, if requested so to do by the
 Governor of a Province, may, with the approval of the Governor-General, agree to serve all or
 any of the needs of the Province…
15
17.   Our entire purpose here of giving this background to the

      formation of Public Service Commission in India both at the

      Union as well as State level, was to emphasize the purpose

      for its establishment, which was to have an impartial and

      autonomous body which should select the best possible

      persons for Government posts, and to have fairness and

      transparency in the procedure. The present dispute which is

      before this Court reflects this concern.
18.
Article 320(3)(a)
of the Constitution, inter alia, states that the

      State Public Service Commission “shall be consulted on all

      matters relating to methods of recruitment to civil services and

      for civil posts”. The provision appears to be mandatory as the

      words “shall be consulted” suggest. All the same, the learned

      counsel   for   the   respondents   would    rely   on   a   1957

      Constitution Bench decision of this Court in
State of U.P v.

      Manbodhan Lal Srivastava
1957 SCC OnLine SC 4 which

      had laid down that the provision is not mandatory but merely

      directory.
19.   The above decision is binding on us. Yet, we must examine

      the context in which the above judgment was rendered. The

      context is important. Although the findings in the judgment

      are generally worded, this Court in Manbodhan Lal
16
Srivastava was not dealing with
Article 320(3)(a)
, as is the

      case before us, but was concerned with
Article 320(3)(c)
i.e. a

      disciplinary matter in an individual case. In Manbodhan Lal

      Srivastava, a government servant who was posted as an

      officer-on-special-duty in the Education Department from

      1948 to 1951 was accused of giving favours to his friends

      and relatives, while working in a Book Selection Committee,

      as he had approved books written by his 14 year old nephew

      and other publishers from whom he had taken certain money

      on interest. In August 1952, he was suspended from service

      and a departmental enquiry was conducted against him. On

      the recommendations of the departmental enquiry report, the

      Government issued a show cause notice under
Article 311(2)
of the Constitution and finally, after hearing the concerned

      employee, the Government issued a notification reducing his

      rank and compulsorily retiring him. These were the facts of

      the case before this Court.
20.
Article 320(3)
speaks of a variety of matters where the

      Commission is to be consulted- (a) Recruitment in Service

      and (c) disciplinary matters, being two such instances.

      Whereas
Article   320(3)(c)
is   generally   concerned   with
17
individual matters relating to disciplinary proceedings,
Article

      320(3)(a)
deals   with    policy    issues    where   an   entire

      recruitment    process     is   at   stake.     Manbodhan      Lal

      Srivastava, was a case dealing with
Article 320(3)(c)
, and

      not with
Article 320(3)(a)
, which is before us.
21.   Another question in Manbodhan Lal Srivastava, was

      whether
Article 311
of the Constitution of India is subject to
Article 320(3)(c).
Para 4 of the Judgment reads like this:
“Hence, the main question in controversy in
            Appeal No. 27 of 1955, is whether the High
            Court was right in taking the view that
Article
            311
was subject to the provisions of
Article
            320(3)(c)
of the Constitution, which were
            mandatory, and as such, non-compliance with
            those provisions in the instant case, was fatal
            to the proceedings ending with the order
            passed by the Government on September 12,
            1953.”
22.   The judgment also restricts itself to the facts relating to
Article 320(3)(c).
This is how it concludes :
“13. In view of these considerations, it must
            be held that the provisions of
Article 320(3)(c)
are not mandatory and that non-compliance
            with those provisions, does not afford a cause
            of action to the respondent in a court of law. It
            is not for this Court further to consider what
            other remedy, if any, the respondent has.
18
Appeal No. 27 is, therefore, allowed and
            Appeal No. 28 dismissed. In view of the fact
            that the appellant did not strictly comply with
            the terms of
Article 320(3)(c)
of the
            Constitution, we direct that each party bear its
            own costs throughout.”
23.   Thus, it was in the background of the above facts that it was

      held by this Court that consultation with the Commission to

      be   directory   and   not   mandatory.     Manbodhan     Lal

      Srivastava also emphasized the purpose of the proviso to
Article 320(3)
of the Constitution which states that the

      Governor of a State is empowered to make regulations

      specifying the matters in which it is not necessary for the

      State to consult the Public Service Commission. This is what

      was said by this Court:
“7…Perhaps, because of the use of the word
            “shall” in several parts of
Article 320
, the High
            Court was led to assume that the provisions of
Article 320(3)(c)
were mandatory, but in our
            opinion, there are several cogent reasons for
            holding to the contrary. In the first place, the
            proviso to
Article 320
, itself, contemplates that
            the President or the Governor, as the case may
            be, “may make regulations specifying the
            matters in which either generally, or in any
            particular class of case or in particular
            circumstances, it shall not be necessary for a
            Public Service Commission to be consulted”.
19
The words quoted above give a clear indication
of the intention of the Constitution makers that
they did envisage certain cases or classes of
cases in which the Commission need not be
consulted. If the provisions of
Article 320
were
of a mandatory character, the Constitution
would not have left it to the discretion of the
Head of the Executive Government to undo
those provisions by making regulations to the
contrary. If it had been intended by the makers
of the Constitution that consultation with the
Commission should be mandatory, the proviso
would not have been there, or, at any rate, in
the terms in which it stands. That does not
amount to saying that it is open to the
Executive Government, completely to ignore the
existence of the Commission or to pick and
choose cases in which it may or may not be
consulted. Once, relevant regulations have been
made, they are meant to be followed in letter
and in spirit and it goes without saying that
consultation with the Commission on all
disciplinary matters affecting a public servant
has been specifically provided for, in order,
first, to give an assurance to the Services that a
wholly      independent    body     not   directly
concerned with the making of orders adversely
affecting public servants, has considered the
action proposed to be taken against a
particular public servant, with an open mind;
and secondly, to afford the Government
unbiased advice and opinion on matters vitally
affecting the morale of public services. It is,
therefore, incumbent upon the Executive
Government, when it proposes to take any
disciplinary action against a public servant, to
20
consult the Commission as to whether the
           action proposed to be taken was justified and
           was not in excess of the requirements of the
           situation.”
                                        (Emphasis Provided)
      Thus, even if, for arguments sake, consultation with

      Commission is held to be directory then also there is no

      doubt that once Regulations are framed these are to be

      followed, “in letter and spirit”.
24.   In other words, this Court in Manbodhan Lal Srivastava,

      had recognised the importance of Regulations framed under

      the proviso to
Article 320(3)
of the Constitution and had

      cautioned against the casual bypassing of the Regulations. In

      the case at hand, Regulations as contemplated under the

      Proviso were already in existence in Punjab known as Punjab

      Public   Service   Commission   (Limitation   of   Functions)

      Regulations, 1955. For our purposes, it is relevant to note

      that with these Regulations the State had taken out certain

      posts outside the purview of the Commission.       Admittedly,

      the posts of Assistant Professors and Librarians in Degree

      Colleges were not amongst them. In other words, these posts

      were within the purview of the Commission. Thus, selection

      of these posts was within the purview of the State
21
Commission, and it was mandatory that it ought to be

      consulted.
25.   The respondents have tried to meet this deficiency by stating

      that the State had amended the 1955 Regulations in March

      2022 (by retrospective effect), by mentioning these posts in

      the 1955 Regulations and these posts were then taken out

      from the purview of Commission. All the same, we are unable

      to accept this argument inasmuch as the amendment was

      made after concluding the entire recruitment process and

      giving appointment letters to the selected candidates. It was

      hence a post facto exercise. The Government had already

      made its selections on the posts which could only have been

      done   by   the    Commission      under
Article   320
of   the

      Constitution of India.
26.   This apart, the 1955 Regulations prescribed a procedure

      under which posts within the purview of the Commission

      could be withdrawn. Part III-B and Part III-C of the

      ‘Regulations and Instructions Governing the Work of the

      Punjab Public Service Commission’ provide a procedure for the

      exclusion   of    posts/services   from    the   purview   of   the

      Commission.
Regulation 20
reads as under:
22
“20. For exclusion of posts/services and other
matters from the purview of the Punjab Public
Service Commission, the following procedure
is to be followed:
(i) Individual proposals for taking out posts
from the purview of the Commission would be
processed by the Administrative Departments
concerned. After the Department had taken a
tentative decision to take out certain posts
from the purview of the Commission, the
Department         would       obtain      the
views/comments of the Public Service
Commission by making a self-contained
reference to the Commission.
(ii) On receipt of the comments/views of the
Commission, the matter would further be
examined by the Department concerned
keeping in view the comments/views so
received and the advice of the Department of
Personnel and Administrative Reforms. If the
Department comes to a definite conclusion
that the posts in question must be taken out of
the purview of the Commission, the
Department would take the matter to the
Council of Ministers incorporating the advice
of the Department of Personnel and
Administrative Reforms in the Memorandum to
be placed before the Council of Ministers.
(iii) After the proposal of the Administrative
Department is approved by the Council of
Ministers, necessary action to amend the
Punjab Public Service Commission (Limitation
of Functions) Regulations, 1955 would be
taken by the Department of Personnel and
Administrative Reforms.”
23
27.   Further, Part III-C of the Regulations provides that in cases

      where a difference of opinion between a Department of

      Government and Public Service Commission arises then

      what is to be done.
Regulation 21
reads as under:
“21. In order to secure uniformity of practice in
            cases of difference of opinion between a
            Department      of   Government       and    the
            Commission and to ensure that the
            Commission is duly consulted in all cases in
            which such consultation is necessary, all
            cases, in which there is difference of opinion
            between a Department and the Commission,
            should be referred to the Chief Minister.
22. The procedure for submitting cases to the
            Chief Minister should be that whenever as
            department finds itself unable to arrive at an
            agreement with the Commission, the cases
            should be sent over to the Chief Secretary on
            an early stage, if possible before any decisive
            action is taken…”
28.     It is admitted that in the present case the required

        procedure was not followed. In relation to 160 posts of

        Assistant Professor and 17 posts of Librarians, the

        Department had sent a reference to take the posts out of

        the purview of the Commission, but the Commission could
24
not take any decision, in the absence of its Chairperson; a

      post which remained unfilled for long years. Meanwhile the

      concerned department proceeded without the views of the

      Commission. 931 posts of Assistant Professors and 50

      posts of Librarians; admittedly with the Commission,

      pending recruitment as requisitioned by the State itself,

      and not taken out of the purview of the Commission, were

      also added and the advertisement inviting applications for

      the posts was issued on 19.10.2021. On the same day, the

      Department wrote to Commission to return its requisition

      sent to Commission for these posts. The Commission,

      however,   on   16.11.2021    wrote   to   the   Department

      disagreeing with the idea of taking the posts out of the

      purview of the Commission since the action as required at

      the end of the Government was not followed. Without any

      further action, the examinations were conducted between

      20th to 22nd November, 2022.
29.   It was after the selection and appointments were made that

      retrospectively on 26.03.2022 an amendment was made

      taking out these posts out of the purview of the

      Commission.     The learned Single Judge has rightly
25
observed that the retrospective amendment to the 1955

         Regulations, which was made much after the conclusion of

         the recruitment process, was nothing but a response to the

         Writ Petitions which had been filed by this time by the

         appellants. The learned Single Judge also notes that in the

         last 30 years, five advertisements had been issued for

         filling of posts of Assistant Professors/Lecturers6 and these

         selections were to be conducted by the Commission. The

         State never took the recruitment for these posts in its

       hands.
30.   What was the need to bypass the Commission in the present

      case? The learned counsel who appear for the appellants

      would argue that a new Government was formed in Punjab in

      September, 2021 which had to face elections in February,

      2022 and the burning hurry to make selections and

      appointments to more than 1000 such posts, on the eve of

      State elections was an act of political pragmatism, and

      nothing more.
31.   In case the State government was dissatisfied with the

      manner in which the Commission was conducting the

      recruitment (an argument which appears to have found


 6 Now the posts of Lecturers have been re-designated as Assistant Professors.
26
favour with the Division Bench), then it ought to have

      followed the due procedure and withdrawn the posts from the

      purview of the Commission in accordance with the 1955

      Regulations. The case at hand is a prime example where

      Commission’s role was totally eliminated in the recruitment

      and well considered selection parameters, prescribed by an

      expert body, like UGC, were replaced with a simple Multiple-

      Choice Question type test, which is unheard of where

      appointments for the posts of Assistant Professor in degree

      colleges are concerned.
32.   Let us for the moment keep aside the ground of political

      expediency and look at what transpired leading to the volte

      face insofar as the selection entrusted to the Commission as

      early as in January 2021. At the risk of repetition, the

      decision of the Council of Ministers on 17.09.2021, as

      approved by the Chief Minister was to take out 160 posts of

      Assistant Proffesors and 17 posts of Librarians from the

      purview of the Commission, which were the freshly created

      posts in the newly established Colleges. The selection

      committee proposed for the said exercise was also to be

      Chaired by a Former Chairman of the UGC. On 20.09.2021,
27
a new Government took over and on 09.10.2021, a committee

      headed by the Secretary, Department of Higher Education

      reviewed the earlier decisions and constituted two separate

      Committees, each headed by the Vice-Chancellors of the two

      Universities and the selection criteria was confined to a

      written test.   The proposal was put up before the Chief

      Minister, with the observation that it shall subsequently be

      placed before the Council of Ministers. Though the Chief

      Minister accepted the proposal on 13.10.2021, it was never

      placed before the Council of Ministers and a Memo was

      issued on 18.10.2021 including the entire posts of Assistant

      Professors and Librarians available, to be filled up. As noticed

      above the decision to remove the said posts from the purview

      of the Commission was taken much later, after the selection

      process stood completed.
33.   Let us also understand the scheme of UGC Regulations.
Entry 66 of List I of Schedule VII of the Constitution

      empowers Union to make laws relating to “Co-ordination and

      determination of standards in institutions for higher education

      or research and scientific and technical institutions”. Under

      this entry, the Parliament had enacted the
UGC Act, 1956
28
setting up an expert body named UGC for the purposes of

       the Act, which is clear from the Preamble of the UGC Act

       which reads as follows:
“
An Act
to make provision for the co-ordination
                and    determination      of   standards     in
                Universities and for that purpose, to establish
                a University Grants Commission.”
34.    Under provisions of the
UGC Act
, UGC frames Regulations

       from time to time setting qualifications and other standards

       for teaching and non-teaching staff. Under
Section 26(1)(e)
and (g)7, the UGC (Minimum Qualifications for Appointment

       of Teachers and Other Academic Staff in Universities and

       Colleges and Measures for the Maintenance of Standards in

       Higher Education) Regulations, 2010 were framed. These

       Regulations set the minimum eligibility criterion for the

       appointment to various posts including Assistant Professors

       and Librarians. A method of selection to these posts is also

       provided in the 2010 UGC Regulations which has not been
 7 The Commission may, by notification in Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with
 this Act and the rules made thereunder-
(a)            …
     (b)            …
                    …
(e) defining the qualifications that should ordinarily be required of any person to
 be appointed to the teaching staff of the University, having regard to the branch of
 education in which he is expected to give instruction.
(f) …
(g) regulating the maintenance of standards and the co-ordination of work or
 facilities in Universities.
29
followed in the present case. To this, the private respondents

      as well as the State have taken the stand that these

      Regulations are directory in nature and non-compliance of

      these Regulations would not vitiate the recruitment.
35.   The respondents would place reliance upon Kalyani

      Mathivanan v. KV Jeyaraj & Ors. (2015) 6 SCC 363 to

      contend that UGC Regulations are not binding on the State if

      the State has not adopted the UGC Regulations 2018 which

      were in force at the relevant time, as was the case here.

      What were adopted by the State in the present case were the

      2010 UGC Regulations, which stood superseded by this time

      by the subsequent Regulations of 2018 of UGC which were

      not adopted by the State till the completion of recruitment

      process.
36.   All the same, the adoption of 2010 UGC Regulations by the

      State vide order dated 30.07.2013 was an adoption by

      incorporation and not an adoption by mere reference. This

      means that the 2010 UGC Regulations were in force in the

      State of Punjab despite its repeal by the 2018 Regulations by

      the UGC. This is clear from the intention and purpose of the

      order dated 30.07.2013 where it was stated in no uncertain

      terms that the 2010 Regulations are being adopted with a
30
view to raise the standard of Higher Education in the State,

with a specific mention of adoption of API Scores. Now API as

we know means Academic Performance Indicator which is a

method used in Higher Education to assess the quality and

merit of teachers in Higher Education which would include

teaching experience and research and academic contribution,

which are extremely relevant factors to judge the merit of a

teacher in Higher Education. The relevant part of the order

dated 30.07.2013 reads as follows:
“With a view to raise the standard of Higher
      Education in the State of Punjab, the
      Notification issued by the U.G.C dated
      30.06.2010 and 14.06.2013 pertaining to
      governing the appointment and promotion of
      Principals/Professors/Associate
      Professors/Asst. Professors, the relevant API
      scores with modifications mentioned below
      are ordered to be applied in the Universities,
      Govt, aided and private colleges : -
1. The term/tenure of the Principal of a private
      college is raised from 5 to 10 years.
2. D.P.T. Punjab or his representatives will be
      associated with the selection committee
      constituted     for   the     appointment     of
      Principals/Asst. Professors (covered under
      Grant-in-aid posts) in private colleges.”
31
37.   The   distinction   between   adoption   by   incorporation   as

      opposed to reference has been explained by Bhagwati, J.,

      speaking for a three-judge Bench of this Court in
Mahindra

      & Mahindra Ltd. v. Union of India
, (1979) 2 SCC 529, in

      the following terms:
“…It ignores the distinction between a mere
            reference to or citation of one statute in
            another and an incorporation which in effect
            means bodily lifting a provision of one
            enactment and making it a part of another.
            Where there is mere reference to or citation of
            one     enactment      in    another     without
            incorporation.
Section 8(1)
applies and the
            repeal and re-enactment of the provision
            referred to or cited has the effect set out in
            that section and the reference to the provision
            repealed is required to be construed as
            reference to the provision as re-enacted. Such
            was the case in
Collector of Customs v.
            Nathella Sampathu Chetty
[AIR 1962 SC 316 :
(
1962) 3 SCR 786] and New Central Jute Mills
            Co. Ltd. v. Assistant Collector of Central Excise
[(1970) 2 SCC 820 : AIR 1971 SC 454 : (1971)
            2 SCR 92] . But where a provision of one
            statute is incorporated in another, the repeal
            or amendment of the former does not affect
            the latter. The effect of incorporation is as if
            the provision incorporated were written out in
            the incorporating statute and were a part of it.
Legislation by incorporation is a common
            legislative device employed by the legislature,
32
where the legislature for convenience of
            drafting incorporates provisions from an
            existing statute by reference to that statute
            instead of setting out for itself at length the
            provisions which it desires to adopt. Once the
            incorporation    is   made,     the    provision
            incorporated becomes an integral part of the
            statute in which it is transposed and
            thereafter there is no need to refer to the
            statute from which the incorporation is made
            and any subsequent amendment made in it
            has no effect on the incorporation statute…”
38.   The distinction here is that in case of adoption by

      incorporation, the subsequent amendment or repeal of the

      incorporated statute will be of no consequences on the

      incorporation. The adoption then becomes frozen at the point

      in time when the incorporation was made. But the question

      whether a provision of law is adopted by reference or

      incorporation also depends upon the language of the

      order/statute in which such provision is being adopted. It

      may also depend upon the conduct of the State and how it

      has been recognised and accepted in that State. 2018 UGC

      Regulations may have repealed the 2010 UGC Regulations

      but still they were being considered and recognised in the

      State of Punjab for all purposes, even after its repeal.   We
33
have already
referred above
the order dated 30.07.2013

      whereby    the   State    Government   had     adopted    2010

      Regulations   and   the   reasons   assigned   by   the   State

      Government in doing so which was to uplift the standard of

      higher education.
39.   Further the memorandum passed by Council of Ministers on

      17.09.2021 makes it clear that the State of Punjab was still

      referring to the 2010 UGC Regulations irrespective of the fact

      that 2010 UGC Regulations had been repealed in 2018. In

      this memorandum, the Council of Ministers has explicitly

      mentioned the 2010 UGC Regulations and also admitted that

      the 2010 UGC Regulations have to be followed strictly since

      they were adopted by the State of Punjab. The relevant

      portion of the said memo reads as under:
1.4 The UGC has already notified rules and
            regulations for recruitment of Assistant
            Professors and Librarians in its notification
            “UGC Regulation on Minimum Qualifications
            for Appointment of Teachers and Other
            Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges
            and Measures for the Maintenance of
            Standards in Higher Education” of 2010,
            which has been adopted by the Government
            of Punjab along with the subsequent
            amendments.
34
The Departmental Selection Committee will
            strictly follow the guidelines as per above
            UGC notification for recruitment of 160
            Assistant Professors and 17 Librarians. The
            relevant portion of the notification for short
            listing”/appointment of candidates to the post
            of Assistant Professor and Librarians under
            the University System (in University and
            colleges) in Appendix III Table II-C is
            reproduced as under:
Selection         a) Academic Record and
         Committe          Research       Performance
         e Criteria        (50%)
         /                 b) Assessment of Domain
         Weightag          Knowledge and Teaching
         e   (Total        Skills (30%)
         Weightag          c)    Interview
         e=100)            Performance (20%)
40.   Thus, officially the 2010 UGC Regulations were in force in

      the State of Punjab as these were adopted by way of

      incorporation and not by reference.      The repeal of 2010

      Regulations by the UGC Regulations of 2018 had no impact

      insofar as applicability of 2010 Regulations in the State of

      Punjab was concerned. Also, it is on record that after the

      impugned order of the Division Bench, the State adopted the

      2018 UGC Regulations. This shows that the State recognises

      the importance of the UGC Regulations. The chief intention
35
of the G.O. dated 30.07.2013 is that while making selection

      to the posts of Assistant Professors API Scores are to be seen.

      This was the purpose; which negates a simple objective type

      test.
41.   Doing away with the 2010 Regulations was also a last minute

      decision. In January 2021 requisition for recruitment of 931

      Assistant Professors and 50 Librarians was sent by the State

      government to the Commission. Then, a meeting of the

      Council of Ministers was held on 17.09.2021 in relation to

      the   recruitment      of   additional   160   posts   of   Assistant

      Professors and 17 posts of Librarians which had come up in

      16 new Government Colleges where a decision was taken to

      remove these posts from the purview of the Public Service

      Commission so that recruitment can be made through a

      Departmental Selection Committee, which we have already

      mentioned above, but what is significant here is that till this

      time the Government had all the intentions of following the

      2010 Regulations as the memorandum dated 17.09.2021

      inter-alia states :-
1.4 The UGC has already notified rules and
             regulations for recruitment of Assistant
             Professors and Librarians in its notification
36
“UGC Regulation on Minimum Qualifications
       for Appointment of Teachers and Other
       Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges
       and Measures for the Maintenance of
       Standards in Higher Education” of 2010,
       which has been adopted by the Government
       of Punjab along with the subsequent
       amendments.
The Departmental Selection Committee will
       strictly follow the guidelines as per above
       UGC notification for recruitment of 160
       Assistant Professors and 17 Librarians. The
       relevant portion of the notification for short
       listing”/appointment of candidates to the post
       of Assistant Professor and Librarians under
       the University System (in University and
       colleges) in Appendix III Table II-C is
       reproduced as under:
Selection                   Academic     Record
  Committee                   and       Research
  Criteria        /           Performance (50%)
  Weightage   (Total          Assessment        of
  Weightage=100)              Domain Knowledge
                              and Teaching Skills
                              (30%)
                              Interview
                              Performance (20%)

                                    (Emphasis provided)


Till   17.09.2021,   therefore,   the   Government      had   full
intentions of following the 2010 Regulations. The decision
37
earlier was only to remove the posts out of the purview of

      Commission.
42.
In a more recent judgment of a Division Bench of this Court

      in
Gambhirdan K. Gadhvi v. State of Gujarat
(2022) 5

      SCC 179, it is held that UGC Regulations have a mandatory

      character and are binding on all universities, State or

      Central, that have opted to receive the financial assistance of

      the UGC under its Scheme dated 31.12.2008 (which later

      came to be incorporated as Appendix I of the 2010 UGC

      Regulations). In that case, what weighed in the mind of the

      Division Bench of this Court was the fact that the concerned

      University had availed of the above-mentioned UGC Scheme,

      and as part of the same, it had agreed to adhere to UGC

      regulations (2010 and 2018 regulations
,
in that case
). As a

      result, the University was bound to follow the UGC

      Regulations for the purposes of appointment of Vice-

      Chancellors, and it had to amend the relevant rules/statutes

      to bring them in line with the UGC Regulations. This is what

      was said:
38
“29. It is not in dispute that the SP University
            is receiving Central financial assistance under
            the Scheme and it is included in the State
            Universities     receiving   Central   financial
            assistance as per
Section 12(b)
of the UGC
            Act, 1956. Therefore, having adopted the UGC
            Scheme and implemented the same and
            getting Central financial assistance to the
            extent of 80% of the maintenance expenditure,
            the State Government and the SP University
            are bound by the UGC Regulations, 2010. The
            UGC Regulations, 2010 are superseded by the
            UGC Regulations, 2018. However, the
            eligibility criteria for the post of Vice-
            Chancellor and the constitution of the Search
            Committee for appointment of a Vice-
            Chancellor remains the same. Therefore, the
            State of Gujarat and the universities
            thereunder including the SP University are
            bound to follow UGC Regulations, 2010 and
            UGC Regulations, 2018.”
43.   It was held that UGC Regulations became a part of the

      parent Act i.e. the
UGC Act
, being a piece of subordinate

      legislation that is laid before both Houses of Parliament. As a

      result, these would prevail in case there is any inconsistency

      between State legislation and UGC regulations, by application

      of the doctrine of repugnancy:
“50. It cannot be disputed that the UGC
            Regulations are enacted by the UGC in
            exercise of powers under
Sections 26(1)(e)
and
39
26(1)(g)
of the UGC Act, 1956. Even as per the
UGC Act
every rule and regulation made
            under the said Act, shall be laid before each
            House of Parliament. Therefore, being a
            subordinate legislation, UGC Regulations
            becomes part of the Act. In case of any conflict
            between the State legislation and the Central
            legislation, Central legislation shall prevail by
            applying the rule/principle of repugnancy as
            enunciated in
Article 254
of the Constitution
            as the subject “education” is in the Concurrent
            List (List III) of the Seventh Schedule to the
            Constitution. Therefore, any appointment as a
            Vice-Chancellor contrary to the provisions of
            the UGC Regulations can be said to be in
            violation     of   the   statutory    provisions,
            warranting a writ of quo warranto.”

                                                  (Emphasis provided)
44.   UGC Regulations are made under
UGC Act
which was

      enacted by Parliament under Entry 66 of List I of the

      Schedule VII, whereas State Governments exercise powers

      under Entry 25 of the List III of the Schedule VII to make

      laws relating to “education”. Further, it is to be noted that

      Entry 25 of the List III is subject to Entry 66 of List I. Hence,

      laws, including the subordinate legislations as in the present

      case, made under Entry 66 of the Union List would prevail

      over any law made under Entry 25 of the Concurrent List.
40
45.   This Court in
State of T.N. v. Adhiyaman Educational &

      Research Institute
, (1995) 4 SCC 104 while dealing with

      Entry 66 and Entry 25 of the Union List and Concurrent

      List, respectively, observed thus:
“41. What emerges from the above discussion
            is as follows:
(i) The expression ‘coordination’ used in Entry
            66 of the Union List of the Seventh Schedule to
            the Constitution does not merely mean
            evaluation. It means harmonisation with a
            view to forge a uniform pattern for a concerted
            action according to a certain design, scheme
            or plan of development. It, therefore, includes
            action not only for removal of disparities in
            standards but also for preventing the
            occurrence of such disparities. It would,
            therefore, also include power to do all things
            which are necessary to prevent what would
            make ‘coordination’ either impossible or
            difficult. This power is absolute and
            unconditional and in the absence of any valid
            compelling reasons, it must be given its full
            effect according to its plain and express
            intention.
(ii) To the extent that the State legislation is in
            conflict with the Central legislation though the
            former is purported to have been made under
            Entry 25 of the Concurrent List but in effect
            encroaches       upon     legislation    including
            subordinate legislation made by the Centre
            under Entry 25 of the Concurrent List or to
41
give effect to Entry 66 of the Union List, it
            would be void and inoperative.
(iii) If there is a conflict between the two
            legislations, unless the State legislation is
            saved by the provisions of the main part of
            clause (2) of
Article 254
, the State legislation
            being repugnant to the Central legislation, the
            same would be inoperative.
(iv) Whether the State law encroaches upon
            Entry 66 of the Union List or is repugnant to
            the law made by the Centre under Entry 25 of
            the Concurrent List, will have to be
            determined by the examination of the two
            laws and will depend upon the facts of each
            case…”

                                        (Emphasis provided)
46.   In short, in the present case the UGC Regulations would be

      binding particularly when the State of Punjab vide its order

      dated 30.07.2013 had adopted 2010 UGC Regulations.
47.   We may add here that what also weighed with the Division

      Bench of the High Court was the fact that it was the Punjab

      Educational Service (College Cadre) (Class II) Rules, 1976

      (hereinafter ‘1976 Rules’) which were applicable, and not the

      UGC Regulations. While it is true that the 1976 Rules were

      applicable to the recruitment but a perusal of the same

      shows that these only mandate that the recruitment to posts

      of Assistant Professors and Librarians should be through
42
direct recruitment. It does not prescribe any mode or method

      of recruitment. This aspect was rightly noticed by the learned

      Single Judge. As discussed in detail above, the State of

      Punjab itself adopted the standards and process
laid down by
the UGC. Therefore, it was bound to follow these Regulations,

      notwithstanding the 1976 Rules.
48.   In short, we find that there is a total arbitrariness in the

      present selection. The memo of Council of Ministers dated

      17.09.2021 shows that State wanted to recruit only on 160

      posts of Assistant Professors and on 17 posts of Librarians

      through departmental selection committee on an urgent

      basis as these were for the newly opened colleges. As we have

      already stated, even in those cases, the recruitment was to be

      made by following the UGC Regulations. Next, the 931 and

      50 posts of Assistant Professors and Librarians, which were

      lying vacant and in regard to which requisition had already

      been sent to Commission, were added and it was decided

      that the sole basis of the selection would be a single exam.

      Moreover,   a   mere   45-day    deadline   was   set   for   the

      commencement and conclusion of the whole recruitment

      process and ultimately within a span of two months, not only
43
was   the     recruitment      process       concluded,     but     even

      appointment letters were issued. One cannot fail to notice the

      burning     haste   with     which    this    entire     exercise   was

      undertaken by the powers that be. It has thus been

      repeatedly pressed by the appellants that all this was

      motivated by political exigency in the form of the impending

      Assembly elections in the State of Punjab.
49.   An attempt was made by the State and the private

      respondents to argue that the selection process which was

      ultimately adopted was in any case better than the one

      prescribed by the UGC. The logic given is that a written test

      would be impartial and will be same to all, whereas there are

      always    chances   of     abuse,    favouritism,      nepotism,    even

      corruption in a test based on API. Written test is also less

      time consuming it was argued.           However, we are not at all

      convinced with this argument. The recruitment for teaching

      posts in higher education on the basis of scores in an

      objective type written test, on grounds that such a test is non

      arbitrary whereas viva voce            and appreciation of other

      aspects such as academic work could be abused and could

      be unfairly applied, is an argument which is puerile to say
44
the least. Abandoning a time tested and uniformly followed

      method of selecting Assistant Professors in higher education

      with Multiple-Choice Questions based written examination is

      unacceptable; especially when the State itself has adopted

      the selection process
laid down by
the expert body which is

      also the apex statutory body, the UGC constituted under

      Entry 66 in the Union List of the Seventh Schedule of the

      Constitution.
50.   The State cannot defend such an arbitrary practice in the

      garb of a policy decision. We have to keep in mind that these

      were the posts of Assistant Professors for which a specialized

      body like UGC has prescribed a process for the selections,

      which includes appreciation of academic work of a candidate,

      his/her performance in viva-voce, amongst others. Just a

      simple Multiple-Choice Question based written exam cannot

      be sufficient to check the suitability of such candidates. Even

      if it is, then also, in the present case, the sudden

      replacement of a time tested recruitment process with a new

      process, was not only arbitrary but was done without

      following the due procedure, which vitiates the entire

      process. Even if we ignore the argument of political
45
expediency, we cannot but notice the executive hegemony in

      reversing a decision of the Council of Ministers, without

      reference to the said body. It also undermines the quality of

      selection, since there was no comprehensive exercise to

      examine the merit of a candidate. The written test did not

      challenge the innovative faculty of a candidate. One was not

      required to give an elaborate answer to a question as is done

      in a subjective type of test. Instead, it was an objective type of

      test in which the correct answer was to be given from

      multiple-choice of answers. The elimination of the viva-voce,

      which is such a vital component in the overall appreciation of

      merit of a candidate, who has to teach in a higher education

      institute, was another grave error.
51.   All this goes on to show that the intention of the authorities

      was to conclude the exercise as quickly as possible; which

      though sought to be justified on grounds of expediency in

      filling up the posts, undermines the selection by reason of no

      qualitative assessment of the candidates carried out. The

      learned Single Judge rightly observed that this approach

      casts serious doubts on the fairness of the process and the

      impartiality of the selectors, who were likely to be under
46
pressure to complete the exercise within the timeline,

      regardless of the quality of the selections. The selection

      process is further impaired by the inclusion of posts already

      requisitioned   to   the   Commission,   which   as   per   the

      Regulations were required to be filled up by the Commission

      and the apparent deviation from the UGC Guidelines which

      were adopted by the State and required to be followed, in this

      very selection, by the Council of Ministers.
52.   The State and its instrumentalities have a duty and

      responsibility to act fairly and reasonably in terms of the

      mandate of
Article 14
of the Constitution. Any decision taken

      by the State must be reasoned, and not arbitrary. This Court

      has consistently held that when a thing is done in a post-

      haste manner, mala fides would be presumed, and further

      that anything done in undue haste can also be termed as

      arbitrary and cannot be condoned in law. We may refer here

      to a few judgments of this Court which lay down this

      proposition.
53.
In
Fuljit Kaur v. State of Punjab
(2010) 11 SCC 455, this

      Court held that any State action undertaken in a hasty

      manner could be arbitrary State action cannot be condoned

      in law. This is what was said by this Court:
47
“25. Before parting with the case, it may be
pertinent to mention here that the allotment
had been made to the appellant within 48
hours of submission of her application though
in ordinary cases, it takes about a year. The
appellant had further been favoured to pay
the aforesaid provisional price of Rs. 93,000 in
four instalments in two years, as is evident
from the letter dated 8-4-1987. Making the
allotment in such a hasty manner itself is
arbitrary and unreasonable and is hit by
Article 14
of the Constitution. This Court has
consistently held that “when a thing is done in
a post-haste manner, mala fides would be
presumed”. Anything done in undue haste can
also be termed as “arbitrary and cannot be
condoned in law”. [
Vide S.P. Kapoor (Dr.) v.
State of H.P.
[(1981) 4 SCC 716 : 1982 SCC
(L&S) 14 :
AIR 1981 SC 2181] , M.P. Hasta
Shilpa Vikas Nigam Ltd. v. Devendra Kumar
Jain
[(1995) 1 SCC 638 : 1995 SCC (L&S) 364
: (
1995) 29 ATC 159] , Bahadursinh
Lakhubhai Gohil v. Jagdishbhai M. Kamalia
[(2004) 2 SCC 65 : AIR 2004 SC 1159] and
ZenitMataplast     (P)   Ltd.    v.   State   of
Maharashtra [(2009) 10 SCC 388] .] Thus,
such an allotment in favour of the appellant is
liable to be declared to have been made in
arbitrary and unreasonable manner. However,
we are not inclined to take such drastic steps
as the appellant has developed the land
subsequent to allotment.”

                           (Emphasis provided)
48
54.
In
Bahadursinh Lakhubhai Gohil v. Jagdishbhai M.

      Kamalia
(2004) 2 SCC 65, this Court reiterated the above

      principle while dealing with a case where the change in the

      office-bearer had resulted in a hasty and arbitrary change in

      the policy, which is also the case here. The relevant

      observations in
the said judgment
are as follows:
“24. The impugned order was preceded by a
            direction of the Home Minister on 7-9-1996. A
            change in the opinion came into being only
            upon change in the holder of the office and
            that too within a few days. Not only had the
            matter not been admittedly placed on the
            agenda of the meeting dated 25-7-1997, the
            same was considered showing undue haste.
25.
In
S.P. Kapoor (Dr) v. State of H.P.
[(1981)
            4 SCC 716 : 1982 SCC (L&S) 14 : AIR 1981
            SC 2181] this Court held that when a thing is
            done in a post-haste manner, mala fide would
            be presumed, stating: (SCC p. 739, para 33)
            “33. … The post-haste manner in which these
            things have been done on 3-11-1979 suggests
            that some higher-up was interested in pushing
            through the matter hastily when the Regular
            Secretary, Health and Family Welfare was on
            leave.”

                                        (Emphasis provided)
55.
In
Zenit Mataplast (P) Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra
(2009)

      10 SCC 388, this Court laid down the general principle that
49
State action should be grounded in sound principles and

      should not be unpredictable or without basis. This Court

      noted as follows:
“27. Every action of the State or its
            instrumentalities should not only be fair,
            legitimate and above-board but should be
            without any affection or aversion. It should
            neither be suggestive of discrimination nor
            even apparently give an impression of bias,
            favouritism and nepotism. The decision
            should be made by the application of known
            principles and rules and in general such
            decision should be predictable and the citizen
            should know where he is, but if a decision is
            taken without any principle or without any
            rule, it is unpredictable and such a decision is
            antithesis to the decision taken in accordance
            with the rule of law (vide
S.G. Jaisinghani v.
            Union of India
[AIR 1967 SC 1427] , AIR p.
            1434, para 14 and
Haji T.M. Hassan Rawther
            v. Kerala Financial Corpn.
[(1988) 1 SCC 166 :
AIR 1988 SC 157] ).”

                                        (Emphasis provided)
56.   In the present case there are multiple deficiencies, as stated

      above. The giving away of a rigorous criteria
laid down in
the

      UGC regulations with a single, multiple-choice question

      based written test, and the complete elimination of the viva-
voce, all establish the arbitrary nature of the exercise which
50
cannot pass the test of reasonableness laid down under
Article 14
of the Constitution. Hence, the learned Single

      Judge had rightly struck down the entire selection process,

      and the Division Bench of the High Court erred in interfering

      with that conclusion.
57.   Lastly we need to state that it is a settled principle that when

      the law prescribes a thing to be done in a particular manner,

      then it should be done in that manner alone. [See:
Cherukuri Mani v. Chief Secretary, Govt of Andhra

      Pradesh & Ors.
(
2015) 13 SCC 722, Dharmin Bai

      Kashyap v. Babli Sahu
(2023) 10 SCC 461, Nazir

      Ahmed v. King-Emperor (LR
63 IA 372), Babu Verghese &

      Ors. v. Bar Council of India & Ors.
(1999) 3 SCC 422]
58.   True, the State is entitled to change its policy, yet a sudden

      change without valid reasons will always be seen with

      suspicion. Even in cases where there is no statutory

      prescription of any particular way of doing a thing, the

      executive must observe the long-standing practice, and a

      deviation from such a practice would require passing the

      muster of reasonableness, which is a facet of
Article 14
of the

      Constitution. In this regard, this Court in Bannari Amman

      Sugars Ltd. v. CTO (2005) 1 SCC 625 observed that:
51
“9. While the discretion to change the policy in
     exercise of the executive power, when not
     trammelled by any statute or rule is wide
     enough, what is imperative and implicit in
     terms of
Article 14
is that a change in policy
     must be made fairly and should not give the
     impression that it was so done arbitrarily or
     by any ulterior criteria. The wide sweep of
Article 14
and the requirement of every State
     action qualifying for its validity on this
     touchstone irrespective of the field of activity
     of the State is an accepted tenet. The basic
     requirement of
Article 14
is fairness in action
     by the State, and non-arbitrariness in essence
     and substance is the heartbeat of fair play.
     Actions are amenable, in the panorama of
     judicial review only to the extent that the State
     must act validly for discernible reasons, not
     whimsically for any ulterior purpose…”


     In the case at hand, the State did not adhere to UGC

Regulations and took the posts out of the purview of the

Commission without following the procedure prescribed

under the law. And this was done suddenly without any

valid reason and thus, it would amount to arbitrariness and

cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
In
Sivanandan C.T.

v. High
Court of Kerala (2024) 3 SCC 799, the

Constitution Bench of this Court observed that:
52
“45. The underlying basis for the application
            of the doctrine of legitimate expectation has
            expanded and evolved to include the
            principles of good administration. Since
            citizens repose their trust in the State, the
            actions and policies of the State give rise to
            legitimate expectations that the State will
            adhere to its assurance or past practice by
            acting in a consistent, transparent, and
            predictable manner. The principles of good
            administration require that the decisions of
            public authorities must withstand the test of
            consistency, transparency, and predictability
            to avoid being regarded as arbitrary and
            therefore violative of Article 14.”
59.   As far back as in the year 1979, this Court in
Ramana

      Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of

      India
, (1979) 3 SCC 489, speaking through Justice PN

      Bhagwati, had said that government jobs are also a kind of

      wealth and the State cannot distribute or withhold such

      wealth on the basis of arbitrary principles. The relevant

      portion from the said case law is as follows:
“11. Today the Government in a welfare State,
            is the regulator and dispenser of special
            services and provider of a large number of
            benefits, including jobs, contracts, licences,
            quotas, mineral rights, etc. The Government
            pours forth wealth, money, benefits, services,
53
contracts, quotas and licences. The valuables
dispensed by Government take many forms,
but they all share one characteristic. They are
steadily taking the place of traditional forms
of wealth…..The discretion of the Government
has been held to be not unlimited in that the
Government cannot give or withhold largesse
in its arbitrary discretion or at its sweet will. It
is insisted, as pointed out by Prof. Reich in an
especially stimulating article on “The New
Property” in 73 Yale Law Journal 733, “that
Government action be based on standards
that are not arbitrary or unauthorised”. The
Government cannot be permitted to say that it
will give jobs or enter into contracts or issue
quotas or licences only in favour of those
having grey hair or belonging to a particular
political party or professing a particular
religious faith…

12…It must, therefore, be taken to be the law
that where the Government is dealing with the
public, whether by way of giving jobs or
entering into contracts or issuing quotas or
licences or granting other forms of largesse,
the Government cannot act arbitrarily at its
sweet will and, like a private individual, deal
with any person it pleases, but its action must
be in conformity with standard or norms
which is not arbitrary, irrational or irrelevant.
The power or discretion of the Government in
the matter of grant of largesse including
award of jobs, contracts, quotas, licences, etc.
must be confined and structured by rational,
relevant and non-discriminatory standard or
norm and if the Government departs from
54
such standard or norm in any particular case
            or cases, the action of the Government would
            be liable to be struck down, unless it can be
            shown by the Government that the departure
            was not arbitrary, but was based on some
            valid principle which in itself was not
            irrational, unreasonable or discriminatory.”




            In the present case, the State has miserably failed to

       justify the departure from the standard norms of the

       recruitment process. It has failed to give any valid reason for

       not adopting the UGC Regulations and avoiding the Public

       Service   Commission       in    the    recruitment        in    question.
Moreover, as discussed earlier, the reason for this departure

       were narrow political and clearly arbitrary.
60.   Before parting, we would like to observe that we are aware of

      the fact that quashing of the entire recruitment process may

      cause hardships for the selected candidates, but at the same

      time, there is no equity in the favour of selected candidates

      as challenge to the recruitment was made during the

      pendency of the process and appointments were subject to

      the   Court   orders.   A   gross       illegality   like   the    present

      recruitment cannot be ignored.
55
61.   Thus, considering the entire facts of the case, we allow these

      appeals and set aside the order dated 23.09.2024 passed by

      the Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court

      and quash the entire recruitment and direct the State to

      initiate the recruitment process as per the 2018 UGC

      Regulations which are now in force in the State of Punjab.
62.   Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of.
………………………………J.
                                        [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]




                                           ………………………………J.
                                         [K. VINOD CHANDRAN]

 NEW DELHI;
JULY 14, 2025.
56