[Cites
33
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. United Spirits Ltd vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 14 July, 2025
2025 INSC 833                                                             REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5113 OF 2025

            M/S UNITED SPIRITS LTD.                                     APPELLANT (s)

                                                     VERSUS

            THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH
            & ORS.                                                     RESPONDENT(s)

                                                      WITH

                                        CIVIL APPEAL No. 5114 of 2025


                                                JUDGMENT
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.              A short and interesting question falls for consideration in these

            appeals. The issue is whether the appellants are liable for the payment

            of entry tax under Section 3 of the Madhya Pradesh Sthaniya Kshetra

            Me Mal Ke Pravesh Par Kar Adhiniyam, 1976 [hereinafter referred to as

            the ‘M.P. Entry Tax Act, 1976’]. The High Court has repelled the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
BORRA LM VALLI
Date: 2025.07.14
17:51:27 IST
Reason:
challenge of the appellants. Aggrieved, they are in appeal(s) before us.
1
BRIEF FACTS: -
CASE OF THE APPELLANTS: -
2.   In the writ petition filed by the appellants, their case was that they

are involved in bottling and supplying of Beer and Indian Made Foreign

Liquor (for short ‘IMFL’). The appellants hold license under the
M.P.

Excise Act, 1944
to manufacture and supply beer and IMFL. They

supply the said goods after obtaining a No Objection Certificate [NOC]

from the officer-in-charge posted at the factory. It was contended that

the goods are transported to the State Government warehouse and the

transportation pass is issued in the name of the concerned warehouse.

According to the appellants, the sales are made by the warehouse in

charge to the authorized retailers, who are also license holders for retail

sale of IMFL and beer.
3.   The appellants averred that under the
M.P. Excise Act
, FL-9

license is to manufacture IMFL products and FL-9A license is to

produce franchisee products. FL-9 and FL-9A licensees can sell to FL-

10 licensees only. According to the appellants, the FL-10 licensee in

M.P. is the Excise Department, which runs the State Government

warehouse. The retailers hold the FL-1 license and they purchase from
2
FL-10 licensee after issuance of NOC by the respective District Excise

Officers. According to the appellants, the sale is made by the

Government warehouses to the retailers through the sale bill issued in

the name of the retailers; that the Government warehouses deposit

the amount payable to the appellants in their bank accounts and send

intimation in respect of the goods sold in respect of the appellants to the

Commissioner, who in turn transfers the amount from the bank of the

Department to the appellants’ bank account. The appellants submit that

the retailers pay license fee in equal installments and at that point were

paying 6% ‘Parivahan Shulk’ (transportation expenses) by depositing

the same with the Treasury. The appellants contend that the transaction

is between the Government warehouses and the retailers.

CASE OF THE RESPONDENT- STATE: -
4.      In the return filed by the State, they contended that the State

Government neither purchases nor sells the liquor. The State referred to

three documents that had a crucial bearing on the disposal of the present

case.
i)      First is the communication issued by the Additional Secretary,

(Finance Department), Government of M.P. to the Excise Commissioner
3
under the subject “Collection of Indian Made Foreign Liquor and

provision of its supply to its retail licensees”. The communication states

that the Manufacturing Units are allowed to store liquor in the

departmental godowns. The Manufacturing units declare the Ex-godown

price of their liquor in due course and supply of liquor is effected to

retail contractors by adding 5% additional fee on this cost. Retail

contractors would deposit the amount with the specified bank and the

bank would deposit the amount through the treasury in the government

account. The Deputy Commissioners would be sent the statement of the

amount deposited twice every month.        Out of the amount collected

during the previous month, payment of amount due to the manufacturing

unit would be made by the Excise Commissioner and the expenditure

would be debited from the expenditure account pertaining to the

Commercial Tax Department.
ii)   The second communication also dealt with the same issue as above

with certain minor changes which are not material. There was a

clarification that the 5% amount would be transferred to the

departmental head, and the remaining amount to the concerned

manufacturing unit.
4
iii)   The third and the most important document annexed to the counter

affidavit is the “Guidelines for the Officers-in-charge of Foreign liquor

warehouse” issued on 27.3.2002. Under the guidelines, it is mentioned

that Foreign liquor warehouse be established at the Divisional

Headquarters of the State. Manufacturing Units would store foreign

liquor and that supply of collected liquor would be effected to the retail

contractors at the rates reckoned after adding 5% amount to the rates

declared by the manufacturing units. All arrangements of storage was to

remain under the control of the Deputy Commissioners posted at the

Divisional Headquarters; and the Divisional Deputy Commissioners

would issue directions to the Officer-in-charge for issuance of No

Objection Certificates to the manufacturing units after assessing the

local demand. Retail sale licensee would make arrangement of loading

on their own for effecting supply of foreign liquor stored in the

warehouse. Collection Counter of Punjab National Bank is established

in each and every store. Retail contractor would deposit the necessary

amount in the account of the concerned manufacturing unit at the

counter of this bank. Under Supply process, the following guidelines

are mentioned:-
5
a)   Demand note of each and every shop would be submitted

individually in the prescribed form for taking supply of foreign liquor

and beer by the licensee of retail sale from the store. Brand-wise/label-
wise/size-wise and quantity of the manufacturing units would be clearly

recorded in this demand note.
b)   Warehouse officer would scrutinize the submitted demand letter.

In case a few labels of liquor/beer mentioned in the submitted demand

letter are not available, then the necessary amendment would be made in

the demand letter.
c)   Warehouse officer would give demand letter to the licensee after

recording the note “liquor may be supplied according to the demand

letter” for further submission in the computer room.
d)   Computer room would prepare a delivery challan in the prescribed

form and the manufacturing unit would make available the information

about the amount to be deposited, to the retail contractor who is/are

going to receive the supply.
e)   In case liquor/beer is supplied to the licensee of retail sale without

depositing the amount on the responsibility of the manufacturing unit on

the basis of the authority letter issued by any manufacturing unit with
6
the prior permission of the Excise Commissioner, the same would have

to be mentioned categorically in the prescribed form.
f)   In case any quantity of liquor/beer is supplied without depositing

the prescribed amount on the responsibility of the manufacturing unit

with the prior permission from the Excise Commissioner, then in each

and every situation, supply of liquor/beer could be effected only after

depositing the 5% amount reckoned at rates declared by the

manufacturing unit.
g)   Retail sale licensee would deposit the amount at the bank counter

established in the warehouse itself and would tender the deposit receipt

issued by the bank in the computer room.
h)   After loading the information about the amount deposited in the

computer room, Accounts-in-charge would submit the delivery challan

to the Officer-in-charge for issuing the delivery order.
i)   After issuance of the supply order by the Officer-in-charge/liquor

officer (whosoever would be in charge of the store) would take out

liquor/beer for the purpose of effecting the supply. Batch number of the

liquor/beer would be recorded in the delivery challan. Final information

of the batches under supply along with vehicle number would be given
7
in the computer branch and the Officer-in-charge so that transportation

permit may be issued from the computer room. Permits would be issued

through the computer only except in the cases of defects in which

situation the work will be completed manually.
j)   Officer-in-charge would ensure that necessary particulars of the

liquor/beer, date and time of leaving vehicle, amount of duty, challan

number and period given to take liquor to the place of destination are

recorded on the permit.
k)   Only after ensuring compliance of the above-said process, the

Officer-in-charge would give permission to vehicle loaded with

liquor/beer to move from the store.
l)   At the end of each and every working day, stock verification

would be carried out. The complete accounts statement of wine/liquor

supplied up to 25th of each and every month would be prepared. All the

accounts of the amount lying deposited in the collection account of the

manufacturing units would be tallied. Officer-in-charge would submit

the said accounts before the concerned Deputy Commissioners and

Deputy Commissioners would direct the bank as to how much amount is

to be transferred by them in their accounts out of the collection accounts
8
of each and every manufacturing unit and how much amount would be

deposited   in    the   government     treasury.   Thereafter,   Deputy

Commissioners would issue directions to the bank to first of all deposit

that much amount in the government treasury and the remaining amount

would be credited to the accounts of the manufacturing unit. The

available stock was to be insured.
5.   An additional return was filed wherein it was averred that the

appellants are under liability to pay VAT tax and the list of the dealers

who are liable to pay VAT tax was annexed.
RELEVANT STATUTORY PROVISIONS: -
6.   Till 31.03.2007, no entry tax was levied in the State of Madhya

Pradesh on beer and IMFL. On 01.04.2007, the M.P. Entry Tax Act was

amended by the M.P. Entry Tax (Amendment) Act No. 9 of 2007 i.e.

The Madhya Pradesh Sthaniya Kshetra Me Mal Ke Pravesh Par Kar

(Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the

Amendment Act of 2007’)
7.   The original Act in
Section 3
provided that an entry tax shall be

levied on the entry in the course of business of a dealer of goods
9
specified in Schedule-II, into each local area for consumption, use or

sale therein.
8.
Section 3
reads as follows:-
“3- Incidence of taxation

       (1) There shall be levied an entry tax,-
(a) on the entry in the course of business of a dealer of goods
       specified in Schedule-II, into each local area for consumption, use
       or sale therein; and
(b) on the entry in the course of business of a dealer of goods
           specified in Schedule-III into each local area for consumption
           or use of such goods but not for sale therein; and such tax
           shall be paid by every dealer liable to tax under the
           [
M.P.VAT Act, 2002
] who has effected entry of such
           goods:..”
                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
9.    By the Amendment Act of 2007, an entry was added to Schedule-

II which reads as follows:-
“ Indian made foreign liquor and beer.”

       The rate of tax prescribed was @ 2%.
10.
The Amending Act
of 2007 introduced Section 3B which reads as

follows:-
“"3-B. Special provisions for collection of entry tax on foreign
       liquor; -
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State
       Government may, by notification, specify the manner and appoint
       the competent authority, to collect entry tax in respect of India
10
made foreign liquor and beer on such terms and conditions as
      may be specified therein.”

      4A. Provision for entry tax at enhanced rate. –
(ii) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be
      substituted, namely: -
(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
      Act, the State Government may, by notification, specify the
      manner and appoint the competent authority to collect entry tax in
      respect of India made foreign liquor and Beer on such terms and
      conditions as may be specified therein, the entry tax payable by a
      dealer under this Act shall be charged on the value of such goods
      at a rate not exceeding thirty per centum as may be specified in
      such notification.. ”
11.   The other relevant sections from the
Entry Tax Act
are
Section

2(1)(aa)
,
2(1) (b)
,
2(1)(l)
,
2(1)(m)
,
2(2)
,
2(3)
and
Section 14
which read

as follows:-
“2(1)(aa) "entry of goods into a local area" with all its
      grammatical variations and cognate expressions means entry of
      goods into that local area from any place outside thereof
      including a place outside the State for consumption, use or sale
      therein;”

      2(1)(b) "Entry tax" means a tax on entry of goods into a local area
      for consumption, use or sale therein levied and payable in
      accordance with the provisions of this Act and includes
      composition money payable under Section 7-A”

      2(1)(l) "Value of goods" in relation to a dealer or any person who
      has effected entry of goods into a local area shall mean the
      purchase price of such goods as defined in clause (s) of
Section 2
of the Madhya Pradesh VAT Act, 2002 (No. 20 of 2002) and
      shall include excise duty and/or additional excise duty and/or
      customs duty, if levied under the Central Excise and Salt Act,
11
1944 (No. 1 of 1944), the
Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of
Special Importance) Act, 1957
(No. 58 of 1957) or the
Customs
Act, 1962
(No. 52 of 1962), as the case may be or the market
value of such goods if they have been acquired or obtained
otherwise than by way of purchase;
2(1)(m) "
VAT Act
" means the
Madhya Pradesh VAT Act, 2002
(No. 20 of 2002).
2(2) All those expressions, other than expression "goods" and
"sale" which are used but are not defined in this Act and are
defined in the
Madhya Pradesh VAT Act, 2002
(No. 20 of
2002) shall have the meanings assigned to them in that Act.
2(3) Any reference in this Act to the expression "has effected
entry of goods" with its grammatical variations and cognate
expressions, whether used in isolation or in conjunction with any
other words shall, wherever necessary, be construed as
including a reference to "has caused to be effected entry of
goods"
(Emphasis supplied)

“14. Assessment, collection etc. of entry tax.- Subject to the
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the
administration of this Act in so far as it relates to levy, assessment
and collection of entry tax from dealers shall vest in the
authorities specified in
Section 3
of the Madhya Pradesh VAT
Act, 2002 (No. 20 of 2002), and accordingly the authorities for
the time being empowered to assess, re-assess, collect and enforce
payment of any tax under the
Madhya Pradesh VAT Act, 2002
(No. 20 of 2002) shall assess, re-assess, collect and enforce the
payment of entry tax including any penalty payable by a dealer
under this Act as if the tax or penalty payable by such dealer
under this Act or under the provisions of the
Madhya Pradesh
VAT Act, 2002
(No 20 of 2002) as made applicable under
Section 13
to dealers in relation to tax levied under this Act is a
tax or penalty payable under that Act and for this purpose they
may exercise all or any of the powers conferred upon them by or
under that Act.”
12
12. “Dealer” as defined under
Section 2(i)
of the Madhya Pradesh

VAT Act, 2002 reads as under:-
“2(i) - Dealer” means any person, who carries on the business of
      buying, selling, supplying or distributing goods, directly or
      otherwise, whether for cash, or for deferred payment or for
      commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration and
      includes –
(i) a local authority, a company, an undivided Hindu family or
      any society (including a cooperative society), club, firm or
      association which carries on such business;
(ii) a society (including a co-operative society), club, firm or
      association which buys goods from, or sells, supplies or
      distributes goods to its;
(iii) a commission agent, broker, a del-credere agent, an
      auctioneer or any other mercantile agent, by whatever name
      called, who carries on the business of buying, selling, supplying
      or distributing goods on behalf of the principal;
(iv) any person who transfers the right to use any goods
      including leasing thereof for any purpose, (whether or not for a
      specified period) in the course of business to any other person;”

      Explanation I - Every person who acts as an agent of a non-
resident dealer, that is as an agent on behalf of a dealer residing
      outside the State and buys, sells, supplies or distributes goods in
      the State or acts on behalf of such dealer as - (i) a mercantile
      agent as defined in the
Sale of Goods Act, 1930
(III of 1930); or
(ii) an agent for handling goods or documents of title relating to
      goods; or (iii) an agent for the collection or the payment of the
      sale price of goods or as a guarantor for such collection or
      payment, and every local branch of a firm or company situated
      outside the State, shall be deemed to be a dealer for the purpose
      of this Act.
13
Explanation II - The Central or a State Government or any of
      their departments or offices which, whether or not in the
      course of business, buy, sell, supply or distribute goods,
      directly or otherwise, for cash or for deferred payment, or for
      commission, remuneration or for other valuable
      consideration, shall be deemed to be a dealer for the purpose
      of this Act.
Explanation III - Any non-trading, commercial or financial
      establishment including a bank, an insurance company, a
      transport company and the like which whether or not in the course
      of business buys, sells, supplies or distributes goods, directly or
      otherwise, for cash or for deferred payment, commission,
      remuneration or for other valuable consideration, shall be deemed
      to be a dealer for the purposes of this Act:
(Emphasis supplied)
13. “Goods” as defined in
Section 2(m)
reads as under:-
“2(m) “Goods” means all kinds of movable property including
      computer software but excluding actionable claims, newspapers,
      stocks, shares, securities or Government stamps and includes all
      materials, articles and commodities, whether or not to be used in
      the construction, fitting out, improvement or repair of movable or
      immovable property, and also includes all growing crops, grass,
      trees, plants and things attached to, or forming part of the land
      which are agreed to be severed before the sale or under the
      contract of sale;”
14. “Sale” as defined in the
M.P. VAT Act
reads as under:-
“2(u) "Sale" with all its grammatical variations and cognate
      expressions means any transfer of property in goods for cash or
      deferred payment or for other valuable consideration and includes
      –
(i) a transfer, otherwise than in pursuance of a contract, of
      property in any goods for cash, deferred payment or other
      valuable consideration;
14
(ii) a transfer of property in goods whether as goods or in some
      other form, involved in the execution of works contract;
(iii) a delivery of goods on hire purchase or any system of
      payment by installments;
(iv) a supply of goods by any unincorporated association or body
      of persons to a member thereof for cash, deferred payment or
      other valuable consideration;
(v) a supply, by way of or as part of any service or in any other
      manner whatsoever, of goods being food or any other article for
      human consumption or any drink (whether or not intoxicating)
      where such supply or service is for cash, deferred payment or
      other valuable consideration;
(vi) a transfer of the right to use any goods including leasing
      thereof for any purpose (whether or not for a specified period) for
      cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, and such
      transfer, delivery or supply of any goods shall be deemed to be a
      sale of those goods by the person making the transfer, delivery or
      supply and purchase of those goods by the person to whom such
      transfer, delivery or supply is made, but does not include a
      mortgage, hypothecation, charge or pledge;”

CONTENTIONS OF PARTIES: -
15. We have heard Mr. Rohan Shah, learned Senior Advocate and Mr.

Sumit Nema, learned Senior Advocate for the appellants and Mr.

Nachiketa Joshi, learned Additional Advocate General for the

respondent-State.
16. Learned counsels for the appellants reiterated the modus operandi

of the transaction as set out hereinabove.           They contended that
15
depending upon the estimation of the retailers’ requirement, each State

Government     warehouse    would     issue   an   indent   on   different

manufacturers of different brands of IMFL to supply goods to the State

Government warehouse.
17. Learned counsels contended that only after complying with the

formalities of receipt of NOC from the State Government warehouse,

the State Excise Officer would allow removal of exact quantity of the

relevant brand by issuing a Transit Pass under Rule 14(1) of the M.P.

Foreign Liquor Rules, 1996 to enable transportation for storage in the

State Government Warehouse. They contend that an invoice specifying

the brand and quantities of IMFL was to be issued by the manufacturer,

in the name of the State Government warehouse. They contend that

there was no privity between the retailers and the manufacturers.

Learned Counsels contend that from the price paid by the retailer, the

State Excise Duty, VAT, and transportation Fees/commission are all

deducted and only then the amount is transferred to the manufacturer by

the Government warehouse. Learned Counsels contend that no direct

sales can be made by the manufacturer to the retailers.
16
18. According to the learned Counsels for the appellants, it is the

Government warehouse which causes the movement of goods into the

local area, which is the incidence for the levy as defined under
Section

3(1)(a)
read with Section 2(1)(aa), 2(1)(b) and 2(3) of the M.P. Entry

Tax Act.      According to the learned Counsels, since the State

Government warehouses not only sells but, in any event, undisputably

distributes the goods they would be “dealer” as per Explanation II to
Section 2(i)
of M.P. VAT Act, 2002. According to the learned counsels,

levy cannot be mulcted on the manufacturers as they do not effect the

entry of goods or cause to effect the entry of goods and it is only the

State Government warehouse which cause to effect the entry of the

goods. That even otherwise, the manufacturers cannot be mulcted with

the liability as the value of the goods would be clear only at the hands of

the State Government warehouse which effects the sale to the retailer

and for this reason, without notification being issued under
Section 3B
of the Entry Tax Act, no levy can be effected. Further, they contend that

since the State Government warehouse causes to effect the entry of the

goods, it is they who will ultimately pass it on to the retailers after the

levy is made. They further contend that with effect from 01.04.2008
17
when the entry tax on IMFL and beer was withdrawn, an increase in 2%

of the transportation fee was brought in and it was made to 8% from the

originally fixed 6% chargeable by the warehouse on the retailers. So

praying, they contend that the writ petitions ought to have been allowed,

and the communication dated 13.06.2007 issued by respondent no. 2 and

the communication 21.06.2007 issued by respondent no. 3 directing the

manufacturers to pay entry tax ought to have been quashed. To buttress

the submission, they further referred to the communication dated

02.06.2007 issued by Commissioner, Commercial Tax to the Excise

Commissioner directing that the entry tax ought to be paid by the

warehouse of the excise department.
19. Mr. Nachiketa Joshi, learned Additional Advocate General,

submitted that the judgment of the High Court upholding the levy on the

manufacturers called for no interference.     Learned Senior Advocate

contends that the High Court has correctly found that the warehouses

neither purchase liquor nor sell liquor and that the Department only

supervises the sale made by the manufacturer to the retail contractors.

Learned Senior Advocate contends that the High Court has rightly found

that Section 3B was only an enabling provision which was in the nature
18
of a machinery provision and even without a notification under
Section

3B
of the Act,
Section 14
could enable the levy of entry tax on the

manufacturers. Learned Senior Advocate contends that the non-obstante

part of Section 3B will not override
Section 14
as there is no conflict

between the two provisions and the two can be harmoniously

interpreted.   Learned Senior Advocate for the State also drew our

attention to the communication of the Commissioner, Commercial Tax

dated 04.10.2008 to the Excise Commissioner correcting the

communication of 02.06.2007 and clarifying the position that it is only

the manufacturing units which were liable to pay the entry tax. Learned

Senior Advocate contended that the High Court has correctly relied on

the judgment of this Court in M/s Bhagatram Rajeevkumar vs.

Commissioner of Sales Tax, M.P. and Others, 1995 Supp. (1) SCC 673

to sustain the levy on the manufacturers.
QUESTION FOR CONSIDERATION:-
20. The question that arises for consideration is: -
Did the appellants cause to effect the entry of goods into the local area

as required under
Section 3(1)(a)
read with Section 2(1)(aa), 2(1)(b) and
19
2(3) of the M.P. Entry Tax Act, 1976, rendering them liable for entry tax

for the period 01.04.2007 to 31.03.2008?
ANALYSIS AND REASONS: -
21. The principal argument of the learned Counsels for the appellants

is that there is no privity of contract between them and the retailers and

that it is the State Government warehouse which sells the goods to the

retailers. According to the learned Counsels for the appellants, it is the

warehouse which causes the movement of the goods into the local area.

Alternatively, it is contended that undisputedly the State Government

warehouse distributes the goods and whether as a seller or as a

distributor they acquire the status of a dealer under the Act, which

makes them liable for the payment of the Entry Tax. The stand of the

State Government is that the warehouse neither purchases nor sells the

liquor and the work undertaken is only to supervise the sale made by the

manufacturer to the retailer. This contention of the State found favour

with the High Court.
22. The model adopted by the State, as set out in the Paragraphs

hereinabove for the transaction, clearly points to the State canalising the

supply of beer and Indian made foreign liquor into the local area. The
20
question that would then arise is: - is there an inseverable link between

the manufacturers like the appellants and the ultimate retailers? While

the manufacturers contend that the sale by them is made to the State

warehouse and thereafter the State warehouse makes the sale to the

retailers, the State contends that there is an inseverable link and it is the

manufacturers who causes the sale to the retailers and the State is

discharging only a supervisory role.
23. Under the modus operandi adopted, as set out in hereinabove, it

will be clear that demand note for each and every shop is submitted to

the warehouse by the retailer. After assessing the local demand, the

Divisional Commissioner issues directions to the Officer in charge for

issuance of a No Objection Certificate to the manufacturing units. The

manufacturing units were allowed to store beer and IMFL in

departmental godowns. The manufacturing units declare the Ex-godown

price and supply of liquor is effected by the warehouse after levying 5

per cent additional fee. The retail buyer deposits the amount with the

warehouse and the transfer of money to the manufacturer is made by the

warehouse and thereafter, delivery is taken by the retailer from the

warehouse.
21
24. The issue of when can a sale which involves a canalizing

agent/intermediary be said to be inseverable has arisen in the context of

exemption sought by assessees under the
Central Sales Tax Act
before

this Court in several cases.
In
K. Gopinathan Nair & Ors. v. State of

Kerala
, (1997) 10 SCC 1, this Court, after analyzing the precedents

applicable to the issue, summarised the law in Para 14 and 15 as under: -
“14.
In the light of the aforesaid settled legal position emerging
      from the Constitution Bench decisions of this Court the following
      propositions clearly get projected for deciding whether the
      concerned sale or purchase of goods can be deemed to take place
      in the course of import as
laid down by
Section 5(2)
of the
      Central Sales Tax Act:
(1) The sale or the purchase, as the case may be, must actually
      take place.
(2) Such sale or purchase in India must itself occasion such
      import, and not vice versa i.e. import should not occasion such
      sale.
(3) The goods must have entered the import stream when they are
      subjected to sale or purchase.
(4) The import of the goods concerned must be effected as a
      direct result of the sale or purchase transaction concerned.
      (5) The course of import can be taken to have continued till
      the imported goods reach the local users only if the import
      has commenced through the agreement between foreign
      exporter and an intermediary who does not act on his own in
      the transaction with the foreign exporter and who in his turn
      does not sell as principal the imported goods to the local
      users.
(6) There must be either a single sale which itself causes the
      import or is in the progress or process of import or though
      there may appear to be two sale transactions they are so
      integrally interconnected that they almost resemble one
22
transaction so that the movement of goods from a foreign
country to India can be ascribed to such a composite well-
integrated transaction consisting of two transactions
dovetailing into each other.
(7) A sale or purchase can be treated to be in the course of import
if there is a direct privity of contract between the Indian importer
and the foreign exporter and the intermediary through which such
import is effected merely acts as an agent or a contractor for and
on behalf of the Indian importer.
(8) The transaction in substance must be such that the
canalising agency or the intermediary agency through which
the imports are effected into India so as to reach the ultimate
local users appears only as a mere name lender through
whom it is the local importer-cum-local user who
masquerades.
15. If the aforesaid conditions are satisfied then obviously the
transaction of sale or purchase would be in the realm of sale or
purchase in the course of import entitling it to earn exemption
under
Section 5(2)
of the Central Sales Tax Act. But if on the
contrary the transactions between the foreign exporter and
the local users in India get transmitted through an
independent canalising import agency which enters into back-
to-back contracts and there is no direct linkage or causal
connection between the export by foreign exporter and the
receipt of the imported goods in India by the local users, the
integrity of the entire transaction would get disrupted and
would be substituted by two independent transactions, one
between the canalising agency and the foreign exporter which
would make the canalising agency the owner of the goods
imported and the other between the import canalising agency
and the local users for whose benefit the goods were imported
by the wholesale importer being the canalising agency. In
such a case the sale by the canalising agency to the local users
would not be a sale in the course of import but would be a
sale because of or by import which would not be covered by
the exemption provision of
Section 5
sub-section (2) of the
Central Sales Tax Act
.”
                                             (Emphasis supplied)
23
25. From the summary of principles set out hereinabove, it will be

clear that in case a canalising agency or intermediary agency is involved,

unless their role is merely that of a name lender, the sale will not be

treated as an inseparable or an inseverable sale. It will also be clear that

if an independent canalising agency enters into back-to-back contracts

and there is no direct linkage or causal connection between the export by

foreign exporter and the receipt of the imported goods in India by local

users, then the integrity of the entire transaction would be disrupted and

would be substituted by two independent transactions.
In
K. Gopinathan

Nair
(supra) it was held that transactions were not integral and were two

separate transactions.
26. Similar view has been expressed by this Court in
Hyderabad

Industries Ltd. v. Union of India & Ors.
, (2000) 1 SCC 718, Kerala

State Warehousing Corpn. v. State of Kerala, (
2005) 10 SCC 142 and

State of Karnataka v. Azad Coach Builders Private Ltd. & Anr.
, (2010)

9 SCC 524. It will be observed that while the tests applied have been

common, factually differing conclusions have been arrived at by this

Court depending upon the facts operating in the respective cases.
24
27. Applying the tests to the present canalising transaction, we have no

manner of doubt that there were two independent transactions, one

between the appellant – manufacturers and the State Warehouse and the

other between the State warehouse and the retailers. Hence, it will be

difficult to accept the contention of the State that the role of the State is

only supervisory and the warehouses didn’t purchase beer and IMFL

from the manufacturer.
28. This, however, does not resolve the issue in favour of the

appellants. Under Section 3 of the M.P. Entry Tax Act, 1976, the

incidence of taxation is on the entry in the course of business of a dealer

of goods specified in Schedule II, into each local area for consumption,

use or sale therein. The further requirement is that such tax was to be

paid by every dealer liable to tax under the
VAT Act
who has effected

entry of such goods. Entry Tax is defined as a tax on entry of goods into

a local area for use, consumption or sale therein levied and payable in

accordance with the provisions of the M.P. Entry Tax Act. Section 2(3)

of the M.P. Entry Tax Act states that any reference to the expression

“has effected entry of goods” shall be construed as including a reference

to “has caused to be effected entry of goods.”
25
29. The other crucial question that arises is whether the appellant

manufacturers have “caused to be effected the entry of goods.” In the

pocket Oxford Dictionary, 8th Edition, “Cause” is defined as follows:
“person or thing that occasions or produces something”

In the context of construing
Section 5(3)
of the Central Sales Tax Act,

1956 which used the phrase “occasioning the export”, this Court in
Azad Coach Builders
(supra) held as follows: -
“27. The phrase “sale in the course of export” comprises in itself
      three essentials: (i) that there must be a sale; (ii) that goods must
      actually be exported; and (iii) that the sale must be a part and
      parcel of the export. The word “occasion” is used as a verb and
      means “to cause” or “to be the immediate cause of”.
      Therefore, the words “occasioning the export” mean the
      factors, which were the immediate cause of export. The words
      “to comply with the agreement or order” mean all transactions
      which are inextricably linked with the agreement or order
      occasioning that export. The expression “in relation to” are words
      of comprehensiveness, which might both have a direct
      significance as well as an indirect significance, depending on the
      context in which it is used and they are not words of restrictive
      content and ought not be so construed. Therefore, the test to be
      applied is, whether there is an inseverable link between the local
      sale or purchase and export and if it is clear that the local sale or
      purchase between the parties is inextricably linked with the
      export of the goods, then a claim under
Section 5(3)
for
      exemption from State sales tax is justified, in which case, the
      same goods theory has no application.”
26
30.
In
Coffee Board, Bangalore v. Joint Commercial Tax Officer,

Madras & Anr.
, (1969) 3 SCC 349, Chief Justice Hidayatullah,

speaking for the Court, held as follows:
“28. ……… The word “occasion” is used as a verb and means
       “to cause” or “to be the immediate cause of”. Read in this way
       the sale which is to be regarded as exempt is a sale which causes
       the export to take place or is the immediate cause of the
       export……..”
31. Reverting back to
Sections 3(1)
read with 2(1)(aa) and 2(1)(b) and

2(3), it is clear that the appellants by the sale to the warehouse caused to

be effected the entry of goods and the entry was occasioned on the

account of the sale into the local area for consumption, use or sale

therein. It is also not disputed that the appellant is a dealer as defined

under the
Madhya Pradesh VAT Act
2002, as it stood then. The only

contention of the appellants is this that the State warehouse is also a

dealer. That makes no difference since it cannot be disputed that the

appellants certainly occasioned the entry of goods and the levy of entry

tax on them, which could always be passed on, is perfectly justifiable in

law.
32. The further contention that no notification having been issued

under Section 3B of the M.P. Entry Tax Act 1976, there could be no
27
levy of entry tax has only to be stated to be rejected. The High Court has

rightly held that Section 3B is only a machinery provision and in the

teeth of Section 14 of the M.P. Entry Tax Act, it is not correct to say that

there cannot be any assessment or collection of Entry Tax merely

because there is no notification under Section 3B.
33. Section 3B of the M.P. Entry Tax is an enabling provision. Further,

the ‘non-obstante’ in Section 3B will not foreclose the operation of
Section 14
, since Section 3B will override only if there is a contrary

provision. In the absence of any notification under Section 3B, there is

nothing contrary in
Section 14
for the non-obstante in Section 3B to be

invoked to override
Section 14
. (See
A.G. Varadarajulu & Anr. v. State

of T.N. & Ors.
, (
1998) 4 SCC 231 and Union of India and Anr. v. G.M.

Kokil & Ors.
, 1984 Supp SCC 196).
34. On this score, The High Court in the impugned order has found

rightly as follows:
“13. In our opinion as
Section 14
deals with the assessment and
      collection of entry tax and State has chosen not to issue
      notification under Section 3B by enacting special procedure for
      collection of entry tax on foreign liquor, it is open to the State to
      recover as per general procedure prescribed in
Section 14
. We do
      not find any legal impediment for applicability of the provision of
Section 14
as under Section 3B no notification to the contrary or
      otherwise has been issued by the State Government so as to
28
override the procedure provided in
Section 14
. When something
      is required to be done so as to bring the non-obstante clause into
      play till that thing has been done, non-obstante clause would not
      come into play. Thus in the instant case, we are of the considered
      opinion that charging section is
Section 3(1)
and in the absence of
      the notification under Section 3B which is a machinery provision,
      State can recover the entry tax as per general machinery provided
      under
Section 14
.”
35. In Bhagatram (supra) cited by the State the question was whether

entry tax on goods such as sugar on which no sales tax is leviable, was

justified. This Court answered the question in favor of the State. For the

reasons that we have stated above, we find no relevance of Bhagatram

(supra) for the present controversy.
36. For the reasons aforestated, we find no grounds to interfere with

the impugned order. Civil Appeals are dismissed. No order as to costs.
….……….........................J.
                                               [J. B. PARDIWALA]


                                              …..……….........................J.
                                              [K. V. VISWANATHAN]


New Delhi;
July 14, 2025.
29