[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Binod Pathak vs Shankar Choudhary on 14 July, 2025
2025 INSC 842                                                                   REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7706 OF 2025
                            (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015)




             BINOD PATHAK & ORS.                                             ...APPELLANT(S)



                                                     VERSUS



             SHANKAR CHOUDHARY & ORS.                                      ...RESPONDENT(S)




                                                 JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHANDRESH
Date: 2025.07.14
18:49:23 IST
Reason:
J. B. PARDIWALA, J.:
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided in the following parts: -
INDEX
A. FACTUAL MATRIX ................................................................................... 2

B. SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES .......................................................... 9

   i. Submissions on behalf of the Appellants / Original Plaintiffs............... 9

   ii. Submissions on behalf of the Respondents / Original Defendants. .... 12

C. ANALYSIS .................................................................................................. 12

   i. Relevant Statutory Provisions. ............................................................... 13

   ii.
Order XXII, Rule 10A of the CPC
. ........................................................ 16

        a. Rationale behind Order XXII Rule 10A. ............................................ 20

        b. Nature of the salutary provision of Order XXII Rule 10A. ................ 21

              I.     Distinction between the legal maxims ‘ex injuria ius non oritur’ and
                     ‘nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propia’. .................. 22
              II.    Duty of Pleader. .................................................................................. 32
D. CONCLUSION ........................................................................................... 38
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                                                           Page 1 of 40
1. Leave Granted.
2. This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High court of

     Judicature at Patna dated 22.10.2014 (hereinafter referred to as the

     “Impugned Order”) in Second Appeal No. 190 of 2008 by which the Second

     Appeal filed the respondents herein; the original defendants, came to be

     allowed thereby setting aside the judgment and order passed by the First

     Appellate Court allowing the First Appeal filed by the appellants herein; the

     original plaintiffs, and decreeing the suit in their favour.
3. For the sake of convenience, the appellants herein shall be referred to as the

     original plaintiffs and the respondents herein shall be referred to as the

     original defendants.
A.     FACTUAL MATRIX
4. The plaintiffs instituted Title Suit No. 106 of 1984 in the Court of the Sub

     Judge – (I) Gopalganj (hereinafter, the “title suit”) for declaration of title and

     recovery of possession of suit land bearing Khewat Nos. 11 and 12

     respectively, revisional survey Nos. 688, 689 and 690 respectively under

     Khata Nos. 571 and 574 respectively situated in the Village Harkhauli, P.S.

     Mirganj, District Gopalganj.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                             Page 2 of 40
5. We need not go into the details of the nature of the suit instituted by the

    plaintiffs as we are inclined to dispose of this appeal on a neat question of law

    and remand the matter to the High Court for fresh consideration on merits.
6. In the aforesaid title suit instituted by the original plaintiffs referred to above,

    the trial court framed the following issues: -
(i)     Is the suit, as framed, maintainable?

    (ii)    Have the plaintiffs got a valid cause of action or right to sue?
(iii)   Whether the ancestors of Defendant nos. 7 to 10 had acquired

            occupancy right in respect of the suit land?
(iv)    Have the plaintiffs got subsisting title and possession over the suit

            lands at the time of vesting of the intermediary interest in the state of

            Bihar as also on the date of proceeding under
Section 145
of the Code

            of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, the “
Cr.P.C
.”)?
(v)     To what relief or reliefs, if any, are the plaintiffs entitled to in the

            aforesaid suit?
7. Upon appreciation of the oral as well as documentary evidence on record the

    trial court recorded a finding that the plaintiffs had failed to establish their

    case and accordingly the suit came to be dismissed vide the judgment and

    decree dated 05.07.1989.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                             Page 3 of 40
8. The original plaintiffs being dissatisfied with the judgment and order passed

   by the trial court dismissing the suit went in First Appeal before the Court of

   Additional District Judge – (I), Gopalganj. The appeal came to be registered

   bearing Title Appeal No. 60/1989 renumbered as Title Appeal No. 58 of

   2007.
9. The appeal filed by the plaintiffs came to be allowed by the First Appellate

   Court vide the judgment and order dated 02.06.2009.
10. The First Appellate Court while allowing the First Appeal of the plaintiffs

   held as under: -
“18. In view of aforesaid finding I hold that plaintiffs have title
           on the suit land and they have been illegally dispossessed by the
           defendants, so plaintiffs title on suit land mentioned in schedule
           2,3 and 4 of plaint is hereby upheld and the plaintiffs are
           entitled for recovery of possession of suit land. Plaintiffs have
           claimed mesne profit, but the lower court neither framed issue
           nor decided the same but in the light of aforesaid finding
           plaintiffs are entitled to mesne profit from the date of
           dispossession upto getting possession on the suit land which has
           to be determined by the lower court in separated proceeding if
           it will be initiated by the plaintiffs after delivery of possession.
Hence, the appeal is allowed with cost, the judgment and decree
           of the lower court is hereby set aside and the suit is decreed with
           cost. The plaintiffs have title and possession on schedule K. 2, 3
           and 4 of the plaint and they are entitled for mesne profit from
           date of dispossession upto the date of getting delivery of
           possession. Defendants (respondents) are directed to deliver
           possession of the suit land to the plaintiffs within thirty days
           from today failing which plaintiffs (appellants) will be entitled
           to get delivery of possession according to the process of law.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                             Page 4 of 40
I have already recorded finding that defendants (respondents)
          have constructed house and structures on suit land during
          pendency of the suit so plaintiffs will have obtain to take
          delivery of possession either with house or structures by
          evicting persons residing in it or if they so like they may apply
          for demotion of house and structures at the cost of the
          defendants and to take vacant possession of the suit land.
          Pleaders fee Rs. 1000/- and Pleader's clerk fee Rs. 250/-.”
11. The original defendants being dissatisfied with the judgment and order passed by

   the First Appellate Court referred to above challenged the same before the High

   Court by way of Second Appeal. In the Second Appeal, the High Court formulated

   the following substantial questions of law: -
i.     "Whether the judgment and decree of the appellate court
                 could be said to be illegal in view of the same having been
                 passed against several dead respondents, i.e. respondent
                 nos. 3, 6(gh), 8, 9, 11 and 12?
ii.    Whether the entry in the concerned 'record of right can be
                 presumed to be the entry in favour of the erstwhile
                 intermediary as his private land?
iii.   Whether in absence of any finding regarding the method
                 and manner of dispossession as alleged by the plaintiffs,
                 the relief of restoration of possession could have been
                 granted especially when the plaintiffs have not adduced
                 any evidence on this aspect of the matter?
iv.    Whether the finding of the appellate Court that in absence
                 of plea taken in the written statement no such plea can be
                 allowed to be taken by the defendants is sustainable in law
                 when both the parties had understood the respective cases
                 and adduce evidence?”
12. It appears from the materials on record that when the aforesaid Second Appeal

   was taken up for hearing it came to the notice of the High Court that some of
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                         Page 5 of 40
the respondents before the First Appellate Court i.e., some of the original

   defendants had passed away and their legal heirs were not brought on record.

   The High Court took the view that in the absence of the legal heirs being

   substituted in accordance with the provisions of
Order XXII Rule 4 of the

   Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (for short, the “
CPC
”) the First Appellate

   Court could not have heard the First Appeal on merits and decided the same

   in favour of the plaintiffs. The High Court took the view that the First Appeal

   had already stood abated as the decree was joint and indivisible.
13. The High Court held that in case of joint and indivisible decree the abatement

   of proceedings in relation to one or more of the appellant(s) or respondent(s)

   on account of omission or lapse and failure to bring on record his or their

   legal representatives in time would prove fatal to the entire appeal and the

   appeal would be liable to be dismissed.
14. The High Court while allowing the Second Appeal filed by the defendants

   held as under: -
“At this juncture, it would be pertinent to mention that the
          judgment and decree in the suit has been passed on 25.07.1989
          and the appeal thereafter came to be decided on 02.06.2008
          reversing the judgment and decree in the suit and granting the
          decree to the plaintiff as prayed. The memo of this second
          appeal has been filed on 27.06.2008 by the original defendant
          no. 2 Bihari Choudhary, defendant no. 4 Baijnath Chaudhary
          and defendant no. 5 Harilal Choudhary along with the
          substituted heirs of the deceased defendant no. 1 Khobhari
          Choudhary and deceased defendant no. 6 Yamuna Choudhary.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                         Page 6 of 40
The appellant no. 7 Dhananjay Choudhary in this appeal is the
          substituted heir of Yadunandan Choudhary who was one of the
          substituted heirs of deceased defendant no. 6 Jamuna
          Choudhary in the appellate court below. From the perusal of
          the memo of the instant appeal, it further transpires that the
          respondent nos. 10 to 13 in this appeal' have been impleaded
          as heirs of deceased defendant no. 3 Sheonath Choudhary.
On behalf of the appellants, it has been emphatically submitted
          that the defendant no. 3-respondent no. 3 (in the appellate court
          below) namely Sheonath Choudhary died on 07.05.1997 and
          similarly the substituted respondent no. 6 (Gha) (one of the
          substituted heirs of the deceased defendant no. 6 Yamuna
          Choudhary in the appellate court below) died on 29.09.2000
          during the pendency of the appeal in the court below. It has been
          further pointed out that the substituted respondent no. 7 (ka)
          Most. Dipiya (one of the substituted heirs of the deceased
          defendant no. 7 Mangaru Bhagat) died on 07.08.1999, the
          defendant no. 8- respondent no. 8 Bacha Bhagat died on
          05.04.2003 and respondent no. 9 Nagina Bhagat also died on
          05.11.2005 during the pendency of the appeal in the court
          below. From the order dated 14.11.2008 passed in this appeal,
          it becomes evident that the fact of death of the aforesaid
          defendant respondents during the pendency of the appeal in the
          court below has been admitted by the plaintiff-respondents and
          it has been also admitted that their heirs could not be substituted
          in the said appeal.
Examined in the backdrop of these facts, it is vivid that the
          deceased defendant no. 3-respondent no. 3 Sheonath
          Choudhary was one of the purchasers of the suit land and
          similarly the deceased respondent no. 6 (Gha) was one of the
          substituted heirs of the original purchaser (Yamuna
          Choudhary) of the suit land. The remaining deceased
          respondent nos. 7(ka), 8 and 9 in the appeal in the court below
          were the heirs of the vendor of the defendant no. 1 to 6. The
          impugned judgment and decree by the appellate court below
          granting the declaration of title and entitlement of recovery of
          possession in favour of the plaintiffs has been passed against
          these deceased persons as well, along with the other
          respondents. In view of the nature of the decree as prayed for
          and granted by the appellate court below being joint and
          inseverable, it is evincible therefore that the same has been
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                           Page 7 of 40
passed against the defendant no. 3-respondent no. 3 Sheonath
          Choudhary, respondent no. 6 (gha) Sheonandan Choudhary
          and some other respondents as abovementioned who were
          already 'dead and their interest was not represented.

          Tested on the anvil of the aforesaid principle the conclusion is
          inevitable that the decree dismissing the suit as against the
          aforesaid deceased respondents had attained finality and could
          not have been varied or overturned in absence of their heirs and
          legal representatives by the appellate court below. In other
          words, the appeal before the appellate court at the time of
          passing of the decree had become defective (not properly
          constituted) as all the necessary parties for the determination of
          the controversy were not before the court and the non-
          substitution of the heirs of the deceased respondents was fatal
          to the entire appeal.
The proposition by the learned senior counsel on behalf of the
          plaintiff-respondents on the strength of the decision of the Apex
          Court in the case of K. Naina Mohamed (supra), in the peculiar
          facts and circumstances of this case as mentioned, is clearly
          misplaced. In the said decision the purchaser was already on
          record to represent the interest of his deceased vendors and, in
          fact, it was the purchaser who filed the appeal as well as
          contested the second appeal thereafter. In the present case, one
          of the purchasers and one of the substituted heirs of another
          purchaser of the suit land died during the pendency of the
          appeal and their interest remained unrepresented as no
          substitution was admittedly done. Similarly, no rule has been
          laid down in the said decision prescribing that the provision of
          Order 22 Rule 10 A shall override the mandatory provision
          relating to abatement as contained in
Order 22 Rule 4 C.P.C
.
          for want of substitution of a defendant/respondent who was a
          necessary party. In this fact situation, this Court is inclined to
          hold that the impugned judgment and decree passed by the
          appellate court below cannot be stained in law, and the same
          is, accordingly, set aside. The substantial question of law, as
          formulated in this regard, is accordingly answered in favour of
          the appellants.
In view of the aforesaid conclusions, there remains no necessity
          for determining the other substantial questions of law as
          framed/suggested.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                          Page 8 of 40
In the result, this appeal is allowed. In the facts and
           circumstances, there shall be no order as to cost.”
15. In such circumstances referred to above, the plaintiffs are here before this

     Court with the present appeal.
B.     SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES


i.     Submissions on behalf of the Appellants / Original Plaintiffs.
16. Mr. Gagan Gupta, the learned counsel appearing for the plaintiffs vehemently

     submitted that the High Court committed a serious error in passing the

     impugned judgment and order. He would submit that the impugned judgment

     and order passed by the High Court is in gross violation of the provisions of
Order XXII Rule 10A of the CPC
. He would submit that respondents /

     defendants in the First Appeal deliberately omitted to bring it to the notice of

     the plaintiffs that some of the defendants had passed away. According to the

     learned counsel, the respondents in the First Appeal not only failed to bring

     it to the notice of the First Appellate Court about the passing away of some

     of the defendants but allowed the First Appeal to be heard on merits. The

     failure on the part of the respondents to bring to the notice of the plaintiffs as

     well as to the Court concerned the factum of death of some of the defendants

     could be said to be in gross violation of
Order XXII Rule 10A of the CPC
.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                             Page 9 of 40
17. Mr. Gupta submitted that even while conceding to the fact that some of the

   respondents before the First Appellate Court had passed away and their legal

   heirs were not brought on record, still the appeal as a whole could not be said

   to have stood abated. In this regard, Mr. Gupta has given a chart indicating

   why the First Appeal could not be said to have wholly abated in absence of

   the legal heirs being brought on record. The chart indicates as follows: -
Position     Position        Position
   S.N     Respondent      before the   before the      before this     Particulars
                          Trial Court   High Court        Court
   1.    Hari      Lal
         Choudhary        Defendant      Appellant      Respondent      No Dispute
         (First    Sale     No. 5         No. 6           No. 6            w.r.t
         Deed)                                                          abatement
   2.    Yamuna
                                        His LRs were                    No Dispute
         Choudhary        Defendant                     His LRs are
                                         Appellants                        w.r.t
         (Second Sale       No. 6                       Respondents
                                        Nos. 11 & 12                    abatement
         Deed)                                           Nos. 8,11
                                                          and 12
   3.    Khobari
         Choudhary        Defendant     His LRs were    His LRs are     No Dispute
         (Third   Sale      No. 1        Appellants     Respondents        w.r.t
         Deed)                            Nos. 1-3       Nos. 1-3       abatement
   4.    Bihari
         Choudhary        Defendant     Appellant No.   Respondent      No Dispute
         (Third   Sale      No. 2             4           No. 4            w.r.t
         Deed)                                                          abatement
   5.    Sheonath                                                      Dispute w.r.t.
                                        His LRs were    His LRs are
         Choudhary        Defendant                                     abatement
                                         Appellants     Respondents
         (Fourth Sale       No. 3                                     (As he died on
                                         Nos. 10-13      Nos. 30-33   07.5.1997 during
         Deed)
                                                                      First      Appeal
                                                                      however in the
                                                                      Second Appeal his
                                                                      LRs          were
                                                                      Impleaded.
   6.    Baijnath
         Choudhary        Defendant     Appellant No.   Respondent       No Dispute
         (Fourth Sale       No. 4             5           No. 5             w.r.t
         Deed)                                                           abatement
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                           Page 10 of 40
18. Mr. Gupta thereafter, by way of one another chart pointed out that all those

   respondents who passed away during the pendency of the First Appeal before

   the district court were only “Performa respondents”. The said chart reads as

   under: -
S.N                        Position before     Position
           Respondent         the High Court     before this           Particulars
                                                   Court
   1.     Sheo Nandan          His LRs were      His LRs are    His    LRs    were     not
          Choudhary           Appellant No. 10   Respondents    impleaded in First Appeal
          (Died       on       & Respondent      Nos. 10 and    but he has no connection
          07.05.1997)           Nos. 14-20       Nos. 36-41     with the impugned sale
                                                                deeds and LRs were
                                                                impleaded in the High
                                                                Court.
   2.     Dipiya                                                No connection with the
          (Died       on                                        impugned sale deeds or the
          07.08.1999)           Not a Party.     Not a Party.
                                                                proceedings.
   3.     Bachha                                                No connection with the
          Bhagat                                                impugned sale deeds or the
                                Not a Party.     Not a Party.
          (Died       on                                        proceedings.
          05.04.2003)
   4.     Nagina                                                No connection with the
          Bhagat                Not a Party.                    impugned sale deeds or the
                                                 Not a Party.
          (Died       on                                        proceedings.
          05.11.2005)
   5.     Md. Islam                                             No connection with the
                               His LRs were      His LRs are
          (Died       on                                        impugned sale deeds or
          08.03.2001)          Respondents       Respondents
                                                                the proceedings.
Nos. 27 & 28      Nos. 46 & 47
6.     Sheo   Dhari
          Bhagat               His LRs were      His LRs are    No connection with the
          (Died          on    Respondents       Respondents    impugned sale deeds or the
          08.07.2008 i.e.,     Nos. 29 & 30      Nos. 48 & 49   proceedings.
          after the passing
          of the judgment
          in First Appeal)
19. In such circumstances referred to above, the learned counsel appearing for the

   plaintiffs prayed that there being merit in his appeal the same may be allowed
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                               Page 11 of 40
and an appropriate order be passed with a view to do substantial justice

      between the parties.
ii.     Submissions on behalf of the Respondents / Original Defendants.
20. Mr. Shantanu Sagar, the learned counsel appearing for the defendants on the

      other hand submitted that no error not to speak of any error of law could be

      said to have been committed by the High Court in passing the impugned

      judgment and order. According to the learned counsel the High Court is right

      in saying that provisions of
Order XXII Rule 4 CPC
would override the

      provisions of
Order XXII Rule 10A of the CPC
.
21. In such circumstances referred to above, the learned counsel prayed that there

      being no merit in the present appeal, the same may be dismissed.
C.      ANALYSIS
22. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone

      through the materials on record the only question that falls for our

      consideration is whether the High Court committed any error in passing the

      impugned judgment and order?
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                         Page 12 of 40
23. We regret to state that we are thoroughly disappointed with the manner in

     which the High Court dealt with the Second Appeal and more particularly the

     understanding of the High Court as regards the position of law on the issues

     in question. Such procedural errors are not expected at the level of any High

     Court. It is not in dispute that the provisions of
Order XXII Rule 10A of the

     CPC
were not complied with.
24. While the First Appeal was being heard, the defendants could have brought

     to the notice of the First Appellate Court that some of the respondents had

     passed away and the appeal had stood abated. Had the defendants brought

     this fact to the notice of the First Appellate Court, the Court could have looked

     into the matter accordingly. It appears that the defendants being fully aware

     of the death of some of the respondents kept quiet and allowed the First

     Appellate Court to proceed with the hearing of the First Appeal on merits.

     When the First Appeal came to be allowed and the matter reached the High

     Court in Second Appeal that the issue as regards the abatement came to be

     raised.
i.     Relevant Statutory Provisions.
25.
Order XXII Rule 1 of the CPC
reads thus: -
“1. No abatement by party's death if right to sue survives.—
           The death of a plaintiff or defendant shall not cause the suit to
           abate if the right to sue survives.”
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                            Page 13 of 40
26.
Order XXII Rule 2 of the CPC
reads thus: -
“2. Procedure where one of several plaintiffs or defendants
          dies and right to sue survives.—
          Where there are more plaintiffs or defendants than one, and any
          of them dies, and where the right to sue survives to the surviving
          plaintiff or plaintiffs alone, or against the surviving defendant
          or defendants alone, the Court shall cause an entry to the effect
          to be made on the record,. and the suit shall proceed at the
          instance of the surviving plaintiff or plaintiffs, or against the
          surviving defendant or defendants”
27. Order XXII Rule 4 and 4A,
of the CPC
reads thus: -
“4. Procedure in case of death of one of several defendants or
          of sole defendant.—
          (1) Where one of two or more defendants dies and the right to
          sue does not survive against the surviving defendant or
          defendants alone or a sole defendant or sole surviving
          defendant dies and the right to sue survives, the Court, on an
          application made in that behalf, shall cause the legal
          representative of the deceased defendants to be made a party
          and shall proceed with the suit. (2) Any person so made a party
          may make any defence appropriate to his character as legal
          representative of the deceased defendant. (3) Where within the
          time limited by law no application is made under sub-rule (1),
          the suit shall abate as against the deceased defendant.
(4) The Court whenever it thinks fit, may exempt the plaintiff
          from the necessity of substituting the legal representatives of
          any such defendant who has failed to file a written statement or
          who, having filed it, has failed to appear and contest the suit at
          the hearing; and judgment may, in such case, be pronounced
          against the said defendant notwithstanding the death of such
          defendant and shall have the same force and effect as if it has
          been pronounced before death took place. (5) Where— (a) the
          plaintiff was ignorant of the death of a defendant, and could not,
          for that reason, make an application for the substitution of the
          legal representative of the defendant under this rule within the
          period specified in the
Limitation Act, 1963
(36 of 1963), and
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                          Page 14 of 40
the suit has, in consequence, abated, and (b) the plaintiff applies
          after the expiry of the period specified therefore in the
Limitation Act, 1963
(36 of 1963), for setting aside the
          abatement and also for the admission of that application under
section 5
of that Act on the ground that he had, by reason of
          such ignorance, sufficient cause for not making the application
          with the period specified in the said Act, the Court shall, in
          considering the application under the said
section 5
, have due
          regard to the fact of such ignorance, if proved.
4A. Procedure where there is no legal representative.—
          (1) If, in any suit, it shall appear to the Court that any party who
          has died during the pendency of the suit has no legal
          representative, the Court may, on the application of any party
          to the suit, proceed in the absence of a person representing the
          estate of the deceased person, or may be order appoint the
          Administrator-General, or an officer of the Court or such other
          person as it thinks fit to represent the estate of the deceased
          person for the purpose of the suit; and any judgment or order
          subsequently given or made in the suit shall bind the estate of
          the deceased person to the same extent as he would have been
          bound if a personal representative of the deceased person had
          been a party to the suit. (2) Before making an order under this
          rule, the Court— (a) may require notice of the application for
          the order to be given to such (if any) of the persons having an
          interest in the estate of the deceased person as it thinks fit; and
(b) shall as certain that the person proposed to be appointed to
          represent the estate of the deceased person is willing to be so
          appointed and has no interest adverse to that of the deceased
          person.”
28. Rule 1 of
Order XXII of the CPC
provides that the death of a plaintiff or

   defendant shall not cause the suit to abate if the right to sue survives. Rule 4,
Order XXII of the CPC
prescribes that where a defendant dies, on an

   application made by the plaintiff, the Court shall cause the legal

   representative of the deceased defendant to be made a party and shall proceed

   with the suit. It cannot be disputed that such an application has to be filed
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                            Page 15 of 40
within the time limit prescribed by law; otherwise, the suit would stand abated

      against the deceased defendant. A clear provision is to be found to that effect

      in sub-rule (3) of Rule 4. Obviously in case of failure to bring the legal

      representative on record within prescribed time, the suit having abated, the

      plaintiff will have to seek the remedy of setting aside abatement in accordance

      with the provisions of law.
ii.
Order XXII, Rule 10A of the CPC
.
29. With enforcement of 1976's amendment to
the CPC
, once a party to the suit

      dies, a duty is cast upon the lawyer representing such party, to communicate

      the fact of death to the opposite party in terms of provisions contain in Rule

      10A of
Order XXII of the CPC
. It is nobody's case that there was compliance

      of this rule in the case at hand by the advocate appearing for the defendants.

      Unless this primary obligation is discharged and it is established with cogent

      evidence that the opposite party had sufficient opportunity to know and, had,

      in fact, knowledge of the death of the defendant, the plea of abatement of the

      suit at the instance of party having failed to comply with the obligation

      mentioned under Rule 10A of
Order XXII of the CPC
cannot be entertained.

      Nobody can be allowed to reap the benefit of his own lapse and to non-suit

      the plaintiff.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                            Page 16 of 40
30. Order XXII, Rule 10A reads thus: -
“10A. Duty of pleader to communicate to Court death of a
          party.—
          Wherever a pleader appearing for a party to the suit comes to
          know of the death of that party, he shall inform the Court about
          it, and the Court shall thereupon give notice of such death to the
          other party, and, for this purpose, the contract between the
          pleader and the deceased party shall be deemed to subsist.”
31. Rule 10A has been newly inserted by
the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 1976.
32. Rule 10A is intended to avoid delay in making an application for bringing

   legal representatives of the deceased party on record. It seeks to mitigate the

   hardship arising from the fact that a party to a suit may not come to know

   about the death of the other side during the pendency of the proceedings. In

   such a situation, it would be appropriate to ask the advocate of the party to

   give intimation of the death of the party represented by him so as to enable

   the other side to take appropriate steps.
33. The Law Commission stated thus: -
“A new rule is proposed to be inserted to the effect that where
          a pleader comes to know of the death of a party to the suit, he
          shall inform the court, and the court, in its turn, shall give notice
          to the plaintiff of the death. Such a provision will, to some extent
          reduce the complications that arise by reason of the plaintiff’s
          ignorance of the death of a defendant.”
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                             Page 17 of 40
34. In the Statement of Objects and Reasons for
the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Bill, 1976, it was observed: -
“Clause 76—Sub-clause (v).—New Rule 10-A is being inserted
          to impose an obligation on the pleaders of the parties to
          communicate to the Court the death of the party represented by
          him.”
35. The Joint Committee also said: -
“Clause 73 (Original clause 76).—(iii) During the course of
          evidence, a point was raised, that, on the death of the client, the
          contract with the pleader comes to an end and so the obligation
          of the pleader to act on behalf of his client ceases on the death
          of the client. The Committee, however, feel that it should be
          made obligatory on the part of the pleader to inform the Court
          about the death of his client and for this purpose the contract
          between the pleader and the party should be deemed to subsist.
          Sub-rule (1) of new proposed Rule 10-A of Order 22 has been
          amended accordingly.
[...] The Committee feel that in view of the amendment made in
          sub-rule (1) of new proposed Rule 10-A proposed sub-rule (2)
          in Rule 10-A is not necessary as the provision is likely to cause
          hardship to the pleader. Sub-rule (2) of the new proposed Rule
          10-A of Order 22 has been omitted accordingly.”
36. Rule 10A, as inserted by the Amendment Act, 1976, imposes an obligation

   on the pleader of the parties to communicate to the court the fact of the death

   of the party represented by him.
37. Rule 10A of Order XXII should be read with Rule 4 of Order III of the Code.

   Rule 4 of Order III reads thus: -
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                           Page 18 of 40
“4. Appointment of pleader.—
          (1) No pleader shall act for any person in any Court, unless he
          has been appointed for the purpose by such person by a
          document in writing signed by such person or by his recognised
          agent or by some other person duly authorised by or under a
          power-of-attorney to make such appointment. (2) Every such
          appointment shall be filed in Court and shall, for the purposes
          of sub-rule (1), be deemed to be in force until determined with
          the leave of the Court by a writing signed by the client or the
          pleader, as the case may be, and filed in Court, or until the client
          or the pleader dies, or until all proceedings in the suit are ended
          so far as regards the client.”
38. Order III, Rule 4 prescribes the manner of appointment of a pleader and also

   the limit upto which such appointment remains in force. Every appointment

   of a pleader will be continued inter alia until the client or the pleader dies. As

   a general rule, therefore, on the death of the client his contract with the pleader

   comes to an end. So also, his authority to act on behalf of his client expires.
39. Rule 10A, as inserted by the Amendment Act, 1976 carves out an exception

   to the above general rule and casts a duty upon the advocate appearing for the

   party to intimate the court about the death of his client. For this purpose, a

   deeming fiction has been created that the contract between the (deceased)

   client and the pleader subsists to that limited extent. [See:
Gangadhar v. Raj

   Kumar
, (1984) 1 SCC 121]
40. Rule 10A of Order XXII is salutary in nature. It has been introduced to

   mitigate hardship arising from the fact that a suit, appeal or other proceeding
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                            Page 19 of 40
may take long time and a party to a suit, appeal or other proceeding may die

     and the other party may not be aware of such a situation. Rule 10A seeks to

     do justice over technicalities by requiring an advocate appearing for the party

     to intimate the court about the death of his client and provides an opportunity

     to the other side to take necessary steps to bring heirs and legal representatives

     of the deceased party on record. Rule 10A is thus not an empty formality. Pre-

     eminent object of the rule is to do full and complete justice.
a.     Rationale behind Order XXII Rule 10A.
41. An “innovative provision” in the form of Rule 10A has been introduced by

     the Amendment Act, 1976 in the Code to avoid procedural technicality

     scoring march over substantial justice.
42.
In
Gangadhar
(supra), dealing with the object underlying Rule 10A, this

     Court observed that it was introduced to mitigate the hardship arising from

     the fact that the party to a suit or appeal, as the case may be, may not come to

     know about the death of the other party during the pendency of such suit or

     appeal. A suit or appeal takes years to come up for hearing and it is very

     difficult to expect the other party to be a watch-dog for day-to-day survival

     of his opponent. Then when the suit / appeal comes up for hearing, it comes

     to the light that not only one of the parties to the suit / appeal had died but the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                              Page 20 of 40
time for substitution had also run out and the suit or appeal had abated. It is

     with a view to avoid technicalities and to do full and complete justice that an

     important provision has been inserted in
CPC
, in the form of Order XXII Rule

     10A, requiring the advocate appearing for the party to inform death of his

     client to the court so as to enable the other side to take appropriate steps to

     bring on record legal representatives of the deceased. For that purpose, a

     deeming fiction is introduced that the contract between the dead client and

     pleader will subsist to the limited extent to supply information to the court

     about the death of his client. This Court stated that: -
“The Legislative intention of casting a burden on the learned
           advocate of a party to give intimation of the death of the party
           represented by him and for this limited purpose to introduce a
           deeming fiction of the contract being kept subsisting between the
           learned advocate and the deceased party was that the other party
           may not be taken unawares at the time of hearing of the appeal
           by springing surprise on it that the respondent is dead and appeal
           has abated. In order to avoid procedural justice scoring a march
           over substantial justice Rule 10-A was introduced by
the Code of
           Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Act of 1976 which came into force
           on February 1, 1977.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)

b.    Nature of the salutary provision of Order XXII Rule 10A.
43. Rule 10A is procedural in nature. No penalty is provided for non-compliance

     with the rule. The provision is not “absolutely mandatory” [See:
United Bank

     of India v. Kanan Bala
, (1987) 2 SCC 583].
44. The new provision has been inserted with a view that just delay in preferring

     substitution application may not be put forward a ground for dismissal of the
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                           Page 21 of 40
application. Since a lawyer for the party is obliged to inform the court about

     the death of his client, his failure to do so should be treated as good and

     sufficient ground for condonation of delay. [See:
Kathpalia v. Lakhmir

     Singh
, (1984) 4 SCC 66].
I.     Distinction between the legal maxims ‘ex injuria ius non oritur’ and
       ‘nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propia’.
45. The genesis of the provision of Rule 10A of the Order XXII lies in the

     doctrine of ‘clean hands’. The doctrine of ‘clean hands’ originates from the

     Roman Law, and finds expression in two latin maxims being (i) ex injuria ius

     non oritur and (ii) nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propia,

     which mean “from wrong, no right arises” and “no one can take advantage of

     their own wrong”, respectively. [See: Schwebel, Stephen M. “Clean Hands,

     Principle” Eds., Rüdiger Wolfrum, Oxford University Press, 2009].
46. Although the aforesaid two maxims, semantically appear to be one and the

     same, with the courts often applying the two interchangeably, yet there lies a

     very fine but pertinent distinction between the two maxims. The two maxims

     are comparable to each other but they are not interchangeable, and differ in

     their scope. Aaron X. Fellmeth and Maurice Horwitz in the “Guide to Latin

     Maxims in International Law” 1st Ed., Oxford University Press, has explained

     the maxim ex injuria ius non oritur as follows: -
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                          Page 22 of 40
“A right does not arise from wrongdoing.” A maxim meaning
          that one cannot generally rely on a violation of law to establish
          a new legal right or to confirm a claimed right. E.g., “As
          Lauterpacht has indicated the maxim ex injuria ius non oritur
          is not so severe as to deny that any source of right whatever can
          accrue to third persons acting in good faith. Were it otherwise
          the general interest in the security of transactions would be too
          greatly invaded and the cause of minimizing needless hardship
          and friction would be hindered rather than helped.” Advisory
          Opinion on Legal Consequences For States Of The Continued
          Presence Of South Africa In Namibia (South West Africa)
          Notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), 1971
          I.C.J. Rep. 16, 167 (separate opinion of Judge Dillard). An
          alternative formulation is Ius ex iniuria non oritur. Compare
          with Nullus commodum capere (potest) de sua iniuria propria.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
47. On the other hand, they have explained the maxim ‘nullus commodum capere

   potest de injuria sua propia’ as follows: -
“No advantage (may be) gained from one’s own wrong.” A
          maxim meaning that the law will not recognize or validate any
          profit a person derives from his own wrongdoing. For example,
          one may not destroy evidence of the extent of damages caused
          by one’s illegal act, then counter a claim for damages based on
          that act by pointing to the lack of evidence. E.g., “[T]he State
          must not be allowed to benefit by its inconsistency when it is
          through its own wrong or illegal act that the other party has
          been deprived of its right or prevented from exercising it [...]”

                                              (Emphasis supplied)
48. A perusal of the aforesaid makes it abundantly clear, that while the maxim

   ‘ex injuria ius non oritur’ is a principle governing the general spirit of the

   jurisprudence of “rights”, that a right cannot emanate or emerge from a

   wrongful act, the maxim ‘nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                         Page 23 of 40
propria’, on the other hand, confirms the general rule of equity and prudence

   that no one can benefit from their own wrongdoing. The scope of the latter is

   wider than the former. The first maxim explains that the legitimacy of a right

   stands vitiated if such right, which otherwise would have been legitimately

   exercisable, accrues from a wrongdoing of the person claiming under or

   exercising such right. Although, under the law, a right may arise even if from

   a wrongdoing, yet if exercise of such right is allowed, it would malign the

   very jurisprudential underpinning of ‘right’ and ‘duty’. A right has a legal

   sanctity and backing to it, in order for it to have a legitimising effect, since

   the jural correlative of a right is duty. More particularly, the term “right” is

   very specific to not include every benefit, profit or advantage. The maxim

   solidifies the faith in law that no wrong action will be given a legal validity.

   The legal validity of a right flows from other legal norms or from a source of

   law [See: Niel MacCormick, “Rights in Legislation”, Law, Morality and

   Society: Essays in Honour of H.L.A. Hart, P.M.S. Hacker, and Joseph

   Raz (eds). 189-206, Oxford: Clarendon Press (1977)].
49. The maxim, ‘nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propria’, on the

   other hand, lays itself as a rule of equity. An advantage falling from

   wrongdoing may be a legal or illegal advantage. The maxim dictates that, be

   that as it may, no profit or advantage of a person’s wrongful act may be

   validated by the seal of law. It may very well happen, that the advantage may
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                         Page 24 of 40
be legal or illegal, but the validation of law will not be extended to it by the

   law. Thus, the courts that have the discretion to allow or disallow the

   availment of such advantage in ordinary circumstances, are constrained to not

   permit a person who has committed a wrongful act to benefit from the

   advantageous position afforded to him because of such wrongful action as a

   matter of justice, equity and fairness. Fellmeth and Horwitz rightly extend an

   illustration, that when a person himself destroys evidence, he cannot take

   shelter of the defence of lack of evidence. The advantage falling from the

   wrong will not be validated by the courts of law.
50. The interpretation of Order XXII Rule 10A is a manifestation of the latter and

   not the former i.e., the cornerstone of its nature and the effect is the maxim

   ‘nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propria’ or no one should

   derive benefit from their own wrong. This is because of the procedural nature

   of the provision as held in
Kanan Bala
(supra) and a catena of other decisions

   of this Court. Although, the provision aims to do justice over technicalities

   by casting a duty upon the pleader to apprise the court as-well as all parties

   about the demise of his client, yet it does not prescribe any penalty for the

   non-compliance of the same, wilful or inadvertent. A pleader may not be put

   to the perils of any penalty for his failure in performing the duty under Rule

   10A in law, yet it does not mean that such failure would also be of no bearing

   in equity or of inconsequence to the ultimate abatement of the suit or appeal.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                         Page 25 of 40
The benevolent object underlying Order XXII Rule 10A to ensure complete

   justice on one hand and the contrasting patent absence of any penalty for non-

   compliance on the other, would simpliciter be irreconcilable, without the

   resort to the maxim ‘nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propria’.

   It would be preposterous to say that a court of conscience would take no

   cognizance of such a failure in duty of the pleader in deciding whether the

   suit or appeal could be said to be abated for want of any application in the

   stipulated time in terms of sub-rule (3) of Rule 4, Order XXII, and allow an

   erring party through its pleader to derive undue advantage thereof. To ignore

   such lapses in equity would render Rule 10A completely otiose and do

   violence to the legislative intent behind it.
51. Thus, the principle that no party can take advantage of his/her own wrong i.e.

   ‘nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propria’ is squarely attracted

   in the event of a failure in complying with the provision of Rule 10A of
Order

   XXII of the CPC
, and any abatement as a result of such wrongdoing or failure

   ought not to be validated by the courts.
52.
In
Kusheshwar Prasad Singh v State of Bihar
, (2007) 11 SCC 447, it was

   held that the aforesaid maxim is based on elementary principles, is fully

   recognised in courts of law and of equity, and, admits of illustration from

   every branch of legal procedure. The relevant observations read as under: -
“14. In this connection, our attention has been invited by the
          learned counsel for the appellant to a decision of this Court in
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                         Page 26 of 40
Mrutunjay Pani v. Narmada Bala Sasmal [AIR 1961 SC 1353]
          wherein it was held by this Court that where an obligation is
          cast on a party and he commits a breach of such obligation, he
          cannot be permitted to take advantage of such situation. This is
          based on the Latin maxim commodum ex injuria sua nemo
          habere debet (no party can_take undue advantage of his own
          wrong).
15.
In
Union of India v. Major General Madan Lal Yadav
[(1996) 4 SCC 127: 1996 SCC (Cri) 592] the accused army
          personnel himself was responsible for delay as he escaped from
          detention. Then he raised an objection against initiation of
          proceedings on the ground that such proceedings ought to have
          been initiated within six months under the
Army Act, 1950
.
          Referring to the above maxim, this_Court held that the accused
          could not take undue advantage of his own wrong. Considering
          the relevant provisions of the Act, the Court held that presence
          of the accused was an essential condition for the commencement
          of trial and when the accused did not make himself available,
          he could not be allowed to raise a contention that proceedings
          were time-barred. This Court (at SCC p. 142, para 28) referred
          to Broom's Legal Maxims (10th Edn.), p. 191 wherein it was
          stated:
“It is a maxim of law, recognised and established, that no man
          shall take advantage of his own wrong; and this maxim. which
          is based on elementary principles, is fully recognised in courts
          of law and of equity, and, indeed, admits of illustration from
          every branch of legal procedure.”
16. It is settled principle of law that a man cannot be permitted
        to take undue and unfair advantage of his own wrong to gain
        favourable interpretation of law. It is sound principle that he
        who prevents a thing from being done shall not avail himself of
        the non-performance he has occasioned. To put it differently,
        “a wrongdoer ought not to be permitted to make a profit out of
        his own wrong”.
(emphasis supplied)
53. We would like to remind the High Court of this very important legal maxim

   of ‘nullus commodum capere potest de inuria sua propria’. It is the duty of

   the court to ensure that dishonesty or any attempt to abuse the legal process
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                        Page 27 of 40
must be effectively curbed and the court must ensure that there is no wrongful,

   unauthorised or unjust gain for anyone by abusing of the process of the court.

   No one should be permitted to use the judicial process for earning undeserved

   gains for unjust profits. The courts’ constant endeavour should be to ensure

   that everyone gets just and fair treatment.
54. We may clarify with a view to obviate any possibility of confusion that the

   maxim ‘ex injuria ius non oritur’ is different from the maxim ‘nullus

   commodum capere potest de inuria sua propria’ for the reason that the former

   pertains to a ‘right’ that may become available to a wrongdoer due to the

   wrongful act and the latter relates to an ‘advantage’ or ‘benefit’ that a

   wrongdoer may derive from his wrongful conduct. Although both are in

   essence a byproduct of the doctrine of equity and share a common genealogy

   under the doctrine of clean hands, the field in which they operate are different

   and distinct. In case of the first maxim, had the right not emanated from a

   wrongful act, it would have been cemented in law and the person in whose

   favour such right had accrued, could have pleaded for vindication of the same,

   with sufficient guarantee, that his plea would be accepted by the court.

   However, in the case of the second maxim, if the advantage was not being

   derived from a wrongful act, the courts would nevertheless still have the

   discretion to hold whether the person in whose favour such advantage had

   arisen, could avail such advantage or not. While in such a case there would
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                         Page 28 of 40
be no embargo on the courts to deny the advantage to the person eligible to

   benefit from the same, the courts could still rule that such person could not

   avail the benefit. Having considered the cases in which there is no wrong done

   by the person deriving the right or benefit from their actions, we shall now

   see how the wrongful action affects the conclusion of the courts in both such

   scenarios as-well. The answer to this is straightforward. In the first case, when

   a right accrues to the person who has committed the wrongful act due to such

   act, and while the law regards it as an enforceable right, yet the courts are

   armed with power to deny the vindication of such rights, which they

   ordinarily could not have done. Put it differently, while the existence of such

   rights is undeniable in the eyes of law, yet the exercise or enforceability of

   such rights would nevertheless be deniable by the courts in equity. The way

   the maxim envisages the application of this principle is based on one another

   well-known principle; that equity cannot supplant the law. When the courts

   deny the right that may have accrued by a wrongdoing, the courts in essence

   are not denying the right itself i.e., they are not supplanting the right

   emanating from a law, rather, they are drawing upon the reservoir of equity

   within their conscience, to withhold its enforcement, not to contradict the law,

   but to ensure that the law does not become an instrument for legitimizing its

   own violation through the hands of courts who are expected and reposed of

   the faith to uphold the law in the first place. Hence, under the first maxim, the

   courts cannot deny such rights, as they flow from the law, but any vindication
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                          Page 29 of 40
or enforcement can be if they require the touch of courts, by invoking a higher

   standard of fairness that guards against the instrumentalization of legal rights

   as vehicles of injustice.
55. Whereas, when it comes to the second maxim, irrespective of how the

   advantage has accrued, it is not an enforceable advantage. The reason being

   a simple one, that they are simply not a ‘right’ so as to have the force or

   backing of any law. In the absence of any enforceability flowing from a law

   or legal norm, the enforcement or vindication of such advantage as a natural

   corollary can only flow from the discretion of the courts, who are required to

   supply the legal formalities to make them enforceable in the first place.

   Hence, the courts in the case of the latter, being a court of conscience, built

   upon the edifice of fair-play, would prohibit inurement of any such benefit

   lacking the backing of law by virtue of this discretion and as a matter of

   fairness disallow a person who has committed the wrongful action to avail

   the benefit or advantage derived from his own wrong. The second maxim

   encapsulates the aforesaid principle and mandates that courts, having the

   conscience of justice, equity and fairness, ought to necessarily disallow the

   benefit of the wrong to such a person.
56. This distinction marks a crucial difference in the scope of the two maxims; in

   the former, equity steps in after the law has recognized a right, to decide
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                         Page 30 of 40
whether justice permits its enforcement; in the latter, however, equity acts

   more preemptively, interrogating the moral propriety of allowing any gain

   from potentially tainted conduct. In either case, where no wrong is

   committed, the courts duty remains guided by legal principle, more so in the

   case of the second maxim. However, in the instance of the first maxim, once

   wrongdoing results in contaminating the jural relation of ‘rights and duty’, a

   shift occurs, where equity steps in in the sphere of entitlement from such

   ‘rights’.
57. On the basis of the aforesaid, we are of the considered view that the

   underlying ethos of Order XXII, Rule 10A is not based on the maxim of ‘ex

   injuria ius non oritur’. A ‘right’ accrues in the eyes of law through two

   principal channels: first through the force of any law or statute itself, and

   secondly, through acts enabled by the law that possess the normative force to

   create enforceable claims backed by the operation of law or facilitated by

   conventional legal norms such as a gift, will, consent, contract etc., acts that

   have the capacity to create legal rights. Any legal norm, must possess

   normativity and generality, which together must have such an effect that the

   norm ought to become valid in law or through the law, in order for it to give

   birth to a right. In other words, only those acts which attain legal validity

   inherently within the legal system or through its mechanism can be said to

   give rise to a ‘right’.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                         Page 31 of 40
58. In the case on hand, the respondents or the original defendants have pleaded

      for the abatement of the suit due to non-substitution of legal heirs therein by

      the plaintiff, within the statutorily prescribed period of time. Abatement of

      suit is not a right that accrues to a party when the other party has failed to

      substitute legal heirs within the specified period of limitation. Abatement may

      be disallowed by the court if it has sufficient cause for condoning the delay

      of the party that ought to have filed for the substitution of legal heirs. In fact,

      Rule 10A was enacted for the purpose to allow for mitigation of the legal

      effects of delay and can be used to request for condonation of delay.
59. The question of allowing abatement of suit is one of discretion and therefore,

      an advantage. Under Rule 10A of Order XXII, the duty of a pleader to apprise

      the court as well as the other parties to the suit or appeal of the death of his

      client is a duty of candour and propriety as a responsible officer of the court.

      The failure of a party to perform the duty under Rule 10A constitutes a

      wrongful act and such party must not be allowed to avail the benefit arising

      therefrom in the form of abatement of suit.
II.     Duty of Pleader.
60. Rule 10A of Order XXII, as inserted by the Amendment Act, 1976 imposes

      an obligation on the pleader appearing for the party to intimate death of his

      client to the court. But there is difference of opinion as to whether the duty
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                               Page 32 of 40
imposed on the pleader is confined to factum of death of a party or also to

   furnish names and particulars of legal representatives.
61. According to one view, there is no obligation on the pleader appearing on

   behalf of the deceased party to furnish or supply list of legal representatives

   of the deceased.
62. According to the other view, however, the pleader has not only to inform the

   court as to death of the party but he must also furnish particulars of legal

   representatives.
63. However, we are of the view that providing merely an information with

   regard to the fact of death is not sufficient compliance of the
Rule 10A of the

   CPC
. unless and until the counsel furnishes the information with regard to the

   details of the persons on whom and against whom the right to sue survives

   and the information under
Rule 10A of the CPC
. and the object behind it

   would remain incomplete as the parties would still be labouring to inquire

   who are the legal representatives and find out as to upon whom and against

   whom the right to sue survives.
64. This Court in
Perumon Bhagvathy Devaswom Perinadu Village v. Bhargavi

   Amma (Dead) by Lrs
. and Others reported in (2008) 8 SCC 321 has

   explained the principles applicable in considering applications for setting

   aside the abatement and as summarised such principles as under: -
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                         Page 33 of 40
“12.
In
State of M.P. v. S.S. Akolkar
[(1996) 2 SCC 568] this
          Court held: (SCC pp. 569-70, paras 6-7)

               “6. [...] Under Order 22 Rule 10-A, it is the duty of
               the counsel, on coming to know of the death of a
               party, to inform it to the court and the court shall
               give notice to the other party of the death. By
               necessary implication delay for substitution of legal
               representatives begins to run from the date of
               knowledge. [...]
7. It is settled law that the consideration for
               condonation of delay under
Section 5
of the
               Limitation Act and setting aside of the abatement
               under Order 22 are entirely distinct and different.
The court always liberally considers the latter,
               though in some case, the court may refuse to
               condone the delay under
Section 5
in filing the
               appeals. After the appeal has been filed and is
               pending, the Government is not expected to keep
               watch whether the contesting respondent is alive or
               has passed away. After the matter was brought to the
               notice of the counsel for the State, steps were taken
               even thereafter; after due verification belated
               application came to be filed. It is true that
Section 5
of the Limitation Act would be applicable and delay
               is required to be explained. The delay in official
               business requires its broach and approach from
               public justice perspective.”
(i) The words “sufficient cause for not making the application
          within the period of limitation” should be understood and
          applied in a reasonable, pragmatic, practical and liberal
          manner, depending upon the facts and circumstances of the
          case, and the type of case. The words “sufficient cause” in
Section 5
of the Limitation Act should receive a liberal
          construction so as to advance substantial justice, when the
          delay is not on account of any dilatory tactics, want of bona
          fides, deliberate inaction or negligence on the part of the
          appellant.
(ii) In considering the reasons for condonation of delay, the
          courts are more liberal with reference to applications for setting
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                            Page 34 of 40
aside abatement, than other cases. While the court will have to
          keep in view that a valuable right accrues to the legal
          representatives of the deceased respondent when the appeal
          abates, it will not punish an appellant with foreclosure of the
          appeal, for unintended lapses. The courts tend to set aside
          abatement and decide the matter on merits, rather than
          terminate the appeal on the ground of abatement.
(iii) The decisive factor in condonation of delay, is not the length
          of delay, but sufficiency of a satisfactory explanation.
(iv) The extent or degree of leniency to be shown by a court
          depends on the nature of application and facts and
          circumstances of the case. For example, courts view delays in
          making applications in a pending appeal more leniently than
          delays in the institution of an appeal. The courts view
          applications relating to lawyer's lapses more leniently than
          applications relating to litigant's lapses. The classic example is
          the difference in approach of courts to applications for
          condonation of delay in filing an appeal and applications for
          condonation of delay in refiling the appeal after rectification of
          defects.
(v) Want of “diligence” or “inaction” can be attributed to an
          appellant only when something required to be done by him, is
          not done. When nothing is required to be done, courts do not
          expect the appellant to be diligent. Where an appeal is admitted
          by the High Court and is not expected to be listed for final
          hearing for a few years, an appellant is not expected to visit the
          court or his lawyer every few weeks to ascertain the position
          nor keep checking whether the contesting respondent is alive.
          He merely awaits the call or information from his counsel about
          the listing of the appeal.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
65. The High Court in its impugned judgment and order has with a great air of

   conviction observed that
Order XXII Rule 10A of the CPC
is not mandatory

   and would not override the mandatory provisions relating to abatement as
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                            Page 35 of 40
contained in
Order XXII Rule 4 of the CPC
. We are afraid, the understanding

    of the High Court is not correct.
66. The legislative intention of casting a burden on the advocate of a party to give

    intimation of the death of the party represented by him and for this limited

    purpose to introduce a deeming fiction of the contract being kept subsisting

    between the advocate and the deceased party was that the other party may not

    be taken unaware at the time of hearing of the appeal by springing surprise

    on it that the respondent is dead and appeal has abated. In order to avoid

    procedural justice scoring a march over substantial justice the Rule 10A was

    introduced by
the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Act of 1976 which

    came into force on February 1st, 1977. Unfortunately, the High Court took no

    notice of the wholesome provision and fell back on the earlier legal position

    which automatically stands modified by the new provision and reached an

    unsustainable conclusion.
67. It is not the question of Order XXII Rule 10A being directory or mandatory.

    The court should know how to apply the provision in the facts of each case.

    The line of reasoning adopted by the High Court if upheld would render Order

    XXII Rule 10A otiose.
68. Before we close this matter, we would like to observe that it is not even the

    case of the defendants that the plaintiffs had knowledge of the death of some
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                          Page 36 of 40
of the defendants. If such would have been the position, then probably the

   applicability of the Order XXII Rule 10A would have been inconsequential.
69. In the present appeal the plaintiffs as well as the defendants have filed their

   written submissions. The defendants in their written submissions have talked

   about the merits of the case but very conveniently have not said a word as to

   why it was not brought to the notice of First Appellate court when the First

   Appeal was taken up for hearing that the first appeal had in fact stood abated

   with the death of some of the defendants. Why the lawyer appearing for the

   defendants also kept quiet and proceeded to argue the matter on merits? This

   smacks of lack of good faith.
70. In the aforesaid context we may refer to and rely upon a decision of this Court

   in P. Jesaya (dead) by Lrs. v. Sub-collector and Anr. reported in (2004) 13

   SCC 431 wherein the only contention taken up in appeal before this Court

   was that one of the respondents in the appeal before the High Court had died

   during the pendency of that appeal. It was contended that his heirs were not

   brought on record and therefore the appeal before the High Court had abated.

   It was also submitted that as the appeal had abated, the judgment delivered

   by the High Court was non-est and could not have been enforced. In the case

   at hand the appeal stood abated according to the High Court before the First

   Appellate court whereas in P. Jesaya (supra) it had stood abated before the

   High Court. This is the only difference.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                          Page 37 of 40
71. This Court observed that although the arguments were attractive, yet one must

     keep in mind Order XXII Rule 10-A
of the C.P.C
. This Court observed that

     it is obligatory on the pleader of the deceased to inform the court and the other

     side about the factum of the death of a party. This Court observed thus: -
“4. Though the arguments are attractive one must also keep in
           mind
Order 22 Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure
. It is
           obligatory on the pleader of a deceased to inform the court and
           the other side about the factum of death of a party. In this case
           we find that no intimation was given to the court or to the other
           side that the first respondent had died. On the contrary a
           counsel appeared on behalf of the deceased person and argued
           the matter. It is clear that the attempt was to see whether a
           favourable order could be obtained. It is clear that the intention
           was that if the order went against them, then thereafter this
           would be made a ground for having that order set aside. This is
           in effect an attempt to take not just the other side but also the
           court for a ride. These sort of tactics must not be permitted to
           prevail. We, therefore, see no reason to interfere. The appeal
           stands dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
72. Had the lawyer of the defendants or the defendants themselves would have

     brought to the notice of the First Appellate court that some of the defendants

     had died then probably the defendants could have taken steps to first get the

     abatement set aside and bring the legal heirs on record.
D.     CONCLUSION
73. In such circumstances referred to above we are left with no other option but

     to partly allow this appeal and set aside the impugned judgment and order

     passed by the High Court.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                            Page 38 of 40
74. We are inclined to remand the matter to the High Court for fresh hearing of

   the second appeal keeping in mind the principles of law as discussed in this

   judgment.
75. In the result, this appeal succeeds and is hereby partly allowed. The impugned

   judgment of the High Court is set aside.
76. The matter is remanded to the High Court. The Second Appeal No. 190 of

   2008 is restored to its original file and shall be heard afresh and decided on

   its own merits after giving opportunity of hearing to both the parties.
77. We clarify that so far as the question whether the decree can be said to be

   joint and indivisible or otherwise shall be looked into by the High Court while

   hearing the Second Appeal afresh. If the High Court reaches the conclusion

   that the decree is joint and indivisible and with the death of some of the

   defendants, the entire First Appeal could be said to have abated then it shall

   remand the matter to the First Appellate Court so as to give an opportunity to

   the plaintiffs to prefer an appropriate application for setting aside of the

   abatement and bring the legal heirs on record and thereafter hear the first

   appeal once again on its own merits.
78. In the event the High Court reaches the conclusion that the First Appeal as a

   whole could not be said to have stood abated as the nature of the decree is
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                         Page 39 of 40
such that it cannot be said to be joint and indivisible then the High Court shall

    hear the Second Appeal on its own merits on other issues involved in the

    litigation.
79. Since this litigation is of 1984, we direct the High Court to take up the Second

    Appeal No. 190 of 2008 for fresh hearing and decide the same within a period

    of three months from the date of receipt of the writ of this order. High Court

    shall inform about the disposal of the second appeal to this Court.
80. The Registry is directed to circulate one copy each of this judgment to all the

    High Courts.
................................ J.
(J.B. Pardiwala)




                                                             ................................. J.
(R. Mahadevan)

New Delhi;
14th July, 2025.
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1536 of 2015                                Page 40 of 40