[Cites
75
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Sonali Power Equipments Pvt. Ltd vs Chairman, Maharashtra State ... on 17 July, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 864                                                                                  REPORTABLE
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 9524-9532 OF 2025
                              ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NOS. 6912-6920 OF 2024

             M/S SONALI POWER EQUIPMENTS PVT. LTD.                                           ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                              VERSUS

             CHAIRMAN, MAHARASHTRA STATE ELECTRICITY
             BOARD, MUMBAI & ORS.                 …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                       JUDGMENT
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J.
Table of Contents
             I.             Introduction.........................................................................2

             II.            Brief Facts ...........................................................................3

             III.           High Court order dated 24.08.2018: ..........................................4

             IV.            Impugned order: ....................................................................6

             V.             Submissions: ...................................................................... 11

             VI.            Issues ............................................................................... 15

             VII.           Relevant statutory provisions: ................................................ 17

             VIII.          Whether time-barred claims can be referred to conciliation under
Section 18(2)
of the MSMED Act: ...................................................... 26

             IX.
Signature Not Verified
Whether time-barred claims can be referred to arbitration under
Digitally signed by
KAPIL TANDON
Date: 2025.07.17
Section 18(3)
of the MSMED Act: ...................................................... 35
   15:50:44 IST
   Reason:
X.             Conclusion ......................................................................... 49
1
1.     Leave granted.
I. Introduction:
2.     The issue arising in the present appeals are whether the

provisions of the Limitation Act, 19631 are applicable to

conciliation and arbitration proceedings initiated under Section 18

of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act,

20062. Further, even if the
Limitation Act
is not applicable,

whether a supplier can recover a time-barred debt by taking

recourse to the remedies provisioned under
Section 18
of the

MSMED Act. In the order impugned before us in the present

appeals, a full bench of the High Court has held that the

Facilitation Council cannot entertain time-barred claims for

conciliation, and that the provisions of the
Limitation Act
are

applicable to arbitration proceedings under the MSMED. On

considering the statutory scheme and provisions of the MSMED

Act, the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 19963, and the
Limitation

Act
, along with the precedents of this Court as well the

submissions of the parties, we have partly allowed the present

appeals as follows. We have upheld the decision of the High Court



1 Hereinafter “
Limitation Act
”.
2 Hereinafter “
MSMED Act
”.
3 Hereinafter “ACA”.
2
to the extent of the
Limitation Act
being applicable to arbitration

proceedings under the
MSMED Act
and have provided our reasons

for the same. With respect to conciliation proceedings on the other

hand, we are of the opinion that they do not attract the

applicability of the
Limitation Act
. Further, there is no legal bar in

the
Limitation Act, the MSMED Act
, the ACA, or the legal

precedents laid down by this Court that proscribes conciliation

with respect to time-barred debts.
II. Brief Facts:
3.     The appellants are small-scale industries registered with the

District Industries Centre, Nagpur. The appellants supplied

transformers to respondent no. 1 under various purchase orders

between 1993 to 2004. Due to delay in payments, the appellants

filed references in 2005-06 before the Industry Facilitation Council

established under the Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale

and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act, 19934. The 1993 Act

came to be repealed by the MSMED Act, 20065, and the

proceedings initiated by the appellants were taken up by the Micro


4 Hereinafter “1993 Act”.
5
Section 32
of the MSMED Act, which reads:
“32. Repeal of Act 32 of 1993.—(1)
The Interest on Delayed Payments to Small
     Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act, 1993
is hereby repealed.
     (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Act
     so repealed under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under
     the corresponding provisions of this Act.”
3
and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council6 under the
MSMED

Act
.
3.1    By its award dated 28.01.2010, the Facilitation Council

allowed the appellants’ claims and awarded interest on the delayed

payments.
3.2    Respondent nos. 1 and 2 challenged the award under Section

34 of the ACA, and deposited the requisite amount under
Section

19
of the MSMED Act. This was allowed by the Commercial Court

by order dated 26.10.2017 and it set aside the award on the

ground that the claims were barred by limitation, against which

order the appellants filed appeals under Section 37 of the ACA

before the High Court.
III. High Court order dated 24.08.2018:
4.     On taking up these appeals under Section 37, the division

bench referred the issue of applicability of
Limitation Act
to

proceedings under the
MSMED Act
to a larger bench. It took note

of a coordinate bench’s decision in M/s. Delton Electricals v.
MSEDCL7 wherein the High Court found that the law of limitation

applies to claims filed before the Facilitation Council. The High




6 Hereinafter “Facilitation Council”.
7 Commercial Appeal No. 38/2017, judgment dated 31.08.2017.
4
Court took a different view and referred the issue to a larger bench

for the following reasons:
4.1    In Delton’s case, the Court held that by virtue of
Section 2(4)
of the ACA, which excludes the applicability of Section 43 of the

ACA to statutory arbitrations, the
Limitation Act
was inapplicable

to arbitrations under the
MSMED Act
. However, analysing the

issue from a different perspective and interpreting the term

“amount due” in the scheme of the
MSMED Act
, the High Court

relied on this Court’s decision in
State of Kerala v. V.R.

Kalliyanikutty8
and held that “amount due” does not include a

time-barred debt. On this basis, the High Court therein set aside

the award of the Facilitation Council that allowed time-barred

claims as being violative of public policy.
4.2    In the order dated 24.08.2018, the division bench doubted

the correctness of the interpretation of “amount due” in Delton’s

(supra) case as various aspects were not considered by the Court

therein, and it framed 9 issues for consideration by a larger bench.
The relevant portion with the issues framed is extracted

hereinbelow:
“46. We find that in Deltons case, this Court was not required to look
      into cardinal issues which may have made some difference on the
      outcome. Those issues are -
8 (1999) 3 SCC 657.
5
A. Whether in view of a more comprehensive scheme in
MSMED Act
and improvement made by it over Act no. 32 of 1993, the jurisdiction
      of Civil Court is taken away by 2006 Act?
B. Whether an incongruous situation perceived in paragraph 71 of its
      judgment by the Division Bench in Delton case (supra) can emerge
      due to reading of
Section 6
of Act no. 32 of 1993, (not in force) and
Section 18
of the MSMED Act?
C. Whether the period of limitation runs from the appointed date only
      to find out limitation for cause of action to approach Council under
Section 18
of 2006 Act?
D. Whether
Section 21
of 1996 Act has any relevance in the scheme
      of
Section 18
of the MSMED Act?
E. Whether the peculiar provisions like “thrice the bank rate of
      interest”, interest compounded monthly, direction to mention
      principal, interest and amount unpaid in balance sheet by buyer, step
      by step approach adopted in
Section 18
and overriding effect in
Section 24
of the 2006 Act, all are sufficient to exclude the
      applicability of the
Limitation Act, 1963
?
F. Whether the mention of "unpaid amount” in balance sheet of the
      buyer must include “time barred” claims?
G. What is the legislative intent in mandating the mention of “unpaid
      amount” or even time-barred recoveries separately?
      H. Whether such disclosure of “unpaid principal amount” or the
      “compound interest quantum” separately gives rise to the fresh or
      repeated annual causes of action for recovery of the principal and/or
      interest amount?
I. Whether the present controversy need to be viewed independent of
      the Act No. 32 of 1993?”

IV. Impugned order:
5.     By judgment dated 20.10.2023, a full bench of the High Court

framed the following issues for its consideration:
“(1) Whether the provisions of
Indian Limitation Act, 1963
are
      applicable to conciliation proceedings initiated and conducted under
Section 18 (1)
& (2) of
MSMED Act, 2006
?
(2) Whether the provisions of
Indian Limitation Act, 1963
are
      applicable to arbitration proceedings under
Section 18(3)
of MSMED
      Act, 2006?”

5.1    Taking up the second question on the applicability of the
Limitation Act
to arbitration proceedings under
Section 18(3)
of the

MSMED Act, the High Court proceeded as follows. Relying on this
6
Court’s decision in Silpi Industries9 and Mahakali Foods10 and the

overriding effect of the
MSMED Act
as provided under
Section 24
therein, the High Court held that
Sections 15
to
23
of the MSMED

Act will override
Section 2(4)
of the ACA. The language of
Section

18
, which commences with a non-obstante clause, fortifies this

position. Therefore, the conduct of arbitration under the
MSMED

Act
will be guided by
Section 18(3)
, which makes the entirety of the

ACA, including Section 43, applicable to arbitrations under the
MSMED Act
. Further, the Court noted that taking an alternative

view would permit time-barred and stale claims to be raised in

arbitration under the
MSMED Act
, which is contrary to the

purpose and object of the statute to provide speedy remedy to the

supplier to recover his claims. The Court also analysed the scheme

of the
MSMED Act
and observed that the statute prescribes time-
limits for payment under
Section 15
, provides for a penal rate of

interest in case of default under
Section 16
, and also provides a

time-limit for the Facilitation Council to decide the reference under
Section 18(5)
. The prescription of such timelines shows that the

legislature did not intend for time-barred claims to be raised in

arbitration under
Section 18(3)
. Finally, the High Court rejected


9
Silpi Industries v. Kerala SRTC
, (2021) 18 SCC 790.
10
Gujarat State Civil Supplies Corpn. Ltd. v. Mahakali Foods (P) Ltd.
, (2023) 6 SCC 401.
7
the appellants’ contention that the decisions in
Silpi Industries
(supra) and
Mahakali Foods
(supra) are per incuriam and held that

the same are binding on it.
5.2    With respect to conciliation under
Sections 18(1)
and
18(2)
of the MSMED Act, the Court noted that there is no provision that

extends the
Limitation Act
to conciliation proceedings. It also noted

that conciliation is mandated under the
MSMED Act
when a

reference is made before the Facilitation Council, and
Section 18
has done away with the requirement of consent for conciliation

that is required under the ACA. In case conciliation fails, the

Facilitation Council can take up the dispute for arbitration or refer

it to an institution or centre. Further, taking into account the

purpose and object of the
MSMED Act
to provide a more robust

mechanism for recovery of “amount due” to the supplier, the Court

held that the
MSMED Act
does not create any “special right” in

favour of the supplier and the right of recovery of the amount is

the same as available under common law.
In this light, it relied on

this Court’s decisions in
V.R. Kalliyanikutty
(supra) and
A.P. Power

Coordination Committee v. Lanco Kondapalli Power Ltd.11
to hold



11 (2016) 3 SCC 468, hereinafter “Lanco”.
These were subsequently followed in
B.K.
Educational Services Pvt. Ltd. v. Parag Gupta and Associates
, (2019) 11 SCC 633, which is
also referred and cited by the High Court.
8
that “amount due” does not include a time-barred, stale and dead

claim. It also noted that if this were the legislative intent, there

must be a specific provision enacted to this effect. Further

considering the compulsory nature of statutory conciliation, the

buyer must be allowed to take the defence of limitation. Hence,

although the
Limitation Act
does not apply to conciliation

proceedings, the Facilitation Council cannot entertain a dead or

stale claim.
5.3   In this light, the High Court answered each of the issues

raised in paragraph 46 of the division bench’s order (extracted

hereinabove) as follows:
Issue A:
The MSMED Act
does not debar the jurisdiction of

      the civil court and only provides an alternative, speedy

      mechanism under
Section 18
for recovery of money with a

      higher rate of interest.
Issue B: An incongruous situation as contemplated in Delton

      (supra) arises. If the limitation provisions are not applied to

      conciliation and arbitration under
Section 18
of the MSMED

      Act, it would lead to an incongruous situation where a suit

      before the civil court for recovery of money would be rejected
9
on the ground of limitation but the same can be claimed

under
Section 18
a number of years after the supply.
Issue C: Limitation commences from the date provided under
Section 15
of the MSMED Act.
Issue D:
Section 21
of the ACA does not have relevance as

conciliation and arbitration are statutorily provided under
Section 18
when a supplier makes a reference before the

Facilitation Council.
Issue E:
Section 22
of the MSMED Act mandates the buyer

to make entries in its books of account to ensure that the

remedy under
Section 18
is a speedy remedy, and therefore

supports the plea that the
Limitation Act
applies.

Issues F and G:
Section 22
does not have the effect of

permitting dead and stale claims, and the concept of a

continuing cause of action cannot be stretched to “an absurd

point of time, where its enforcement would make it an engine

of oppression and not of providing justice to one”.

Issue H: The purpose and object of
Section 16
read with
Sections 22
and
23
is to dissuade the buyer from delaying

payments but not to be used as a tool for oppression by the
10
supplier by letting time lapse and inflating the claim by

     charging interest for that period before the Facilitation

     Council. The charging of interest under
Section 16
does not

     amount to a fresh cause of action at the end of every month,

     for then there would be no time limit within which the

     supplier is required to raise his claim.
Issue I: Considering the scheme of the 1993
Act and the

     MSMED Act, 2006
, the latter provides a more robust recovery

     mechanism by reducing timelines for payments, providing for

     higher    interest,   and    a    timeline   for    conciliation    and

     arbitration. However, the basic provisions remain the same

     and hence, what has been considered and held in respect of

     provisions under the 1993 Act will hold good in respect of the
MSMED Act
, unless a contrary intention appears from the

     language of the
MSMED Act
.
V. Submissions:
6.   We have heard Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi and Mr. Jayant

Bhushan, learned senior counsels for the appellants and Mr.

Shikhil Suri, learned senior counsel for the respondents, as well

as   perused   the   written     submissions      of    the   parties.   The

submissions advanced on behalf of the appellants are as follows:
11
6.1   The decision of this Court in
Silpi Industries
(supra) that has

held that the
Limitation Act
is applicable to arbitration proceedings

under
Section 18
of the MSMED Act is per incuriam for two

reasons: first,
Section 2(4)
of the ACA that excludes the

applicability of Section 43 of the ACA to statutory arbitrations was

not brought to the notice of the Court, and second, the Court relies

on another decision in
Lanco
(supra), which is itself per incuriam

as it is directly contrary to an earlier coordinate bench decision in
T.N. Generation & Distribution Corpn. Ltd. v. PPN Power Generating

Co. (P) Ltd.12
6.2   Relying on
Section 2(4)
of the ACA, it is submitted that

Section 43, which provides for the applicability of limitation

provisions in arbitral proceedings, does not apply to statutory

arbitrations.
Further, the Limitation Act
only applies to courts, and

not to quasi-judicial bodies or tribunals. Hence, in view of
Section

2(4)
, Limitation Act cannot be extended to arbitrations under the
MSMED Act
. Further, there is no provision under the
MSMED Act
providing for the applicability of the
Limitation Act
to proceedings

under it.
12 (2014) 11 SCC 53, hereinafter “TANGEDCO”.
12
6.3
Section 22
of the MSMED Act mandates the buyer to disclose

in its books of accounts the principal amount and interest due

thereon that remains unpaid to any supplier. It is submitted that

such an entry in the balance sheet or financial statement of the

buyer reflecting the unpaid sum is an acknowledgement of debt

and extends the period of limitation as per
Section 18
of the

Limitation Act. Contravention of this requirement is punishable

under
Section 27
of the MSMED Act.
6.4
The MSMED Act
has been enacted with the object of

protecting suppliers, and the onus is on the buyers to make

payments. Suppliers often do not raise complaints or claims in the

fear that it would jeopardise future business with the buyer. No

injustice would be caused to the buyer if
Limitation Act
is not

applicable.
6.5    Finally, with respect to conciliation proceedings, it is

submitted that the same is to provide an opportunity to parties to

explore an amicable settlement. If time-barred claims cannot be

referred to conciliation, it would render Section 25(3) of the Indian

Contract Act, 187213 otiose, which enables parties to agree to pay

time-barred debts.
Further, the MSMED Act
creates substantive


13 Hereinafter “
Contract Act
”.
13
rights beyond establishing a mechanism for speedy recovery.

Hence, the decisions in
V.R. Kalliyanikutty
(supra) and
Lanco
(supra) do not apply.
7.    On behalf of the respondents, it is submitted that:
7.1   The language
Section 18(3)
of the MSMED Act provides for

the applicability of the ACA to arbitrations under it as if the

arbitration was in pursuance of an arbitration agreement under
Section 7(1)
of the ACA. Hence, the statutory fiction places

arbitration under the
MSMED Act
on the same footing as those

under the ACA and incorporates the entirety of the ACA, including

Section 43.
7.2
Section 2(4)
of the ACA addresses situations where statutes

mandating arbitration prescribe their own limitation periods, and

then the applicability of Section 43 of the ACA is excluded.
However, when such statutes do not prescribe any such limitation

period,
Section 2(4)
cannot preclude the applicability of limitation

law to such arbitrations.
7.3   This Court’s decision in
Lanco
(supra) is not per incuriam as

it took note of the decision in TANGEDCO (supra) and held that the

issue of limitation was not examined in detail therein.
14
7.4   Further, it is clear from the statutory framework and intent

of the
MSMED Act
that the intent was not to exclude the

applicability of the
Limitation Act
. Rather, the applicability of

limitation laws complements the scheme of the
MSMED Act
for

speedy dispute resolution. Further, a contrary interpretation

would create an anomalous position where claims barred by law

can be revived by approaching a different forum.

7.5   Finally,
Section 22
of the MSMED Act that requires disclosure

of the unpaid amount in the buyer’s balance sheet is to promote

transparency and accountability in financial reporting, rather than

alter or extend statutory limitation periods.

VI. Issues:
8.     Upon perusing the impugned order, we find that the full

bench set out two issues, namely the applicability of limitation law

to    arbitration   proceedings    and   conciliation   proceedings

respectively under the
MSMED Act
. However, in its conclusion, the

High Court proceeded to answer several other issues that were

referred to it by the division bench’s order dated 24.08.2018

(paragraph 46). There are several questions of law arising therein,

such as whether the jurisdiction of civil courts is ousted by the
MSMED Act
, commencement of the limitation period, extension of
15
the limitation period, and applicability of decisions rendered in the

context of the 1993 Act. These issues do not directly arise for our

consideration in the present appeals and the parties’ submissions

have been confined to the two legal issues framed by the full bench,

as well as brief submissions on the effect of
Section 22
of the

MSMED Act. In this light, we will confine our examination to the

two issues that have been formulated and answered by the High

Court and while doing so, we will also briefly deal with
Section 22
of the MSMED Act. We may reformulate the issues arising in the

present appeals as follows:
i.    Whether    the   Limitation   Act   applies   to   conciliation

        proceedings under
Section 18
of the MSMED Act, and even

        if not, whether time-barred debts can be referred to

        conciliation?
ii.   Whether    the   Limitation   Act   applies   to   arbitration

        proceedings under
Section 18
of the MSMED Act, and

        whether time-barred debts can be referred to arbitration?
Further, what is the effect of disclosure of the unpaid

        amount in the buyer’s financial statements as mandated

        under
Section 22
on extending the limitation period?
16
VII. Relevant statutory provisions:
9.     Before we analyse each issue, it would be relevant to

understand the statutory scheme and interplay of the Limitation

Act, ACA, and the MSMED Act.
10.
Section 3
of the Limitation Act provides that when a suit,

appeal, or application is filed after the prescribed period of

limitation as per the Schedule, the same shall be dismissed even

if limitation is not set up as a defence. The calculation of the

limitation period is subject to
Sections 4
to
24
of the Limitation

Act.14 Further,
Section 29(2)
of the Limitation Act makes its

provisions applicable to special or local laws when they prescribe

a different period of limitation than what is provided in the

Schedule. In such a situation,
Section 3
will apply as if such period

were prescribed in the Schedule, and
Sections 4
to
24
will apply to

the extent that they are not impliedly or expressly excluded by the

local or special law.15


14 The relevant portion of
Section 3
of the Limitation Act is:
“3. Bar of limitation.— (1) Subject to the provisions contained in
sections 4
to
24
      (inclusive)
, every suit instituted, appeal preferred, and application made after the
      prescribed period shall be dismissed, although limitation has not been set up as a
      defence.”
15
Section 29(2)
of the Limitation Act reads:
“29. Savings.—
      ***
      (2) Where any special or local law prescribes for any suit, appeal or application a
      period of limitation different from the period prescribed by the Schedule, the
      provisions of
section 3
shall apply as if such period were the period prescribed by
      the Schedule and for the purpose of determining any period of limitation prescribed
      for any suit, appeal or application by any special or local law, the provisions
17
11. Coming to the ACA,
Section 2(4)
deals with the applicability

of Part I of the ACA to statutory arbitrations. It provides that all

the provisions of Part I, except Sections 40(1), 41 and 43, shall

apply to arbitrations under other enactments as if such arbitration

were pursuant to an arbitration agreement and as if such other

enactment were an arbitration agreement, except insofar as the

provisions of Part I are inconsistent with the other enactment or

rules made thereunder.
Section 2(4)
is extracted for ready

reference:
“2. Definitions.—
     ***
     (4) This Part except sub-section (1) of section 40, sections 41 and 43
     shall apply to every arbitration under any other enactment for the
     time being in force, as if the arbitration were pursuant to an
     arbitration agreement and as if that other enactment were an
     arbitration agreement, except in so far as the provisions of this Part
     are inconsistent with that other enactment or with any rules made
     thereunder.”
12. Arbitration agreement is defined in
Section 7
of the ACA as

an agreement to submit disputes which have arisen or which may

arise between parties in respect of a defined legal relationship,

whether contractual or not, to arbitration.16


      contained in
sections 4
to
24 (inclusive)
shall apply only in so far as, and to the
      extent to which, they are not expressly excluded by such special or local law.”
Although the expression used in the provision is “expressly excluded”, this Court has
consistently interpreted the same to include implied exclusions. See
Hukumdev Narain Yadav
v. Lalit Narain Mishra
, (1974) 2 SCC 133, para 17;
Union of India v. Popular Construction
,
(2001) 8 SCC 470, paras 8-11;
Commissioner of Customs and Central Excise v. Hongo India
Pvt Ltd
, (2009) 5 SCC 791, para 35.
16
Section 7
defines an arbitration agreement and sets out the mandatory requirements of an

arbitration agreement. The relevant portion is:
18
13. Further, Section 43(1) provides for the applicability of the
Limitation Act
to arbitral proceedings. It reads:
“43. Limitations.—(1)
The Limitation Act, 1963
(36 of 1963), shall
    apply to arbitrations as it applies to proceedings in court.”
14. Part III of the ACA deals with conciliation of disputes. Section

67 therein provides for the role of the conciliator, and is extracted

for ready reference:
“67. Role of conciliator.— (1) The conciliator shall assist the parties
    in an independent and impartial manner in their attempt to reach an
    amicable settlement of their dispute.
(2) The conciliator shall be guided by principles of objectivity, fairness
    and justice, giving consideration to, among other things, the rights
    and obligations of the parties, the usages of the trade concerned and
    the circumstances surrounding the dispute, including any previous
    business practices between the parties.
(3) The conciliator may conduct the conciliation proceedings in such a
    manner as he considers appropriate, taking into account the
    circumstances of the case, the wishes the parties may express,
    including any request by a party that the conciliator hear oral
    statements, and the need for a speedy settlement of the dispute.
    (4) The conciliator may, at any stage of the conciliation proceedings,
    make proposals for a settlement of the dispute. Such proposals need
    not be in writing and need not be accompanied by a statement of the
    reasons therefor.”
15. Sections 68 to 72 deal with the procedural aspects of

conciliation, such as administrative assistance, communication,

disclosure of information, cooperation of parties, and submission

of suggestions. Section 73 provides for a signed and written




    “7. Arbitration agreement.— (1) In this Part, “arbitration agreement” means an
    agreement by the parties to submit to arbitration all or certain disputes which have
    arisen or which may arise between them in respect of a defined legal relationship,
    whether contractual or not.”
19
settlement agreement, which shall be final and binding on the

parties. It reads:
“73. Settlement agreement.— (1) When it appears to the conciliator
    that there exist elements of a settlement which may be acceptable to
    the parties, he shall formulate the terms of a possible settlement and
    submit them to the parties for their observations. After receiving the
    observations of the parties, the conciliator may reformulate the terms
    of a possible settlement in the light of such observations.
    (2) If the parties reach agreement on a settlement of the dispute, they
    may draw up and sign a written settlement agreement. If requested
    by the parties, the conciliator may draw up, or assist the parties in
    drawing up, the settlement agreement.
(3) When the parties sign the settlement agreement, it shall be final
    and binding on the parties and persons claiming under them
    respectively.
(4) The conciliator shall authenticate the settlement agreement and
    furnish a copy thereof to each of the parties.”
                                                       (emphasis supplied)
16. Section 74 provides that such settlement agreement shall

have the same status and effect as an arbitral award on agreed

terms on the substance of the dispute rendered by an arbitral

tribunal under
Section 30
of the ACA.
17. Finally, Section 76 provides for termination of the conciliation

proceedings in various circumstances: (i) signing of the settlement

agreement by the parties, (ii) written declaration by the conciliator

that efforts at conciliation are no longer justified, (iii) written

declaration of the parties to the conciliator that conciliation

proceedings are terminated, or (iv) written declaration of a party to

the other party and conciliator that conciliation proceedings are
20
terminated. Hence, conciliation is terminated when the parties

arrive at and sign the settlement agreement. It can also be

terminated at the behest of the conciliator or one or both parties,

when there is no settlement, by way of a written declaration.
Section 76 of the ACA reads:
“76. Termination of conciliation proceedings.— The conciliation
      proceedings shall be terminated—
(a) by the signing of the settlement agreement by the parties, on the
      date of the agreement; or
(b) by a written declaration of the conciliator, after consultation with
      the parties, to the effect that further efforts at conciliation are no
      longer justified, on the date of the declaration; or
(c) by a written declaration of the parties addressed to the conciliator
      to the effect that the conciliation proceedings are terminated, on the
      date of the declaration; or
(d) by a written declaration of a party to the other party and the
      conciliator, if appointed, to the effect that the conciliation proceedings
      are terminated, on the date of the declaration.”
18.
Finally, Chapter V of the MSMED Act
that deals with delayed

payments to Micro and Small Enterprises is relevant for our

purpose.
Section 15
imposes obligations on the buyer17 in respect

of timelines for payment to the supplier18 as follows- on or before
17 Buyer is defined under
Section 2(d)
of the MSMED Act as:
“2. Definitions.— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
      ***
(d) “buyer” means whoever buys any goods or receives any services from a supplier
      for consideration;”
18 Supplier is defined under
Section 2(n)
of the MSMED Act as:
“2. Definitions.— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
      ***
(n) “supplier” means a micro or small enterprise, which has filed a memorandum
      with the authority referred to in sub-section (1) of
section 8
, and includes,—
(i) the National Small Industries Corporation, being a company, registered under the
Companies Act, 1956
(1 of 1956);
(ii) the Small Industries Development Corporation of a State or a Union territory, by
      whatever name called, being a company registered under the
Companies Act, 1956
(1 of 1956);
21
the date agreed upon between the parties in writing, provided that

the same does not exceed 45 days from the day of acceptance or

the day of deemed acceptance19, or where there is no agreement in

this behalf, before the “appointed day”20.
Section 15
of the MSMED

Act reads:
“15. Liability of buyer to make payment.— Where any supplier,
      supplies any goods or renders any services to any buyer, the buyer
      shall make payment therefor on or before the date agreed upon
      between him and the supplier in writing or, where there is no
      agreement in this behalf, before the appointed day:
Provided that in no case the period agreed upon between the
      supplier and the buyer in writing shall exceed forty-five days from the
      day of acceptance or the day of deemed acceptance.”
19.
Section 16
of the MSMED Act provides that when the buyer

fails to make the payment as required under
Section 15
, he shall

be liable to pay compound interest with monthly rests for the period

stipulated therein, at 3 times the bank rate notified by the Reserve
(iii) any company, co-operative society, trust or a body, by whatever name called,
      registered or constituted under any law for the time being in force and engaged in
      selling goods produced by micro or small enterprises and rendering services which
      are provided by such enterprises;”
19 See
Section 2(b)
of the MSMED Act.
20 Appointed day is defined under
Section 2(b)
of the MSMED Act as:
“2. Definitions.— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
      ***
(b) “appointed day” means the day following immediately after the expiry of the
      period of fifteen days from the day of acceptance or the day of deemed acceptance
      of any goods or any services by a buyer from a supplier.
         Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—
(i) “the day of acceptance” means,—
(a) the day of the actual delivery of goods or the rendering of services; or
(b) where any objection is made in writing by the buyer regarding
         acceptance of goods or services within fifteen days from the day of the delivery of
         goods or the rendering of services, the day on which such objection is removed by
         the supplier;
(ii) “the day of deemed acceptance” means, where no objection is made in writing
      by the buyer regarding acceptance of goods or services within fifteen days from the
      day of the delivery of goods or the rendering of services, the day of the actual
      delivery of goods or the rendering of services;”
22
Bank. The rate of interest prescribed under
Section 16
shall

override any agreement with the supplier in this behalf and any

other law in force for the time being.
Section 16
of the MSMED Act

reads:
“16. Date from which and rate at which interest is payable.—
    Where any buyer fails to make payment of the amount to the supplier,
    as required under
section 15
, the buyer shall, notwithstanding
    anything contained in any agreement between the buyer and the
    supplier or in any law for the time being in force, be liable to pay
    compound interest with monthly rests to the supplier on that amount
    from the appointed day or, as the case may be, from the date
    immediately following the date agreed upon, at three times of the
    bank rate notified by the Reserve Bank.”
20.
Section 17
provides for recovery of “amount due”, which

includes the interest provided thereon under
Section 16
. It reads:
“17. Recovery of amount due.— For any goods supplied or services
    rendered by the supplier, the buyer shall be liable to pay the amount
    with interest thereon as provided under
section 16
.”
21.
Section 18
, which falls for our interpretation, provides the

remedies for recovery of the “amount due” calculated under
Section 17
. While we will deal with the interpretation of its sub-

sections in more detail at a later stage, it is relevant to note the

following about the remedial mechanism: first, any party to a

dispute with regard to the amount due can make a reference before

the Facilitation Council; second, the Facilitation Council shall, on

receipt of such reference, conduct conciliation or refer the dispute

for conciliation to an institution or centre; third, such conciliation
23
shall be conducted as per Sections 65 to 81 of the ACA as if the

conciliation is initiated under Part III of the ACA; fourth, in case of

failure and termination of conciliation without any settlement, the

Facilitation Council shall either take up the dispute for arbitration

or refer it to any institution or centre for arbitration; fifth, the

provisions of the ACA shall apply to the dispute as if the arbitration

was pursuant to an arbitration agreement; sixth, notwithstanding

any other law, the Facilitation Council can act as a conciliator and

arbitrator in the dispute when the supplier is located in its

jurisdiction; and seventh, the reference shall be decided within 90

days of it being made.
Section 18
is extracted below for ready

reference:
“18. Reference to Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation
    Council.— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
    for the time being in force, any party to a dispute may, with regard to
    any amount due under
section 17
, make a reference to the Micro and
    Small Enterprises Facilitation Council.
(2) On receipt of a reference under sub-section (1), the Council shall
    either itself conduct conciliation in the matter or seek the assistance
    of any institution or centre providing alternate dispute resolution
    services by making a reference to such an institution or centre, for
    conducting conciliation and the provisions of
sections 65
to
81
of the
    Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996) shall apply to such
    a dispute as if the conciliation was initiated under Part III of that Act.
    (3) Where the conciliation initiated under sub-section (2) is not
    successful and stands terminated without any settlement between
    the parties, the Council shall either itself take up the dispute for
    arbitration or refer to it any institution or centre providing alternate
    dispute resolution services for such arbitration and the provisions of
    the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
(26 of 1996) shall then
    apply to the dispute as if the arbitration was in pursuance of an
    arbitration agreement referred to in sub-section(1) of
section 7
of that
    Act.
24
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
     being in force, the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council or
     the centre providing alternate dispute resolution services shall have
     jurisdiction to act as an Arbitrator or Conciliator under this section in
     a dispute between the supplier located within its jurisdiction and a
     buyer located anywhere in India.
(5) Every reference made under this section shall be decided within a
     period of ninety days from the date of making such a reference.”
22.
Section 19
stipulates a pre-deposit requirement for filing an

application under Section 34 of the ACA to set aside the award.
Section 20
provides for establishment of the Facilitation Council

and
Section 21
provides for its composition.
23.
Section 22
mandates the buyer to disclose the unpaid

amount along with interest in its annual statement of accounts.21
Section 23
provides for the treatment of the interest amount under

taxation laws.
Section 24
provides for the overriding effect of
Sections 15
to
23
as follows:
21
Section 22
of the MSMED Act reads:
“22. Requirement to specify unpaid amount with interest in the annual
     statement of accounts.— Where any buyer is required to get his annual accounts
     audited under any law for the time being in force, such buyer shall furnish the
     following additional information in his annual statement of accounts, namely:—
(i)the principal amount and the interest due thereon (to be shown separately)
     remaining unpaid to any supplier as at the end of each accounting year;
(ii) the amount of interest paid by the buyer in terms of
section 16
, along with the
     amount of the payment made to the supplier beyond the appointed day during each
     accounting year;
(iii) the amount of interest due and payable for the period of delay in making
     payment (which have been paid but beyond the appointed day during the year) but
     without adding the interest specified under this Act;
(iv) the amount of interest accrued and remaining unpaid at the end of each
     accounting year; and
(v) the amount of further interest remaining due and payable even in the succeeding
     years, until such date when the interest dues as above are actually paid to the
     small enterprise, for the purpose of disallowance as a deductible expenditure under
section 23
.”
25
“24. Overriding effect.— The provisions of
sections 15
to
23
shall
     have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
     contained in any other law for the time being in force.”

VIII. Whether time-barred claims can be referred to conciliation

under
Section 18(2)
of the MSMED Act:
24. In light of the above statutory provisions, we will decide the

first issue of whether the
Limitation Act
applies to conciliation

proceedings under
Section 18(2)
of the MSMED Act, and even if

not, whether time-barred claims can be referred to conciliation.
25. Conciliation has not been defined per se under the ACA or

the
MSMED Act
. Hence, it would be relevant to refer to decisions

where the term has fallen for consideration and has been

interpreted by this Court.
In
State of Punjab v. Jalour Singh,22
a 3-

judge bench determined the meaning and scope of conciliation in

the context of the powers of the Lok Adalats under the
Legal

Services Authorities Act, 1987
.
Similarly, in
United India Insurance

Co. Ltd. v. Ajay Sinha23
, this Court relied on the role of the

conciliator under Sections 67 and 73 of the ACA to explain

conciliation as a dispute resolution mechanism.
Finally, in
Afcons

Infrastructure Ltd. & Anr. v. Cherian Varkey Construction Co. (P) Ltd.
22 (2008) 2 SCC 660.
23 (2008) 7 SCC 454.
26
& Ors.24, this Court explained conciliation as an ADR remedy

under
Section 89
of the CPC. The following features of conciliation

can be culled out from these decisions as well as the statutory

provisions:
i.        Conciliation is not an adjudicatory or judicial process

             where the conciliator hears the parties and decides a

             dispute.25

   ii.       The parties to the conciliation resolve their disputes

             through settlement, whose terms may be arrived at with

             the assistance of the conciliator. The role of the conciliator

             is to guide and assist the parties in arriving at a

             compromise          or     settlement26,         make        proposals    for

             settlement27, formulate the terms of settlement or assist

             the parties in doing so,28 and reformulate the terms of

             settlement based on the observations of the parties.29

   iii.      The conciliator must be guided by the principles of

             independence, impartiality, objectivity, justice, equity, fair

             play, fairness, and confidentiality, and must also consider
24 (2010) 8 SCC 24.
25
Jarlour Singh
(supra), para 8;
Afcons Infrastructure Ltd.
(supra), para 35.
26 Section 67(1) of the ACA;
Jarlour Singh
(supra), para 8.
27 Section 67(4) of the ACA.
28 Section 73(1) of the ACA;
Jarlour Singh
(supra), para 8;
United India Insurance Co. Ltd.
(supra), paras 22-23.
29 ibid.
27
the rights and obligations of the parties, trade usages, and

           business practices between the parties. He must also take

           into account the wishes of the parties and the need for

           speedy settlement of dispute.30 The parties must also

           cooperate with the conciliator in good faith and endeavour

           to comply with the conciliator’s requests.31

   iv.     Finally, the terms of the settlement that are recorded in a

           settlement agreement must be signed by the parties and it

           shall be final and binding on them.32 The same is

           enforceable as an arbitral award.33
26.
Section 18(2)
of the MSMED Act provides that conciliation

must be conducted as per Sections 65 to 81 of the ACA. On

perusing these provisions of the ACA, as well as the provisions of

the
MSMED Act
, it is clear that there is no provision that extends

the applicability of the
Limitation Act
to conciliation proceedings.

Further, neither
Section 29(2)
nor any other provision of the
Limitation Act
has the effect of extending its application to

conciliation proceedings. On the other hand, it is a settled position




30 ibid; Sections 67(2) and (3), Section 75 of the ACA.
31 Section 71 of the ACA.
32 Section 73(2) and Section 74 of the ACA;
Jarlour Singh
(supra), para 12;
Afcons Infrastucture

Ltd.
(supra), para 38.
33 See Section 74 of the ACA read with
Section 30
of the ACA.
28
that the
Limitation Act
only applies suits, appeals, and

applications filed before courts.34 Conciliation being an out-of-

court and non-adjudicatory process of dispute resolution, the
Limitation Act
cannot be extended to it.
27. This position of law has been recognised by the High Court in

its impugned order as well, in that it has held that the
Limitation

Act
does not directly apply to conciliation proceedings. However,

the High Court adopted a different approach and interpreted the

term “amount due” referred in
Sections 17
and
18
of the MSMED

Act to hold that time-barred claims are not included, and hence

cannot be referred to conciliation under
Section 18(2)
.
In doing so,

the High Court primarily relied on this Court’s decision in
V.R.

Kalliyanikutty
(supra), and its reliance in
Lanco
(supra).
We will

now examine the legality and correctness of the High Court’s

reasoning and decision by contrasting the present case with the

reasoning in
V.R. Kalliyanikutty
(supra).
28.
In
V.R. Kalliyanikutty
(supra), a 3-judge bench of this Court

examined whether time-barred claims of the State Financial

Corporation and banks can be recovered through recourse to the

mechanism under the
Kerala Revenue Recovery Act, 1968
.
For this


34
M.P. Steel Corpn. v. CCE
, (2015) 7 SCC 58, paras 11-32.
29
purpose, the Court interpreted the term “amount due” appearing

in Section 71 of that Act, and whether it would include time-barred

claims.35 The Court held that “amount due” refers to an amount

which the creditor has a right to recover, and does not include a

time-barred debt.36 The Court considered that the Act only

provides a special procedure for speedy recovery of these amounts

that the creditor can use instead of filing a civil suit. It also noted

that the Act did not enlarge the existing right of recovery, but only

provisioned a different process for recovery.37 This process of

recovery is also a judicial process and is coercive in nature.38

Hence, the Court held that the same would attract the law of

limitation.39 It also observed that the application of limitation law

would advance the public interest of the Act, i.e., speedy recovery

of amounts.40
29. The question before us is whether the decision in
V.R.

Kalliyanikutty
(supra) would apply while interpreting “amount



35 ibid, para 8.
36 ibid, para 8.
37 ibid, para 16.
38 ibid, paras 16 and 17.
39 ibid, para 17.
40 Ibid, para 14. It is relevant to note that
V.R. Kalliyanikutty
(supra) has been doubted by a

division bench of this Court in
K.P. Khemka v. Haryana SIIDC
, (2024) 8 SCC 391 on the point
of whether the
Kerala Revenue Recovery Act
created a distinct right of recovery.
While the
legal principle and law
laid down in
V.R. Kalliyanikutty
(supra) has not been doubted, its
application to the statutory provisions has been referred to a three-judge bench.
See
K.P.
Khemka
(supra), para 35 onward.
30
due” in the context of conciliation proceedings under
Section 18(2)
of the MSMED Act. Considering the non-adjudicatory and non-

coercive nature of conciliation that we have explained above, we

are of the opinion that this decision does not apply in the present

context for the following reasons:
29.1 One of the considerations of this Court in
V.R. Kalliyanikutty
(supra) was that the recovery process under the
Kerala Revenue

Recovery Act
was a judicial process, and it would hence attract the

law of limitation. However, as we have explained above,

conciliation is not an adjudicatory or judicial process.
29.2 While
Section 18(2)
of the MSMED Act does away with the

requirement of consent for conciliation as provided in Section 61

of the ACA and statutorily mandates the Facilitation Council and

parties to explore conciliation for dispute resolution, the ultimate

outcome of conciliation remains entirely dependent on the parties.

Sections 65 to 81 of the ACA apply to conciliation proceedings

under the
MSMED Act
as per
Section 18(2)
. The parties must be

agreeable to the terms of settlement. The conciliator cannot, and

must not, coerce the parties to agree to certain terms or settle the

dispute. Ultimately, if the parties are not willing to amicably settle

the dispute, either or both of them can terminate the conciliation
31
proceedings as per Section 76 of the ACA. Hence, conciliation

cannot be termed as a “coercive” process, which was another

consideration of the Court in
V.R. Kalliyanikutty
(supra).
30. For these reasons, the recovery process considered in
V.R.

Kalliyanikutty
(supra) can be said to stand on a different footing

than conciliation under
Section 18(2)
of the MSMED Act read with

Sections 65 to 81 of the ACA. Hence, the decision is inapplicable

to the present context. The High Court did not consider these

aspects of the matter, and rather relied on the compulsory nature

of conciliation under
Section 18(2)
as well as the object of speedy

recovery under the
MSMED Act
to hold that time-barred claims

cannot be referred to conciliation. As we have already explained,

merely because conciliation is mandatory does not mean that the

parties are required to settle the dispute. They may choose to

terminate conciliation and avail the remedy of arbitration provided

in
Section 18(3)
, wherein they can raise all defences available to

them in law. Considering that conciliation is non-adjudicatory by

nature and is rather based on negotiation, compromise, and

settlement by the parties, it is not necessary that the defence of

limitation be available to the parties in this process.
32
31. There is yet another reason why time-barred claims must not

be excluded from conciliation under the
MSMED Act
. It is a settled

position of law that the statute of limitation only bars the remedy,

but does not extinguish the underlying right, which in this case is

the right to recover the unpaid amount and interest thereon. The

right to recover of the creditor/supplier and the corresponding

liability of the debtor/buyer to repay the amount subsists even

after the expiry of the limitation period. The creditor can recover a

time-barred debt, other than through remedies through a court of

law, such as by adjusting payments from the debtor made without

direction on how it must be appropriated,41 recovering the amount

from a surety/ guarantee, or enforcing lien or security.42 Further,

the parties may also enter into a contract for repayment of a time-

barred debt, which is recognised under
Section 25(3)
of the

Contract Act.43


41 See
Section 60
of the Contract Act, which allows the debtor to apply such payment, at his

discretion, to any lawful debt actually due and payable to him from the debtor, whether or
not its recovery is time-barred under limitation law.
42
Bombay Dyeing & Mfg. Co. Ltd. v. State of Bombay
, AIR 1958 SC 328, para 12;
Punjab

National Bank v. Surendra Prasad Sinha
, 1993 Supp (1) SCC 499. para 5;
Prem Cottex v. Uttar
Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd.
, (2021) 20 SCC 200, para 13.
43
Section 25(3)
of the Contract Act reads:
“25. Agreement without consideration, void, unless it is in writing and
      registered, or is a promise to compensate for something done or is a
      promise to pay a debt barred by limitation law.—An agreement made without
      consideration is void, unless—
      ***
      (3) it is a promise, made in writing and signed by the person to be charged
      therewith, or by his agent generally or specially authorized in that behalf, to pay
      wholly or in part a debt of which the creditor might have enforced payment but for
33
32. A settlement agreement for a time-barred claim arrived at

between the buyer and supplier through conciliation under
Section

18(2)
is precisely in the nature of a contract recognised and

declared valid under
Section 25(3)
of the Contract Act. It is clear

that although certain remedies are no longer available in law to the

creditor once the limitation period expires, the creditor can adopt

other methods, including contractual agreements, to recover time-
barred debts. Conciliation as a dispute-resolution process only

facilitates the parties in arriving at such a contract or settlement

agreement. Hence, it is not correct to exclude time-barred claims

from being settled through conciliation under
Section 18(2)
of the

MSMED Act. The High Court did not fully appreciate this aspect

and rather relied on the object of speedy recovery to arrive at its

conclusion. In doing so, it lost sight of the forest for the trees and

entirely foreclosed a beneficial mechanism made available to the

supplier under the
MSMED Act
, and more generally recognised in

law, to recover the amounts due to him even if they are time-

barred.
33. For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that neither the
Limitation Act
applies to conciliation proceedings under Section


    the law for the limitation of suits. In any of these cases, such an agreement is a
    contract.”
34
18(2) nor are time-barred claims excluded from such conciliation.

The supplier’s right to recover the principal amount and interest

thereon subsists even after the expiry of the limitation period, and

he may recover the same through a settlement agreement arrived

at through conciliation by the Facilitation Council under
Section

18(2)
. In case such settlement is not reached between the parties

and the conciliation proceedings are terminated for this reason,

the matter must be referred to arbitration as per
Section 18(3)
,

which we will deal with presently.
IX. Whether time-barred claims can be referred to arbitration under
Section 18(3)
of the MSMED Act:
34. The next issue falling for our consideration is whether the
Limitation Act
applies to arbitration by the Facilitation Council

under
Section 18(3)
, and whether time-barred claims can be

referred to arbitration. At this very stage, it is necessary to take

note of this Court’s decision in
Silpi Industries
(supra), which the

High Court relied on to hold that time-barred claims cannot be

referred to arbitration.
35.
In
Silpi Industries
(supra), the Court was faced with a similar

fact-situation wherein the suppliers initially approached the

Industrial Facilitation Council under the 1993 Act for recovery of
35
time-barred claims. As conciliation failed, the claims were decided

by the Facilitation Council under the
MSMED Act
and it made

arbitral awards in favour of the suppliers. The buyer/respondent

therein challenged the award under Sections 34 and 37 of the ACA,

wherein the High Court held that the
Limitation Act
is applicable

to arbitration claims under the
MSMED Act
. In the suppliers’

appeals, this Court considered the issue of whether the provisions

of the
Limitation Act
apply to arbitration proceedings initiated

under Section 18(3) of the MSMED Act,44 which is the very issue

arising for our consideration.
35.1 The Court took note of the statement and objects of the
MSMED Act
and the scheme for recovery of delayed payments

under Chapter V, specifically
Sections 15
to
18
.45 It then relied on

Section 43 of the ACA, which extends the applicability of the
Limitation Act
to arbitration proceedings. Since
Section 18(3)
of

the MSMED Act mandates arbitration upon failure of conciliation,

and makes the provisions of the ACA applicable as if there were an

arbitration agreement between the parties, this Court held that

Section 43 of the ACA is also applicable.46



44
Silpi Industries
(supra), para 17.1.
45 ibid, paras 24-25.
46 ibid, paras 26-27.
36
35.2 This Court also affirmed the High Court’s reliance on the

decision in
Lanco
(supra) to hold that the
Limitation Act
is

applicable to arbitration proceedings under
Section 18(3)
.47 The

relevant portions of the decision are extracted below:
“25. With regard to the first issue, namely, applicability of
Limitation
      Act, 1963
to the arbitration proceedings initiated under the provisions
      of
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006
, we
      need to notice certain relevant sections of the Act. As per
Section 15
of the said Act, where supplier supplies any goods or renders any
      services to any buyer, the buyer shall make payment on or before the
      agreed date between the parties in writing or where there is no
      agreement, before the appointed day.
Section 16
deals with date from
      which and rate of interest payable in the event of not making the
      payment. The recovery mechanism for the amount due is covered by
Sections 17
and
18
of the said Act. If any party has a dispute with
      regard to amount due under
Section 17
, a reference is required to be
      made to the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council. On such
      reference, the Council is empowered to conduct conciliation in the
      matter or seek assistance of any institution or centre providing
      alternate dispute resolution services by making a reference to such
      institution for conducting conciliation. If the conciliation is not
      successful, as contemplated under
Section 18(2)
of the said Act, same
      stands terminated under
Section 18(3)
of the said Act. Thereafter, the
      Council shall either itself take up the dispute for arbitration or refer it
      to any institution or centre providing alternate dispute resolution
      services for such arbitration and the provisions of the
Arbitration and
      Conciliation Act, 1996
are made applicable as if the arbitration was
      in pursuance of arbitration agreement between the parties, under
      sub-section (1) of
Section 7
of the 1996 Act.
26.
Applicability of the Limitation Act, 1963
to the arbitrations is
      covered by Section 43 of the 1996 Act. The High Court, while referring
      to abovesaid provisions and the judgment of this Court in
A.P. Power
      Coordination Committee v. Lanco Kondapalli Power Ltd.
has held that
      the
Limitation Act, 1963
is applicable to the arbitrations covered by
Section 18(3)
of the 2006 Act. A reading of Section 43 itself makes it
      clear that the
Limitation Act, 1963
shall apply to the arbitrations, as
      it applies to proceedings in court. When the settlement with regard to
      a dispute between the parties is not arrived at under
Section 18
of
      the 2006 Act, necessarily, the Micro and Small Enterprises
      Facilitation Council shall take up the dispute for arbitration under
Section 18(3)
of the 2006 Act or it may refer to institution or centre to

47 ibid, paras 26-27.
37
provide alternate dispute resolution services and provisions of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
are made applicable as if there
    was an agreement between the parties under sub-section (1) of
Section 7
of the 1996 Act.”
36. The learned senior counsels on behalf of the appellants have

made two submissions regarding the correctness of
Silpi Industries
(supra), which otherwise lays down the law on this exact issue. The

first is that the Court therein did not consider the effect of
Section

2(4)
of the ACA, which explicitly excludes the applicability of

Section 43 to statutory arbitrations, while arriving at its decision.
The second is that the decision in
Lanco
(supra), relied on by the

Court, is per incuriam as it is contrary to an earlier, coordinate

bench decision in TANGEDCO (supra). We will now consider each

of these submissions in some detail, and while doing so, will also

provide our reasoning for why the
Limitation Act
must be held

applicable to arbitration proceedings under
Section 18(3)
of the

MSMED Act.
37. We will first deal with the argument regarding applicability of

Section 43 of the ACA to arbitrations under
Section 18(3)
of the

MSMED Act. The significance of Section 43 of the ACA has been

explained by this Court in
Consolidated Engineering Enterprises v.
38
Principal     Secretary       Irrigation     Department48
as     making      the

provisions of the
Limitation Act
, which are otherwise only

applicable       to     proceedings         before      courts,         applicable      to

arbitrations.49 Without the enactment of
Section 43
, the Limitation

Act would not extend to claims filed before arbitral tribunals.50
38. It is in this light that we must consider the interplay of
Section 2(4)
of the ACA with the provisions of the
MSMED Act
. If

the applicability of the provisions of Part I of the ACA is determined

as per
Section 2(4)
, it is an inevitable conclusion that Section 43

will not apply to such arbitrations, and consequently, the
Limitation Act
will also not apply.
39.
Section 18
of the MSMED Act provides for arbitration by the

Facilitation Council in the following terms. Sub-section (1)

commences with a non-obstante clause and provides for reference

of a dispute regarding the amount due under
Section 17
to the

Facilitation Council. While
Section 18(2)
mandates conciliation,
Section 18(3)
deals with the eventuality of failure of settlement. It

provides that when the conciliation stands terminated without a

settlement, the matter must be referred to arbitration and the


48 (2008) 7 SCC 169.
49 ibid, paras 23, 45; My Preferred Transformation & Hospitality Pvt. Ltd. v. M/s Faridabad

Implements Pvt. Ltd. 2025 INSC 56, paras 10-11.
50 ibid.
39
provisions of the ACA shall apply as if the arbitration is in pursuance

of an arbitration agreement under
Section 7(1)
of the ACA. It is clear

that there is a statutory deeming fiction that the arbitration under

the statute is to be considered as being pursuant to an arbitration

agreement.51 It is also relevant to note that
Section 24
of the

MSMED Act provides for the overriding effect of
Sections 15
to
23
notwithstanding anything inconsistent in any other law for the

time being in force.
40.
Section 2(4)
of the ACA also employs a similar device of

deeming statutory arbitrations as being pursuant to an arbitration

agreement, as if the other enactment is an arbitration agreement.

By doing so, it extends the applicability of Part I of the ACA to such

arbitrations, except certain provisions including Section 43 and

except insofar as the provisions of the ACA are inconsistent with

the other enactment or rules thereunder. Two things are relevant

to note here: first, by default,
Section 2(4)
extends Part I of the

ACA, except Sections 40(1), 41, and 43, to statutory arbitrations;

and second,
Section 2(4)
itself provides for the overriding effect of

the special law in case of inconsistency with its provisions.




51 See
Mahakali Foods
(supra), para 43.
40
41. There is a clear and apparent conflict in the manner in which

the provisions of the ACA are made applicable – while
Section 2(4)
provides for the exclusion of Section 43 to statutory arbitrations,
Section 18(3)
provides for the applicability of all the provisions of

the ACA as would apply if there were an arbitration agreement,

which includes Section 43. We are of the opinion that
Section 18(3)
of the MSMED Act will prevail over
Section 2(4)
of the ACA. There

is a clear legislative intent that the provisions of the
MSMED Act
will have an overriding effect in case of inconsistency, which is

evidenced from the non-obstante clause in
Section 18
and the

express language in
Section 24
. The language of
Section 2(4)
itself

also supports this overriding effect of the special law. The same

has also been recognised and affirmed by this Court in
Mahakali

Foods
(supra), wherein the Court considered the purpose and

object, statutory scheme, and sequence of enactment of the ACA

and the MSMED Act to arrive at the conclusion that the
MSMED

Act
is a special law that will prevail over the provisions of the ACA,

which is a general law.52
42. For these reasons, we are of the opinion that the applicability

of the ACA to arbitrations under the
MSMED Act
is not determined


52 ibid, paras 33-42.
41
by
Section 2(4)
of the ACA, and is rather determined as per
Section

18(3)
of the MSMED Act. Pursuant to the deeming fiction ingrained

in the language of
Section 18(3)
, the arbitration conducted

thereunder would attract the provisions that are otherwise

applicable when there is an arbitration agreement. This includes

Section 43, thereby making the
Limitation Act
applicable to

arbitral proceedings under the
MSMED Act
.
43.
In this light, although the Court in
Silpi Industries
(supra) did

not consider
Section 2(4)
while arriving at its decision, we have

provided our reasons for why it will not be applicable.
The

submission by the appellants that
Silpi Industries
(supra) is per

incuriam on this ground is therefore rejected and the applicability

of the
Limitation Act
to arbitrations under
Section 18(3)
, by virtue

of Section 43, is affirmed.
44. We will now briefly consider the second contention regarding
Lanco
(supra) being per incuriam and contrary to TANGEDCO

(supra), thereby rendering its reliance in
Silpi Industries
(supra) as

incorrect.
It is relevant to note that
Lanco
(supra) and TANGEDCO

(supra) arise in the context of the
Electricity Act, 2003
and the

applicability of the
Limitation Act
to arbitrations conducted

thereunder.
42
45. In TANGEDCO (supra), a dispute regarding payments under

a Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) was raised before the State

Electricity Regulatory Commission, which allowed the same and

held that the
Limitation Act
does not apply to claims under the
Electricity Act
. It is also relevant to note that the PPA contained an

arbitration clause, which is governed by English law and provided

that the arbitration shall be conducted in England. While

considering various submissions, this Court held that the issue of

delay and laches did not arise in the facts of the case.53 It also

rejected the contention of the appellant therein that the
Limitation

Act
would have applied had the matter been referred to arbitration,

by holding that this situation also does not arise as the State

Commission decided the dispute itself.54 It then proceeded to

observe that even if the matter were referred to arbitration, Section

43 of the ACA would not apply and consequently, the
Limitation

Act
would not apply, due to
Section 2(4)
of the ACA.55 However, the

Court finally noted that in any case, the arbitration clause is

governed by English Law and hence the applicability of Section 43,

which is under Part I, does not arise.56


53 TANGEDCO (supra), para 64.
54 ibid, para 65.
55 ibid, paras 65-66.
56 ibid, para 69.
43
46. It is therefore clear that the issue of limitation as well as the

interpretation of
Section 2(4)
and the applicability of Section 43 of

the ACA to statutory arbitrations under the
Electricity Act
did not

directly arise for consideration in TANGEDCO (supra).
This has

also been noted by this Court in
Lanco
(supra)57, wherein the issue

directly falling for the Court’s consideration was whether the
Limitation Act
applies to actions instituted before the State

Commission under the
Electricity Act
.58 The Court noted that the
Limitation Act
does not ordinarily apply to proceedings before

quasi-judicial bodies or tribunals59.
However, applying the

principle in
V.R. Kalliyanikutty
(supra), the Court held that
Electricity Act
does not create a new right to claim amounts that

are barred by limitation. An amount that is not ordinarily

recoverable by filing a regular suit, on account of being barred by

limitation, cannot be entertained in exercise of judicial powers by

the State Commission. The Court also considered that there is no

conflict between the provisions of the
Limitation Act and the

Electricity Act
, in which context it examined the effect of
Sections

174
and
175
of the Electricity Act.
Ultimately, the Court concluded



57
Lanco
(supra), paras 16, 28.
58 ibid, para 9.1.
59 ibid, para 28. The Court relied on
M.P. Steel Corpn.
(supra).
44
that the
Limitation Act
is applicable to proceedings before the State

Commission under the
Electricity Act
.
The relevant portion of
Lanco
(supra) is extracted below:
“30.
In such a situation it falls for consideration whether the principle
    of law enunciated in
State of Kerala v. V.R. Kalliyanikutty
and in
New Delhi Municipal Committee v. Kalu Ram
is attracted so as to bar
    entertainment of claims which are legally not recoverable in a suit or
    other legal proceeding on account of bar created by the
Limitation Act
.
    On behalf of the respondents those judgments were explained by
    pointing out that in the first case the peculiar words in the statute—
    “amount due” and in the second case “arrears of rent payable” fell
    for interpretation in the context of powers of the tribunal concerned
    and on account of the aforesaid particular words of the statute this
    Court held that the duty cast upon the authority to determine what is
    recoverable or payable implies a duty to determine such claims in
    accordance with law. In our considered view a statutory authority like
    the Commission is also required to determine or decide a claim or
    dispute either by itself or by referring it to arbitration only in
    accordance with law and thus
Sections 174
and
175
of the Electricity
    Act assume relevance. Since no separate limitation has been
    prescribed for exercise of power under Section 86(1)(f) nor this
    adjudicatory power of the Commission has been enlarged to entertain
    even the time-barred claims, there is no conflict between the
    provisions of the
Electricity Act and the Limitation Act
to attract the
    provisions of
Section 174
of the Electricity Act. In such a situation, on
    account of the provisions in
Section 175
of the Electricity Act or even
    otherwise, the power of adjudication and determination or even the
    power of deciding whether a case requires reference to arbitration
    must be exercised in a fair manner and in accordance with law. In
    the absence of any provision in the
Electricity Act
creating a new right
    upon a claimant to claim even monies barred by law of limitation, or
    taking away a right of the other side to take a lawful defence of
    limitation, we are persuaded to hold that in the light of nature of
    judicial power conferred on the Commission, claims coming for
    adjudication before it cannot be entertained or allowed if it is found
    legally not recoverable in a regular suit or any other regular
    proceeding such as arbitration, on account of law of limitation. We
    have taken this view not only because it appears to be more just but
    also because unlike labour laws and the
Industrial Disputes Act, the
    Electricity Act
has no peculiar philosophy or inherent underlying
    reasons requiring adherence to a contrary view.
31. We have taken the aforesaid view to avoid injustice as well as the
    possibility of discrimination. We have already extracted a part of para
    11 of the judgment in
State of Kerala v. V.R. Kalliyanikutty
wherein
45
the Court considered the matter also in the light of
Article 14
of the
    Constitution. In that case the possibility of
Article 14
being attracted
    against the statute was highlighted to justify a particular
    interpretation as already noted. It was also observed that it would be
    ironic if in the name of speedy recovery contemplated by the statute,
    a creditor is enabled to recover claims beyond the period of limitation.
In this context, it would be fair to infer that the special adjudicatory
    role envisaged under Section 86(1)(f) also appears to be for speedy
    resolution so that a vital developmental factor — electricity and its
    supply is not adversely affected by delay in adjudication of even
    ordinary civil disputes by the civil court. Evidently, in the absence of
    any reason or justification the legislature did not contemplate to
    enable a creditor who has allowed the period of limitation to set in, to
    recover such delayed claims through the Commission. Hence we hold
    that a claim coming before the Commission cannot be entertained or
    allowed if it is barred by limitation prescribed for an ordinary suit
    before the civil court. But in an appropriate case, a specified period
    may be excluded on account of the principle underlying the salutary
    provisions like
Section 5
or
Section 14
of the Limitation Act. We must
    hasten to add here that such limitation upon the Commission on
    account of this decision would be only in respect of its judicial power
    under clause (f) of sub-section (1) of
Section 86
of the Electricity Act,
    2003 and not in respect of its other powers or functions which may
    be administrative or regulatory.”
47.
In view of the above reading of TANGEDCO (supra) and
Lanco
(supra), the following can be concluded: first, the issue of

applicability of the
Limitation Act
to statutory arbitrations is not

an issue determining the rights and liabilities of the parties in

TANGEDCO (supra); second, the issue of applicability of the
Limitation Act
to statutory arbitrations does not arise in
Lanco
(supra), and the Court was in fact dealing with whether time-

barred claims can be entertained in proceedings before the State

Commission; and third, after taking note of the decision in

TANGEDCO (supra), the Court in
Lanco
(supra) provided an

alternative reasoning based on the principle of
V.R. Kalliyanikutty
46
(supra) to hold that the
Limitation Act
applies to proceedings under

the
Electricity Act
.
Hence, we are of the opinion that the decision

in
Lanco
(supra) is not per incuriam, and there is no conflict

between these judgments. We therefore reject the submission by

the appellant on this ground as well.
48.
In light of the above reasoning, this Court’s decision in
Silpi

Industries
(supra) cannot be said to be per incuriam, as has been

contended before us. The Court in
Silpi Industries
(supra)

considered the issue and conclusively decided that the provisions

of the
Limitation Act
are applicable to arbitration under
Section

18(3)
of the MSMED Act.
We have supplemented the reasoning

provided in
Silpi Industries
(supra) by analysing with the interplay

of
Section 2(4)
of the ACA and
Section 18
and
Section 24
of the

MSMED Act.
Considering the overriding effect of the provisions of

the
MSMED Act
and the clear language of
Section 18(3)
, we have

arrived at the same conclusion as in
Silpi Industries
(supra) that

Section 43 of the ACA applies to arbitrations under
Section 18
of

the MSMED Act, thereby attracting the provisions of the
Limitation

Act
to claims made under the
MSMED Act
. We answer the second

issue accordingly.
47
49. Before concluding, we will briefly deal with the contention

raised by the appellant that even if the
Limitation Act
applies to

arbitration proceedings, the limitation period stands extended due

to the disclosure of unpaid amount in the buyer’s financial

statements as per
Section 22
of the MSMED Act. This is based on

the application of
Section 18
of the Limitation Act, which provides

that a fresh period of limitation commences when a written

acknowledgement of the liability is signed by the party against

whom such right is claimed.60
50. To briefly state the law on the issue, we will refer to this

Court’s decision in
Asset Reconstruction Co. (India) Ltd. v. Bishal

Jaiswal61
. Here, the issue was the applicability of
Section 18
of the

Limitation Act when there is acknowledgment of liability in

financial statements. Citing various precedents on the issue, this

Court reaffirmed the position that an entry in the balance sheet of

the debtor would amount to an acknowledgement of liability as per
Section 18
of the Limitation Act.62 However, it also observed that



60
Section 18
of the Limitation Act reads:
“18. Effect of acknowledgment in writing.—(1) Where, before the expiration of
       the prescribed period for a suit or application in respect of any property or right, an
       acknowledgment of liability in respect of such property or right has been made in
       writing signed by the party against whom such property or right is claimed, or by
       any person through whom he derives his title or liability, a fresh period of limitation
       shall be computed from the time when the acknowledgment was so signed…”
61 (2021) 6 SCC 366.
62 ibid, paras 16-17.
48
it is not uncommon for such entry to have notes annexed, or the

auditor’s report that must be read along with the balance sheet,

that     indicate   that   such   entry   does   not   amount   to   an

acknowledgement of debt for reasons stated therein.63 While the

law mandates the preparation of the balance sheet, and in our

case, the disclosure of the unpaid amount and interest thereon,

the entry made therein must be examined on a case-to-case basis

to determine whether it amounts to an acknowledgement of debt

as per the requirements of
Section 18
of the Limitation Act.64 It is

sufficient to restate this position of law for our purpose.

X. Conclusion:
51. On considering the statutory provisions of the MSMED Act,

the ACA, and the Limitation Act, the precedents of this Court, and

on the basis of the above reasoning, we have answered the issues

arising in the present appeals as follows:
i.
The Limitation Act
does not apply to conciliation

           proceedings under
Section 18(2)
of the MSMED Act. A

           time-barred claim can be referred to conciliation as the

           expiry of limitation period does not extinguish the right to

           recover the amount, including through a settlement
63 ibid, para 21.
64 ibid, para 35.
49
agreement that can be arrived at through the conciliatory

        process.
ii.
The Limitation Act
applies to arbitration proceedings

        under
Section 18(3)
of the MSMED Act. The applicability

        of the provisions of ACA to such arbitrations is determined

        as per
Section 18(3)
and other provisions of the
MSMED

        Act
, as these are special laws, rather than by
Section 2(4)
of the ACA, which is under a general law. This is in

        addition to the reasoning provided in
Silpi Industries
(supra). Further, the extension of the limitation period on

        the basis of disclosure under
Section 22
of the MSMED Act

        must be examined on a case-to-case basis.
52. We therefore partly allow the present appeals arising out of

SLP (C) Nos. 6912-6920/2024 and set aside the impugned order

dated 20.10.2023 arising in Commercial Appeal Nos. 1-9/2018

before the High Court of Bombay Bench at Nagpur to the extent of

applicability of the
Limitation Act
to conciliation proceedings under

the
MSMED Act
. We have upheld the High Court’s decision on the

applicability of the
Limitation Act
to arbitration proceedings under

the
MSMED Act
for the reasons provided hereinabove.
53. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
50
54. No order as to costs.
………………………………....J.
                            [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]



                                     ………………………………....J.
                                        [JOYMALYA BAGCHI]

NEW DELHI;
JULY 17, 2025
51