[Cites
33
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Padi Kaushik Reddy vs The State Of Telangana on 31 July, 2025
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
2025 INSC 912                                                                    REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL/ORIGINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NOS.___________ OF 2025
                                     (Arising out of SLP(C) Nos. 2353-54 of 2025)

                            PADI KAUSHIK REDDY ETC.
                                                …APPELLANT(S)/PETITIONER(S)

                                                               VERSUS

                            THE STATE OF TELANGANA AND
                            OTHERS ETC.                                      …RESPONDENTS

                                                                 WITH

                                        WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 82 OF 2025

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.___________ OF 2025
                                      (Arising out of SLP(C) No. __________of 2025)
                                                               DIARY NO.14577 OF 2025

                                                         JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, CJI
1.    Leave granted in SLP (C) Nos. 2353-2354 of 2025 and SLP

                            (C) Diary No. 14577 of 2025.
2.    The appeals in the present set of matters challenge the

                            judgment and final order dated 22nd November 2024 passed by

                            a Division Bench of the High Court for the State of Telangana
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2025.07.31
11:29:18 IST
at Hyderabad1 in Writ Appeal Nos. 1157, 1158 and 1160 of
Reason:
1 Hereinafter referred to as “the High Court”.
1
2024 whereby the Division Bench of the High Court set aside

the judgment and final order dated 9th September 2024 passed

by a learned Single Judge of the High Court in a batch of Writ

Petitions.
FACTS
3.     Shorn of unnecessary details, the facts leading to the

appeals are as under:
3.1. On 3rd November 2023, on the recommendation of the

Election Commission of India, the Hon’ble Governor of the

State of Telangana issued the notification for General Election

to the State Legislative Assembly.
3.2. Pursuant to the notification, one Danam Nagender filed

his nomination as a candidate of the Bharat Rashtra Samithi2

from the Khairatabad Assembly Constituency on 6th November

2023. Similarly, two others namely Venkata Rao Tellam and

Kadiyam Srihari filed their nomination from Bhadrachalam

Assembly Constituency and Ghanpur Station Constituency as

candidates of BRS on 9th November 2023.
3.3. Thereafter, on 30th November 2023, the elections were

held and the results were declared on 3rd December 2023.
2 Hereinafter referred to as “BRS”.
2
3.4. The aforementioned Danam Nagender, Venkata Rao

Tellam and Kadiyam Srihari won the election from their

respective constituency. The Indian National Congress3

emerged as the single largest party and it along with its ally

formed the Government.
3.5. It is the allegation of the appellants that on 15th March

2024, Danam Nagender joined the INC. It is further their

allegation that the other two BRS Members of Legislative

Assembly4 namely Kadiyam Srihari and Venkata Rao Tellam

also joined the INC on 31st March 2024 and 7th April 2024

respectively.
3.6. Subsequently, the Appellants in the lead matter namely

Padi Kaushik Reddy and Kuna Pandu Vivekanand, who are

themselves MLAs belonging to BRS, filed separate petitions

under Paragraph 2(1) of the Tenth Schedule read with
Article

191(2)
of the Constitution of India and Rules 6(1) and 6(2) of

the      Members          of     Telangana         Legislative   Assembly

(Disqualification on ground of Defection) Rules, 19865 before the

Telangana State Legislative Assembly on 18th March 2024,



3 Hereinafter referred to as “INC”.
4 Hereinafter referred to as “MLA”.
5 Hereinafter referred to as “Disqualification Rules 1986”.
3
2nd April 2024 and 8th April 2024. The common prayer in all

the three petitions was for a declaration from the Speaker of

the Telangana Legislative Assembly that the MLAs from BRS

who joined the INC be declared as disqualified from continuing

as members of the Telangana Legislative Assembly.

3.7. The       Appellant      in      the   connected   matter,   namely

Alleti Maheshwar Reddy, who is an MLA belonging to

Bharatiya Janata Party6, also filed a petition seeking the

disqualification of Danam Nagender on 1st July 2024.

3.8. Thereafter, aggrieved by the inaction/delay on part of the

Speaker      in    deciding      the    disqualification   petitions,   the

Appellants filed three separate Writ Petitions before the High

Court being Writ Petition Nos. 9472, 11098 & 18553 of 2024.

The first two Writ Petitions were filed on 10th April 2024 and

24th April 2024 and the third Writ Petition was filed on 9th July

2024.
3.9. On 9th September 2024, the learned Single Judge of the

High Court by a common judgment and order directed the

Secretary of the Telangana Legislative Assembly to forthwith

place the disqualification petitions before the Speaker for fixing


6 Hereinafter referred to as “BJP”.
4
a schedule of hearing (filing of pleadings, documents, personal

hearing etc.) within a period of four weeks. It was further

directed that the schedule so fixed, shall be communicated to

the Registrar (Judicial) of the High Court. It was further

clarified by the learned Single Judge of the High Court that if

nothing is heard within four weeks, then the matter would be

reopened suo motu and appropriate orders would be passed.

3.10.      Taking exception to the judgment and order passed

by the learned Single Judge of the High Court, the Secretary of

the Telangana Legislative Assembly preferred three separate

intra-court appeals being Writ Appeal No. 1157, 1158 & 1160

of 2024.
3.11.      On 22nd November 2024, the Division Bench of the

High Court by a common judgment and final order disposed of

the Writ Appeals by setting aside the judgment and order

passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court.

3.12.      Aggrieved thereby, the present appeals pertaining to

disqualification petitions pending against three MLAs came to

be filed by way of special leave.
3.13.      A Writ Petition has also been filed before this Court

by the Appellants in the lead matter along with a few others
5
pertaining   to   disqualification   petitions   pending   against

another seven MLAs. The prayer in the Writ Petition is on the

same lines as the prayer by the original writ-petitioners before

the High Court i.e., to direct the Speaker to decide the

disqualification petitions in a time-bound manner and

preferably within an outer limit of 4 weeks. Accordingly, the

Writ Petition was tagged and heard along with the present

appeals.
SUBMISSIONS
4.   We have heard Shri C. Aryama Sundaram, Shri Dama

Seshadri Naidu and Shri Gandra Mohan Rao, learned Senior

Counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellants/Petitioners and

Shri Mukul Rohatgi, Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Shri Ravi

Shankar Jandhyala, Shri Gaurav Agrawal, Shri S. Niranjan

Reddy, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the

Respondents.
5.   Shri Sundaram, learned Senior Counsel appearing on

behalf of the Appellants submitted that till the time the learned

Single Judge of the High Court decided the writ petition on 9th

September 2024 i.e., after a period of almost five months from

the date of filing, the Speaker had not even issued a notice in
6
the   disqualification   petitions   filed   by   the   Appellants.

It is submitted that taking into consideration this factual

aspect of the matter, the learned Single Judge had issued a

direction only to the effect that the Speaker should fix a

schedule of hearing within a period of 4 weeks from the date

of the said order. It is therefore submitted that, as such, there

was no occasion for the learned Judges of the Division Bench

to have interfered with the order of the learned Single Judge.
6.    Shri Sundaram submitted that even after the order of the

learned Single Judge, for a period of more than 4 months, the

Speaker did not take any action. It is further submitted that

only after the present set of appeals came to be filed before this

Court on 15th January 2025, a notice has been issued to the

delinquent MLAs on 16th January 2025. The learned Senior

Counsel submitted that under Rule 7 of the Disqualification

Rules, 1986, a copy of the Disqualification Petition is required

to be forwarded to the member in relation to whom the petition

has been made or the Leader of the Legislature Party to which

the member belongs. It is submitted that in spite of a lapse of

a period of more than 11 months from the filing of

disqualification petitions, even the statutory requirement as
7
per Rule 7 of the Disqualification Rules 1986 has not been

complied with. It is further submitted that since the Speaker

was acting in such a lackadaisical manner, the learned Single

Judge of the High Court was completely justified in issuing

directions to the Secretary of the Telangana Legislative

Assembly to place the matter before the Speaker for fixing of

the schedule of the hearing within a period of 4 weeks.
7.    Shri Sundaram submitted that the learned Single Judge

of the High Court had rightly applied the principles as laid

down by the Constitution Bench of this Court in the cases of
Kihoto Hollohan v. Zachillhu and Others7
,
Rajendra

Singh Rana and Others v. Swami Prasad Maurya and

Others8
and
Subhash Desai v. Principal Secretary,

Governor of Maharashtra and Others9
.
The learned Senior

Counsel further submitted that the facts in the present case

are squarely identical to the facts in the case of
Keisham

Meghachandra Singh v. Speaker, Manipur Legislative

Assembly and Others10
. It is submitted that applying the said

case, the learned Single Judge of the High Court would have
7
1992 Supp (2) 651
8
(2007) 4 SCC 270
9
(2024) 2 SCC 719
10
(2021) 16 SCC 503
8
been justified even in directing the disqualification petitions to

be decided within a specified period. However, the learned

Single Judge of the High Court, exercising restraint and

showing respect to the high constitutional functionary, had

only issued a direction to the Secretary of the Telangana

Legislative Assembly to place the matter before the Speaker for

fixing up the schedule of the hearing.
8.        It is submitted by the learned Senior Counsel that since

the directions issued by the Constitution Bench of this Court

on 11th May 2023 in the case of
Subhash Desai
(supra) were

not complied with by the Speaker, a Full Bench of this Court

in the case of
Sunil Prabhu v. The Speaker, Maharashtra

State Legislative Assembly11
on 18th September 2023,

directed to place the proceedings before the Speaker within a

period of one week from that date so as to issue procedural

directions for completing the record and setting down a time

schedule for hearing of the disqualification petitions.
It is

further submitted that thereafter vide an order dated 30th

October 2023, this Court in the said case of
Sunil Prabhu
(supra) directed the pending proceedings under the Tenth
11
Writ Petition (C) No.685 of 2023
9
Schedule to be concluded and final orders to be passed in

respect of Group A petitions on or before 31st December 2023

and Group B petitions on or before 31st January 2024.
The

learned Senior Counsel further submitted that the said

directions were issued by a Bench presided over by the same

learned Judge (D.Y. Chandrachud, C.J.), who had authored

the judgment in the case of
Subhash Desai
(supra).
9.    Shri Sundaram submitted that the learned Judges of the

Division Bench of the High Court, have erred in setting aside

a well-reasoned and fairly balanced judgment of the learned

Single Judge of the High Court. He further submitted that this

is a fit case wherein this Court should issue directions to the

Speaker to decide the disqualification petitions within a

specified period of time. He, therefore, prayed that the appeals

be allowed and appropriate directions be issued.
10. Shri Naidu, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf

of   the   Appellants/Petitioners   supported   the   arguments

advanced by Shri Sundaram.
11. Additionally, Shri Naidu submitted that prolonging the

disqualification proceedings and not taking them to a logical

end would frustrate the very purpose of the Tenth Schedule to
10
the Constitution of India. He submitted that the fear with

regard to the Speaker belonging to a particular political party

and as a result acting in a partisan manner was apprehended

when the Parliament was discussing the insertion of the Tenth

Schedule in the Constitution. It is submitted that Shri A.K.

Sen, the then Law Minister, had stated that the Speaker was

expected to act in an impartial manner and decide the

disqualification proceedings without any delay. Not only that

but Shri A.K. Sen had stated that if the amendment to the

Constitution was to be effective, and if the defection was to be

outlawed effectively, then it was necessary to choose a forum

which would decide the matter fearlessly and expeditiously. He

further stated that the Speaker was the only forum that was

possible. In that light, the learned Senior Counsel submitted

that a situation has now arisen which would require this Court

to reconsider the issue because in many cases the Speaker has

been acting like a member of a political party and not acting

like a Tribunal. He, therefore, reiterated that this Court should

direct the Speaker to decide the disqualification petitions

matter within a specified period of time.
11
12. Shri Rohatgi, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf

of the respondents, on the contrary, submitted that the

Division Bench of the High Court has rightly applied the legal

position as emanating from the Constitution Bench decisions

of this Court in the cases of
Rajendra Singh Rana
(supra),
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra) and
Subhash Desai
(supra) and

held that a court cannot issue timelines to the Speaker for

deciding the matter within a particular period. He submitted

that the High Court does not have the power of judicial

superintendence over the functioning of the Speaker as a

Tribunal under
Article 227
of the Constitution. He submitted

that the only power of judicial review that is available with the

High Court is under
Article 226
of the Constitution. It is

submitted that while exercising the power of judicial review

under
Article 226
of the Constitution, the High Court can only

examine the decision arrived at by the Speaker. It is further

submitted by the learned Senior Counsel that it is not

permissible for the High Court to pass any order which would

amount to Quia Timet action.
It is submitted that this Court in

the case of
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra) has categorically held

that the High Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution
12
cannot pass any order which would amount to Quia Timet

action. It is, therefore, submitted that as such any petition

prior to the decision made by the Speaker would not be

tenable.
13. Shri Rohatgi further submitted that the three-Judges

Bench of this Court has wrongly decided the case of
Keisham

Meghachandra Singh
(supra).
In that regard, it is submitted

that this Court in the case of
Keisham Meghachandra Singh
(supra) did not take into consideration the law
laid down by
the Constitution Bench in the cases of
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra) and
Rajendra Singh Rana
(supra) in the correct

perspective.
It is, therefore, submitted that vide the impugned

judgment and final order, the Division Bench of the High Court

has rightly distinguished the judgment of this Court in the

case of
Keisham Meghachandra Singh
(supra).
14. Shri Rohatgi further submitted that, in any case, judicial

propriety demanded that this Court should not have delivered

a judgment as was delivered in the case of
Keisham

Meghachandra      Singh
(supra)   inasmuch   as   a   Bench

comprising of two learned Judges on an earlier occasion had

referred the same issue to a larger Bench by an order dated 8th
13
November 2016 in the case of
S.A. Sampath Kumar v. Kale

Yadaiah and Others12
.
He submitted that as a matter of fact

the judgment in the case of
Keisham Meghachandra Singh
(supra) tries to nullify what has been held by the larger

Benches of this Court in the cases of
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra)

and
Rajendra Singh Rana
(supra).
15. Shri         Rohatgi   further        submitted   that   even   the

Constitution Bench decision in the case of
Subhash Desai
(supra) does not lay down any timeline for the Speaker for

deciding a disqualification petition. It is, therefore, submitted

that the learned Division Bench of the High Court was right in

reversing the direction of the learned Single Judge of the High

Court to the Speaker to decide the disqualification petitions

within a specified period.
16. Dr. Singhvi, Shri Ravi Shankar Jandhyala, and Shri

Gaurav Agrawal, learned Senior Counsel supplemented the

arguments of Shri Rohatgi on the similar lines.
17. Dr. Singhvi submitted that no judgment of this Court,

including the three Constitution Bench judgments, has given

directions to the Speaker for deciding the matter within a
12
(2021) 16 SCC 528
14
specified period. It is submitted by Dr. Singhvi that the only

exception    in   this   regard    is   the   case   of
Keisham

Meghachandra Singh
(supra), however, it is reiterated by the

learned Senior Counsel that
Keisham Meghachandra Singh
(supra) does not lay down a good law.
18. Insofar as the orders passed by the Full Bench of this

Court dated 18th September 2023 and 30th October 2023 are

concerned, Dr. Singhvi submitted that the said orders do not

lay down a binding precedent. Next, Dr. Singhvi tried to

distinguish the case of
Rajendra Singh Rana
(supra) by

stating that the facts in the said case are totally different.
It is

submitted that in the case of
Rajendra Singh Rana
(supra),

because the term of the Assembly was coming to an end, the

Court was justified in directly deciding the disqualification

petition itself. It is further submitted that, in the present case,

there is still a long time for the term to expire and as such,

there is no urgency which requires a direction to be issued to

the Speaker to decide the matter within a particular period of

time.
19. Shri Agrawal submitted that if the Parliament decides

that a particular time limit is required to be laid down for
15
deciding the disqualification petitions, nothing prevents the

Parliament from doing so. However, the Parliament has not yet

chosen to do so and therefore it is neither the High Court nor

this Court that can issue a writ directing the Speaker to decide

the disqualification proceedings within a particular period.
20. Shri Agrawal further submitted that in any case, the

learned Division Bench of the High Court vide the impugned

judgment and final order has itself directed that the matter

should be decided within a reasonable period and as such, no

interference is warranted in the present proceedings.
21. Shri Sundaram, in rejoinder, submitted that in the

present case, the facts are glaring. It is submitted that one of

the MLAs, after being elected to the Legislative Assembly as a

Member of the BRS, contested and lost the Lok Sabha Election

as a Member of the INC but is still enjoying the Office of MLA,

having contested for the same while belonging to the BRS

party. It is submitted that if such a situation is permitted to

continue only on account of not deciding the disqualification

petitions within a particular period, it would be nothing less

than playing a fraud on democracy. The learned Senior

Counsel therefore reiterated that this is a fit case wherein this
16
Court should direct the Speaker to decide the disqualification

petitions within a specified period of time.
22. Before we proceed to decide the matter on merits, we find

it appropriate to revisit how the matter has reached the present

stage.
23. When the matter was firstly listed on 31st January 2025,

taking into consideration that the learned Division Bench of

the High Court had directed the disqualification proceedings

to be decided within a “reasonable period”, we had asked Shri

Rohatgi to take instructions from the Speaker as to within how

much time he would decide the disqualification proceedings.

Thereafter, when the matter was listed on 10th February 2025,

Shri Rohatgi submitted that he was not in a position to make

any statement in that regard. The matter, upon being

mentioned on 20th February 2025, was directed to be kept for

hearing on 4th March 2025. On the said date, when the matters

were called out and after we had heard Shri Sundaram and

Shri     Naidu,    learned     Senior     Counsel    for    the

Appellants/Petitioners at some length, an objection was raised

by Dr. Singhvi and Shri Rohatgi, learned Senior Counsel

appearing for the Respondents that no “formal notice” was
17
issued in these matters and therefore the respondents could

not file any reply. It will be relevant to refer to paras 5 and 6 of

the order dated 4th March 2025, which read thus:
“5. No doubt that the objection is hypertechnical,
     however we propose to adjourn the matter so that
     no objection is raised at a subsequent point of time
     by the respondents that the petitions were decided
     without following the principles of natural justice.
6. We, therefore, issue a formal notice to the
     respondents in both the matters, returnable on
     25.03.2025.”
24. Thereafter, the matter was called on 25th March 2025, 2nd

April 2025 and finally on 3rd April 2025 when we concluded

the hearing.
25. In this background, we proceed to consider the rival

contentions.
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
26. To appreciate the rival submissions, it would be apposite

that we first take a close look at the judicial decisions which

hold the field.
27. The Constitution Bench of this Court, in the case of
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra), had an occasion to consider the

constitutional    validity   of   the   Tenth   Schedule    of   the

Constitution which was introduced by the Constitution (Fifty-
18
second Amendment) Act, 1985. The Constitution Bench, in the

said case specifically considered the validity and scope of

Paragraphs 6 and 7 of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution.

It will be relevant to refer to the following observations of this

Court:
“13. …. A political party goes before the electorate
     with a particular programme and it sets up
     candidates at the election on the basis of such
     programme. A person who gets elected as a
     candidate set up by a political party is so
     elected on the basis of the programme of that
     political party. The provisions of Paragraph
     2(1)(a) proceed on the premise that political
     propriety and morality demand that if such a
     person, after the election, changes his
     affiliation and leaves the political party which
     had set him up as a candidate at the election,
     then he should give up his membership of the
     legislature and go back before the electorate.
     The same yardstick is applied to a person who is
     elected as an Independent candidate and wishes to
     join a political party after the election.”
                                      [emphasis supplied]
28. This Court, amongst other questions, framed the

following two questions for its consideration:
“24. …..
(E) That the deeming provision in Paragraph 6(2)
     of the Tenth Schedule attracts the immunity under
Articles 122
and
212.
The Speaker and the
     Chairman in relation to the exercise of the powers
     under the Tenth Schedule shall not be subjected
     to the jurisdiction of any Court.
19
The Tenth Schedule seeks to and does create a new
     and non-justiciable area of rights, obligations and
     remedies to be resolved in the exclusive manner
     envisaged by the Constitution and is not amenable
     to, but constitutionally immune from, curial
     adjudicative processes.
(F) That even if Paragraph 7 erecting a bar on the
     jurisdiction of Courts is held inoperative, the
     Courts' jurisdiction is, in any event, barred as
     Paragraph 6(1) which imparts a constitutional
     ‘finality’ to the decision of the Speaker or the
     Chairman, as the case may be, and that such
     concept of ‘finality’ bars examination of the matter
     by the Courts.
29. One of the arguments that was advanced before this

Court was that the concept of “finality” given to the decision of

the Speaker excluded the court’s jurisdiction. This Court

therefore considered the question as to whether the word

“final” in paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth Schedule rendered the

decision of the Speaker immune from judicial review. The

majority judgment rendered by M.N. Venkatachaliah, J. (as His

Lordship then was), after referring to various earlier judgments

of this Court, observed thus:
“94. It is, therefore, inappropriate to claim that the
     determinative jurisdiction of the Speaker or the
     Chairman in the Tenth Schedule is not a judicial
     power and is within the non-justiciable legislative
     area. The classic exposition of Issacs J.,
     in Australian        Boot      Trade       Employees
     Federation v. Whybrow & Co. [(1910) 10 CLR 266,
     317] as to what distinguishes a judicial power from
20
a legislative power was referred to with the
approval of this Court in
Express Newspaper (P)
Ltd. v. Union of India
[AIR 1958 SC 578, 611 : 1959
SCR 12 : (1961) 1 LLJ 339] . Issacs, J., stated:
(CLR p. 317 quoted at AIR p. 611)
     “If the dispute is as to the relative rights
     of parties as they rest on past or present
     circumstances, the award is in the
     nature of a judgment, which might have
     been the decree of an ordinary judicial
     tribunal acting under the ordinary
     judicial power. There the law applicable
     to the case must be observed. If,
     however, the dispute is as to what shall
     in the future be the mutual rights and
     responsibilities of the parties — in other
     words, if no present rights are asserted
     or denied, but a future rule of conduct
     is to be prescribed, thus creating new
     rights and obligations, with sanctions
     for non-conformity — then the
     determination that so prescribes, call it
     an award, or arbitration, determination,
     or decision or what you will, is
     essentially of a legislative character,
     and limited only by the law which
     authorises it. If, again, there are neither
     present rights asserted, nor a future
     rule of conduct prescribed, but merely a
     fact ascertained necessary for the
     practical effectuation of admitted rights,
     the proceeding, though called an
     arbitration, is rather in the nature of an
     appraisement or ministerial act.”
95. In the present case, the power to decide
disputed disqualification under Paragraph 6(1)
is pre-eminently of a judicial complexion.
96. The fiction in Paragraph 6(2), indeed, places it
in the first clause of
Article 122
or 212, as the case
may be. The words “proceedings in Parliament” or
“proceedings in the legislature of a State” in
21
Paragraph      6(2)   have    their corresponding
     expression in
Articles 122(1)
and
212(1)
respectively. This attracts an immunity from mere
     irregularities of procedures.
97. That apart, even after 1986 when the Tenth
     Schedule was introduced, the Constitution did
     not evince any intention to invoke
Article 122
or 212 in the conduct of resolution of disputes
     as to the disqualification of members under
Articles 191(1)
and
102(1).
The very deeming
     provision implies that the proceedings of
     disqualification are, in fact, not before the
     House; but only before the Speaker as a
     specially designated authority. The decision
     under Paragraph 6(1) is not the decision of the
     House, nor is it subject to the approval by the
     House. The decision operates independently of
     the House. A deeming provision cannot by its
     creation transcend its own power. There is,
     therefore, no immunity under
Articles 122
and
212
from judicial scrutiny of the decision of the
     Speaker or Chairman exercising power under
     Paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth Schedule.
98. But then is the Speaker or the Chairman
     acting under Paragraph 6(1) a Tribunal? “All
     tribunals are not courts, though all courts are
     tribunals”. The word “courts” is used to designate
     those tribunals which are set up in an organised
     State for the Administration of Justice. By
     Administration of Justice is meant the exercise of
     judicial power of the State to maintain and uphold
     rights and to punish “wrongs”……..”
                                   [emphasis supplied]
30. It can thus be seen that this Court, in unequivocal terms,

has held that it was inappropriate to claim that the

determinative jurisdiction of the Speaker/Chairman in the
22
Tenth Schedule to the Constitution was not a judicial power

and was within the non-justiciable legislative area. This Court,

in no unclear terms, held that the power to decide disputed

disqualification under Paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth Schedule to

the Constitution was pre-eminently of a judicial complexion.

This     Court,   thereafter,    referred   to   the   provision    of
Articles 122(1)
and
212(1)
of the Constitution and the fiction

in Paragraph 6(2) of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution.

This Court observed that these provisions attract immunity

from mere irregularities of procedures. Then, in paragraph 98,

this     Court    posed   a     question    as   to    whether     the

Speaker/Chairman, acting in Paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth

Schedule to the Constitution, is a Tribunal or not.
31. Thereafter, this Court referred to various judgments

distinguishing between the Courts and Tribunals and observed

thus:
“100. By these well known and accepted tests of
        what constitute a Tribunal, the Speaker or the
        Chairman, acting under Paragraph 6(1) of the
        Tenth Schedule is a Tribunal.”
32. It can thus be seen that this Court, in unequivocal terms,

has held that the Speaker/Chairman, acting under Paragraph

6(1) of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution is a Tribunal.
23
The Constitution Bench thereafter insofar as Questions (E) and

(F) are concerned, came to the following conclusion:
“109. In the light of the decisions
referred to above
and the nature of function that is exercised by the
     Speaker/Chairman under Paragraph 6, the scope
     of judicial review under
Articles 136
, and
226
and
227
of the Constitution in respect of an
     order passed by the Speaker/Chairman under
     Paragraph 6 would be confined to jurisdictional
     errors only viz., infirmities based on violation
     of constitutional mandate, mala fides, non-
     compliance with rules of natural justice and
     perversity.
110. In view of the limited scope of judicial review
     that is available on account of the finality clause
     in Paragraph 6 and also having regard to the
     constitutional intendment and the status of the
     repository of the adjudicatory power i.e.
     Speaker/Chairman, judicial review cannot be
     available at a stage prior to the making of a
     decision by the Speaker/Chairman and a quia
     timet action would not be permissible. Nor
     would interference be permissible at an
     interlocutory stage of the proceedings.
Exception will, however, have to be made in
     respect of cases where disqualification or
     suspension is imposed during the pendency of
     the proceedings and such disqualification or
     suspension is likely to have grave, immediate
     and      irreversible      repercussions        and
     consequence.
111. In the result, we hold on contentions (E) and
     (F):
That the Tenth Schedule does not,
          in providing for an additional grant
          (sic ground) for disqualification and for
          adjudication          of         disputed
          disqualifications, seek to create a non-
          justiciable constitutional area. The
24
power to resolve such disputes vested in
the Speaker or Chairman is a judicial
power.
That Paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth
Schedule, to the extent it seeks to
impart finality to the decision of the
speakers/Chairmen is valid. But the
concept     of    statutory    finality
embodied in Paragraph 6(1) does not
detract from or abrogate judicial
review under
Articles 136
, 226
and
227
of the Constitution insofar as
infirmities based on violations of
constitutional mandates, mala fides,
non-compliance with Rules of Natural
Justice     and     perversity,    are
concerned.
That the deeming provision in
Paragraph 6(2) of the Tenth Schedule
attracts an immunity analogous to that
in
Articles 122(1)
and
212(1)
of the
Constitution      as    understood     and
explained in
Keshav Singh
case [(1965)
1 SCR 413 : AIR 1965 SC 745] to protect
the validity of proceedings from mere
irregularities of procedure. The deeming
provision, having regard to the words
‘be deemed to be proceedings in
Parliament’ or ‘proceedings in the
legislature of a State’ confines the scope
of the fiction accordingly.
The Speakers/Chairmen while
exercising powers and discharging
functions under the Tenth Schedule
act as Tribunal adjudicating rights
and obligations under the Tenth
Schedule and their decisions in that
capacity are amenable to judicial
review.
However, having regard to the
Constitutional Schedule in the Tenth
25
Schedule, judicial review should not
           cover any stage prior to the making of a
           decision by the Speakers/Chairmen.
           Having regard to the constitutional
           intendment and the status of the
           repository of the adjudicatory power,
           no quia timet actions are permissible,
           the only exception for any interlocutory
           interference being cases of interlocutory
           disqualifications or suspensions which
           may have grave, immediate and
           irreversible     repercussions       and
           consequence.”
                                [emphasis supplied]
33. The Constitution Bench therefore held that in light of the

decisions
referred to above
and the nature of function that was

exercised by the Speaker/Chairman under Paragraph 6 of the

Tenth Schedule to the Constitution, the scope of judicial review

under
Articles 136
, 226
and
227
of the Constitution in respect

of   an   order   passed   by   the   Speaker/Chairman     under

Paragraph 6 of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution would

be confined to jurisdictional errors only i.e., infirmities based

on violation of constitutional mandate, mala fides, non-
compliance with rules of natural justice and perversity.
34. This Court thereafter held that in view of the limited

scope of judicial review on account of the finality clause in

Paragraph 6 of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution and
26
having regard to the constitutional intendment and the status

of   the    repository    of   the   adjudicatory    power     i.e.,   the

Speaker/Chairman, judicial review could not be available at a

stage      prior   to    the   making     of   a    decision    by     the

Speaker/Chairman and a Quia Timet action would not be

permissible. It held that any interference would not be

permissible at an interlocutory stage of the proceedings.

This Court, however, excluded the cases where disqualification

or suspension was imposed during the pendency of the

proceedings and such disqualification or suspension was likely

to have grave, immediate and irreversible repercussions and

consequences.
35.
In the present case, heavy reliance is sought to be placed

on paragraph 110 of
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra) by both the

sides. On the side of the Appellants/Petitioners, it is contended

that judicial restriction against Quia Timet actions does not

interdict in any manner against the judicial review in aid of

Speaker/Chairman to arrive at a prompt decision of the

disqualification petition. Per contra, it is argued on behalf of

the Respondents that no interference would be warranted by
27
the High Court or this Court at any time prior to the final

decision being rendered by the Speaker/Chairman.
36.
Insofar as Shri Rohatgi’s submission that the High

Courts cannot exercise powers under
Article 227
of the

Constitution is concerned, the said contention, in our view,

lacks merit inasmuch as in
Paragraph 109 of Kihoto

Hollohan
(supra) itself, the Constitution Bench has referred

to
Article 227
along with
Articles 136
and
226
of the

Constitution.
In any case, the difference between the

jurisdictional exercise under
Article 227
of the Constitution

and the jurisdiction of the High Court to issue a writ of

certiorari under
Article 226
of the Constitution is very thin as

per the judgment of this Court in the case of
Surya Devi Rai

v. Ram Chander Rai and Others13
.
37. The next judgment of the Constitution Bench which is

required to be considered by us is the case of
Rajendra Singh

Rana
(supra).
38. In the said case, on 27th August 2003, 13 MLAs from the

Bahujan Samaj Party14 approached the Hon’ble Governor of

the State of Uttar Pradesh and requested him to call upon the
13
(2003) 6 SCC 675
14
Hereinafter referred to as “BSP”.
28
Leader of Opposition i.e., Samajwadi Party to form the

Government. This was despite the fact that the ruling coalition

Government led by BSP had recommended the dissolution of

the Assembly on 25th August 2003. The leader of BSP

Legislature Party on 4th September 2003 filed a petition in

terms of
Article 191
read with Paragraph 2 of the Tenth

Schedule of the Constitution for disqualification of the said 13

MLAs. Thereafter, on 6th September 2003, 37 MLAs from BSP,

including the original 13 MLAs, claimed to have “split” from

the BSP. They claimed protection under Paragraph 3 of the

Tenth Schedule to the Constitution since they formed one-

third of the BSP (37 out of 109). The Speaker, instead of

deciding the disqualification petition relating to the original 13

MLAs, decided that the said 37 MLAs had met the

requirements of Paragraph 3 of the Tenth Schedule to the

Constitution and therefore did not incur disqualification under

Paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution.

However, the Speaker had kept the petition relating to

disqualification of original 13 MLAs pending.
39. Challenging the decision of the Speaker in accepting this

split while keeping the issue with regard to the disqualification
29
of the original 13 MLAs pending, a writ petition came to be filed

before the Allahabad High Court. The matter was adjourned in

the High Court on a number of occasions. At the same time,

the petition for disqualification of the original 13 MLAs which

was pending was adjourned by the Speaker on the ground that

the matter was pending before the High Court. The said

petition was pending before the High Court from 29th

September 2003 on one pretext or the other. In the meantime,

on 7th September 2005, the Speaker passed an order rejecting

the petition filed for disqualification of the original 13 MLAs.

Thereafter, the appellants therein moved an application for

amendment of the writ petition before the High Court. It

appears that there were certain unpleasant happenings as

recorded in paragraph 9 of
the said judgment
between two

Members of the Bench. Thereafter, the matter was assigned to

the Full Bench. Ultimately, the matter was decided on 14th

February 2007. The learned Chief Justice had dismissed the

appeals while the other two learned Judges quashed the order

of the Speaker and directed him to reconsider the matter with

particular reference to the petition for disqualification of the

original 13 MLAs. The learned Chief Justice took the view that
30
the Speaker was justified in finding a split on the basis of a

claim of split in the original political party and one-third

members of the legislature party separating, by taking into

account all events up to the time of his taking a decision on

the question of split. However, the other two learned Judges

took a view that the Speaker was in error in not deciding the

petition seeking disqualification of the original 13 MLAs first

and in proceeding to decide the application for recognition of a

split made by the 37 MLAs which included the original 13

MLAs already subject matter of the disqualification petition

before him.
40. Aggrieved by the decision of the Full Bench of the High

Court to remit the matter to the Speaker, the set of 37 MLAs

filed various appeals before this Court. There was also an

appeal before this Court by the original writ petitioner wherein

it was contended that instead of remanding the matter, the

High Court, on the basis of pleadings and material, ought to

have allowed the writ petition and disqualified the original 13

MLAs. This is how the matter reached this Court.
41. Before this Court, it was sought to be urged on behalf of

the 37 MLAs who claimed to have split from the BSP that the
31
two learned Judges who had set aside the decision of the

Speaker had exceeded their jurisdiction. A reliance was sought

to be placed on the judgment of this Court in the case of
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra) in support of the said argument.

Justice P.K. Balasubramanyan, speaking for the Constitution

Bench, however, observed thus:
“40. Coming to the case on hand, it is clear that
     the Speaker, in the original order, left the question
     of disqualification undecided. Thereby he has
     failed to exercise the jurisdiction conferred on him
     by para 6 of the Tenth Schedule. Such a failure to
     exercise jurisdiction cannot be held to be covered
     by the shield of para 6 of the Schedule. He has also
     proceeded to accept the case of a split based
     merely on a claim in that behalf. He has entered
     no finding whether a split in the original political
     party was prima facie proved or not. This action of
     his, is apparently based on his understanding of
     the ratio of the decision in
Ravi S. Naik
case [1994
     Supp (2) SCC 641 : (1994) 1 SCR 754] . He has
     misunderstood the ratio therein.
Now that we have
     approved the reasoning and the approach in
Jagjit
     Singh
case [(2006) 11 SCC 1 : (2006) 13 Scale 335]
     and the ratio therein is clear, it has to be held that
     the Speaker has committed an error that goes to
     the root of the matter or an error that is so
     fundamental, that even under a limited judicial
     review the order of the Speaker has to be interfered
     with. We have, therefore, no hesitation in agreeing
     with the majority of the High Court in quashing the
     decisions of the Speaker.”
42. It can thus be seen that the Constitution Bench came to

the conclusion that since the Speaker in the original order had
32
left the question of disqualification undecided, he had failed to

exercise the jurisdiction conferred on him by Paragraph 6 of

the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution. This Court held that

such a failure to exercise jurisdiction could not be held to be

covered by the shield of Paragraph 6 of the Tenth Schedule to

the Constitution. This Court also came to a finding that the

Speaker had committed an error that goes to the root of the

matter or an error that was so fundamental that it would

enable this Court to interfere with the order of the Speaker

even under a limited judicial review.
43. After observing the aforesaid, this Court itself, in the

peculiar facts and circumstance, proceeded to decide the

question of disqualification. This Court took note of the fact

that the term of the Assembly was coming to an end and an

expeditious decision by the Court was warranted for protection

of the constitutional scheme and constitutional values. This

Court found that the very fact that the original 13 MLAs gave

a letter to the Hon’ble Governor requesting him to call upon

the Leader of Opposition to form the Government was

sufficient enough to incur a disqualification under Paragraph

2(1)(a)   of   the   Tenth   Schedule   to   the   Constitution.
33
This Court therefore took an unprecedented step of holding

those 13 MLAs as disqualified.
44. The last of the Constitution Bench judgments which is

required to be considered for the present purpose is that of
Subhash Desai
(supra).
45.
Insofar as the said case is concerned, the Constitution

Bench firstly held that the finding of another Constitution

Bench in the case of Nabam Rebia and Bamang Felix v.

Deputy Speaker, Arunachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly

and Others, to the effect that a notice for the removal of a

Speaker restricts him from adjudicating disqualification

proceedings under the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution,

was in conflict with another Constitution Bench judgment in

the case of
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra) and therefore referred the

same to a larger Bench of seven Judges.
46. Thereafter, it can be seen that one of the issues framed

by this Court in the reference order leading to the Constitution

Bench judgment in the said case of
Subhash Desai
(supra)

was as under:
34
“32. …… The following questions were framed for
     consideration:
…….
32.2. (b) Whether a petition under
Article 226
or
Article 32
lies, inviting a decision on a
     disqualification petition by the High Courts or the
     Supreme Court, as the case may be;”
47. The petitioners therein had urged before this Court that

this Court itself should decide the disqualification petitions at

the first instance. While considering the argument in that

regard, the Constitution Bench observed thus:
“76.
In
Kihoto                      Hollohan [Kihoto
     Hollohan v. Zachillhu
, 1992 Supp (2) SCC 651] ,
     this Court held that the Speaker is a Tribunal for
     the purposes of the Tenth Schedule. Therefore, the
     exercise of power under the Tenth Schedule is
     subject to the jurisdiction of courts under
Articles
     136
, 226
and
227
of the Constitution. This Court
     further observed that the finality clause contained
     in Para 6(2) did not completely exclude the
     jurisdiction of courts. However, it was held that
     such a clause limits the scope of judicial review
     because the Constitution intended the Speaker or
     the Chairman to be “the repository of adjudicatory
     powers” under the Tenth Schedule. This Court
     held that judicial review is not available at a stage
     prior to the decision of the Speaker or Chairman,
     save in certain exceptional circumstances detailed
in that case
.
Thus, Kihoto Hollohan [Kihoto
     Hollohan v. Zachillhu
, 1992 Supp (2) SCC 651]
     makes it evident that the exclusive power to decide
     the question of disqualification under the Tenth
     Schedule vests with the Speaker or Chairman of
     the House.
……………
35
80. This Court should normally refrain from
deciding disqualification petitions at the first
instance, having due regard to constitutional
intendment. The question of disqualification
ought to be adjudicated by the constitutional
authority concerned, namely, the Speaker of
the Legislative Assembly, by following the
procedure prescribed. Disqualification of a
person for being a Member of the House has
drastic    consequences     for   the    Member
concerned and by extension, for the citizens of
that constituency. Therefore, any question of
disqualification ought to be decided by
following the procedure established by law.
In
Kshetrimayum     Biren   Singh [Kshetrimayum
Biren Singh v. Speaker, Manipur Legislative
Assembly
, (2022) 2 SCC 759] , a three-Judge
Bench of this Court set aside the order of the
Speaker disqualifying MLAs under Para 2(1)(a) for
not granting an opportunity to them to lead
evidence and present their case. The Speaker was
directed to decide the disqualification petitions
afresh by complying with the principles of natural
justice. Even in cases where the Speaker
decides disqualification petitions without
following the procedure established by law, this
Court normally remands the disqualification
petitions to the Speaker. Therefore, absent
exceptional circumstances, the Speaker is the
appropriate authority to adjudicate petitions
for disqualification under the Tenth Schedule.
…………………
82. In a parliamentary democracy, the Speaker is
an officer of the Assembly. The Speaker performs
the function of presiding over the proceedings of
the House and representing the House for all
intents and purposes.
In
Kihoto Hollohan [Kihoto
Hollohan v. Zachillhu
, 1992 Supp (2) SCC 651] , it
was contended that the Speaker does not
represent an independent adjudicatory machinery
since they are elected by the majority of the
36
Assembly. Rejecting the argument, this Court
emphasised that the office of the Speaker is held
in high respect in parliamentary tradition. The
Court held that the Speaker embodies propriety
and impartiality and that it was therefore
inappropriate to express distrust in the office of the
Speaker : (SCC p. 714, para 118)
     “118. It would, indeed, be unfair to the
     high traditions of that great office to say
     that the investiture in it of this
     jurisdiction would be vitiated for
     violation of a basic feature of
     democracy. It is inappropriate to express
     distrust in the high office of the Speaker,
     merely because some of the Speakers
     are alleged, or even found, to have
     discharged their functions not in keeping
     with the great traditions of that high
     office. The robes of the Speaker do
     change and elevate the man inside.”
                                (emphasis supplied)
……………….
84. A similar submission was made before this
Court in
Keisham Meghachandra Singh v. Manipur
Legislative Assembly [Keisham Meghachandra
Singh
v. Manipur Legislative Assembly, (2021) 16
SCC 503 : 2020 SCC OnLine SC 55] , wherein it
was submitted that this Court should issue a writ
of quo warranto against the appointment of an
MLA as a minister when disqualification petitions
are pending. Rejecting the submission, this Court
held as under : (SCC pp. 513 & 527, paras 10 &
33)
     “10. Shri Kapil Sibal, learned Senior
     Advocate appearing on behalf of the
     Appellant, in the Civil Appeal arising
     out of SLP (C) No. 18659 of 2017, has
     argued that the Speaker in the present
     case has deliberately refused to decide
     the disqualification petitions before
37
him. … In these circumstances, he has
exhorted us to issue a writ of quo
warranto against Respondent 3 stating
that he has usurped a constitutional
office, and to declare that he cannot do
so. …
                   ***
33. It is not possible to accede to Shri
Sibal's submission that this Court issue
a writ of quo warranto quashing the
appointment of Respondent 3 as a
minister of a cabinet led by a BJP
Government. Mrs Madhavi Divan is
right in stating that a disqualification
under the Tenth Schedule from being
an MLA and consequently minister
must first be decided by the exclusive
authority in this behalf, namely, the
Speaker of the Manipur Legislative
Assembly. It is also not possible to
accede to the argument of Shri Sibal
that the disqualification petition be
decided by this Court in these appeals
given the inaction of the Speaker. It
cannot be said that the facts in the
present case are similar to the facts
in
Rajendra     Singh    Rana [Rajendra
Singh Rana v. Swami Prasad Maurya
,
(2007) 4 SCC 270] .
In the present case,
the life of the Legislative Assembly
comes to an end only in March 2022
unlike         in
Rajendra          Singh
Rana [Rajendra Singh Rana v. Swami
Prasad Maurya
, (2007) 4 SCC 270]
where, but for this Court deciding the
disqualification petition in effect, no
relief could have been given to the
petitioner
in that case
as the life of the
Legislative Assembly was about to come
to an end. The only relief that can be
given in these appeals is that the
38
Speaker of the Manipur Legislative
     Assembly be directed to decide the
     disqualification petitions pending before
     him within a period of four weeks from
     the date on which this judgment is
     intimated to him. In case no decision is
     forthcoming even after a period of four
     weeks, it will be open to any party to the
     proceedings to apply to this Court for
     further directions/reliefs in the matter.”
85. The incumbent Speaker of the Maharashtra
Legislative Assembly has been duly elected by the
MLAs in terms of the procedure laid down under
the Maharashtra Assembly Rules, 1960. The
petitioners have referred to the decision of the
Speaker to cancel the recognition of Mr Sunil
Prabhu as the Chief Whip of the Shiv Sena on 3-7-
2022 to argue that the Speaker is biased and
impartial. The decision of the Speaker to cancel the
recognition of Mr Prabhu has also been challenged
in the instant proceedings. Even if this Court sets
aside the decision of the Speaker cancelling the
recognition of Mr Prabhu on merits, it would not
be a sufficient reason for this Court to decide the
disqualification petitions. We are also unable to
accept the alternative submission of the
petitioners to direct the Deputy Speaker to
adjudicate the question of disqualification for the
simple reason that the Maharashtra Legislative
Assembly has duly elected the Speaker, who has
been entrusted with the authority to decide
disqualification petitions under the Constitution.
The Deputy Speaker can perform the duties of the
Speaker only when the office of the Speaker is
vacant. [
Article 180
of the Constitution.] As
observed          in
Kihoto        Hollohan [Kihoto
Hollohan v. Zachillhu
, 1992
Supp (2) SCC 651]
and Shrimanth       Balasaheb       Patil [Shrimanth
Balasaheb        Patil v. Karnataka        Legislative
Assembly
, (2020) 2 SCC 595] , the Speaker is
expected to act fairly, independently, and
impartially while adjudicating the disqualification
39
petitions under the Tenth Schedule. Ultimately,
     the decision of the Speaker on the question of
     disqualification is subject to judicial review.
     Therefore, this Court is of the opinion that the
     Speaker of the Maharashtra Legislative
     Assembly is the appropriate constitutional
     authority    to   decide    the    question   of
     disqualification under the Tenth Schedule.”
                                    [emphasis supplied]
48. Finally, in conclusion, this Court observed thus:
“213. In view of the discussion above, the following
     are our conclusions:
…………….
213.2. This Court cannot ordinarily adjudicate
     petitions for disqualification under the Tenth
     Schedule in the first instance. There are no
     extraordinary circumstances in the instant case
     that warrant the exercise of jurisdiction by this
     Court to adjudicate disqualification petitions. The
     Speaker must decide disqualification petitions
     within a reasonable period;
…………..”
49. It can thus be seen that even in the case of
Subhash

Desai
(supra), this Court reiterated the position that the

Speaker is a Tribunal for the purposes of the Tenth Schedule

to the Constitution and that the exercise of powers under the

Tenth Schedule to the Constitution was subject to the

jurisdiction of courts under
Articles 136
, 226
and
227
of the

Constitution. This Court reiterated that the finality clause
40
contained in Paragraph 6(2) of the Tenth Schedule to the

Constitution did not completely exclude the jurisdiction of

courts. This Court further reiterated that judicial review is not

available    at   a     stage     prior       to     the   decision     of   the

Speaker/Chairman,               save        in        certain       exceptional

circumstances. The Constitution Bench held that this Court

should      normally    refrain        from        deciding     disqualification

petitions    at   the   first    instance,          having    regard    to   the

constitutional intendment. It held that the question of

disqualification ought to be adjudicated by the constitutional

authority concerned i.e., the Speaker.
50. This Court also noticed that in the case of
Rajendra

Singh Rana
(supra), this Court decided to adjudicate the

disqualification petition since, the Speaker of the Legislative

Assembly had inter-alia failed to decide the same in a time-

bound manner and also took into consideration the necessity

of an expeditious decision.
51. Though        the    Constitution         Bench        also   noticed    the

judgment of three learned Judges in the case of
Keisham

Meghachandra Singh
(supra), it did not disapprove the view

taken in the said case and in subsequent paragraphs observed
41
that the Speaker should act fairly, independently, and

impartially while adjudicating the disqualification petitions

under the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution. This Court,

therefore, observed that the Speaker of the Maharashtra

Legislative Assembly was the appropriate constitutional

authority to decide the question of disqualification under the

Tenth Schedule to the Constitution which decision was

ultimately subject to judicial review.
52. Having considered the ratio of the Constitution Bench

judgments of this Court, we also find it appropriate to refer to

the judgment of the three learned Judges of this Court in the

case of
Keisham Meghachandra Singh
(supra).
53. In the said case, Respondent No.3, in one of the appeals,

contested as a candidate nominated and set up by the INC and

was duly elected as such. Immediately after declaration of the

results on 12th March 2017, said Respondent No. 3 along with

various BJP MLAs met the Hon’ble Governor of the State of

Manipur in order to stake a claim for forming a BJP-led

Government. On 15th March 2017, the Governor invited the

group led by the BJP to form the Government in the State.

Respondent No. 3, along with others, was sworn in as a
42
Minister in the BJP-led Government. As many as thirteen

applications for the disqualification of Respondent No.3 were

filed before the Speaker of the Manipur Legislative Assembly

between April and July 2017. Since no action was taken on

any of the said petitions by the Speaker, a writ petition came

to be filed in July 2017 before the High Court of Manipur at

Imphal seeking a direction to the Speaker to decide the

disqualification    petition   within   a    reasonable    time.

On 8th September 2017, the High Court observed that since

the issue as to whether a High Court can direct a Speaker to

decide a disqualification petition within a certain time-frame is

pending before a Bench of Five Judges of this Court, it was

unable to pass any order in the matter. Another writ petition

seeking disqualification of Respondent No. 3 met the same

fate. As a result, the writ petitioners preferred appeals by way

of special leave.
54. Since the facts in the present case are somewhat similar

to the facts in the case of
Keisham Meghachandra Singh
(supra), we find it appropriate to refer to the arguments

advanced on behalf of the appellants therein which are
43
recorded in paragraph 10 of
the said judgment
and which read

thus:
“10. Shri Kapil Sibal, learned Senior Advocate
        appearing on behalf of the appellant, in the civil
        appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 18659 of 2017,
        has argued that the Speaker in the present case
        has deliberately refused to decide the
        disqualification petitions before him. This is
        evident from the fact that no decision is
        forthcoming till date on petitions that were
        filed way back in April 2017. Further, it is clear
        that notice in the present disqualification
        petition was issued by the Speaker only on 12-
        9-2018, long after the petition had been filed,
        and as correctly stated by the High Court, it
        cannot be expected that the Speaker will decide
        these petitions at all till the life of the
        Assembly of 5 years expires. In these
        circumstances, he has exhorted us to issue a writ
        of quo warranto against Respondent 3 stating that
        he has usurped a constitutional office, and to
        declare that he cannot do so. For this purpose, he
        has cited several judgments of this Court. He has
        also argued that though it is correct to state that
        whether a writ petition can at all be filed against
        inaction by a Speaker is pending before a Bench of
        five Judges of this Court, yet, it is clear from a
        reading        of     para       110       of
Kihoto
        Hollohan v. Zachillhu [Kihoto
        Hollohan
v. Zachillhu, 1992 Supp (2) SCC 651] ,
        that all that was interdicted by that judgment was
        the grant of interlocutory stays which would
        prevent a Speaker from making a decision and not
        the other way around. For this purpose, he read to
        us Black's Law Dictionary on the meaning of a quia
        timet action, and argued that the judgment read as
        a whole would make it clear that if the
        constitutional objective of checking defections is to
        be achieved, judicial review in aid of such goal can
        obviously not be said to be interdicted.
He also
44
strongly relied upon the observations of this Court
     in
Rajendra     Singh    Rana v. Swami      Prasad
     Maurya [Rajendra Singh Rana
v. Swami Prasad
     Maurya, (2007) 4 SCC 270] and exhorted us to
     uphold the reasoning contained in the impugned
     judgment [Mohd. Fajur Rahim v. Speaker, Manipur
     Legislative Assembly, 2019 SCC OnLine Mani 127]
     and then issue a writ of quo warranto against
     Respondent 3.”
55. It will also be relevant to refer to paragraph 12 of the said

judgment which sets out the Reference Order made in the case

of
S.A. Sampath Kumar
(supra) referring the issue to a larger

Bench:
“12. Having heard the learned counsel for both the
     parties, it is important to first set out the reference
     order of this Court dated 8-11-2016 in
S.A.
     Sampath Kumar v. Kale Yadaiah [S.A. Sampath
     Kumar
v. Kale Yadaiah, (2021) 16 SCC 528] .
A
     Division Bench of this Court after referring
     to
Speaker, Haryana Vidhan Sabha v. Kuldeep
     Bishnoi [Speaker
,
Haryana            Vidhan
     Sabha v. Kuldeep Bishnoi
, (
2015) 12 SCC 381] ,
     and Speaker, Orissa Legislative Assembly v. Utkal
     Keshari      Parida [Speaker
,
Orissa Legislative
     Assembly v. Utkal Keshari Parida
, (2013) 11 SCC
     794] , then held : (
S.A. Sampath Kumar
case [S.A.
     Sampath Kumar v. Kale Yadaiah, (2021) 16 SCC
     528] , SCC p. 532, paras 3-4)
           “3. We have considered the aforesaid
           submissions of both the learned
           Attorney General and the learned
           counsel appearing on behalf of the
           petitioner. We feel that a substantial
           question as to the interpretation of the
           Constitution arises on the facts of the
           present case.
It is true that this Court
45
in
Kihoto      Hollohan
case [
Kihoto
Hollohan v. Zachillhu
, 1992 Supp (2)
SCC 651] laid down that a quia
timet action would not be permissible
and Shri Jayant Bhushan, learned
Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of
some of the respondents has pointed
out to us that in P. Ramanatha
Aiyar's Advanced Law Lexicon a quia
timet action is the right to be protected
against anticipated future injury that
cannot be prevented by the present
action.
Nevertheless, we are of the view
that it needs to be authoritatively
decided by a Bench of five learned
Judges of this Court, as to whether the
High Court, exercising power under
Article 226
of the Constitution, can
direct a Speaker of a Legislative
Assembly (acting in quasi judicial
capacity under the Tenth Schedule) to
decide a disqualification petition within
a certain time, and whether such a
direction would not fall foul of the quia
timet action doctrine mentioned in para
110 of
Kihoto Hollohan
case [
Kihoto
Hollohan v. Zachillhu
, 1992 Supp (2)
SCC 651] .
We cannot be mindful of the
fact that just as a decision of a Speaker
can be corrected by judicial review by
the High Court exercising jurisdiction
under
Article 226
, so prima facie should
indecision by a Speaker be correctable
by judicial review so as not to frustrate
the laudable object and purpose of the
Tenth Schedule, which has been
referred to in both the majority and
minority judgments in
Kihoto Hollohan
case [
Kihoto Hollohan v. Zachillhu
, 1992
Supp (2) SCC 651] .
4. The facts of the present case
demonstrate  that  disqualification
46
petitions had been referred to the
           Hon'ble Speaker of the Telangana State
           Legislative Assembly on 23-8-2014, and
           despite the hopes and aspirations
           expressed by the impugned judgment
           [
Errabelli    Dayakar    Rao v. Talasani
           Srinivas Yadav
, 2015 SCC OnLine Hyd
           418] , the Speaker has chosen not to
           render any decision on the said
           petitions till date. We, therefore, place
           the papers before the Hon'ble Chief
           Justice of India to constitute an
           appropriate Bench to decide this
           question as early as possible.””
56. It will also be relevant to refer to paragraph 13 of
the said

judgment
, which reads thus:
“13. We would have acceded to Mrs Madhavi
     Divan's plea that in view [S.A. Sampath
     Kumar v. Kale Yadaiah, (2021) 16 SCC 528] of this
     order of a Division Bench of this Court, the hearing
     of this case ought to be deferred until the
     pronouncement by a five-Judge Bench of this
     Court on the issues raised in the present petition.
However, we find that this very issue was
     addressed by a five-Judge Bench judgment
     in
Rajendra      Singh    Rana [Rajendra       Singh
     Rana v. Swami Prasad Maurya
, (2007) 4 SCC 270]
     and has already been answered.
Unfortunately,
     the decision contained in the aforesaid judgment
     was not brought to the notice of the Division Bench
     which referred [S.A. Sampath Kumar v. Kale
     Yadaiah, (2021) 16 SCC 528] the matter to five
     Hon'ble Judges of this Court, though
Rajendra
     Singh Rana [Rajendra Singh Rana v. Swami
     Prasad Maurya
, (2007) 4 SCC 270] was sought to
     be distinguished in
Kuldeep Bishnoi [Speaker,
     Haryana Vidhan Sabha v. Kuldeep Bishnoi
, (2015)
47
12 SCC 381] , which was brought to the notice of
     the Division Bench of this Court.”
57. It is pertinent to note that R.F. Nariman, J. who had

authored        the   judgment      in    the   case     of
Keisham

Meghachandra Singh
(supra) was also a Member of the

Bench which passed the Reference Order in the case of
S.A. Sampath Kumar
(supra).
A perusal of paragraph 13 of

the judgment in the case of
Keisham Meghachandra Singh
(supra) would clearly reveal that the judgment in the case of
Rajendra Singh Rana
(supra) was not brought to the notice

of the Bench that made the Reference Order.
58. This Court, in the said case, thereafter, extensively

referred to the Constitution Bench judgment in the cases of
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra) and
Rajendra Singh Rana
(supra),

which      we     have    already        referred   to    hereinabove.

This Court, thereafter, observed thus:
“25.
Indeed, the same result would ensue on a
     proper     reading     of
Kihoto    Hollohan [Kihoto
     Hollohan v. Zachillhu
, 1992 Supp (2) SCC 651] .
     Paras 110 and 111 of
the said judgment
when read
     together would make it clear that what the finality
     clause in Para 6 of the Tenth Schedule protects is
     the exclusive jurisdiction that vests in the Speaker
     to decide disqualification petitions so that nothing
     should come in the way of deciding such petitions.
     The exception that is made is also of importance in
48
that interlocutory interference with decisions of
the Speaker can only be qua interlocutory
disqualifications or suspensions, which may have
grave, immediate, and irreversible repercussions.
Indeed, the Court made it clear that judicial review
is not available at a stage prior to the making of a
decision by the Speaker either by a way of quia
timet action or by other interlocutory orders.
26. A quia timet action has been           described
in Black's Law Dictionary as follows:
“Quia Timet.— Because he fears or
     apprehends. In equity practice, the
     technical name of a bill filed by a party
     who seeks the aid of a court of equity,
     because he fears some future probable
     injury to his rights or interests, and
     relief granted must depend on
     circumstances.”
27. The leading judgment referred to insofar
as quia timet actions are concerned is the
judgment in Fletcher v. Bealey [Fletcher v. Bealey,
(1884) LR 28 Ch D 688 : 54 LJ Ch 424 : 52 LT 541]
. In this case, a quia timet action was asked for to
interdict the tort of nuisance in order to prevent
noxious liquid from flowing into a river. Pearson,
J. after referring to earlier judgments on quia
timet action then held : (Ch D p. 698)
     “ … I do not think, therefore, that I shall
     be very far wrong if I lay it down that
     there are at least two necessary
     ingredients for a quia timet action.
There must, if no actual damage is
     proved, be proof of imminent danger,
     and there must also be proof that the
     apprehended damage will, if it comes,
     be very substantial. I should almost say
     it must be proved that it will be
     irreparable, because, if the danger is not
     proved to be so imminent that no one
     can doubt that, if the remedy is delayed,
49
the damage will be suffered, I think it
     must be shown that, if the damage does
     occur at any time, it will come in such a
     way and under such circumstances that
     it will be impossible for the plaintiff to
     protect himself against it if relief is
     denied to him in a quia timet action.”
28. This statement of the law has subsequently
been followed by recent English decisions reported
as London     Borough    of   Islington v. Margaret
Elliott [London Borough of Islington v. Margaret
Elliott, 16 2012 EWCA Civ 56] (see para 30)
and Vastint Leeds BV v. Persons unknown [Vastint
Leeds BV v. Persons unknown, (2019) 4 WLR 2 :
2018 EWHC 2456 (Ch)] in which a quia
timet injunction was described in the following
terms : (Vastint Leeds BV case [Vastint Leeds
BV v. Persons unknown, (2019) 4 WLR 2 : 2018
EWHC 2456 (Ch)] , WLR para 26)
     “26.      Gee       describes     a quia
     timet injunction in the following terms
     [Gee, Commercial Injunctions, 6th Edn.
     (2016) at [2-035]]:
‘A quia timet (since he fears) injunction
     is an injunction granted where no
     actionable wrong has been committed,
     to prevent the occurrence of an
     actionable wrong, or to prevent
     repetition of an actionable wrong.’ ”
The decision in Fletcher [Fletcher v. Bealey, (1884)
LR 28 Ch D 688 : 54 LJ Ch 424 : 52 LT 541] was
referred to in approval in para 30 of the aforesaid
judgment.
29. The decision in Fletcher [Fletcher v. Bealey,
(1884) LR 28 Ch D 688 : 54 LJ Ch 424 : 52 LT 541]
was also referred to by this Court in
Kuldip
Singh v. Subhash      Chander        Jain [Kuldip
Singh
v. Subhash Chander Jain, (2000) 4 SCC 50]
as   follows  :   (
Kuldip   Singh
case [
Kuldip
50
Singh v. Subhash Chander Jain
, (2000) 4 SCC 50]
, SCC p. 55, para 6)
     “6. A quia timet action is a bill in equity.
It is an action preventive in nature and
     a specie of precautionary justice
     intended to prevent apprehended wrong
     or anticipated mischief and not to undo
     a wrong or mischief when it has already
     been done. In such an action the court,
     if    convinced,   may      interfere    by
     appointment of receiver or by directing
     security to be furnished or by issuing an
     injunction or any other remedial
     process.
In Fletcher v. Bealey [Fletcher v. Bealey
     , (1884) LR 28 Ch D 688 : 54 LJ Ch 424
     : 52 LT 541] , Pearson, J. explained the
     law as to actions quia timet as follows :
(Ch D p. 698)
     ‘ … there are at least two necessary
     ingredients for a quia timet action.
     There must, if no actual damage is
     proved, be proof of imminent danger,
     and there must also be proof that the
     apprehended damage will, if it comes,
     be very substantial. I should almost say
     it must be proved that it will be
     irreparable, because, if the danger is not
     proved to be so imminent that no one
     can doubt that, if the remedy is delayed
     the damage will be suffered, I think it
     must be shown that, if the damage does
     occur at any time, it will come in such a
     way and under such circumstances that
     it will be impossible for the plaintiff to
     protect himself against it if relief is
     denied to him in a quia timet action.’ ”
30. A reading of the aforesaid decisions, therefore,
shows that what was meant to be outside the pale
of judicial review in para 110 of
Kihoto
Hollohan [Kihoto Hollohan v. Zachillhu
, 1992 Supp
51
(2) SCC 651] are quia timet actions in the sense of
injunctions to prevent the Speaker from making a
decision on the ground of imminent apprehended
danger which will be irreparable in the sense that
if the Speaker proceeds to decide that the person
be disqualified, he would incur the penalty of
forfeiting his membership of the House for a long
period.
Paras      110    and     111    of Kihoto
Hollohan [Kihoto Hollohan v. Zachillhu
, 1992
Supp (2) SCC 651] do not, therefore, in any
manner, interdict judicial review in aid of the
Speaker arriving at a prompt decision as to
disqualification under the provisions of the
Tenth Schedule. Indeed, the Speaker, in acting
as a tribunal under the Tenth Schedule is bound
to decide disqualification petitions within a
reasonable period.
What is reasonable will
depend on the facts of each case, but absent
exceptional circumstances for which there is
good reason, a period of three months from the
date on which the petition is filed is the outer
limit within which disqualification petitions
filed before the Speaker must be decided if the
constitutional    objective     of   disqualifying
persons who have infracted the Tenth Schedule
is to be adhered to. This period has been fixed
keeping in mind the fact that ordinarily the life
of the Lok Sabha and the Legislative Assembly
of the States is 5 years and the fact that
persons       who     have      incurred      such
disqualification do not deserve to be MPs/MLAs
even for a single day, as found in
Rajendra
Singh Rana [Rajendra Singh Rana v. Swami
Prasad Maurya
, (2007) 4 SCC 270] , if they
have infracted the provisions of the Tenth
Schedule.”
                              [emphasis supplied]
52
59. Thereafter, in paragraph 33 in the case of
Keisham

Meghachandra Singh
(supra), this Court considered and

rejected the contention of the appellants therein for deciding

the disqualification petition itself and observed that the facts

in the said case are not similar to the facts in the case of
Rajendra Singh Rana
(supra). This Court also observed that

the life of the Legislative Assembly in the said case would come

to an end only in March 2022. It, therefore, granted relief to

the extent of directing the Speaker of the Manipur Legislative

Assembly to decide the disqualification petitions pending

before him within a period of four weeks from the date on

which that judgment was intimated to him. It also reserved a

remedy to the parties to approach the Court in the event the

decision was not taken within a period of four weeks.
60. Having considered the position of law as has been
laid

down by
this Court in various judgments, we will now consider

the issue that falls for consideration before us.
61. Noticing the evil of political defections, the Parliament

had found it appropriate to amend the Constitution by the
Constitution (Fifty-Second Amendment) Act, 1985
so as to

provide for the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution of India.
53
The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Constitution

(Fifty-Second Amendment) Bill, 1984 reads thus:
“Statement of Objects and Reasons
     The evil of political defections has been a matter of
     national concern. If it is not combated, it is likely
     to undermine the very foundations of our
     democracy and the principles which sustain it.
     With this object, an assurance was given in the
     Address by the President to Parliament that the
     Government intended to introduce in the current
     session of Parliament an anti-defection Bill. This
     Bill is meant for outlawing defection and fulfilling
     the above assurance.”
62. By the said amendment, certain changes were made to
Articles 101
, 102
, 190
and
191.
Most importantly, the Tenth

Schedule which provided for disqualification on the ground of

defection, came to be added by the said Amendment Act.
63. It will be relevant to note that, when the Bill came up for

discussion before both the Houses of Parliament, the question

as to “whether the adjudication of disqualification petitions

should be left to the discretion of the Speaker/Chairman or to

some other authority” was also extensively debated.
64. It will be relevant to refer to the speech of Shri A.K. Sen,

the then Law Minister, delivered on 30th January 1985 before

the Lok Sabha, which reads thus:
54
“Shri A.K. Sen - …… Once it goes outside the
     control of the House, it will take years and years
     for the court to come to a decision, because there
     will be appeals and further appeals and the matter
     will be forgotten, like the Anti-Defection Bills of the
     past. Therefore, if we mean business, we must give
     authority to decide this serious matter to the
     Speaker or the chairman of the House concerned,
     who has been elected by the majority vote of the
     Hose concerned. With these words, I recommend
     to the House the unanimous acceptance of this
     Bill.”
65. It can thus be seen that the reason for entrusting this

important task to the Speaker/Chairman was that, once such

a disqualification petition goes outside the control of the

House, it might take years and years for the courts to come to

a decision due to appeals and further appeals ultimately

leading to the matter being forgotten.
66. It will be relevant to refer to the speech of the then

Member of Parliament Shri Rajesh Pilot, made during the same

Lok Sabha debate, which reads thus:
“Shri Rajesh Pilot - …….. I would also like to
     make a submission that when we go through this
     legislation and analyse it, there is a lurking fear
     that the Speaker may have been given
     authoritarian powers. The Speaker or the
     Chairman is elected through due process and he
     belongs to a party. He is elected on the ticket of a
     particular party and when he seeks re-election, he
     has to look to that party again. A legislation should
     be brought in the Parliament that in future nobody
     would contest against the Speaker and once his
55
non-political character has been recognized, he
     will have to sever all connections with his political
     party so that nobody may contest election against
     him. Then he will contest election as an
     independent candidate and return as an
     independent candidate to this House. Otherwise, if
     such privileges are not given to the Speaker and he
     is under pressure from the ruling party, it is feared
     that the rights of the Opposition may be adversely
     affected.”
67. The then learned Member of Parliament expressed his

fear that the Speaker may have been given authoritarian

powers. He expressed that the Speaker/Chairman belongs to

a particular party and is elected through due process. He also

expressed his fear that, such a Speaker/Chairman has to be

supported by that particular party when he seeks re-election.

He, therefore, suggested enacting a legislation providing for re-

election   of   the     Speaker/Chairman     without     contest.

He    expressed       that   it    was   necessary     that   the

Speaker/Chairman severs all connections with his political

party so that nobody would contest elections against him and

that he contests the election as an independent candidate and

return as an independent candidate to the House. The learned

Member of Parliament expressed that if such privileges were

not given to the Speaker and if he was under pressure from
56
the ruling party, the rights of the members of the Opposition

may be adversely affected.
68. It will also be relevant to refer to the speech made by one

of the Members Shri Priya Ranjan Das Munshi, wherein he

expressed his apprehension that the petition before the

Speaker could face undue delay, which reads thus:
“Shri Priya Ranjan Das Munshi : ……Now, in
     regard to a dispute regarding a member, the
     matter will be referred to the Presiding Officer, but
     no time limit has been fixed. I would request in the
     next session the time limit should be fixed within
     which the Speaker has to announce his decision.
     If he keeps it pending for three to four months, it
     should not be allowed.”
69. The learned Member had expressed that no time limit had

been fixed for the Presiding Officer to decide the issue. He

suggested that a time-limit should be fixed, within which the

Speaker must announce his decision. He also expressed that

the Speaker/Chairman should not be allowed to keep the

matter pending for three to four months.
70. It will be relevant to refer to another extract from the

speeches of Shri A.K. Sen, the then Law Minister delivered

during the same debate, which reads thus:
57
“Shri A.K. Sen : …..The other questions are about
     the Speaker’s authority. It was our clear intention
     from the very beginning that we are not going to
     allow this matter to be dilly-dallied and tossed
     about in the courts of law or in the Election
     Commission’s office. I had myself appeared in the
     Courts along with late Kanhaiya Lal Mishra Ji for
     winning our symbol. Babuji is there. He was the
     President of our party then. We used to go very
     regularly and Shri Siddhartha Shankar Ray was
     assisting me at that time. But the time we won
     back our symbol, it became worthless, because we
     had already won the election not on a pair of
     bullocks, but on a cow and a calf. Therefore, that
     type of delay should not be tolerated any more. We
     want a quick decision. If this Bill is to be effective,
     and if defection is to be outlawed effectively, then
     we must choose a forum which will decide the
     matter fearlessly and expeditiously. This is the
     only forum that is possible. With these words I
     commend the Motion for consideration.”
71. It can therefore be seen that the only purpose of

entrusting the work of adjudicating the disqualification

petitions to the Speaker/Chairman was to avoid dilly-dallying

in the courts of law or the Election Commission’s office.

The then Law Minister, who was himself an eminent lawyer,

referred to a matter in which he had appeared before the courts

seeking restoration of his party’s rights to use a party symbol.

However, by the time his party’s right was restored by the

courts, his party had already won the election on another

symbol. The then Law Minister expressed that such a type of
58
delay should not be tolerated and that they wanted a quick

decision.
72. It can also be seen that the Parliament decided to entrust

the important question of adjudication of disqualification

petitions, on account of defection, to the Speaker/Chairman

expecting him to decide them fearlessly and expeditiously.

As can be seen from the speeches of the then Law Minister and

other Members, Parliament was conscious of the potential long

delays that could arise if the petitions were left to be decided

through court proceedings. To avoid such potential delays,

that would defeat the purpose of the Tenth Schedule, the

Parliament therefore intended to have a forum which

facilitated   the   quick   disposal   of   the   disqualification

proceedings.
73. With the experience of over 30 years of working of the

Tenth Schedule to the Constitution, the question that we will

have to ask ourselves is as to whether the trust which the

Parliament entrusted in the high office of the Speaker or the

Chairman of avoiding delays in deciding the issue with regard

to disqualification has been adhered to by the incumbents in

the high office of Speaker and the Chairman or not?
59
74. We need not answer this question, since the facts of the

various cases we have referred to hereinabove themselves

provide the answer.
75. Now, let us consider the submissions made on behalf of

the rival parties.
76. It has been argued on behalf of the respondents that in

view of the Reference made to a Bench of learned five Judges

in the case of
S.A. Sampath Kumar
(supra), the question as

to whether this Court can issue a direction to the Speaker to

decide the disqualification proceedings in a time-bound

manner should not be decided in the present proceedings. It

has also been argued on behalf of the respondents that this

Court cannot pass any order which would be in the nature of

Quia Timet action.
77. No doubt that the Bench of learned two-Judges of this

Court in the case of
S.A. Sampath Kumar
(supra) has referred

the question with regard to the issuance of directions to the

Speaker, to the Bench of learned five-Judges.
However, in a

subsequent case of
Keisham Meghachandra Singh
(supra),

a Bench of learned three-Judges of this Court found that when

the Reference Order came to be passed in the case of
S.A.
60
Sampath Kumar
(supra), the judgment of the Constitution

Bench of this Court in the case of
Rajendra Singh Rana
(supra) was not brought to the notice of the Division Bench of

this Court.
It will also be relevant to note that R.F. Nariman,

J., who had authored the judgment in the case of
Keisham

Meghachandra Singh
(supra) was also a Member of the

Bench which passed the Reference Order in the case of
S.A.

Sampath Kumar
(supra).
78. Needless    to   state that in the case of
Keisham

Meghachandra Singh
(supra), this Court, after referring to

various earlier judgments of this Court, has directed the

Speaker of the Manipur Assembly to decide the disqualification

petitions within a period of three months from date of order.
79. In our considered view, the issue is no more res-integra.
80. The Constitution Bench in the case of
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra), while considering the challenge to the constitutional

validity of the Tenth Schedule, has held that the power of the

Speaker/Chairman to decide disqualification petitions under

Paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution is

pre-eminently of a judicial complexion. In the majority

judgment, M.N. Venkatachaliah, J. (as His Lordship then was)
61
held that the proceedings of disqualification were, in fact, not

before the House, but only before the Speaker as a specially

designated authority. The decision under Paragraph 6(1) of the

Tenth Schedule to the Constitution was not the decision of the

House, nor was it subject to the approval by the House. The

decision operated independently of the House. It was therefore

held that the decision of the Speaker/Chairman exercising

power under Paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth Schedule to the

Constitution does not enjoy immunity from judicial scrutiny

under
Articles 122
and
212
of the Constitution.
81. No doubt that the Constitution Bench in the case of
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra) observed that the scope of judicial

review under
Articles 136
, 226
and
227
of the Constitution in

respect of an order passed by the Speaker/Chairman under

Paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution

would be confined to jurisdictional errors only i.e., infirmities

based on violation of constitutional mandate, mala fides, non-

compliance with rules of natural justice and perversity.

This Court also observed that judicial review would not be

available at a stage prior to the making of a decision by the

Speaker/Chairman and a Quia Timet action would not be
62
permissible. Further, it was observed that an interference

would not be permissible at an interlocutory stage of the

proceedings. However, this Court made an exception in respect

of cases where disqualification or suspension was imposed

during   the   pendency   of    the   proceedings   and   such

disqualification or suspension was likely to have grave,

immediate and irreversible repercussions and consequences.

A heavy reliance is sought to be placed on the aforesaid

observations by the Respondents.
82. It can be seen from the judgment of the Constitution

Bench in the case of
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra) that what was

contemplated by not permitting a Quia Timet action was to

prevent the passing of an order which would have the effect of

protracting, interfering or delaying the proceedings pending

before the Speaker/Chairman. At that point of time, the

Constitution Bench was not expected to anticipate that, in the

future, situations may arise where the high constitutional

functionaries, like the Speaker/Chairman, would keep the

proceedings pending for years together and permit them to die

a natural death at the end of the tenure of the members facing
63
such disqualification proceedings. However, such situations

have subsequently come before this Court in various cases.
83. A glaring example was the case of
Rajendra Singh Rana
(supra) which came before the Constitution Bench of this

Court. We have already narrated the facts of the said case. In

the said case, though the proceedings of disqualification and

the split were pending since 4th September 2003 and 6th

September 2003 respectively, the Speaker chose not to decide

the disqualification petition relating to the original 13 MLAs

but decided the question of split under Paragraph 3 of the

Tenth Schedule to the Constitution. Meanwhile, the petition

regarding the disqualification of the original 13 MLAs was kept

pending. The pendency of the writ petition before the

Allahabad High Court was taken as one of the grounds by the

Speaker for not deciding the proceedings pending before him.

Subsequently, the matter was heard by a Full Bench of the

Allahabad High Court. In the Full Bench, the writ petition was

dismissed by the learned Chief Justice, while the other two

learned Judges of the Bench took a view that the Speaker was

in error in not deciding the petition seeking disqualification of

the original 13 MLAs first, and instead, directly deciding the
64
application for recognition of a split made by the 37 MLAs,

which included the original 13 MLAs. Finally, the matter

reached this Court. The Constitution Bench of this Court

ultimately held that the Speaker had committed an error that

goes to the root of the matter or an error that was so

fundamental, that even under a limited judicial review, the

order of the Speaker had to be interfered with.
84. This Court took into consideration the glaring facts in the

case. It found that the term of the Assembly was coming to an

end and an expeditious decision by the Court was warranted

for   the   protection   of   the    constitutional   scheme   and

constitutional values. This Court further found that the very

fact that the original 13 MLAs had given a letter to the Hon’ble

Governor requesting him to call upon the Leader of Opposition

to form the Government was a ground sufficient enough to

incur disqualification under Paragraph 2(1)(a) of the Tenth

Schedule to the Constitution. This Court therefore took an

unprecedented step of holding those 13 MLAs as disqualified.
85. The view taken by another Constitution Bench of this

Court in the case of
Subhash Desai
(supra) is consistent with

the decisions of the earlier Constitution Bench.
65
86. This Court, in the case of
Subhash Desai
(supra), held

that the Speaker of the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly was

the appropriate constitutional authority to decide the question

of   disqualification   under   the   Tenth   Schedule   to   the

Constitution.   It was held that there were no extraordinary

circumstances in the said case that warranted the exercise of

jurisdiction by this Court to adjudicate disqualification

petitions in the first instance. This Court therefore held that

the Speaker must decide disqualification petitions within a

reasonable period.
It is to be noted that though the

Constitution Bench in the case of
Subhash Desai
(supra) had

noticed the judgment of three learned Judges in the case of
Keisham Meghachandra Singh
(supra), it did not disapprove

the view taken in the said case. On the contrary, it observed

that the Speaker should act fairly, independently, and

impartially while adjudicating the disqualification petitions

under the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution.
87. We have also extensively referred to the judgment of

learned three Judges in the case of
Keisham Meghachandra

Singh
(supra).
This Court, after referring to the earlier

judgments, found that what was meant by passing an order in
66
Quia Timet action in the case of
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra) was

passing an order injuncting the Speaker from making a

decision in the disqualification petitions pending before him. It

held that it did not, in any manner, interdict judicial review in

aid of the Speaker arriving at a prompt decision as to

disqualification under the provisions of the Tenth Schedule to

the Constitution. It was observed that the Speaker, in acting

as a Tribunal was bound to decide the disqualification

petitions within a reasonable period.
88. In the present case, the Appellants in the lead matter

namely Padi Kaushik Reddy and Kuna Pandu Vivekanand filed

separate disqualification petitions before the Telangana State

Legislative Assembly on 18th March 2024, 2nd April 2024 and

8th April 2024.
89. Since the petitions for disqualification filed by the

Appellants/Petitioners were kept pending before the Speaker,

writ petitions were filed before the High Court.
90. The learned Single Judge, vide judgment and order dated

9th September 2024, had only asked the Speaker for fixing a

schedule of hearing (filing of pleadings, documents, personal

hearing etc.) within a period of four weeks. The learned Single
67
Judge further clarified that, if nothing was heard within four

weeks, then the matter would be reopened suo motu. Being

aggrieved by the order of the learned Single Judge, the

Secretary of the Telangana Legislative Assembly preferred

three separate appeals. Vide impugned judgment and final

order dated 22nd November 2024, however, the learned

Division Bench of the High Court reversed the order of the

learned Single Judge.
91. When the matter was firstly listed on 31st January 2025

before this Court, taking into consideration that the learned

Division   Bench   of   the   High   Court   had   directed   the

disqualification proceedings to be decided within a “reasonable

period”, we had asked Shri Rohatgi, learned Senior Counsel for

the Respondents to take instructions from the Speaker as to

within how much time would the disqualification proceedings

be decided by him. Thereafter, when the matter was listed on

10th February 2025, Shri Rohatgi submitted that he was not in

a position to make any statement in that regard. Thereafter,

upon the matter being mentioned on 20th February 2025, it

was directed to be kept for hearing on 4th March 2025. On the

said date, after we had heard Shri Sundaram and Shri Naidu,
68
learned Senior Counsel for the Appellants/Petitioners at some

length, a hyper technical objection was raised by Dr. Singhvi

and Shri Rohatgi, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

Respondents that no “formal notice” was issued in these

matters and therefore the respondents could not file any reply.

Though we found the objection to be totally hyper technical, in

order to avoid any complications at a subsequent point of time,

where a ground could be raised by the respondents claiming

that the petitions were decided without following the principles

of natural justice, we issued a formal notice to the respondents

returnable on 25th March 2025. It is to be noted that the

Speaker had issued notices to the MLAs pertaining to the lead

matter only on 16th January 2025 i.e., on the next day after

the lead matter was filed before this Court on 15th January

2025. Similarly, notices were issued to the remaining MLAs

pertaining to the connected writ petition on 4th February 2025

i.e., on the next day after the connected matters were heard for

the first time by this Court on 3rd February 2025.
92. It could thus be seen that the Speaker did not even find

it necessary to issue notices in the petitions filed by the present

petitioners for a period of more than seven months and only
69
after the proceedings were filed before this Court, did the

Speaker find it necessary to issue notice.
93. The question, therefore, that we ask ourselves is as to

whether the Speaker has acted in an expeditious manner,

when expedition was one of the main reasons, why the

Parliament had entrusted the important task of adjudicating

disqualification   petitions   to   the      Speaker/Chairman.

Non-issuance of any notice for a period of more than seven

months and issuing notice only after either the proceedings

were filed before this Court, or after this Court had heard the

matter for the first time cannot by any stretch be envisaged as

acting in an expeditious manner.
94. Though, we do not possess any advisory jurisdiction, it is

for the Parliament to consider whether the mechanism of

entrusting the Speaker/Chairman the important task of

deciding the issue of disqualification on the ground of

defection, is serving the purpose of effectively combating

political defections or not? If the very foundation of our

democracy and the principles that sustain it are to be

safeguarded, it will have to be examined whether the present

mechanism is sufficient or not. However, at the cost of
70
repetition, we observe that it is for the Parliament to take a call

on that.
95. In light of the facts of the present case, however, a failure

to issue any direction to the Speaker, in our view, would

frustrate the very purpose for which the Tenth Schedule has

been brought in the Constitution. If we do not issue any

direction, it will amount to permitting the Speaker to repeat

the widely criticized situation of “operation successful, patient

died”.
96. In any event, we find that there was absolutely no

occasion for the learned Judges of the Division Bench of the

High Court to have interfered with the well-reasoned order of

the learned Single Judge, as learned Single Judge had only

asked the Speaker to fix a schedule of hearing (filing of

pleadings, documents, personal hearing etc.) within a period

of four weeks. The learned Single Judge had not even issued

any direction to decide the disqualification proceedings within

a time-bound period. We, therefore, find that the Division

Bench of the High Court has erred in interfering with the order

of the learned Single Judge of the High Court.
71
97. We further find that as a matter of fact, there was no

occasion for the Secretary, Telangana Legislative Assembly to

have challenged the order passed by the learned Single Judge

inasmuch as nothing adverse could be found in the said order.
98. Next, it was sought to be urged on behalf of the appellants

that taking into consideration the glaring facts in the present

case, we ourselves should decide the question with regard to

the disqualification as was done by the Constitution Bench of

this Court in the case of
Rajendra Singh Rana
(supra).
99.
In that respect, it is pertinent to note that all the

judgments of the Constitution Bench, right from
Kihoto

Hollohan
(supra) to
Subhash Desai
(supra), consistently hold

that the Speaker is the authority who should decide the issue

with   regard   to   disqualification   at   the   first   instance.

We are, therefore, not inclined to accede to the said request.

We, however, find it appropriate to direct the Speaker to decide

the petitions pending before it within a stipulated period.
100. We may clarify that we are inclined to do so in view of the

specific finding of the Constitution Bench of this Court in the

cases of
Kihoto Hollohan
(supra) and
Subhash Desai
(supra), that the Speaker, while acting as an adjudicating
72
authority in Paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth Schedule to the

Constitution, acts as a Tribunal amenable to the jurisdiction

of the High Court under
Articles 226
and
227
of the

Constitution and of this Court under
Article 136
of the

Constitution. While doing so, we are also reminded of the

finding of the Constitution Bench that the Speaker/Chairman,

while acting as an adjudicating authority under Paragraph 6

of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution does not enjoy the

constitutional immunity as available either under
Article 122
or 212 of the Constitution.
101. We     are   therefore   inclined   to   allow   the   present

appeals/petition.
102. In the result, we pass the following order:
(i)     The present appeals/petition are allowed;
(ii)    The impugned judgment and final order dated 22nd

          November 2024 passed by the Division Bench of the

          High Court is quashed and set aside;
(iii)   We direct the Speaker to conclude the disqualification

          proceedings pending against the 10 MLAs pertaining

          to the present appeals/petition as expeditiously as
73
possible and in any case, within a period of three

         months from the date of this judgment; and
(iv)   We further direct that the Speaker would not permit

         any of the MLAs who are sought to be disqualified to

         protract the proceedings. In the event, any of such

         MLAs    attempt     to        protract     the     proceedings,

         the Speaker would draw an adverse inference against

         such of the MLAs.
103. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
104. In the facts and circumstances, no order as to costs.
..............................CJI
                                                            (B.R. GAVAI)




                              .............................................J
                               (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)

NEW DELHI;
JULY 31, 2025.
74