[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Narayan Das vs State Of Chhattisgarh on 17 July, 2025
2025 INSC 872
                                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      EXTRAORDINARY CRIMINAL JURISDICTION

                              SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO.                     OF 2025
                                             [Diary No. 30825/2025]

        NARAYAN DAS                                                             Petitioner(s)

                                                        VERSUS

        STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                                                   Respondent(s)

                                                     O R D E R
1.     Delay condoned.
2.     The petitioner was put to trial in the Court of Special

                         Judge (NDPS Act), Surguja, Ambikapur, District-Surguja (C.G.)

                         in Special Criminal (NDPS) Case No.04/2019 for the offence

                         punishable   under
Section   21(c)
of   the    Narcotic    Drugs    and

                         Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (for short “the
NDPS Act
”).
3.     It is the case of the prosecution that on 20 th September,

                         2018, the Investigating Officer attached with the Ambikapur,

                         police station received information that two individuals namely

                         Ambika Vishwakarma and Narayan Das (petitioner herein) were

                         standing on the side of the main road of Parsa and were in

                         possession of psychotropic substance in a bag.
4.     A search was undertaken of the two individuals and the

                         same resulted in seizure of R.C. Kuff cough syrup in all 143
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHANDRESH
Date: 2025.07.18
vials each containing 100ml, Codectus cough Syrup 70 vials each
   17:35:13 IST
   Reason:
containing   100ml   and   Elderqurex   cough      syrup   23   vials   each
1
containing 100ml with labels containing a substance Codeine

Phosphate. In all 236 vials were recovered from the possession

of the petitioner herein along with the co-accused.
5.      At    the   end   of    the    trial   the    petitioner     herein    stood

convicted and was sentenced to undergo 12 years of rigorous

imprisonment with fine of Rs.1,00,000/-. The petitioner went in

appeal before the High Court. The High Court dismissed the

appeal. However, while dismissing the appeal, the High Court

reduced the sentence of 12 years as imposed by the trial court

to 10 years i.e. the minimum as provided under the
NDPS Act
.
6.      We heard Mr. Ashish Pandey, the learned counsel appearing

for the petitioner.
7.      This is a legal aid matter.
8.      Manifold contentions were raised by the learned counsel

to persuade us to take the view that the entire seizure was

vitiated as the same suffered from serious infirmities.
9.      There is no good reason for us to disturb the impugned

judgment of the High Court dismissing the appeal.                           However,

there    is    something       which   we   have     noticed   and   must     not   be

ignored. The High Court seems to be labouring under a serious

misconception of law so far as the interpretation of
Section

32-B
of the NDPS Act is concerned.
10.     The High Court from paragraph 25 onwards has observed

thus:-
2
“25. The last contention that has been raised on behalf of
the appellants is that without assigning any special
reason, the learned trial Court has awarded sentence for a
period of 12 years to the appellants, which is more than
the minimum sentence prescribed for offence under
Section
21(c)
of the NDPS Act.
26.
Section 32B
of the NDPS Act states about the facts to
   be taken into account for imposing higher than the
   minimum punishment, which reads as under:
“Where a minimum term of imprisonment or amount
      of fine is prescribed for any offence committed
      under this Act, the court may, in addition to
      such factors as it may deem fit, take into
      account the following factors for imposing a
      punishment higher than the minimum term of
      imprisonment or amount of fine, namely:--
(a) the use or threat of use of violence or arms
      by the offender;
(b) the fact that the offender holds a public
      office and that he has taken advantage of that
      office in committing the offence;
(c) the fact that the minors are affected by the
      offence or the minors are used for the commission
      of an offence;
(d) the fact that the offence is committed in an
      educational    institution   or   social   service
      facility or in the immediate vicinity of such
      institution or faculty or in other place to which
      school   children    and   students   resort   for
      educational, sports and social activities.;
(e) the fact that the offender belongs to
      organised international or any other criminal
      group which is involved in the commission of the
      offences; and
(f) the fact that the offender is involved in
      other illegal activities facilitated by
      commission of the offence.”
27. The Supreme Court in the matter of Rafiq Qureshi (supra)
has held that in a case where the court imposes a punishment
higher than minimum relying on an irrelevant factor and no
other facts as enumerated in
Sections 32B(a)
to (f) is
present, award of sentence higher than minimum can be
interfere with and observed in Para-23 & 24 as under:
“23. In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of
   the view that punishment awarded by the trial court
   of a sentence higher than the minimum relying on the
   quantity of substance cannot be faulted even though
   the Court had not adverted to the factors mentioned
   in clauses (a) to (b) as enumerated under
Section
   32B
.   However,   when   taking   any   factor   into
3
consideration other than the factors enumerated in
Section 32B
, (a) to (f), the Court imposes a
  punishment higher than the minimum sentence, it can
  be examined by higher Courts as to whether factor
  taken into consideration by the Court is a relevant
  factor or not. Thus in a case where Court imposes a
  punishment   higher  than   minimum  relying  on   a
  irrelevant factor and no other factor as enumerated
  in
Section 32B
(a to f) are present award of sentence
  higher than minimum can be interfered with.
24. In the present case The High Court held that
  although gross quantity of 8.175 Kg. of Heroin was
  alleged to have been recovered from the appellant
  but actual quantity of Heroine which was found to be
  in possession was only 609.6 gm. The High Court held
  that since the appellant was found in possession of
  Narcotic Drugs as per the analysis report to 609.6
  gm. which is much higher than the commercial
  quantity, punishment higher than the minimum is
  justified. The High Court reduced the punishment
  from 18 years to 16 years. We, thus, uphold the
  judgment of the trial court and the High Court
  awarding the punishment higher than the minimum,
  however, looking to all the facts and circumstances
  of the present case including the fact that it was
  found by the High Court that the appellant was only
  a carrier, we find that the ends of justice will be
  sub-served in reducing the sentence from 16 years to
  12 years. Thus, while maintaining the conviction of
  the appellant the appellant is sentenced to undergo
  12 years rigorous imprisonment with fine of Rs. 2
  lakh and in default of payment of such fine the
  appellant shall further undergo for a simple
  imprisonment for six months. The appeal is partly
  allowed to the extent as indicated above.”
28. As such, in view of discussion made hereinabove, in
light of
Section 32B
of the NDPS Act coupled with above-
quoted principle of law laid down in Rafiq Qureshi (supra),
since no specific or any special reason has been assigned by
the learned trial Court for awarding sentence higher than
minimum to the appellants for having committed offence under
Section 21(c)
of the NDPS Act, in the considered opinion of
this Court, while affirming the conviction of the appellants
for offence under
Section 20(c)
of the NDPS Act, we deem it
appropriate to reduce his sentence of 12 years rigorous
imprisonment, as awarded to them by the learned trial Court,
to 10 years rigorous imprisonment. So far as the default
sentence is concerned, the same is modified to the extent
that in case of failure to deposit the fine amount awarded
by the trial Court, the appellants shall undergo further
rigorous imprisonment for one year instead of three years,
as awarded by trial Court. It is ordered accordingly.
4
29. Consequently, both the criminal appeals are partly
      allowed to the extent indicated hereinabove. It is stated
      that the appellants are in jail, they shall serve out the
      remaining sentence as modified by this Court.”
                                              (Emphasis supplied)
11.     According to the High Court if the trial court wants to

impose sentence more than the minimum prescribed under the
NDPS

Act
, then it is obliged to assign reasons. This according to

the High Court is because of the provision of
Section 32-B
of

the NDPS Act.
12.
Section 32-B
of the NDPS Act reads thus:-
“32-B. Factors to be taken into account for imposing
      higher than the minimum punishment.—Where a minimum term
      of imprisonment or amount of fine is prescribed for any
      offence committed under this Act, the court may, in
      addition to such factors as it may deem fit, take into
      account the following factors for imposing a punishment
      higher than the minimum term of imprisonment or amount of
      fine, namely:—
(a) the use or threat of use of violence or arms by the
      offender;
(b) the fact that the offender holds a public office and
      that he has taken advantage of that office in committing
      the offence;
(c) the fact that the minors are affected by the offence
      or the minors are used for the commission of an offence;
(d) the fact that the offence is committed in an
      educational institution or social service facility or in
      the immediate vicinity of such institution or faculty or
      in other place to which school children and students
      resort for educational, sports and social activities;
(e) the fact that the offender belongs to        organised
      international or any other criminal group        which is
      involved in the commission of the offence; and
(f) the fact that    the offender is involved in other
      illegal activities   facilitated by commission of the
      offence.”
5
13.   While interpreting
Section 32-B
of the NDPS Act, the High

Court also looked into the decision of this Court in the case

of
Rafiq Qureshi vs. Narcotic Control Bureau Eastern Zonal

Unit
, (2019) 6 SCC 492. According to the High Court, at the

time of imposing sentence the trial court need to keep in mind

the factors as provided in Clauses (a) to (f) of
Section 32-B
respectively.
14.   We are afraid the understanding of the High Court is not

correct.
Section 32-B
provides that the court in addition to

various relevant factors may also take into account the factors

as prescribed in Clauses (a) to (f).
15.   Therefore, in a given case, the trial court may not find

it necessary to consider the factors as prescribed in
Section

32-B
. Having regard to the quantity of the contraband, the

nature of the narcotic or the psychotropic substance, as the

case may be, the antecedents, if any, etc., may deem fit to

impose punishment which can be more than the minimum.
In such

circumstances, there was no good reason for the High Court to

reduce the sentence from 12 years to 10 years relying on
Rafiq

Qureshi
(supra).
The   dictum   as
laid   down   in
Rafiq   Qureshi
(supra) has not been understood in its true perspective.
6
16.
In
Rafiq Qureshi
(supra), this Court observed as follows:-
“12.
Section 32-B
is also inserted by Act 9 of 2001.
      It is useful to refer to the Statement of Objects and
      Reasons of Amendment Act 9 of 2001 which is to the
      following effect:
“Statement of Objects and Reasons.— Amendment
           Act 9 of 2001.— The Narcotic Drugs and Psycho-
           tropic Substances Act, 1985 provides deterrent
           punishment for various offences relating to il-
           licit trafficking in narcotic drugs and psycho-
           tropic substances. Most of the offences invite
           uniform punishment of minimum ten years' rigor-
           ous imprisonment which may extend up to twenty
           years.
While the Act
envisages severe punish-
           ments for drug traffickers, it envisages re-
           formative approach towards addicts. In view of
           the general delay in trial it has been found
           that the addicts prefer not to invoke the pro-
           visions of the Act. The strict bail provisions
           under the Act add to their misery. Therefore,
           it is proposed to rationalise the sentence
           structure so as to ensure that while drug traf-
           fickers who traffic in significant quantities
           of drugs are punished with deterrent sentences,
           the addicts and those who commit less serious
           offences are sentenced to less severe punish-
           ment. This requires rationalisation of the sen-
           tence structure provided under the Act. It is
           also proposed to restrict the application of
           strict bail provisions to those offenders who
           indulge in serious offences.”
13. The Statement of Objects and Reasons reveals that
      the Amendment Act has inserted provisions for ratio-
nalisation of the sentencing structure.
Section 32-B
is a provision which is brought in the statute to ra-
      tionalise the sentencing structure.
Section 32-B
from
      clauses (a) to (f) enumerates various factors for im-
      posing a punishment higher than the minimum term of
      imprisonment.
14. The submission made by the counsel for the appel-
      lant is that unless in the facts of a case, any of
      the factors mentioned in clauses (a) to (f) are not
      present, the Court cannot impose punishment higher
      than the minimum term of the imprisonment. It is sub-
      mitted that the factors have been brought in the
7
statute for the purpose of imposing the punishment
higher than the minimum, hence, in the absence of any
such factor only minimum punishment should be
awarded.
15. We have to first see the actual words used in the
statute to find out the object and purpose of insert-
ing
Section 32-B
. The court after conviction of an
accused hears the accused and takes into considera-
tion different circumstances of the accused and the
offence for awarding the appropriate sentence. Sec-
tion 32-B uses the phrase

   “the court may, in addition to such factors as it
   may deem fit, take into account the following
   factors for imposing a punishment higher than the
   minimum term of imprisonment”.
The above statutory scheme clearly indicates the fol-
lowing:
15.1. The court may where minimum term of punishment
is prescribed take into consideration “such factors
as it may deem fit” for imposing a punishment higher
than the minimum term of imprisonment or fine.
15.2. In addition, take into account the factors for
imposing a punishment higher than the minimum as enu-
merated in clauses (a) to (f).
16. The statutory scheme indicates that the decision
to impose a punishment higher than the minimum is not
confined or limited to the factors enumerated in
clauses (a) to (f). The Court's discretion to con-
sider such factors as it may deem fit is not taken
away or tinkered. In case a person is found in pos-
session of a manufactured drug whose quantity is
equivalent to commercial quantity, the punishment as
per
Section 21(c)
has to be not less than ten years
which may extend to twenty years. But suppose the
quantity of manufactured drug is 20 times of the com-
mercial quantity, it may be a relevant factor to im-
pose punishment higher than minimum. Thus, quantity
of substance with which an accused is charged is a
relevant factor, which can be taken into considera-
tion while fixing quantum of the punishment. Clauses
(a) to (f) as enumerated in
Section 32-B
do not enu-
merate any factor regarding quantity of substance as
a factor for determining the punishment. In the event
8
the Court takes into consideration the magnitude of
quantity with regard to which an accused is con-
victed, the said factor is relevant factor and the
court cannot be said to have committed an error when
taking into consideration any such factor, higher
than the minimum term of punishment is awarded.
17. This Court in Sakshi v. Union of India [Sak-
shi v. Union of India, (2004) 5 SCC 518 : 2004 SCC
(Cri) 1645], held that it is a well-settled principle
that the intention of the legislature is primarily to
be gathered from the language used, which means that
attention should be paid to what has been said as
also to what has not been said. A construction which
requires for its support addition or substitution of
words has to be avoided. In para 19 of the judgment
the following was laid down: (SCC p. 537)

   “19. It is well-settled principle that the inten-
   tion of the legislature is primarily to be
   gathered from the language used, which means that
   attention should be paid to what has been said as
   also to what has not been said. As a consequence
   a construction which requires for its support ad-
   dition or substitution of words or which results
   in rejection of words as meaningless has to be
   avoided. It is contrary to all rules of construc-
   tion to read words into an Act unless it is abso-
   lutely necessary to do so. Similarly it is wrong
   and dangerous to proceed by substituting some
   other words for words of the statute. It is
   equally well settled that a statute enacting an
   offence or imposing a penalty is strictly con-
   strued. The fact that an enactment is a penal
   provision is in itself a reason for hesitating
   before ascribing to phrases used in it a meaning
   broader than that they would ordinarily bear.
   (Justice G.P. Singh: Principles of Statutory In-
   terpretation, pp. 58 and 751, 9th Edn.)”
18. The   specific  words   used   in
Section   32-B
that court may, in addition to such factors as it may
deem fit clearly indicates that court's discretion to
take such factor as it may deem fit is not fettered
by factors which are enumerated in clauses (a) to (f)
of
Section 32-B
.
19. The learned counsel for the appellant has relied
on a judgment of the Allahabad High Court in Raj Ku-
9
mar   Bajpaee v. Union   of  India [Raj   Kumar   Ba-
jpaee v. Union of India, (2016) 95 ACC 896]. A Single
Judge of the Allahabad High Court referring to Sec-
tion 32-B of the Act stated the following in paras 39
and 40:
“39. After going through the impugned judgment
   and order very carefully, I find that the trial
   court while imposing higher than the minimum pun-
   ishment prescribed under the
NDPS Act
on convic-
   tion under
Sections 8
/
20
of the NDPS Act, upon
   the appellants has failed even to advert to the
   factors enumerated in
Section 32-B
of the NDPS
   Act. In fact, no reason whatsoever is forthcoming
   in the impugned judgment which lead the trial
   court to impose higher than the minimum punish-
   ment prescribed under the Act upon the appel-
   lants.
40. After going through the evidence on record, I
   am satisfied that in the present case none of the
   factors as spelt out in
Section 32-B
of the Act
   exist which could have prompted the trial court
   to award higher than the minimum punishment pre-
scribed under the Act. The sentence awarded to
   the appellants thus cannot be sustained. While
   maintaining the conviction of the appellants un-
   der
Sections 8
/
20
, I allow this appeal in part
   and modify the sentence awarded to them by the
   trial court by the impugned judgment and order to
   10 years' RI and a fine of Rs 1 lakh and in de-
   fault of payment of fine the appellants shall be
   liable to undergo further simple imprisonment for
   one month. The impugned judgment stands modified
   accordingly.”
20. Although in the above judgment it has not been
categorically held that punishment higher than the
minimum cannot be awarded unless any of the factors
spelt out in
Section 32-B
are present but the Court
proceeded to set aside the award of higher punishment
on the above ground. There are two other judgments of
the learned Single Judges of the Allahabad High Court
which have been brought to our notice. First is the
judgment of the Single Judge in Krishna Murari
Pal v. State of U.P. [Krishna Murari Pal v. State of
U.P., 2015 SCC OnLine All 4909], where the learned
10
Single Judge in para 13 has considered
Section 32-B
in the following words: (SCC OnLine All)

   “13. The trial court has awarded the sentence of
   12 years' rigorous imprisonment and fine of Rs 1
   lakh to the appellant-accused under
Sections
   8
/
20(b)(ii)(c)
of the NDPS Act on the ground that
   huge quantity of the said contraband (ganja) has
   been recovered from the possession of the appel-
   lant-accused. There is nothing on record to show
   that the appellant-accused had committed any act
   which may lie under any of the clauses of
Section
   32-B
of the NDPS Act hereinabove mentioned. But
   that does not mean that the Court cannot award
   the sentence more than the minimum sentence in
   the absence of any of the above conditions men-
   tioned in clauses (a) to (f) because these condi-
   tions are in addition to the factors as the Court
   may deem fit in awarding higher punishment to the
   accused. In the case at hand, there is nothing on
   record to show that the appellant-accused and
   previous criminal history or he is a previous
   convict and that the appellant is now advanced in
   years and is aged about 56 years as mentioned in
   the supplementary affidavit filed on behalf of
   the appellant-accused. Undisputedly the appel-
   lant-accused had licence of the retailer shop of
   bhang. Thus, regard being had to all the facts
   and circumstances of the case I think that reduc-
   tion of sentence of 12 years' rigorous imprison-
   ment awarded to the appellant to the period of
   imprisonment already undergone by him and in de-
   fault of payment of fine, reduction of sentence
   of one year imprisonment to six months' simple
   imprisonment would meet the ends of justice.”
21. Another case which has been relied by the counsel
is in Ram Asre v. State of U.P. [Ram Asre v. State of
U.P., 2017 SCC OnLine All 2891], where a learned
Single Judge of the Allahabad High Court after refer-
ring to
Section 32-B
made the following observation:
(SCC OnLine All para 61)

   “61. … In opinion of this Court, if the said sec-
   tion be read with greater attention, it would re-
   veal that the words used in it are “it may deem
   fit”, therefore word “may” would indicate that it
   would be discretionary for the Court to take the
11
grounds into consideration which are mentioned in
         sub-sections (a) to (f) of the said section,
         while awarding punishment higher than the minimum
         prescribed. Therefore there is no force found in
         the argument in this regard made by the learned
         amicus curiae that in the case at hand the pun-
         ishment awarded needs to be curtailed keeping in
         view that the lower court did not take into con-
         sideration the above factors.”
22. The views expressed by the learned Single Judges
      in
Krishna Murari Pal [Krishna Murari Pal v. State of
      U.P.
, 2015 SCC OnLine All 4909] and Ram Asre [Ram
      Asre v. State of U.P., 2017 SCC OnLine All 2891] cor-
      rectly notice the ambit and scope of
Section 32-B
.
23. In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of
      the view that punishment awarded by the trial court
      of a sentence higher than the minimum relying on the
      quantity of substance cannot be faulted even though
      the court had not adverted to the factors mentioned
      in clauses (a) to (f) as enumerated under
Section 32-
B. However, when taking any factor into consideration
      other than the factors enumerated in
Sections 32-B(a)
to (f), the court imposes a punishment higher than
      the minimum sentence, it can be examined by higher
      courts as to whether factor taken into consideration
      by the court is a relevant factor or not. Thus in a
      case where the court imposes a punishment higher than
      minimum relying on an irrelevant factor and no other
      factor as enumerated in
Sections 32-B(a)
to (f) is
      present, award of sentence higher than minimum can be
      interfered with.”                 (Emphasis supplied)
17.    The seminal issue in
Rafiq Qureshi
(supra) revolved around

the interpretation of
Section 32-B
of the NDPS Act. In other

words, whether the absence of any factors enumerated in
Section

32-B
in Clauses (a) to (f) restricts the trial courts from

imposing    sentence   higher   than   the   minimum   prescribed.
This

Court in
Rafiq Qureshi
(supra) clarified that the language of
12
Section 32-B
inherently preserves the court’s discretion to

consider     other   relevant    factors        beyond   those   listed.
Specifically, the quantity of the narcotic substance was deemed

a pertinent factor warranting a sentence above the statutory

minimum,   despite   the   absence   of   any   enumerated   aggravating

factors in
Section 32-B
. Referring to             Sakshi vs. Union of

India, reported in (2004) 5 SCC 518, this Court emphasized the

principle that legislative intent is derived from the explicit

language of the statute, avoiding the insertion of words not

present. Since
Section 32-B
uses “may deem fit” in addition to

the enumerated factors, it does not restrict the courts to only

those factors but allows broader discretion in sentencing.
18.    We may also refer to the decision of this Court in
Gurdev

Singh vs. State of Punjab
, reported in (2021) 6 SCC 558. In the

said case, it was held that the court should be guided by the

factors mentioned in
Section 32-B
of the NDPS Act and other

relevant factors while imposing a sentence higher than the

minimum. Therefore, factors mentioned in
Section 32-B
of the

NDPS Act are in addition to other relevant facts, and it cannot

be said that the minimum sentence under the
NDPS Act
is to be

considered as a maximum sentence. It was observed at page 564:
“7. Therefore, while imposing a punishment higher
      than the minimum term of the imprisonment or an
      amount of fine, the court may take into account the
      factors  enumerated   in
Section  32-B
of  the  Act
      referred to hereinabove. However, it is required to
      be noted ( 2025:HHC:2309 ) that
Section 32-B
of the
      Act itself further provides that the court may, in
13
addition to such factors as it may deem fit, take
  into account the factors for imposing a punishment
  higher than the minimum term of imprisonment or
  amount of fine as mentioned in
Section 32- B
of the
  Act. Therefore, while imposing the punishment higher
  than the minimum term of imprisonment or amount of
  fine, the court may take into account such factors as
  it   may    deem    fit    and    also   the    factors
  enumerated/mentioned in
Section 32-B
of the Act.
  Therefore, on fair reading of
Section 32-B
of the
  Act, it cannot be said that while imposing a
  punishment   higher   than    the   minimum  term    of
  imprisonment or amount of fine, the court has to
  consider    only     those     factors    which     are
  mentioned/enumerated in
Section 32-B
of the Act.
xx   xx   xx    xx   xx   xx
10. Therefore, the quantity of substance would fall
  into “such factors as it may deem fit” and while
  exercising    its     discretion     of    imposing    the
  sentence/imprisonment higher than the minimum, if the
  court has taken into consideration such factor of
  larger/higher quantity of substance, it cannot be
  said that the court has committed an error. The court
  has    a    wide      discretion      to     impose    the
  sentence/imprisonment ranging between 10 years to 20
  years and while imposing such sentence/imprisonment
  in   addition,    the   court    may    also   take   into
  consideration other factors as enumerated in
Sections
  32-B(a)
to   (f).     Therefore,     while    imposing   a
  punishment higher than the minimum sentence, if the
  court has considered such factor as it may deem fit
  other than the factors enumerated in
Sections 32-
B(a) to (f), the High Court has to only consider
  whether "such factor" is a relevant factor or not.”
19.   It appears that the understanding of the High Court so

far as
Section 32-B
of the NDPS is concerned is that the mini-
mum sentence should be considered as maximum sentence. That is

not the correct understanding of
Section 32-B
of the NDPS Act.
14
20.    Be that as it may.   We do not want to interfere with that

part of the order of the High Court reducing the sentence.
21.    However, we do not find any merit in this petition. The

petition, accordingly, fails and is hereby dismissed.
22.    Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of.
…………………………………………J.
                                (J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                …………………………………………J.
                                (R. MAHADEVAN)

NEW DELHI
17th JULY, 2025.
15