[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Tosh Kumar Sharma vs High Court Of Judicature At Allahabad on 16 July, 2025
REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 921
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.       OF 2025
                              [ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO.4605 OF 2023]
                                       [@DIARY NO.42279/2022]

                TOSH KUMAR SHARMA                                        …APPELLANT

                                                   VERSUS

                HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
                & ORS.                                                  …RESPONDENTS

                R1:HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
                R2:STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH
                R3:SELECTION & APPOINTMENT COMMITTEE OF U.P.H.J.S.
                EXAMINATION



                                                    ORDER
Leave granted.
2. Heard Mr. Ajit Kumar Sinha, learned senior counsel
                for the appellant and Ms. Preetika Dwivedi, learned
                counsel for Respondent No.1-Allahabad High Court and
                Respondent         No.3.     The    State   of   Uttar    Pradesh   is
                unrepresented, despite valid service of notice. We
Signature Not Verified
are glossing over the non-appearance in praesenti;
Digitally signed by
NITIN TALREJA
Date: 2025.08.04
16:07:44 IST
Reason:
however,         the   State   to    take   note   of    defaults   in
1
appearances         to    avoid    adverse        orders    that        affect
public interest.
3. The present appeal is directed against the Final
Judgment      and    Order       dated      22.09.2022     in     WRIT    -    A
No.13979 of 2022 passed by a learned Division Bench
of     the   High        Court    of        Judicature     at     Allahabad
[2022:AHC:164781-DB] (hereinafter referred to as the
‘Impugned Judgment’), whereby the claim raised for
appointment         by    the      appellant         to    the     post       of
Additional District and Sessions Judge in the Uttar
Pradesh      Higher      Judicial          Service   (of   the    State       of
Uttar Pradesh) has been negatived.
FACTUAL SETTING:
4. The appellant, pursuant to the ‘Direct Recruitment
to the Uttar Pradesh Higher Judicial Service-2016’
advertisement dated 10.05.2016 (hereinafter referred
to as the ‘2016 Advertisement’), participated in the
said     selection        process.          The   final    results        were
published on 01.10.2020, and the appellant ranked at
Sl. No.38 in the Merit List. However, since the total
vacancies       were        only           thirty-seven         under      the
Unreserved/General Category (hereinafter referred to
as the ‘General Category’), the High Court forwarded
a list of the top thirty seven persons, who were
placed       above       the      appellant,         to     the     Hon’ble
Governor/Government of Uttar Pradesh for acceptance,
clearance and final issuance of Appointment Letters.
2
However, at the level of the Hon’ble Governor, State
of Uttar Pradesh, only thirty-six persons out of the
thirty-seven recommended candidates were approved and
consequently appointed. Herein lies the genesis of
the instant dispute.
5.   As      per    the    appellant,          since   he     was    the    next
candidate in line as the next person (at Sl. No.38 in
the Merit List) belonging to the General Category, he
should       automatically        have     been       recommended      to    the
State Government for appointment. The same was not
done;     instead,         the    said    vacant       post    was    carried
forward       for    the    next    recruitment          cycle      and     left
unfilled in the subject selection.
APPELLANT’S SUBMISSIONS:
6.     Mr.     Sinha,       learned       senior       counsel       for     the
appellant, contended that once the vacancies as per
the 2016 Advertisement were for thirty-seven persons
in the General Category, the entirety of the said
thirty-seven vacancies had to be filled up from the
same      selection        process.       It    was    urged    that       there
cannot       be     any    question       of     carry-forward        of     any
vacancy in the facts of the present lis, for the
reason that it was not the case of a casual vacancy
having       arisen       after   the     candidates        concerned        had
joined their posts. Rather, it was a case where one
recommended candidate was not finally approved by the
Hon’ble       Governor/State         Government,         which       made    the
3
thirty       seventh     post    available              and     vacant        for
recruitment. In such a scenario, as canvassed by Mr.
Sinha,    it    was     incumbent        upon      the     High      Court    to
recommend/forward         the    name        of     the       next    eligible
candidate, which, as per the Merit List, was the
present appellant.
7. It was further argued that Rule 8(2) of the Uttar
Pradesh        Higher     Judicial              Service        Rules,        1975
(hereinafter      referred       to        as     the     ‘Rules’),         being
relied upon by the High Court, is not attracted in
the facts at hand as the same is applicable only when
the    persons        finally    found            eligible          for     being
recommended for appointment is less than the total
posts available, which is not the situation herein as
there were more than thirty-seven persons available
and eligible. Due to the restriction of thirty-seven
posts, as pointed out above, only thirty-seven names
were      finally         recommended              to         the         Hon’ble
Governor/State         Government,         out     of     which       only     36
candidates found favour.
8. It was also submitted that the one candidate who
was    not     approved    by        the    Hon’ble           Governor/State
Government had accepted the said position, and there
was no pending litigation vis-à-vis the said person
and the High Court/State Government. Learned senior
counsel argued that as the said thirty seventh post
was    never      filled        up       pursuant          to        the    2016
4
Advertisement,          technically,           such    a     post    was    still
available. The contention of the High Court that it
had been subsequently filled up by carry-forward to
the next recruitment cycle, thus, ought not to be
sustained. The Court was urged to allow the appeal.
SUBMISSIONS BY RESPONDENTS NO.1 AND 3:
9. Per contra, Ms. Dwivedi, learned counsel for the
High    Court,     in    support      of       the     Impugned      Judgment,
submitted that the appellant may not be eligible for
the reason that there was one candidate (Mr. Shakir
Hasan)       belonging     to    the           Other    Backward          Classes
Category       (hereinafter          referred          to     as     the        ‘OBC
Category’), who had fared better than the appellant
in     the   Merit      List,    and       if     somebody          was    to     be
appointed for the said thirty seventh post, it would
be   Mr.     Shakir     Hasan.       On    the       direct    query       as    to
whether      the   appointment            of    Mr.    Shakir        Hasan      had
materialised, learned counsel informed us that he had
been appointed, treating him as falling in the OBC
Category.
10. The Court’s next line of examining proceeded as
follows:
(a) Whether, even after the appointment of Mr. Shakir
Hasan in the OBC Category, a vacancy in the General
Category      subsisted,        in    relation          to    the     selection
process initiated by the 2016 Advertisement?
5
(b) Whether any candidate had staked a claim for
appointment on the ground that she/he stood higher in
the Merit List than the appellant but had not been
recommended for appointment?
11. Learned counsel referred to the Counter-Affidavit
to submit that in accordance with Rule 8(2) of the
Rules,     after   the     candidature    of   one   recommended
person was not approved by the Hon’ble Governor/State
Government, the Selection and Appointment Committee
vide   Minutes     dated    19.06.2020   had   resolved,   inter
alia, as under:
‘…The post now vacated after the cancellation of his
candidature will be accounted for in the next
recruitment process as an unforeseen vacancy. It is
also resolved that promotion under Rule 8(2) of
Rules, 1975 against one post be made so that
necessary compliance of the order of Apex Court in
Malik Mazhar Sultan's case may be ensured.’
12. Learned counsel argued that the promotion was
also     made   against    the   post    remaining   vacant   on
account of the rejected candidature as per the Rules.
13. Ms. Dwivedi, as an officer of the Court, on the
factual score, submitted viz. (a) Mr. Shakir Hasan
was appointed under the OBC Category, and (b) no
other person had sought appointment on the thirty
seventh post under the General Category claiming to
be higher up on the Merit List than the appellant. We
appreciate her fair stand.
6
ANALYSIS:
14. Before appreciating the crux of the matter at
hand, we may note the special position of the High
Court in matters relating to the Judicial Services of
the    State(s)/Union        Territory(ies)        under     its
jurisdiction.   It   would    be   fitting    to    advert   to
certain Articles from the Constitution of India, 1950
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘Constitution’):
‘233. Appointment of district judges.—
      (1) Appointments of persons to be, and the
      posting and promotion of, district judges
      in any State shall be made by the Governor
      of the State in consultation with the High
      Court exercising jurisdiction in relation
      to such State.
(2) A person not already in the service of
      the Union or of the State shall only be
      eligible to be appointed a district judge
      if he has been for not less than seven
      years an advocate or a pleader and is
      recommended   by   the   High  Court   for
      appointment.
xxx
234. Recruitment of persons other than
      district judges to the judicial service.—
      Appointments   of   persons   other   than
      district judges to the judicial service of
      a State shall be made by the Governor of
      the State in accordance with rules made by
      him in that behalf after consultation with
      the State Public Service Commission and
      with    the    High    Court    exercising
      jurisdiction in relation to such State.
235. Control over subordinate courts.— The
7
control over district courts and courts
      subordinate thereto including the posting
      and promotion of, and the grant of leave
      to, persons belonging to the judicial
      service of a State and holding any post
      inferior to the post of district judge
      shall be vested in the High Court, but
      nothing in this article shall be construed
      as taking away from any such person any
      right of appeal which he may have under
      the law regulating the conditions of his
      service or as authorising the High Court
      to deal with him otherwise than in
      accordance with the conditions of his
      service prescribed under such law.
236. Interpretation.—In this Chapter—
(a)   the   expression   “district  judge”
      includes judge of a city civil court,
      additional district judge, joint district
      judge, assistant district judge, chief
      judge of a small cause court, chief
      presidency magistrate, additional chief
      presidency magistrate, sessions judge,
      additional sessions judge and assistant
      sessions judge;
(b) the expression “judicial service”
      means a service consisting exclusively of
      persons intended to fill the post of
      district judge and other civil judicial
      posts inferior to the post of district
      judge.’
15.
In several judgments, including, but not limited
to,
Chief   Justice   of       Andhra    Pradesh     v     L.V.A.
Dixitulu
, (1979) 2 SCC 34; High Court of Judicature
for
Rajasthan   v   P.P.   Singh
,       (2003)   4   SCC     239;
Rajendra Singh Verma v Lieutenant Governor, (2011) 10
SCC 1, and;
Dr. P.S. Malik v High
Court of Delhi,
(2020) 19 SCC 714, it has been spelt out by the Court
8
that
Article       235
of     the   Constitution       bestows
complete,     exclusive        and     effective     control       over
Judicial Officers, encompassing appointment, removal,
reduction   of    rank,       dismissal,     transfer,      promotion
etc. on the concerned High Court.
16. Three learned Judges of this Court in the High
Court of Judicature for
Rajasthan
(supra) opined that
a Committee of Judges can be authorised by the Full
Court/Chief Justice or the concerned High Court Rules
to decide on matters, and such delegation to the
Committee was permissible in law.
In Rajendra Singh
Verma (supra), the facts of the lead case were that
an officer of the Delhi Higher Judicial Service was
recommended      to     be     compulsorily       retired    by     the
Screening Committee of the Delhi High Court, and the
Full Court approved such recommendation. Aggrieved,
that officer moved the Delhi High Court by way of a
writ petition, which was dismissed. When the matter
was carried to this Court, no reason was found to
interfere   and       the    appeal(s)     were   dismissed,      inter
alia, with the observation:
‘218. On a careful consideration of the
       entire material, it must be held that the
       evaluation made by the Committee/Full
       Court, forming their unanimous opinion, is
       neither so arbitrary nor capricious nor
       can be said to be so irrational, so as to
       shock the conscience of this Court to
       warrant or justify any interference. In
       cases of such assessment, evaluation and
       formulation of opinions, a vast range of
       multiple   factors   play  a   vital   and
9
important role and no one factor should be
      allowed to be blown out of proportion
      either to decry or deify an issue to be
      resolved or claims sought to be considered
      or asserted. In the very nature of things,
      it would be difficult, nearing almost an
      impossibility to subject such exercise
      undertaken by the Full Court to judicial
      review except in an extraordinary case
      when the Court is convinced that some real
      injustice, which ought not to have taken
      place, has really happened and not merely
      because there could be another possible
      view or someone has some grievance about
      the    exercise    undertaken    by    the
      Committee/Full Court.’
                         (emphasis supplied)
17. In this appeal, we are, in effect, considering
the   legality    of   the   decision(s)      taken   by   the
Selection   and   Appointment     Committee   comprising    of
learned Judges of the High Court on the conclusion of
selection process initiated pursuant to the subject
advertisement. Doubtlessly, the views of a Committee
of the High Court or the Full Court itself are to be
bestowed due consideration and appropriate weightage.
However, we are convinced that in the instant appeal,
the appellant deserves to succeed, and if we refuse
to intervene, an unjust outcome would be perpetuated.
The reasons for our statement follow hereinafter.
18. This Court is required to examine how the said
vacancy of one post should be treated, and if at all
it should be filled up from the Merit List resulting
from the 2016 Advertisement, or not.
10
19. Having considered the matter in its entirety, we
find   substance      in    the   contentions          of    the   learned
senior counsel for the appellant. The fact remains
that thirty-seven posts under the General Category
were to be filled pursuant to the 2016 Advertisement.
It   is   a    fact   that      the    appellant       was    placed      at
position thirty-eight in the Merit List. It is also a
fact   that     one   candidate        out      of   the    thirty-seven
candidates      recommended       by    the     High    Court      did   not
receive       approval     from   the      Hon’ble       Governor/State
Government, leaving the actual recruitment under the
General       Category     to   thirty-six,          with   one    vacancy
remaining.      For   clarity,        it   is    noted      that   another
candidate, although appointed, unfortunately, later
committed suicide. However, this does not impact the
present matter, and we are not reckoning the said
resultant vacancy in appreciating the applicability
of Rule 8 of the Rules to the controversy presented
by the admitted circumstances of this case.
20. The issue, thus, lies in a narrow compass of Rule
8. Let us look at Rule 8, especially sub-Rule (2) of
the Rules:
‘8. Number of appointments to be made –
       (1) The Court, shall, from time to time,
       but not later than three years from the
       last recruitment, fix the number of
       officers to be taken at the recruitment
       keeping   in  view   the   vacancies  then
       existing and likely to occur in the next
       two years.
11
Note - The limitation of three years
      mentioned in this sub-rule shall not apply
      to the first recruitment held after the
      enforcement of these rules.
(2) If at any selection the number of
      selected direct recruits available for
      appointment is less than the number of
      recruits decided by the Court to be taken
      from that source, the Court may increase
      correspondingly the number of recruits to
      be taken by promotion from the Nyayik
      Sewa;
Provided that the number of vacancies
      filled in as aforesaid under this sub rule
      shall be taken into consideration while
      fixing the number of vacancies to be
      allotted to the quota of direct recruits
      at the next recruitment, and the quota for
      direct recruits may be raised accordingly;
      so, however, that the percentage of direct
      recruits in the service does not in any
      case exceed 25% of strength of the
      service:’
                             (emphasis supplied)
21. Rule 8(2) is not mired in complexity. As per the
contention of the High Court, the thirty seventh post
was a vacancy which had to be carried forward, and
was   done   so    by    the   Selection    and     Appointment
Committee, which also resolved to make a promotion
against   one     post   as    per   the   orders   passed   at
different points in time in
Malik Mazhar Sultan and
Anr. v Uttar Pradesh Public Service Commission and
Ors., Civil Appeal No.1867/2006
. On deeper scrutiny,
our finding is that Rule 8(2) of the Rules does not
apply to the situation confronting the High Court
upon the rejection of one candidature by the Hon’ble
12
Governor/State           Government      from        out      of      the
communicated list. The first portion of Rule 8(2) of
the Rules itself contemplates that the said Rule is
attracted only when the number of ‘selected direct
recruits available for appointment’ is less than the
number      of   direct    recruit     vacancies,     i.e.,        vacant
posts available/advertised. In the absence of this
condition        being   satisfied,     the   High    Court    is    not
under obligation to act in terms of Rule 8(2) of the
Rules. Admittedly, and at the cost of repetition,
thirty-seven General Category posts were available as
per   the    2016    Advertisement,      of   which    thirty-seven
candidates were recommended. Among these thirty-seven
candidates,        the    Hon’ble     Governor/State       Government
rejected one person’s candidature. The terminology
employed in Rule 8(2) is ‘selected direct recruits
available for appointment’. Had the term only been
’selected direct recruits’, we could have upheld the
contentions         of    Ms.   Dwivedi.      However,      this       is
immediately followed by ‘available for appointment’.
The   provision      fundamentally       negates     any   option      of
approving the High Court’s invocation of Rule 8(2) of
the Rules, as the said Rule itself is cognizant of
availability for appointment. This implies that it
accounts for a situation wherein, for instance, a
Merit    List       contains    eleven     candidates,        but    the
recruitment process culminates in recommending ten
candidates        for     notification.       If     the    top       ten
candidates are approved by the Hon’ble Governor/State
13
Government,         the    person        placed       at       the     eleventh
position is out of the game. However, if, for any
reason, one or more of the top ten candidates do not
get   approved       for     appointment,           the    eleventh-ranked
candidate from the same selection process is entitled
to be offered an appointment. This logically flows
from reading and construing ‘selected direct recruits
available for appointment’ as a whole.
We have borne
in    mind    the    principles          elucidated        recently        by   a
Three-Judge Bench in
A. Raja v D. Kumar
, 2025 SCC
OnLine SC 1033, which has considered a whole host of
relevant precedents on interpretive methods. We find
our analysis to be in accord therewith. The term
‘direct      recruits’       occurring         in   Rule       18(4)    of   the
Rules   will,       therefore,      also       need       to    be   construed
bearing      the    other     Rules       in    mind,          including     the
phraseology engrafted in Rule 8(2).
22. Rule 8(2) could have been pressed into service
when, exempli gratia, vacancies advertised were ten,
but only nine candidates figured in the Merit List,
leaving one clear vacancy, which would be filled-up
from the Nyayik Sewa by way of promotion, and also
adjusted in the next recruitment cycle for direct
recruits correspondingly, as per the proviso to Rule
8(2),   such       that    the   direct        recruits         do   not     ever
exceed 25% strength of the service.
23. The appellant was placed at the thirty eighth
position     in     merit,    alongside         others         ranking     below
14
him, who were all eligible for appointment, i.e.,
‘available       for    appointment’.               However,       due    to    the
limited number of posts, i.e., thirty-seven in the
General Category, the top thirty-seven from the Merit
List were recommended for final appointment. As fate
would    have    it,    the       candidature          of    one     originally
recommended       person          did         not   materialise          into   an
appointment,          and     the        said       person     accepted         the
position.
24. In light of the above, we are unable to justify
the     denial     of       recommendation             and     consequential
appointment       of     the        appellant.         For     the       sake   of
clarity, this is not a case where the appellant is
ineligible or otherwise disqualified for appointment.
This is also not a case where a ‘continuing wait
list’ is being created. For the reasons stated above,
this appeal is allowed. The Impugned Judgment is set
aside.
25.   The   High       Court      and         the   State    Government         are
directed to process and issue Appointment Letter to
the     appellant.          His     seniority         would     be       reckoned
notionally       as     part        of        the   2016     Advertisement’s
selection process. Needless to state, no back-wages
or any other emoluments preceding the date of actual
joining in service shall be due and/or payable to the
appellant. The entire exercise, including necessary
formalities,       shall       be    completed         within       two    months
from the date. The appellant shall be assigned a
15
posting, and shall complete the prescribed training.
26. We have perused
Ashok Pal Singh v Uttar Pradesh
Judicial       Services    Association
,        (2010)        12    SCC     635;
High Court of
Kerala v Reshma A.
, (2021) 3 SCC 755,
and;
Vallampati        Sathish      Babu    v     State        of    Andhra
Pradesh
, (2022) 13 SCC 193, which find mention in the
High Court’s Counter-Affidavit.
Insofar as
Ashok Pal
Singh
(supra) is concerned, it does not even touch
upon the specific issue emanating herein.
The High
Court     of
Kerala
(supra)      reiterates           the        settled
principle        that,      ordinarily,              the         number      of
appointments       made      cannot        exceed          the     vacancies
advertised/notified,         as     well      as     the    understanding
that a selection process may reasonably contemplate
both actual and anticipated vacancies, but not future
vacancies. We are unable to see how this judgment in
any     way    militates     against          what     we        have     held.
Vallampati Sathish Babu
(supra) held:
‘20. An identical question came to be
        considered   by   this   Court   in Suresh
        Prasad [Bihar SEB v. Suresh Prasad, (2004)
        2 SCC 681: 2004 SCC (L&S) 438]. In the
        said decision, it is specifically observed
        and held that even in case candidates
        selected for appointment have not joined,
        in the absence of any statutory rules to
        the contrary, the employer is not bound to
        offer   the   unfilled  vacancy   to   the
        candidates next below the said candidates
        in the merit list. It is also further held
        that in the absence of any provision, the
        employer is not bound to prepare a waiting
        list in addition to the panel of selected
        candidates and to appoint the candidates
16
from   the   waiting    list    in   case   the
      candidates from the panel do not join.
The
      aforesaid decision of this Court has been
      subsequently    followed     by    the   Andhra
      Pradesh      High       Court       in
Samiulla
      Shareef [State       of       A.P. v. Samiulla
      Shareef
, 2013 SCC OnLine AP 482].’
                                (emphasis supplied)
27. The dicta in
Vallampati Sathish Babu
(supra),
following
Bihar    State      Electricity       Board    v    Suresh
Prasad
,     (2004)    2    SCC        681,   was    based       on   the
provision/Rule therein.
The concerned provision in
Vallampati Sathish Babu
(supra) is as follows:
‘13. Rule 16 of the 2012 Rules is in
      respect of preparation of the select list.
      Sub-rule (5) of Rule 16 of the 2012 Rules,
      which is relevant for the purpose of this
      case reads as under:
“(5) The number of candidates selected
      shall not be more than the number of
      vacancies notified. There shall be no
      waiting list and posts if any unfilled for
      any reason whatsoever shall be carried
      forward for future recruitment.”’
                             (emphasis supplied)
28. Rule 8(2) of the Rules specifically incorporates
and   employs   the       term    ‘selected        direct   recruits
available for appointment’. To try to read it in the
manner the High Court would like us to read, would do
violence to the plain and clear text of the Rule. As
such,
Vallampati Sathish Babu
(supra) and
Bihar State
Electricity Board
(supra) do not aid the High Court.
We may, in passing, albeit, record that the matter
17
deserved         a     higher    level       of   scrutiny,    which     the
Division Bench did not accord it.
29.   Learned          counsel    for       the   High    Court,    at   this
juncture, prayed that to put an authoritative quietus
to    the        issue(s)       and    prevent      further    litigation
concerning inter-se seniority, this Court may direct
that the appellant be placed below the last-appointed
candidate         in    the     same    selection        process.   Finding
merit in the request made, the same was put to the
learned          senior       counsel       for    the     appellant.     On
instructions, learned senior counsel does not oppose
such a proposal. Ordered accordingly – the appellant
shall       be       placed     immediately        below     all    persons
appointed            pursuant     to        the   2016     Advertisement,
including Mr. Shakir Hasan, to reckon his seniority
and entry into service without financial commitments
to the State Government.
..........................J.
                                              [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]




                                        ..........................J.
                                                    [S.V.N. BHATTI]
NEW DELHI
16TH JULY, 2025
18