[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Arifa vs Abhiman Apartment Co Operative Housing ... on 14 July, 2025
2025 INSC 875
                                                                        Reportable
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                             SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) @ DIARY NO. 14976 of 2024
                            SMT. ARIFA & ORS.
                                                                        …PETITIONERS
                                                           VERSUS

                            ABHIMAN APARTMENT CO OPERATIVE
                            HOUSING SOCIETY LTD. & ORS.
                                                         …RESPONDENTS

                                                           ORDER
1.   The question arising in the above case is as to whether

                                 the liberty granted to file a fresh suit by the High Court

                                 would enable the party to revive a cause of action and

                                 save limitation, so as to enable raking up all grounds

                                 earlier raised and rejected by concurrent findings of the

                                 trial court and the first appellate court, affirmed by the

                                 High Court in Second Appeal.
2.   We heard Mr. Raghavendra Srivatsa, Senior Advocate

                                 appearing for the petitioners and Mr. Sharanagouda

                                 Patil, Advocate appearing for respondent No.1.
3.   The original plaintiff, the predecessor-in-interest of the
Signature Not Verified
petitioners herein admittedly entered into an agreement
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2025.07.19
12:02:05 IST
Reason:
for sale of the suit scheduled property to the first
Page 1 of 8
SLP (C) @D. No.14976 of 2024
defendant, a Cooperative Society. It is also admitted that

     a Power of Attorney (PoA) was executed in favour of the

     second defendant, the Secretary of the first defendant. It

     is alleged that the PoA was executed on coercion and

     misrepresentation, which also stood cancelled before

     the execution of the sale deed in favour of the first

     defendant by the second defendant, by virtue of the PoA.

     Admittedly, the plaintiff first filed a suit for permanent

     injunction against the second defendant, impleaded in

     his capacity as the Secretary of the Society, for a

     permanent injunction from alienating or disposing off the

     plots comprised in the suit scheduled property and from

     making any constructions thereon. The said suit was

     dismissed by the trial court confirmed by the First

     Appellate Court against which the plaintiff approached

     the High Court in the second appeal. The second appeal

     stood allowed upon which the Society filed an SLP before

     this Court in which leave was granted and the Civil

     Appeal was allowed as per Annexure P/9, remanding the

     matter to the High Court by Annexure P/10.
Page 2 of 8
SLP (C) @D. No.14976 of 2024
4.   The High Court on remand, dismissed the second appeal

     finding no substantial question of law and also rejected

     an amendment application to incorporate additional

     reliefs of declaration of title and recovery of possession,

     which applications were filed in the second appeal. The

     High Court having agreed with the concurrent findings,

     while dismissing the Second Appeal granted liberty to

     file a comprehensive suit for the reliefs sought for,

     including the proposed amendment.
5.    Relying on the liberty granted, the plaintiff filed a fresh

     suit for declaration of two sale deeds executed by second

     defendant in favour of the first defendant as void ab initio

     and declaration of the further sale of plots comprised in

     the scheduled land by the first defendant in favour of the

     defendant nos. 2-120 as illegal and invalid. The plaintiff

     also sought possession of the property from defendant

     nos. 1-120 and a permanent injunction restraining them

     from interfering with the actual physical and peaceful

     possession of the scheduled property by the plaintiff. The

     said suit was decreed by the trial court and in first appeal
Page 3 of 8
SLP (C) @D. No.14976 of 2024
the judgment and decree were set aside, and the suit was

     dismissed on the grounds of resjudicata, limitation and

     non-joinder of necessary parties.
6.   On the ground of resjudicata, we cannot but notice that

     the High Court in the earlier round in Annexure P/10

     judgment found that the plaintiff had executed two sale

     agreements in favour of the first defendant and had put

     the first defendant in possession of the scheduled land,

     the conveyance having been effected subsequently by

     the Secretary of the Society to the Society on the strength

     of a PoA. The High Court approved the concurrent

     finding that the notice of cancellation of the PoA was

     never served on the Secretary of the Society. The

     acknowledgement produced to prove its service was not

     with respect to the notice of cancellation, since it was four

     months later to the date in the notice of cancellation. It

     was also found by all the three courts that sale deeds

     were executed in favour of the allottees of the Society in

     whose possession the plots were, who had constructed

     residential buildings in the said lands: not impleaded in
Page 4 of 8
SLP (C) @D. No.14976 of 2024
the suit seeking permanent injunction. The additional

     relief prayed through an amendment for declaration of

     title and recovery of possession was hence rightly

     rejected by the High Court. The second appeal was

     dismissed finding no substantial question of law and by a

     laconic observation, liberty as stated above was

     reserved.
7.   In the impugned judgment reversing the judgment and

     decree of the trial court, the High Court has categorically

     found that the suit was barred by limitation. The specific

     averment regarding the cause of action, as stated in the

     plaint was extracted, which was the date on which the

     High Court had dismissed the second appeal and

     reserved such liberty. The limitation would commence

     from the date of execution of the agreements, the first two

     of which were in the year 1998. Though the two sale

     deeds in favour of the Society were thus executed, when

     the first suit was pending, the plaintiff did nothing to

     challenge the said conveyance. In the earlier suit the

     defendant in the written statement had specifically
Page 5 of 8
SLP (C) @D. No.14976 of 2024
pleaded about the conveyances and the plaintiff

     admitted his knowledge of all the conveyances while

     verifying the ‘record of rights’. No cause of action can be

     claimed on the liberty reserved, which is only on just

     exceptions including limitation, which in any event has to

     go by the period prescribed in the statute of limitation.

     The High Court has further found that there can also be

     no resort to
Section 14
of the Limitation Act, since the suit

     already laid was not before a wrong forum but was not

     properly framed. Even when a suit is withdrawn with

     leave of the Court to file a fresh suit, under
Order 23 Rule

     1 of the CPC
limitation applies with full force as per Rule

     2 of Order 23.
8.   The presently filed suit had sought for declaration as null

     and void, the conveyances in favour of the first

     respondent Society and the subsequent conveyances

     made to defendant nos. 2-120 as also recovery of

     possession        from    the   defendants   and   permanent

     injunction as against the defendants from interference in

     the enjoyment of the property.
Page 6 of 8
SLP (C) @D. No.14976 of 2024
9.   The entire sub-stratum of the plaintiff’s case is built upon

     the alleged coercion and misrepresentation in execution

     of the PoA and subsequent cancellation effected, which

     ground       does         not   survive   having   been   rejected

     concurrently by three courts in the earlier proceeding,

     clearly barring the present suit on the ground of

     resjudicata. The issue now agitated was substantially in

     issue in the earlier suit and decided against the plaintiff,

     bringing in the rigor of
Section 11
of the Civil Procedure

     Code.
10. We perfectly agree with the findings in the impugned

     judgment regarding limitation and resjudicata and

     cannot but observe that the liberty granted by the High

     Court in the second appeal was akin to flogging a dead

     horse; which cannot give a fresh lease of life to either the

     cause of action; to save limitation or the grounds on which

     the declaration and consequential relief has been prayed

     for in the present suit; which grounds were already

     adjudicated in the earlier suit and found against the

     plaintiff by three Courts.
Page 7 of 8
SLP (C) @D. No.14976 of 2024
11. We also notice that the High Court has further observed

     that the suit is barred for reason of non-joinder of

     necessary         parties,   namely   the   Belgaum     Urban

     Development Authority and the Badminton Association

     who were conceded certain extents of property for

     forming a lay out and civic amenities; with roads to be

     maintained by the former, and the establishment and

     management of a Badminton Hall by the latter, which we

     agree with.
12. We find absolutely no reason to interfere with the well-
considered judgment of the High Court which we affirm

     while rejecting the Special Leave Petition.
13. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
………….……………………. J.
(K. VINOD CHANDRAN)



                                    …………………………………J.
                                    (N.V. ANJARIA)
NEW DELHI;
JULY 14, 2025.
Page 8 of 8
SLP (C) @D. No.14976 of 2024