[Cites
27
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
G. Kalawathi Bai (Died Per Lrs.) vs G. Shashikala (Died Per Lrs.) on 15 July, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Kumar
Bench:
Sanjay Kumar
Non-reportable
2025 INSC 851
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO(S) 9497-9501 OF 2025
                                       (@ S.L.P.(C) Nos. 6685-6689 of 2023)


         G. Kalawathi Bai (Died), per LRs.                                    ….. Appellants


                                                      Versus


         G. Shashikala (Died), per LRs., and others etc.                    ….. Respondents


                                                    ORDER
1.             Leave granted.
2.             These appeals turn open the validity of the registered Irrevocable

             General Power of Attorney dated 15.10.1990 allegedly executed by

             Ranveer Singh and his wife, Gyanu Bai, in favour of G. Rajender Kumar,

             their tenant, and, in turn, the validity of the three registered sale deeds

             dated 16.11.1990, 18.07.1991 and 16.08.1991 respectively executed by

             G. Rajender Kumar, the power-of-attorney holder, in favour of his wife,

             G. Shashikala.
Signature Not Verified
3.
Digitally signed by
babita pandey
Ranveer Singh, in fact, denied the execution of this General Power
Date: 2025.07.15
17:55:05 IST
Reason:
of Attorney, by way of his written statement filed in the suit. In that
1
context, the Trial Court framed an issue as to ‘whether Ranveer Singh

had appointed G. Rajender as his General Power of Attorney and

whether the sale deeds executed by G. Rajender in favour of

G.Shashikala as a General Power of Attorney were valid’. Thereafter,

pursuant to the revisionary order passed by the High Court, the very

admissibility of the General Power of Attorney dated 15.10.1990 and the

three sale deeds executed by the power-of-attorney holder was called in

question before the Trial Court and four additional issues were framed.

One of the additional issues was whether the alleged General Power of

Attorney dated 15.10.1990 was authenticated by the Registrar, as

required under
Sections 32
,
33
,
34
and
35
of the Registration Act, 1908

(hereinafter, ‘the Act’). Another additional issue was as to whether the

Registrar   had     recognized   G.       Rajender   Kumar,   the   alleged

power-of-attorney holder, at the time of execution of the three

sale deeds, as required under
Section 34(3)(c)
of the Act read with

Rule 53 of the Rules framed thereunder.
4.   While so, during the course of arguments before us on

authentication of a power of attorney and the duty cast upon the

Registrar while registering a sale deed executed by a power-of-attorney

holder, the earlier decision of this Court in
Rajni Tandon vs. Dulal

Ranjan Ghosh Dastidar and another
1 was cited. In fact, the High Court
1
(2009) 14 SCC 782
2
placed reliance upon
the said decision
in support of its conclusions.

Perforce, we had to study the decision and its ratio. In that case, by way

of a notarized power of attorney, the principal had authorized the agent

named therein to transfer his property and execute necessary

documents. Pursuant thereto, the power-of-attorney holder executed a

sale deed and presented it for registration. This action was assailed on

the ground that the power-of-attorney holder had to present an

authenticated power-of-attorney before the Sub-Registrar to get the sale

deed registered. A co-ordinate Bench heard the case and framed the

issue falling for consideration as under:
’19. ………. whether a person who executes a document under
      the terms of the power of attorney, is, insofar as the registration
      office is concerned, the actual executant of the document and is
      entitled under
Section 32(a)
to present it for registration and get
      if registered.’
5.    The Bench noted that one of the categories of persons eligible to

present a document for registration, in terms of
Section 32
of the Act, is

the ‘person executing’ the document. The Bench opined that the

expression ‘person executing’, as used in
Section 32(a)
of the Act,

signifies the person actually executing the document and includes a

principal who executes by means of an agent. Elaborating further, the

Bench held that where a person holds a power of attorney which

authorizes him to execute a document as an agent for someone else
3
and   he    executes    such    document     under    the   terms   of   the

power of attorney, he is, so far as the registration office is concerned, the

actual executant of the document and is entitled under
Section 32(a)
to

present it for registration and get it registered. The
Bench further held
that, in such a situation, the duty cast on the registering officer under
Section 32
of the Act is only to satisfy himself that the document was

executed by the person by whom it purports to have been signed and

upon being so satisfied and upon being presented with the document to

be registered, the registering officer has to proceed with its registration.

The conclusion of the Bench, as summed up in paragraph 33 of the

reported decision, reads as under:
“33. Where a deed is executed by an agent for a principal
      and the same agent signs, appears and presents the deed or
      admits execution before the registering officer, that is not a
      case of presentation under
Section 32(c)
of the Act. As
      mentioned earlier the provisions of
Section 33
will come into
      play only in cases where presentation is in terms of
Section
      32(c)
of the Act. In other words, only in case where the
      person(s) signing the document cannot present the
      document before the registering officer and gives a power of
      attorney to another to present the document before the
      registering officer and gives a power of attorney to another to
      present the document that the provisions of
Section 33
get
      attracted. It is only in such a case, that the said power of
      attorney has to be necessarily executed and authenticated in
      the manner provided under
Section 33(1)(a)
of the Act.”
6.    In effect, the Bench held that, when a document is executed by an

agent for a principal in terms of a power of attorney and the same agent
4
signs, appears and presents the said document or admits its execution

before the registering officer, it would not be a presentation falling under
Section 32(c)
of the Act and there would be no necessity for

‘authentication’ of the power of attorney, as required by
Section 33(1)(a)
of the Act.
7.    At this stage, it would be apposite to note the statutory scheme

obtaining under the Act.
Part VI of the Act
is titled ‘Of presenting

documents for registration’ and comprises
Sections 32
to
39
. To the

extent relevant,
Sections 32
,
33
,
34
and
35
are extracted hereunder:
“32. Persons to present documents for registration. — Except
      in the cases mentioned in
sections 31
,
88
and
89
, every
      document to be registered under this Act, whether such
      registration be compulsory or optional, shall be presented at the
      proper registration-office, —
(a) by some person executing or claiming under the same, or, in
          the case of a copy of a decree or order, claiming under the
          decree or order, or
(b) by the representative or assign of such a person, or
(c) by the agent of such a person, representative or assign, duly
          authorized by power-of-attorney executed and authenticated
          in manner hereinafter mentioned.
33. Power-of-attorney recognizable for purposes of
section 32
. — (1) For the purposes of
section 32
, the following
      powers-of-attorney shall alone be recognized, namely: —
(a) if the principal at the time of executing the power-of-attorney
      resides in any part of India in which this Act is for the time being
      in force, a power-of-attorney executed before and authenticated
      by the Registrar or Sub-Registrar within whose district or
      sub-district the principal resides;
5
(b) if the principal at the time aforesaid resides in any part of India
in which this Act is not in force, a power-of-attorney executed
before and authenticated by any Magistrate;
(c) if the principal at the time aforesaid does not reside in India,
a power-of-attorney executed before and authenticated by a
Notary Public, or any Court, Judge, Magistrate, Indian Consul or
Vice-Consul, or representative of the Central Government:
Provided that ……
Explanation. -- ……
(2) In the case of every such person the Registrar or
Sub-Registrar or Magistrate, as the case may be, if satisfied that
the power-of-attorney has been voluntarily executed by the
person purporting to be the principal, may attest the same without
requiring his personal attendance at the office or Court aforesaid.
(3) To obtain evidence as to the voluntary nature of the execution,
the Registrar or Sub-Registrar or Magistrate may either himself
go to the house of the person purporting to be the principal, or to
the jail in which he is confined, and examine him, or issue a
commission for his examination.
(4) Any power-of-attorney mentioned in this section may be
proved by the production of it without further proof when it
purports on the face of it to have been executed before and
authenticated by the person or Court hereinbefore mentioned in
that behalf.
34. Enquiry before registration by registering officer.—(1)
Subject to the provisions contained in this Part and in
sections 41
,
43
,
45
,
69
,
75
,
77
,
88
and
89
, no document shall be registered
under this Act, unless the persons executing such document, or
their representatives, assigns or agents authorized as aforesaid,
appear before the registering officer within the time allowed for
presentation under
sections 23
,
24
,
25
and
26
:
Provided that, …….
(2) ……

(3) The registering officer shall thereupon—
6
(a) enquire whether or not such document was executed by the
persons by whom it purports to have been executed;
(b) satisfy himself as to the identity of the persons appearing
before him and alleging that they have executed the document;
and
(c) in the case of any person appearing as a representative,
assign or agent, satisfy himself of the right of such person so to
appear.
(4) ……
(5) ……
35. Procedure on admission and denial of execution
respectively. — (1)(a) If all the persons executing the document
appear personally before the registering officer and are
personally known to him, or if he be otherwise satisfied that they
are the person they represent themselves to be, and if they all
admit the execution of the document, or
(b) if in the case of any person appearing by a representative,
assign or agent, such representative, assign or agent admits the
execution, or
(c) if the person executing the document is dead, and his
representative or assign appears before the registering officer
and admits the execution, the registering officer shall register the
document as directed in
sections 58
to
61
inclusive.
(2) The registering officer may, in order to satisfy himself that the
persons appearing before him are the persons they represent
themselves to be, or for any other purpose contemplated by this
Act, examine any one present in his office.
(3) (a) ……, or
(b) ……, or
(c) ……,
……:
Provided that, ……:
Provided further that …….”
7
8.
Section 32
of the Act details the persons competent to present a

document for registration before the registering authority.
Section 32(a)
speaks of the person ‘executing’ or ‘claiming under’ the document

presenting it for registration while
Section 32(b)
refers to the

presentation by a representative or assign of such person.
Section 32(c)
,

on the other hand, speaks of presentation of the document by the agent

of such person, representative or assign, who has been authorized to do

so by a power of attorney, executed and authenticated in the manner

prescribed.
9.   As per
Section 33
of the Act, the power of attorney recognizable

for the ‘purposes of
Section 32
’ has to fulfil the requirements set out

therein so as to validate it and, in consequence, the presentation of the

document by such power-of-attorney holder for registration. We may

also note that Rules 49 to 55 in Chapter XI of the Andhra Pradesh Rules

framed under the Act set out the requirements for compliance with the

mandate of
Section 33
of the Act. Rule 49(i) pertains to a registered

power of attorney and states that the registering officer should satisfy

himself as to the identity of the party and, after obtaining his left thumb

impression against his signature, when necessary, authenticate it in the

prescribed format as set out therein. Rule 49(ii) relates to an

unregistered   power    of   attorney       and   details   the   procedure   of

authentication to be followed in such a case. Rule 53 categorically states
8
that even if a power of attorney is registered, it would not be valid for

registration purposes unless it is authenticated.
10.   Further,
Section 34(3)(a)
of the Act casts a duty on the registering

officer to enquire whether or not the document presented for registration

was executed by the person(s) by whom it purports to have been

executed; satisfy himself as to the identity of the persons appearing

before him and alleging that they have executed the document; and in

the case of any person appearing as a representative, assign or agent,

satisfy himself of the right of such person so to appear. Finally,
Section 35
of the Act speaks of the registering officer satisfying himself

as to the competence and identity of the person(s) presenting the

document for registration.
11.   The view taken in
Rajni Tandon
(supra) is that, if the

power-of-attorney holder is authorized to execute a document, say, a

sale deed, he would then become the ‘executant’ of the sale deed and

can directly present it for registration under
Section 32(a)
of the Act and

it would not be necessary to apply the tests prescribed under the Act

apropos powers-of-attorney.
12.   With due respect to the learned Judges who decided
Rajni

Tandon
(supra), we are unable to subscribe to this view. A

power-of-attorney holder executes a document, say, a sale deed, not in

his own name but in the name of his principal, and signs it on behalf of
9
the principal by virtue of the authority conferred upon him by the

power of attorney. He does not, thereby, become the ‘executant’ of the

sale deed as the said sale deed would invariably be executed in the

name of the principal, who would be shown therein as represented by

the power-of-attorney holder. The power-of-attorney holder, therefore,

does not become the ‘executant’ referred to in
Section 32(a)
of the Act

but would still remain the agent and, by virtue of being authorized by the

power of attorney, he merely executes and signs it on that principal’s

behalf.
13.   That is the reason why, generally, a power of attorney not only

authorizes the power-of-attorney holder to execute documents of

transfer, i.e., sale deeds, on behalf of the principal, but further authorizes

that power-of-attorney holder to present such sale deeds for registration

before the registering officer. In the present case also, the alleged

Irrevocable General Power of Attorney dated 15.10.1990 contains like

clauses that read as under:
‘2. To Sign all the documents of transfer such as sale
      Deed/s mortgage, lease, deeds, etc. in respect of all
      above Property on my behalf.
3. To sell, mortgage or lease out the above property in
      favour of any person or persons whomsoever as she likes
      on my behalf.
4. To present and sign all the documents of transfer
      Before the registering authority, by executing the same in
      respect of the above property on my behalf.’
      }}
10
Therefore, a power-of-attorney holder, having signed the document

as an agent of the principal pursuant to the authority conferred on him by

the power of attorney, then presents it for registration, having been

specifically authorized to do so by the power of attorney, and not

because he is the ‘executant’ of the document in terms of
Section 32(a)
of the Act.
14.   The contrary interpretation adopted and applied by the Bench in
Rajni Tandon
(supra) would lead to a rather incongruous situation

where a notarized power-of-attorney holder, as
in that case
, who

executes a sale deed would become its ‘executant’ in terms of
Section 32(a)
of the Act and would be entitled to get the sale deed

registered without further ado but, hypothetically and only for the

purpose of illustration without reference to the legal repercussions and

validity of such an act, if that notarized power-of-attorney holder then

executes a power-of-attorney, even if registered, in favour of any person

to merely present the sale deed executed by him for registration, that

registered power-of-attorney holder has to pass the tests set out in
Sections 32(c)
,
33
,
34
and
35
of the Act!          In effect, the merely

mechanical act of presentation of a document for registration would have

to be subjected to rigorous scrutiny but the weightier act of executing a

document transferring title in immovable property on behalf of the true
11
owner, on the strength of a power of attorney, which may even be

unregistered or just notarized, passes muster straightaway and need not

be subjected to any of the tests prescribed in the Act!
15.   Further, the Bench did not note that
Section 34(3)
of the Act

requires the registering officer to conduct a detailed enquiry as to

whether the document presented for registration was executed by the

persons by whom it ‘purports to have been executed’ and also satisfy

himself as to the identity of the persons appearing before him and

alleging   that   they   have   executed   the   document.   In   addition,
Section 35(2)
of the Act posits a duty upon the registering officer to

satisfy himself that the persons appearing before him are the persons

‘they represent themselves to be’.
16.   Therefore, when G. Rajender Kumar, the power-of-attorney holder,

presented the three sale deeds in question for registration, wherein he

had signed on behalf of his alleged principals, viz., Ranveer Singh and

Gyanu Bai, the Registrar necessarily had to satisfy himself, not only

about his identity, but also as to whether G. Rajender Kumar had the

authority to sign the documents on their behalf. This, inevitably, would

require verification of the power of attorney, which would then have to

pass all the prescribed tests. In our opinion, elevating G. Rajender

Kumar, the alleged power-of-attorney holder, to the status of ‘the

executant’ of the sale deeds in question would be contrary to the recitals
12
in the sale deeds themselves, as the sale deeds name the principals,

viz., Ranveer Singh and Gyanu Bai, as the executants and not

G.Rajender Kumar, the power-of-attorney holder, who allegedly

represented them and signed the sale deeds on their behalf.
17.   By merely signing a document on behalf of the principal, a

power-of-attorney holder does not lose his status as an agent of that

principal and become the ‘executant’ in his own right. Such an agent

would, therefore, continue to be covered by
Section 32(c)
of the Act as

he would then present the signed document for registration only as an

agent and must necessarily satisfy the requirements of
Sections 32(c)
,
33. 34 and 35 of the Act and the rules framed in that context.
18.
Rajni Tandon
(supra) holds to the contrary and declares that a

power-of-attorney holder who signs a sale deed on behalf of the principal

would become the ‘executant’ thereof and would be covered by
Section 32(a)
of the Act, whereby he/she need not fulfil the requirements

of
Sections 32(c)
and
33
of the Act and the contextual rules framed

thereunder. With all due respect, as we are unable to persuade

ourselves to agree with that view, we are of the considered opinion that

the said issue requires to be addressed and conclusively settled by a

larger Bench.
13
19.   We, accordingly, direct the Registry to obtain necessary orders

from the Hon’ble The Chief Justice as to the expeditious listing of these

appeals before an appropriate Bench.
............................., J
                                                           (Sanjay Kumar)



                                                    ............................., J
                                                     (K.V. Viswanathan)
      July 15, 2025
      New Delhi.
14