[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Communidade Of Tivim Tivim, Bardez-Goa vs State Of Goa on 14 July, 2025
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
,
Aravind Kumar
REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
2025 INSC 835
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
          CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).                OF 2025
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO(S).    OF 2025)
                                   @ DIARY NO. 16901/2025



     COMMUNIDADE OF TIVIM, TIVIM, BARDEZ GOA                               …APPELLANT

                                                     Versus

     STATE OF GOA & ORS.                                                ..RESPONDENTS

                                               JUDGMENT
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.
1.Delay of 146 days in filing the Special Leave Petition is condoned.
Leave granted.
2.The appellant before this court is a ‘Communidade’ 1 or an

                            agricultural association of villagers that has properties in

                            common and the income derived from these properties

                            accrues in favour of its members. The system is peculiar to

                            Goa and is based on the concept of collective village

                            ownership, which was originally called as the ‘Gaunkari

                            System’ and the village communities owning the land
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Nirmala Negi
Date: 2025.07.14
collectively were known as ‘gaunkaria’ which ultimately came
   17:57:08 IST
   Reason:
1 Portugese translation of the English word ‘Community’.
Page 1 of 12
to be termed as ‘communidades’ during the Portuguese

     colonisation of Goa.
3.Under challenge before us in this Appeal is the judgment dated

      06.08.2024 by which the Writ Petition filed by the appellant,

     stood dismissed by the High Court of Bombay at Goa.
4.The High Court while doing so has upheld the order dated

      13.04.2023 by which the Administrative Tribunal, Goa has

      refused to grant permission to the Appellant to compromise

      proceedings instituted by the private respondents herein

      (respondent Nos. 3 to 11) under the
Goa, Daman and Diu

      Agricultural Tenancy Act, 1964
(hereinafter ‘Tenancy Act,

      1964’).
5.At the outset, it is necessary to mention here at this stage that

      the administration of Comunidades is governed by the Code

      of Comunidades (hereinafter ‘the Code’).
Article 154 (3)
of

      the Code empowers the Administrative Tribunal to grant

      permission to the Communidade to compromise terms in any

     suit to which the Communidade is a party.
6.The facts which have led to filing of the Writ Petition before the

      High Court can be summarised as under:
a) Two properties (hereinafter ‘Suit Properties’) belonging to
        the appellant, known as “Oiteil-De-Madel” bearing Survey
        No. 448/0 & “Levelechy Aradi” bearing Survey No. 440/0
        are situated in the village of Tivim in the taluka of Bardez
Page 2 of 12
in Goa and were leased to the predecessors-in-interest of
     the private respondents by the appellant, in July, 1978.
b)   A civil suit was filed by the predecessor of the private
     respondents praying that his name be entered in the
     Tenants column in the Survey numbers which correspond
     to the two properties mentioned above. This suit was
     decreed on 08.01.1986 & consequently, the name of the
     predecessor of the private respondents was entered as
     tenant of the two properties. Since no appeal was preferred
     against the decree passed by the Trial Court, the same
     attained finality. Thereafter, predecessor of the private
     respondents herein passed away on 01.02.2015.
c)   On 08.12.2016, the private respondents herein filed
     Tenancy Application No. 71/2016 before the Civil Judge,
     Junior Division (B-Court), Bicholim (hereinafter ‘Trial
     Court’) for declaration of Tenancy under Section 7 of the
     Tenancy Act, 1964. Despite service of notice to the
     appellant by the Trial Court, no appearance was entered on
     its behalf, which led to the case being proceeded ex-parte
     against the appellant.
d)   Vide Judgment & Order dated 01.09.2017, Trial Court
     allowed the Tenancy Application, consequently declaring
     the private respondents as agricultural tenants of the Suit
     Properties. Aggrieved by the declaration of tenancy, the
     appellant preferred Tenancy Appeal before the Ad-hoc
     District Judge-I at Mapusa, Goa (hereinafter ‘Appellate
     Court’).
Page 3 of 12
e)   The above-mentioned appeal remains pending before the
     Appellate Court till date. All the same, during pendency of
     the Tenancy Appeal, an Extraordinary General Body
     Meeting of the appellant was held on 14.03.2021, in which
     members of the appellant deliberated upon the Tenancy
     Appeal and also considered the fact that if the appeal fails,
     they stand to lose a major chunk of land held by the
     Communidade. It is at this meeting that the Communidade
     resolved that as a compromise, the land in dispute could be
     bifurcated into a 60:40 sharing ratio, with 60% of the land
     being allotted to the private respondents and 40% of the
     land to be retained by the communidade.
f)   Pursuant to the above, Managing Committee of the
     Communidade had further deliberations and finally, a
     General Body Meeting was convened on 31.10.2021
     wherein consent terms were finalised and agreed upon. All
     the same, before filing these consent terms before the
     Appellate    Court,     permission   was   needed   from    the
     Administrative Tribunal in terms of
Article 154 (3)
of the
     Code. Accordingly, on 22.02.2023, respondent No. 2 herein
     i.e.,   Administrator    of   Communidades    forwarded     the
     consent terms to the Administrative Tribunal for approval.
g)   As stated earlier, by an Order dated 13.04.2023, such
     permission was denied by the Administrative Tribunal and
     this Order of the Administrative Tribunal was assailed by
     the Communidade before the High Court by way of a Writ
     Petition.
Page 4 of 12
7.The short question that arose for consideration before the High

     Court, which will also be before this Court is whether the

     Administrative Tribunal was correct in its refusal to grant the

     appellant, permission to compromise proceedings with the

     private respondents in terms of
Article 154 (3)
of the Code?

     The High Court as we know has already held that this

     permission could not have been granted under law.
8.We have heard Mr. Huzefa Ahmadi, learned counsel for the

     appellant who submits that the Administrative Tribunal has

     erred in refusing to grant permission to the Communidade,

     and as such, the High Court ought not to have upheld the

     Administrative Tribunal’s decision. He contends that the best

     interests of the appellant and its members have to be

     considered and both the High Court as well as the

     Administrative Tribunal have failed to take into consideration

     the fact that the appellant had finalised consent terms,

     keeping in mind its best interest and in the absence of such

     terms, the suit properties would have to be regarded as

     ‘tenanted land’ which is allotted to the private respondents

     herein, which would in turn be contrary to the appellant’s

     best interests.
Page 5 of 12
9.It is Mr. Ahmadi’s second argument that the Code itself by virtue

      of
Article 30 (4) (g)
empowers the Communidade to deliberate

      upon, the withdrawal and compromise of civil suits and this

      aspect of the matter was completely ignored by the High

      Court.
10.   For the respondent no. 1-State of Goa and respondent no. 2,

      we have heard learned counsel Mr. Abhay Anil Anturkar, who

      supports the decision of the Administrative Tribunal and

      submits that the same warranted no interference by the High

      Court and hence, there is no infirmity with the order

      impugned.    Learned counsel would argue that the consent

      terms sought to be entered into between the appellant and

      the private respondents is nothing but an attempt to bypass

      and negate the provisions contained in the
Tenancy Act
as

      well as the
Goa Land Use (Regulation) Act, 1991
(hereinafter

      ‘Land Use Act’).
11.   In this regard, the learned Counsel has referred to Clauses i),
iii), v), x) and xi) of the consent terms, which essentially

      confer to the private respondents ‘all rights and interests,

      which rights shall be akin to full ownership rights’ over 60% of

      the land and reciprocally, the appellant is to have ‘exclusive

      rights free from any tenancy claim’ over 40% of land.
Page 6 of 12
Additionally, these clauses also stipulate that the private

      respondents can use and utilise 60% of the land ‘for any

      purpose whatsoever’ in lieu of which the appellant is also

      entitled to use its share of 40% of land ‘in the manner

      deemed fit and proper.’
12.   It is therefore the respondent-State’s contention that the

      proposed consent terms effectively accord freehold ownership

      rights over the land in question to both the parties and also

      allows them to use the land for non-agricultural purposes,

      which is in blatant violation of statutory provisions contained

      in the
Tenancy Act
as well as the Land Use Act.
13.   Having heard learned counsel for both the sides and having

      perused the material on record, we are of the considered

      opinion that the Administrative Tribunal has rightly refused

      to grant permission to the consent terms finalised by the

      appellant. A bare perusal of the same indicates that it is

      nothing   but   an   attempt   to   circumvent   the   statutory

      framework laid down in
Tenancy Act
and also violates the

      Land Use Act.
14.   We are in complete agreement with the Administrative

      Tribunal, Goa which has refused to accord its permission to

      the filing of the consent terms. What weighed in with the

      Tribunal is the fact that these terms effectively wipe out
Page 7 of 12
tenancy rights of the private respondents which was declared

      by the Trial Court vide judgment dated 01.09.2017 and by

      the proposed compromise, the parties have agreed that in

      lieu of the 60:40 bifurcation of land between them, the

      judgment dated 01.09.2017 stands set aside. This prompted

      the   Tribunal   to   observe   that   instead   of   testing   the

      correctness of judgment dated 01.09.2017 on merits before

      the appellate court, the parties intend to set aside the

      judgment by way of compromise.
15.   Moreover, the Tribunal also expressed its dismay at the fact

      that these consent terms have the effect of bypassing the
Tenancy Act
, since it confers full ownership rights to the

      private respondents who have been declared as tenants and

      any compromise which is contrary to a statute cannot be

      entered into by the appellant.
16.
Section 9
of the Tenancy Act lists down the modes of

      termination of tenancy and specifies that tenancy can only be

      terminated via three modes. The first is when the tenant

      himself surrenders his right of tenancy to the landlord in the

      manner contained in
Section 10
. Similarly, in the second

      situation, the landlord may terminate the tenancy, but only

      on the basis of the specific grounds contained in
Section 11
.
Page 8 of 12
Lastly,
Section 9 (c)
provides for termination under any other

      specific provision of the
Tenancy Act
. It is abundantly clear

      that by means of the proposed compromise, the parties have

      essentially terminated the tenancy, without recourse to any

      of the modes referred to in
Section 9
of the Act.
17.   We shall now refer to
Chapter IIA of the Tenancy Act
which is

      titled “Special rights and privileges of tenants.” Section 18A in

      this chapter provides that every tenant shall be deemed to

      have purchased from his landlord, the land held by him as a

      tenant on the tillers’ day, subject to other provisions of the

      Act. This chapter then lays out the procedure to be followed.

      Section 18C provides for the Mamlatdar to first issue public

      notice to the tenants who are deemed to have purchased the

      lands as well as the landlords of such lands and other

      interested persons. The purchase price payable by a tenant to

      the landlord is then indicated in the Table contained in

      Section 18D. We must also take note of the fact that
Section

      18K
of the Tenancy Act prohibits a tenant who has

      purchased the land from transferring the land without the

      Mamlatdar’s prior permission. If the proposed consent terms

      are to be allowed, not only would the tenant be conferred full

      ownership rights, in complete disregard of the procedure for
Page 9 of 12
purchase mentioned above, but it would also mean that the

      tenant would be conferred a right to alienate land, without

      seeking permission of any statutory authority.
18.   It is also important to take note of the fact that even after a

      tenant has purchased the land in question after complying

      with the procedure contemplated under Chapter IIA, he is

      barred from using the land for any purpose other than

      agriculture, as per Section 2 of the Land Use Act, which

      reads as under:
“2. Regulation of use of land.— Notwithstanding
          anything contained in the
Goa, Daman and Diu Town and
          Country Planning Act, 1974
(Act 21 of 1975), or in any
          plan or scheme made thereunder, or in the Goa Land
          Revenue Code, 1968 (Act 9 of 1969), no land which is
          vested in a tenant under the provisions of the
Goa, Daman
          and Diu Agricultural Tenancy Act, 1964
(Act 7 of 1964)
          shall be used or allowed to be used for any purpose other
          than agriculture.”
19.   A bare reading of the aforementioned provisions is enough to

      come to the conclusion that the proposed consent terms or

      the compromise sought to be entered by the appellant with

      the private respondents falls foul of both the statutes i.e., the

      Tenancy Act and the Land Use Act, insofar as it creates

      freehold ownership rights over tenanted land, without

      resorting to the procedure contemplated for the purchase of

      such land by the tenant and secondly, for the reason that
Page 10 of 12
these terms effectively allow the appellant, as well as the

      private respondents, to use an agricultural land for non-

      agricultural purposes. In other words, the compromise not

      only circumvents procedural aspects contained in
Chapter

      IIA of the Tenancy Act
but also allows the parties to use the

      suit properties for a purpose which is expressly barred by the

      Land Use Act.    The compromise sought by the parties is

      nothing but an abuse of the process of law. The so called

      compromise or agreement is a ploy to defeat the provisions of

      law and therefore it has been rightly denied the legal sanctity

      which was sought.
20.   As regards the submission of the learned counsel relating to
Art. 30 (4) (g)
of the Code, it is to be noted that the said

      provision merely empowers a Communidade to deliberate

      upon terms of compromise, which upon finalisation, has to

      be forwarded to the Administrative Tribunal. By no stretch of

      imagination can this provision be construed to mean that it

      confers an unfettered power on the Communidade to enter

      into a compromise, without the Tribunal’s sanction.
21.   Hence, we see absolutely no reason to interfere with the order

      dated 06.08.2024 passed by the High Court of Bombay at

      Goa.
Page 11 of 12
22.   Consequently,    this   appeal   stands      dismissed.        Pending

      application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
23.   All the same, we deem it necessary to clarify that we have

      expressed no opinion whatsoever on the merits of the dispute

      between the appellant and private respondents as regard the

      claim of Tenancy. The Tenancy Appeal filed by the appellant

      before the Appellate Court shall be decided on its own merits,

      in accordance with law.
….....................................J.
                                              [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]




                                        ……..................................J.
                                            [K. VINOD CHANDRAN]


 NEW DELHI;
JULY 14, 2025.
Page 12 of 12