[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Indian Oil Corporation Limited vs M/S Shree Niwas Ramgopal on 14 July, 2025
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
2025 INSC 832                                                                 REPORTABLE



                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                              SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1381 OF 2025


                         INDIAN OIL CORPORATION
                         LIMITED & ORS.                                  …PETITIONER(S)

                                                     VERSUS

                         M/S SHREE NIWAS
                         RAMGOPAL & ORS.                                 …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                JUDGMENT
PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.    Heard Smt. Madhavi Goradia Divan, learned senior

                               counsel for the Petitioner, Shri Yashraj Singh Deora,

                               learned senior counsel for the Respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and

                               Smt. Pallavi Pratap, learned counsel for the Respondent

                               Nos.7 and 8.
2.    It is a classic case where instead of acting in a just, fair
Signature Not Verified
and equitable manner, the statutory corporation, a state
Digitally signed by
SNEHA DAS
Date: 2025.07.14
17:50:32 IST
Reason:
instrumentality, has acted in a high-handed manner while
1
exercising arbitrary powers with no sense of fairness in a

           matter of commercial interest.
3.      The Indian Oil Corporation Limited1 after having lost

           before the Single Judge and the Division Bench of the High

           Court of Calcutta in successfully defending its above

           action has preferred this Special Leave Petition, probably

           in order to cover its illegal action.
4.      The Special Leave Petition is directed against the judgment

           and order dated 04.07.2018 passed by the Division Bench

           of the High Court upholding the mandamus issued by the

           Single Judge on 03.07.2012 in a writ petition directing the

           IOCL to maintain the supply of kerosene to the respondent

           No.1 till it is reconstituted or its dealership agreement is

           terminated.
5.      The brief facts giving rise to the present dispute and to this

           Special Leave Petition are that Respondent No.1 – M/s

           Shree Niwas Ramgopal herein was a proprietorship firm of

           one Kanhaiyalal Sonthalia. The said Kanhaiyalal Sonthalia

           reconstituted the firm on 24.11.1989 and included his two

           sons, Ramesh Sonthalia and Gobinda Sonthalia along with


1 In short ‘IOCL’
2
himself as partners in the said firm. The firm was

     reconstituted as a partnership firm with Kanhaiyalal

     Sonthalia having 55% share, Ramesh Sonthalia having

     35% share and Gobinda Sonthalia holding 10% share in

     the said partnership business.
6.   The partnership was to work as an agency/distributor of

     kerosene oil for the IOCL. The said partnership firm

     entered into a kerosene dealership agreement with the

     IOCL on 11.05.1990 which inter alia specifically provided

     that in the event of death of any of the partners of the

     partnership firm, the dealer shall immediately inform the

     corporation and provide details of the heirs and legal

     representatives of the deceased partner. It further provided

     that IOCL shall have an option:- i) to continue with the

     dealership with the existing firm; or ii) to have fresh

     agreement of dealership with the reconstituted firm; or
iii) to terminate the dealership agreement. The decision of

     the IOCL in this behalf shall be final and binding upon all

     parties.
7.   One of the partners of the aforesaid partnership firm

     Kanhaiyalal Sonthalia, having 55% shares in the firm, died
3
on 29.11.2009 leaving behind his wife, seven sons and four

     daughters as his heirs and legal representatives which

     included Ramesh Sonthalia and Gobinda Sonthalia, the

     two sons who were already working as partners in the firm.
8.   On the death of aforesaid Kanhaiyalal Sonthalia, as

     usually happens in all business families, disputes cropped

     up amongst his heirs with regard to the stake of 55%

     shareholding of the deceased in the partnership firm.
9.   One of his legal heirs Ananda Sonthalia addressed a letter

     dated 19.01.2010 to the existing partners staking claim in

     the partnership and that he be inducted as one of the

     partners. An undated letter was written by another heir

     Jagdish Prasad Sonthalia stating he has a            bitter

     experience about the firm’s business and he does not know

     about the assets and liabilities of his deceased father,

     therefore, the remaining partners be directed to furnish

     the details of the assets and liabilities, failing which it

     would not be possible for him to take a decision in the

     matter. Another legal heir Rakesh Sonthalia sent a letter

     to the Chief Divisional Retail Sales Manager of IOCL on

     07.02.2010, informing him that his deceased father had
4
left a will dated 28.05.2008, bequeathing his 55% share in

     the firm to him and that after his death he should be taken

     as a partner. It was later informed that he had already

     applied for probate of the said will through Miscellaneous

     Case No.11 of 2010 in the court of Civil Judge, Junior

     Division, Jangipur.
10. Pending the above confusion regarding the reconstitution

     of   the   partnership   firm,   the   IOCL   approved   the

     continuation of the firm till 14.06.2010 and advised them

     to furnish documents for the reconstitution of the firm.

     Accordingly, the subsisting partners on 13.04.2010

     submitted a proposal for the reconstitution of the firm with

     the surviving partners and one another legal heir of the

     deceased i.e., Bijoy Sonthalia, with necessary documents

     and the reconstitution fee of Rs.25,000/-.
11. Despite the above, the firm was informed that the validity

     of the token to supply kerosene would not be extended

     beyond 14.06.2010 if a fresh agreement is not executed.

     The representations of the partners to continue supplies

     were all in vain. Thus, the firm and its partners were

     compelled to invoke the writ jurisdiction of the High Court
5
under
Article 226
of the Constitution by filing Writ Petition

          No.758 of 20102. The firm and its subsisting partners

          therein prayed for declaring Clause 1.5 of the policy

          guidelines dated 01.12.2008 to be illegal and contrary to

          the provisions of the
Indian Partnership Act, 1932
, for a

          mandamus to renew the licence to supply kerosene and to

          allow reconstitution of the partnership firm in terms of the

          partnership deed dated 24.11.1989. A further prayer was

          made to extend the validity of the token for the supply of

          the kerosene and not to stop it after 14.06.2010 so that

          the partnership firm may continue its business till the

          reconstitution of the firm.
12. The aforesaid writ petition was allowed vide judgment and

          order dated 03.07.2012 directing the IOCL to allow the

          partnership firm to be reconstituted subject to any order

          that may be passed in the probate case or by the

          competent civil court in the event any of the legal heirs

          approaches the court. The aggrieved heirs were given

          liberty to get their rights decided by the competent civil

          court. The court directed that till their rights are not


2 M/s
Shree Niwas Ramgopal & Ors. vs. The Director of Consumer Goods & Ors.
6
decided, the partnership firm will be allowed to continue

          with its subsisting partners and to receive supplies of

          kerosene.
13. Aggrieved by the aforesaid directions of the learned Single

          Judge of the High Court, only the IOCL appealed against

          it. No grievance was raised by any of the heirs and legal

          representatives of the deceased Kanhaiyalal Sonthalia.

          None of them assailed the aforesaid order before the

          Division Bench meaning thereby that they felt satisfied

          and accepted the directions of the Single Judge.
14. The appeal by the IOCL was disposed of by the Division

          Bench on 04.07.2018 holding that in view of the law laid

          down earlier by the High Court in
Indian Oil Corporation

          vs.     Roy and Company3
, the IOCL is not entitled to

          discontinue the supply of kerosene oil to the partnership

          firm. The IOCL being a state authority ought to act in the

          interest of consumers, the common people, and should

          continue to supply kerosene oil to the firm for a period of

          one year and thereafter review the same on yearly basis till




3 2018 (1) CHN (Cal) 199
7
the partnership firm is        reconstituted    amongst the

    surviving partners and the heirs of the deceased partner.
15. The sheet anchor of Smt. Madhavi Divan, learned senior

    counsel for the IOCL, is the revised policy guidelines dated

    01.12.2008. Her main submission is that the IOCL is

    following the said guidelines uniformly throughout the

    country. The said guidelines vide Clause 1.5 provides that

    in case of death of a partner(s), the partnership shall be

    reconstituted with the legal heir(s) of the deceased

    partner(s) and the surviving partner(s). Since all the heirs

    of deceased Kanhaiyalal Sonthalia have not applied or

    joined as partners to the reconstituted partnership firm,

    the IOCL is not bound to continue business with the

    existing    partnership   or   to   recognise   the   alleged

    reconstituted partnership, so as to continue the supply of

    kerosene.
16. In order to counter the above arguments, the counsel for

    the Respondents 1,2 and 3 i.e., the partnership firm and

    the surviving partners submitted that under the deed of

    partnership dated 24.11.1989, it has been specifically

    stipulated vide Clause 18 that in the event of death of any
8
of the partner, the partnership will not cease to function,

    rather it shall continue to carry on the business and the

    surviving partners may admit any of the competent heirs

    of the deceased partner to the partnership so as to

    reconstitute   it.   The       Dealership   Agreement   dated

    11.05.1990 also does not provide for the cessation of the

    existing partnership on the death of one of the partners,

    rather it provides to continue the dealership with the

    existing firm or to have a fresh dealership agreement with

    the firm, if reconstituted, or to terminate the dealership

    agreement. Since the dealership agreement was never

    terminated, the IOCL is not empowered to stop the

    supplies of the kerosene or to treat the business having

    come to an end.
17. In the light of the facts as narrated above and the

    submissions advanced by the counsel for the parties, it

    would be prudent to first refer to the Dealership Agreement

    dated 11.05.1990 which lays down the conditions of

    dealership inter alia that in the event of death of any

    partner, the subsisting partners of the dealership shall

    immediately inform to the IOCL about the death of the
9
partner with necessary details of legal heirs of the deceased

     partner; whereupon it would be open for the IOCL to:- (i)

     either continue the dealership with the existing firm; or (ii)

     to have the fresh agreement of the dealership with the firm

     if reconstituted; or (iii) to terminate the dealership

     agreement. The above three conditions are evident from

     the plain and simple reading of Clause 30 of the dealership

     agreement.
18. It is an admitted position that the IOCL till date has not

     exercised the option of terminating the dealership of the

     firm, rather has provided opportunity to the firm to

     reconstitute itself. The firm has been reconstituted as per

     the proposal    submitted on 13.04.2010          having the

     surviving partners and Vijay Sonthalia, one of the heirs

     and legal representatives of the deceased, as the third

     partner. However, the said reconstituted firm has not been

     recognised by the IOCL simply for the reason that all the

     heirs and legal representatives of the deceased persons

     have not joined or have not expressed their unwillingness

     to join the partnership firm.
10
19. The deed of partnership on the other hand vide Clause 18

           clearly stipulates that the death of any partner shall not

           cause discontinuance of the partnership business and that

           the surviving partners may continue the business and the

           interest of the deceased partner shall vest in the legal heirs

           of the deceased. The surviving partners have the option to

           admit any of the competent heirs of the deceased partner

           to the partnership on such terms and conditions as may

           be agreed upon.
20. The aforesaid clause thus permits the existing partners to

           continue with the partnership business notwithstanding

           the death of one of the partners, leaving it open for the

           surviving partners to induct any of the competent heirs of

           the deceased partner in the partnership business. It is not

           necessary for the surviving partners to include all the heirs

           of the deceased partners in the partnership or to wait for

           their consent to be included or not to be included in the

           partnership.
21. It is settled in law by virtue of Section 42 of the Partnership

           Act, 19324 that the partnership will stand dissolved inter


4 Hereinafter referred to as the “
Partnership Act
”
11
alia on the death of the partner but this is applicable in

          cases where there are only two partners constituting the

          partnership firm. The aforesaid principle would not apply

          where there are more than two partners in a partnership

          firm and the deed of partnership provides otherwise that

          the firm will not stand automatically dissolved on the

          death of one of the partners.
22. In the case at hand, the partnership consisted of three

          partners and the deed of partnership, in unequivocal

          terms, provided that the death of a partner shall not cause

          discontinuance of partnership and the surviving partners

          may continue with the business. Therefore, the principle

          laid down under
Section 42
of the Partnership Act would

          not be applicable and the partnership would continue

          despite the death of one of the partners.
23. This Court in M/s
Wazid Ali Abid Ali vs. Commissioner

          of Income Tax, Lucknow5
observed that under the
Partnership Act
, on death or demise of a partner, the firm

          shall not be dissolved but shall be carried on with the

          remaining partners or by including the heirs and


5 1988 (Supp) SCC 193
12
representative of the deceased partner on such terms and

          conditions mutually agreed upon.
The aforesaid decision

          relied upon the decision of Calcutta High Court in
Sandersons & Morgans                   vs.   ITO6
wherein it was

          reiterated that if one of the partners dies or retires, there

          is change in the constitution of the firm but there is no

          dissolution.
A similar view was expressed by the Allahabad

          High        Court   in
Noor        Mohammad    and   Co.   vs.

          Commissioner of Income-Tax7
wherein it was held that

          the partnership would continue despite the death of one of

          the partners in terms of the Partnership Deed.
24. Moreover, the dealership agreement itself recognises that

          in the event of death of one of the partners, the IOCL may

          continue the dealership with the said firm. Therefore, on

          the death of one of the partners of the firm, the business

          of the firm would not come to an end in view of Clause 18

          of the deed of partnership read with Clause 13 of the

          dealership agreement. In such a situation, the IOCL could

          not have discontinued the supply of kerosene to the

          existing firm without terminating its dealership.


6 (1973) 87 ITR 270
7 (1991) 191 ITR 550
13
25. The IOCL has refused to recognise the reconstituted firm

    on the pretext that all the heirs of the deceased partners

    have not joined or expressed their willingness either way

    to join or not to join the firm. In this connection,

    Clause 1.5 of the guidelines dated 01.12.2008 is very

    relevant and important. The said guidelines simply provide

    that in the case of death of one of the partners, the

    partnership shall be reconstituted with the legal heirs of

    the deceased partner and the surviving partners. It further

    provides that if there are no legal heirs or any of them have

    expressed unwillingness to join the firm, the dealership

    shall be reconstituted with the surviving partners or with

    the willing heirs of the deceased partner. The aforesaid

    guidelines nowhere stipulates that it is mandatory for all

    the legal heirs to join or reconstitute the partnership firm

    or otherwise to express their unwillingness to participate.

    It simply provides that a firm can be reconstituted with the

    legal heirs of the deceased partner which does not in any

    manner mean that it is mandatory for all the legal heirs to

    join for reconstitution of the firm. In fact, the deed of

    partnership specifically provides that on the death of any
14
of the partners, the business of the partnership will

     continue with the surviving partners and they may induct

     any of the competent heirs of the deceased partners, which

     means that it is not imperative upon the surviving partners

     to induct all the heirs of the deceased partner in the

     reconstituted partnership firm. The insistence of the IOCL

     that all the legal heirs of the deceased partner should join

     the reconstituted firm or give ‘No Objection Certificate’ to

     the reconstituted firm would be contrary to the spirit of the

     original deed of partnership. The IOCL has no role to play

     in determining as to who is the competent heir of the

     deceased partner. It should be left on the wisdom of the

     existing partners.
26. In the wake of the above analysis and the discussion, the

     IOCL appeared to have misconstrued its own guidelines in

     not recognising the reconstitution of the partnership firm

     with the surviving partners and one new partner being one

     of the competent heir and legal representative of the

     deceased partner.
27. It is trite to mention that the IOCL is supposed to act in a

     manner which is beneficial for the continuance of the
15
business and not to adopt an arbitrary approach thereby

     creating hinderance in the running business. It is for this

     reason that the learned Single Judge and the Division

     Bench of the High Court issued Mandamus, directing IOCL

     to continue the supply of kerosene to the existing

     partnership firm till it is properly reconstituted, subject to

     any order that may be passed in the probate case or by the

     competent Civil Court, if any of the heirs of the deceased

     partners approaches such a court and that the situation

     be reviewed on yearly basis to allow reconstitution of the

     firm with the surviving partners.
28. In the facts and circumstances of the case, there is no error

     or illegality on the part of the High Court in issuing the

     above directions.
29. It may be pertinent to note that none of the heirs and legal

     representatives were dissatisfied by the directions issued

     by the High Court as they have not assailed the same in

     any   forum.   Therefore,       when   the    heirs    and    legal

     representatives     of   the    deceased     partner   were    not

     aggrieved, it was not appropriate for the IOCL to have

     taken a hyper-technical approach on the interpretation of
16
the guidelines, so as not to extend the period of supply of

    kerosene or to stop the supply which, in effect, is axiomatic

    to the continuance and the smooth flow of business which

    was continuing for past many years.
30. Accordingly,   in    view    of   the   aforesaid   facts   and

    circumstances, we do not propose to entertain the Special

    Leave Petition and to interfere with the impugned order(s)

    of the High Court.
31. The Special Leave Petition is devoid of merit and is

    dismissed with the observation that the IOCL ought to

    avoid such litigations by interfering with the continuance

    of any running business by taking a narrow approach.
.............……………………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)



                          .............……………………………….. J.
(AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH)
 NEW DELHI;
JULY 14, 2025.
17