[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Byluru Thippaiah @ Byaluru Thippaiah @ ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 July, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Vikram Nath
2025 INSC 862




                                                                            REPORTABLE


                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL Nos. 2490-2491 OF 2023


                            BYLURU THIPPAIAH @
                            BYALURU THIPPAIAH
                            @ NAYAKARA THIPPAIAH                        … APPELLANT(S)

                                                        VERSUS


                            STATE OF KARNATAKA                        …RESPONDENT(S)




                                                    JUDGMENT
SANJAY KAROL, J.
1.    This is the third in an unfortunate line of cases that have
                            travelled up to this Court in a recent past and have become ripe
                            for adjudication where we find all sense of responsibility and
Signature Not Verified   propriety to have been given a go by, by the Appellant-convict.
Digitally signed by
NAVEEN D
Date: 2025.07.16
18:11:55 IST
In this case, the seed of violence was the suspected infidelity of
Reason:
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                              Page 1 of 23
his wife Pakkeeramma1. He suspected that his three-children
namely Pavithra2, Nagraj @Rajappa3 and Basamma4 born to D-1
were perhaps not his own.
2.       Concurrently, the Appellant-convict has been held guilty
of charges framed against him in FIR Cr. No. 23 of 2017 dated
26th February 2017 registered at PS Kampli, Ballari District,
Karnataka – by the IIIrd Additional District and Sessions Judge5,
Ballari vide judgment dated 3rd December 2019 in Sessions Case
No. 5031 of 2017 and by the High Court vide impugned judgment
dated 30th May 2023 in Criminal Appeal No. 100170 of 2020 and
Criminal Referred Case No. 100002 of 2020.
3.       The facts of the appeals as have been culled out by the
Courts below are that on 25th February 2017 the Appellant-
convict assaulted D1, her sister Gangamma6 and his children D3-
D5 brutally, resulting in the death of D1 to D4 on the spot and
D5 on the way to the hospital. Having done so, he stepped out of
the house and apparently, proclaimed his satisfaction of having
put an end to the life of his wife and sister-in-law who, according
to him, was engaged in ‘immoral activities’ and also the children
born to his wife which, as per him, were a direct consequence of
1
Hereinafter referred to as D1
2
Hereinafter referred to as D3
3
Hereinafter referred to as D4
4
Hereinafter referred to as D5
5
Hereafter ‘Trial Court’
6
Hereinafter referred to as D2
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                              Page 2 of 23
such immoral activities. This statement was witnessed by as
many as eight prosecution witnesses, namely, Shankaramma
(CW-4); Bandi Basavaraja alias S. Basavaraj (CW-11);
Thippeswamy (CW-30); V. Sathyappa (CW-32); K. Abdul
Wahid (CW-35); Mehaboob (CW-36); Ragavendra (CW-37);
Syed Mehaboob (CW-38); Nagappa (CW-39) and Athaulla
(CW-40). Upon hearing such a statement, they rushed to the
house of the Appellant-convict and found the abovenamed
deceased persons lying there in pool of blood. D-5, at this time,
was still alive and was accordingly taken to the Government
Hospital, by CWs 35 and 36, where she died. CW-2 Marenna
lodged a complaint with the police that his nieces, D-1 and D-2
as also D-1’s children had been killed by the Appellant-convict.
The latter also went to the Kampili PS and admitted to having
killed D-1 to D-5.7 A First Information Report8 was registered
and forwarded to the Judicial Magistrate, First Class (Sr. Dn.) on
the same day at 11:45 pm. The Appellant-convict was formally
arrested at 5 a.m., the next morning.
4.      After completion of the investigation, challan was
presented for trial under
Section 302
, Indian Penal Code, 18609.
To establish its case, the prosecution examined 36 witnesses
(although 66 were cited in the charge-sheet), marked 51
7
Ex. 9(a) at Pg 170 of CC
8
FIR No. 23/2017
9
Abbreviated as ‘
IPC
’
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                             Page 3 of 23
documents and 22 material objects, as exhibits. The Trial Court,
having given its consideration to the evidence produced,
concluded that the Appellant-convict had barbarically murdered
his family members, D-1 to D-5 and had a ‘beast mind’. The
order of sentencing dated 4th December 2019 reveals the
consideration of two judgments of this Court,
Khushwinder
Singh v. State of Punjab10
and Ishwari Lal Yadav v. State of
Chattisgarh11.
In
Khushwinder
(supra) the appellant was
convicted by all courts for having killed with premeditation, six
people including two children. This he did on the pretext of
ridding a close family member of an excessive drinking problem
by getting the said family member in touch with an alleged
godman, as also sending the father of the deceased children to
Canada, for a hefty sum of money.
The second case, Ishwari Lal
Yadav (supra) was concerned with the sentence of death imposed
upon the appellants therein for the murder of a two-year-old boy
in sacrificium. Since the child was brought to the house of
Ishwari and his wife Kiran Bai by the other co-accused, to further
their attempts to gain enlightenment by pleasing God, and, when
questioned by the villagers regarding the reason as to why there
were freshly dug mounds of earth and blood in their house, they
confessed. They were convicted under
Section 302
read with
10
(2019) 4 SCC 415
11
(2019) 10 SCC 423
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                              Page 4 of 23
Section 34
IPC across fora. Having considered the above two
cases, the Trial Court found it fit to impose capital punishment.
The conclusions are extracted hereunder:
“Materials on record indicates that, the accused has chopped
        off his wife, sister-in-law and 03 helpless children in a barbaric
        way, that too in a diabolical and dastardly manner one after the
        other. There is a serial killing within a span of few minutes.
        The learned Public Prosecutor pointed out that accused has
        hatched a full proof plan before chopping off 05 person. He
        has made arrangements that none of them can escape from
        death. The photographs of scene of crime itself is the mirror of
        cruelty. The photographs are resembling a rustic butcher shop,
        where the animals were killed inhumanly. The accused has not
        allowed the other person to see him chopping the rest. The
        organ on which the cruel assault is made is clear indication that
        accused has made up his mind not to spare any of them. The
        Post Mortem report indicates that, the children to whom the
        accused has chopped off were hardly 06, 07 and 08 years
        helpless kids. The accused mercilessly chopped off his own
        small children without a second thought. That itself clearly
        indicates that accused is not worth to live in the civilized
        society. It is also to be noted that, even accused has threatened
        the witnesses to kill them also if they give evidence against
        him after he released from jail. This fact also clearly indicates
        that, even now accused has no guilt feeling for committing
        murder of his own 05 family members. Hence, as rightly
        pointed out by the learned P.P. If the accused gets an
        opportunity to come out of jail, he may finish off another
        dozen or so. Considering the facts and circumstances of this
        case and keeping in view of the nature of crime committed by
        the accused, I am of the opinion that, this case squarely fall
        within the rarest of the rare category. However, as the accused
        is guilt for the offence punishable under
Section 302
of I.P.C.,
        and as the prosecution has established that accused has killed
05 innocent person in a pre-planned murder. In the facts and
        circumstances of the case, I am of the opinion that there is no
        alternative punishment suitable, except the death sentence. The
        crime is committed with extremist brutality and the collective
        conscious of the society would be shocked. Therefore, I am of
        the opinion that the capital punishment/death is the only
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                                        Page 5 of 23
solution to this kind of crime. Hence, I hold that, this is a fit
          case to impose capital punishment of death penalty…”
5.       Given that the sentence awarded by the Trial Court was
that of death, the matter made its way to the High Court by way
of confirmation proceedings under
Section 366
of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 197312. The Appellant-convict also
challenged the conviction and sentence.
6.       By the common impugned judgment, reference was
answered in as much as the sentence and conviction awarded by
the Trial Court were confirmed. The criminal appeal at the
instance of the Appellant-convict was, accordingly, dismissed. In
coming to the conclusions as it did, the High Court is required to
have, as the first court of appeal, re-examined the evidence before
it, and come to an independent conclusion regarding the
correctness or otherwise, of the Trial Court findings. [See:
Atley
v. State of U.P13
;
Ajit Savant Majagvai v. State of Karnataka14
and Ramji Singh v. State of Bihar15] The High Court has in this
case, followed this well-established principle. The findings can
be summarized thus:
6.1     Motive on the part of the Appellant-convict can be
         established by way of multiple witnesses, PW-2
         (Halladamane Marenna), PW-4 (Gangadhar), PW-5
12
For Short, ‘
CrPC
’.
13
AIR 1955 SC 807
14
(1997) 7 SCC 110
15
(2001) 9 SCC 528
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                                         Page 6 of 23
(Thippaiah), PW-8 (Shankramma), PW-9 (Raghavendra),
      PW-11 (Adbul Wahed), PW-14 (Somakka), PW-16
      (Raghavendra),        PW-17   (Syed   Mehaboob),   PW-20
      (Ramu), PW-21 (Parashuram), PW-32 (Anjinamma), who
      have consistently deposed as to the frequent squabbles
      between the Appellant-convict and D-1. Regarding his
      suspicion of having not fathered the three children, PW-2,
      PW-9, PW-14, PW-15 (Nagaraja) have stated that he made
      categorical statements to that extent.
6.2   PWs 7, 11, 16 & 17 have deposed that the Appellant-
      convict told them that he had ‘chopped off’ the deceased
      persons and that he was happy about that.
6.3   The Appellant-convict’s statement to PW-15 that his
      daughter Rajeshwari would be coming to the village of
      Yarakullu and that he should pick her up, shows pre-
      planning. He has also stated that he has only one child of
      his own.
6.4    The manner in which the five deceased persons met
      their death shows barbarity, maliciousness on his part.
      6.5     On the aspect of sentencing, the High Court asked
      the probation officer concerned to collect certain
      information which would be relevant to the adjudication of
      the propriety of the highest form of punishment.
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                            Page 7 of 23
6.6     The conclusions as can be drawn from the reading
      of paragraph 49 of the impugned judgment are that:
6.6.1   Regarding the early life and background of
             the Appellant-convict, it was observed that he had
             lost his parents at an early age and was brought up
             by his elder sister. Prior to his marriage to D-1, he
             was married to someone else and had begotten a son
             as well. There had been accusations of him being
             responsible for his former father-in-law’s death, but
             no action in law was taken.
6.6.2    He is illiterate. Troubled relations with his
             former wife, including attempts to take her and her
             mother’s life, resulted in separation. When it comes
             to D-1, here too, he is without any assets or savings
             and resided with D-1 in her maternal home.
             6.6.3 The Amin, 3rd Additional District and
             Sessions Court, Hospete, indicated in his report that
             the people around him do not believe he can be
             reformed. The probation officer who spoke to the
             people in his native village, however, said that he
             could be reformed.
6.6.4    Dharwad Institute of Mental Health and
             Neurosciences in their report submitted that he had
             an IQ of 93, a psychiatric score of 29, which is
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                              Page 8 of 23
below the cut of score. He does not have any
             personality disorders but is mildly depressed.
             6.6.5    The Court recorded that in their interaction
             with the Appellant-convict, he only denied the
             happenings and stated not to know anything about
             it. He appeared to be divorced from reality, but
             since the psychiatric analysis report ruled out the
             said possibility, he appears to have no regard for
             law.
6.6.6 The gruesome manner of the commission of
             the     murder    was     taken    as    an    aggravating
             circumstance. For the opposite, it was held that
             none of the substance can be found. He has only one
             daughter; no extreme mental or physical disturbance
             or provocation.
6.7    The final order is as below:-
“ORDER

             i.     Criminal Appeal No.100170/2020 stands
             dismissed.
ii.    Criminal R.C.No.100002/2020 stands allowed.
             iii.   The death sentence awarded by the trial Court is
             confirmed. The Appellant shall be hung by his neck till
             death.
iv.    The Additional Registrar (Judicial) is directed to
             forward the above file to the concerned District Legal
             Service Authority (DLSA) to determine and make
             necessary arrangements for payment of compensation in
             terms of
Sections 357
and 357A of the Code of Criminal
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                                    Page 9 of 23
Procedure, to the daughter of the deceased namely
               Rajeshwari.
v.      Registry is directed to furnish a copy of this
               judgment to the Appellant through Jail Authorities free
               of cost and inform him of his right to appeal to the
               Hon’ble Supreme Court and transmit the trial Court
               records to the trial Court along with a copy of this
               judgment.
vi.     Though the above matter is disposed, re-list on
               10.07.2023 at 2.30 p.m. for reporting compliance with
               the directions issued above.
vii.    We place our appreciation for the services
               rendered by Sri.S.L.Matti, Panel Advocate of Karnataka
               State Legal Services Authority.”
7.    The extant appeals are by the Appellant-convict
challenging the findings of the High Court. We have heard Mr.
Gopal Sankaranarayanan, learned Senior Counsel for the
Appellant and Mr. Avishkar Singhvi, learned Additional
Advocate General for the State of Karnataka.
8.    As we have already noticed, the prosecution examined a
total of thirty-six witnesses. A brief overview of the relevant PWs
is as under:
8.1      PW-1 is the Medical Officer, Kampili Government
      Hospital. He conducted the post-mortem of the deceased
      persons. Having seen the weapon allegedly used by the
      Appellant-convict, it was said that the weapon (Ex.7)
      could have been used to cause the injuries.
      8.2       PW-2 stated that the Appellant-convict would
      repeatedly accuse D-1 and D-2 of being promiscuous. He
      further stated that the Appellant-convict had called and
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                                   Page 10 of 23
told him that he had killed the deceased persons. He went
      to D-1’s house to check on them and found all of them
      dead. He also stated that Appellant-convict threatened to
      kill him after he leaves the Court.
8.3     PW-4 stated that PW-2 informed him crying over
      the phone that Appellant-convict had killed D-1 to D-5. He
      went to the spot of the crime and saw the bodies of the
      deceased persons there.
8.4     PW-5 stated that PW-2 informed him crying over
      the phone that Appellant-convict had killed D-1 to D-5. At
      the time that he reached the spot, D-5 was still alive and
      was accordingly taken to receive medical attention. PW-7
      told him that D-1 had an affair with another person, and
      that is the reason why the Appellant-convict took such a
      step. When the latter came out of the house, the chopper
      which was the alleged murder weapon was in his hand, and
      he stated that he had killed them.
8.5     PW-7 who had been declared a hostile witness,
      deposed that upon receipt of information regarding the
      commission of murders, he went to the spot. He was the
      one who informed the complainant. He had however, not
      seen the Appellant-convict coming out of the house. In the
      cross-examination he stated that he had gone to the spot
      having heard sounds of quarrelling.
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                           Page 11 of 23
8.6      PW-8 in her examination in chief, made a positive
      identification of the weapon allegedly used by the
      Appellant-convict. She also deposed that he came out of
      the house and declared that he had killed D-1 to D-5. In
      her cross-examination, she denied the suggestion that she
      had not seen the incident.
8.7        PW-11 in his testimony deposed regarding a
      particular quarrel which happened a few months prior to
      the incident and that PW-2 had told him that it was a fairly
      regular occurrence. Part of his testimony reads as under:
“On the date of incident i.e. 25.02.2017 I saw the accused
            holding M.O-1 chopper in his hand. He was coming out of
            his house holding M.O-1. It was fully blood stained.
            Accused was abusing his wife and declaring that “-sic-”.
            When I rush to the house of accused it was fully blooded
            there were five human bodies found laying in the pool of
            blood. Out of which four person were already dead, One
            girl found to be alive I immediately shifted her to the
            Hospital there she was declared dead. Thippeswamy,
            Basavaraja and Satyappa also accompanied me.”

      8.8        PW-14 stated that the Appellant-convict was
      quarrelsome and often he had asked the latter to mend his
      ways to no avail. He got information of the occurrence the
      next day morning. He also deposed that the Appellant-
convict often cast aspersions on the fidelity of D-1 and the
      children, D-3 to D-5, that’s why he killed them.
      8.9      PW-15 is the person who had housed the Appellant-
      convict’s daughter Rajeshwari, upon the latter’s request,
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                                   Page 12 of 23
when he had planned to kill D-1 to D-5. He states that the
      only reason she was spared was that he believed her to be
      his child.
8.10    PW-16 deposed as follows:-
“…At about 8.00 p.m. the accused came out of his house
          holding a chopper, which was blood stained, his clothes
          were also stained with blood. I have enquired him about
          the blood stains, he reported that he chopped off five person
          and abused them as prostitutes. The accused moved to
          Police Station alongwith chopper. Immediately we rush to
          the house of accused. Where we noticed that five persons
          were lying in the pool of blood, sustaining chopper injuries
          out of which three women died and a boy also no more. A
          girl aged five years was alive sustaining grievous head
          injury. Immediately we shifted the injured girl to the
          hospital, where she also passed away…”

          Cross-examination by Sri C.M.S.P. advocate for
          accused

          ...It is false to suggest that on the date of incident also it
          was informed by others, witness voluntaries that myself
          saw the accused. M.O-1 is the same chopper which was
          held by accused on that day. It is false to suggest that I
          have not seen M.O-1. It is true that I didn’t enquire the
          accused about the cause of this incident. Accused moved
          away with courage...”


             We have extracted the aforesaid, for as we notice the
      testimony       of     this     important        witness       remains
      unimpeachable, clearly establishing the guilt of the
      Appellant-convict.
8.11    PW-22 is Rajeshwari, the daughter of Appellant-
convict. She was not present at the time of the incident and
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                                       Page 13 of 23
did not know how the deceased persons died. She stated
      that D-1 and the Appellant-convict would never fight and
      were cordial with one-another.
Well, she is the only one who had supported the
      Appellant-convict. In view of overwhelming evidence to
      the contrary, her testimony cannot be said to have rendered
      the prosecution case to be doubtful of the Appellant-
      convict’s involvement in the crime.
8.12     PWs 23 and 24 both stated that they reached the
      spot upon hearing a commotion. There they found out that
      the Appellant-convict had put an end to five of his family
      members.
8.13     PW-29 deposed that he is the Appellant-convict’s
      immediate neighbour and upon hearing a commotion, he
      stepped out of his house to see a throng of people gathering
      there. He also saw the Appellant-convict stepping away
      from his house with the blood-stained weapon in his hand.
      It was then he found out what had transpired.
      8.14      PW-33 was the CPI at Kampili Circle. He stated
      that the Appellant-convict having committed the crime,
      surrendered. He recorded the voluntary confession
      statement given by the Appellant-convict. He also
      recovered the murder weapon and shirt worn by the
      Appellant-convict at the time of the crime. He identified
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                             Page 14 of 23
the various objects recovered by him in the course of
      investigation and also stated the names of various persons
      whose statements were recorded by him. Nothing could
      be elicited in the cross-examination to discredit his
      testimony or the investigation process.
9.   We have given our anxious consideration to the testimonies,
referred supra and also all other evidence brought on record by
the prosecution. We find that numerous witnesses have testified
to Appellant-convict’s quarrelsome nature and repeated clashes
with D-1. Further, quite a few witnesses have deposed that they
saw the Appellant-convict with the murder weapon as also he
himself was drenched in blood. Still further, other witnesses such
as PW-10 testified that he came out of the house and in front of
all the people that had gathered there due to gatala stated openly
that due to the promiscuous nature of D-1 and D-2 and the fact
that D-3 to D-5 were not his children, he murdered them. It
cannot be questioned that the act of the Appellant-convict came
from a place of grave hatred for the deceased persons. It has,
however been recorded that there was no sudden provocation
which led to him having taken such a drastic step. His planning
and forethought is sufficiently exhibited by the fact that he sent
away the only child he considered to be his own that is
Rajeshwari. He also phoned up PW-15 and asked him to collect
her from the bus station displaying that he had love and care for
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                            Page 15 of 23
her in his heart. To doubt upon the paternity of D-3 to D-5 is not
substantiated by any evidence nor have any of the witnesses lent
credence to this hypothesis. Therefore, only on a hunch and as a
matter of belief, he chose to end the lives of three young children.
Regarding D-2, his sister-in-law, the only statement that can be
found is that she aided and abetted the alleged misdeed and
wrongdoings of D-1. We ask ourselves a question – is belief
simpliciter sufficient enough to drive a person to a point of no
return where ending the life of the deceased is the only rational
outcome that can be perceived. We think, not. It is true that
Appellant-convict is illiterate, but he is most certainly not
irrational. He had a plan in mind which he executed, achieving
his desired goal. There is nothing on record which would
discredit the case of the prosecution or expose any gaps, errors,
conjectures or surmises in the chain of circumstantial evidence
established by the prosecution, beyond reasonable doubt. Not a
shred of evidence either oral or documentary has been produced
to posit Appellant-convict’s innocence and bringing the
possibility of involvement of third party.
10.     In that view of the matter, we find no reason to take a
different view on the Appellant-convict’s guilt, than the one that
has been taken by the Courts below. This is keeping with the
well-established principle of this Court adopting a cautionary
approach in interfering with concurrent findings of guilt.
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                              Page 16 of 23
Hidayatullah J. (as his Lordship then was) writing for the
majority in
Saravanabhavan & Govindaswamy v. State of
Madras16
, captured this principle in the following terms:
“It has been ruled in many cases before, that this Court will not
         reassess the evidence at large, particularly when it has been
         concurrently accepted by the High Court and the court or
         courts below. In other words this Court does not form a fresh
         opinion as to the innocence or the guilt of the accused. It
         accepts the appraisal of the evidence in the High Court and the
         court or courts below. Therefore, before this Court interferes
         something more must be shown, such as: that there has been in
         the trial a violation of the principles of natural justice or a
         deprivation of the rights of the accused or a misreading of vital
         evidence or an improper reception or rejection of evidence
         which, if discarded or received, would leave the conviction
         unsupportable, or that the court or courts have committed an
         error of law or of the forms of legal process or procedure by
         which justice itself has failed.”

        [See also:
Mekala Sivaiah v. State of Andhra Pradesh17
].
11.    On the aspect of sentencing, the test to be applied is as to
whether the conduct of the Appellant-convict meets the standard
of ‘rarest of rare cases’. This has been the consistent position in
confirmation of sentences of death imposed by the trial courts,
ever since
Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab18
.
Swami
Shradhanand v. State of Karnataka19, introduced a new position
wherein the Courts were able to impose sentences that fall short
of death but at the same time, keeping in mind the heinousness
16
1965 SCC OnLine SC 176
17
(2022) 8 SCC 253
18
(1980) 2 SCC 684
19
(2008) 13 SCC 767
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                                       Page 17 of 23
of the crime by the accused persons, ensure that the society is not
put in danger with the possibility of such an accused walking
free.
In para 10 thereof, it was observed: “The absolute
irrevocability of the death penalty renders it completely
incompatible to the slightest hesitation on the part of the Court.”
            With the judgment in
Manoj v. State of M.P.20
came a
watershed moment in the criteria of sentencing. This judgment
ensured that if and when a person is finally sent to the gallows he
is only so sent after due consideration of the entire background
of facts and circumstances that have landed the accused person
at the precipice of death. Under the direction issued therein, the
Court is required to call for reports that detail the social and
psychological backdrop of the Appellant-convict. It was held by
the three-Judge Bench as follows :
“249. To do this, the trial court must elicit information from
            the accused and the State, both. The State, must—for an
            offence carrying capital punishment—at the appropriate stage,
            produce material which is preferably collected beforehand,
            before the Sessions Court disclosing psychiatric and
            psychological evaluation of the accused. This will help
            establish proximity (in terms of timeline), to the accused
            person's frame of mind (or mental illness, if any) at the time of
            committing the crime and offer guidance on mitigating factors
            (1), (5), (6) and (7) spelled out in
Bachan Singh [Bachan
            Singh v. State of Punjab
, (1980) 2 SCC 684 : 1980 SCC (Cri)
            580] . Even for the other factors of (3) and (4)—an onus placed
            squarely on the State—conducting this form of psychiatric and
            psychological evaluation close on the heels of commission of
            the offence, will provide a baseline for the appellate courts to
20
(2023) 2 SCC 353
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                                          Page 18 of 23
use for comparison i.e. to evaluate the progress of the accused
        towards reformation, achieved during the incarceration period.
250. Next, the State, must in a time-bound manner,
        collect additional information pertaining to the accused. An
        illustrative, but not exhaustive list is as follows:
(a) Age
(b) Early family background (siblings, protection of parents,
        any history of violence or neglect)
(c) Present family background (surviving family members,
        whether married, has children, etc.)
(d) Type and level of education
(e) Socio-economic background (including conditions of
        poverty or deprivation, if any)
(f) Criminal antecedents (details of offence and whether
        convicted, sentence served, if any)
(g) Income and the kind of employment (whether none, or
        temporary or permanent, etc.);
(h) Other factors such as history of unstable social behaviour,
        or mental or psychological ailment(s), alienation of the
        individual (with reasons, if any), etc.
        This information should mandatorily be available to the trial
        court, at the sentencing stage. The accused too, should be given
        the same opportunity to produce evidence in rebuttal, towards
        establishing all mitigating circumstances.
251. Lastly, information regarding the accused's jail conduct
        and behaviour, work done (if any), activities the accused has
        involved themselves in, and other related details should be
        called for in the form of a report from the relevant jail
        authorities (i.e. Probation and Welfare Officer, Superintendent
        of Jail, etc.). If the appeal is heard after a long hiatus from the
        trial court's conviction, or High Court's confirmation, as the
        case may be — a fresh report (rather than the one used by the
        previous court) from the jail authorities is recommended, for a
        more exact and complete understanding of the
        contemporaneous progress made by the accused, in the time
        elapsed. The jail authorities must also include a fresh
        psychiatric         and      psychological        report      which
        will further evidence the reformative progress, and reveal
        post-conviction mental illness, if any.”
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                                       Page 19 of 23
12.     The High Court did, in accordance with
Manoj
(supra),
call for the reports. However, we are of the considered view, that
the said reports have not been considered to their full extent. The
Probation Report reveals that the Appellant-convict has no
antecedents; there is mixed opinion on whether he is suitable for
reformation or not. The “Conduct and Behavioural Report”
submitted by the Government of Karnataka, Prisons and
Correctional Services records that he has “good moral character”
and “good conduct” with co-prisoners and prison officials. He
has also attempted to mend one of the gaps in the fabric of his
life i.e., literacy by participating in the Basic Literacy Program
organized by the Zilla Lok Shiksha Samiti and passing the same
with good rank.
13.    The mitigation report reveals difficulties throughout- lack
of paternal/maternal love and care which later became extreme
protectiveness after the death of his brother, difficulties in
learning in school leading to him dropping out, making impulsive
decisions in business often leading to losses, breakdown of the
marriage with his first wife for the reason that neither quite
comprehended issues with substance dependence.
14.    Once incarcerated, it appears that mental health struggles
have been a constant and unwelcome companion. He considered
making an attempt to take his own life on two occasions, one
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                             Page 20 of 23
when he found out about the deaths of his entire family and two,
when he himself was sentenced to death.
15.        The report further concludes that:
(a) the Appellant-convict has the ability to adapt, engage
              in constructive activities, pursue an education despite
              past difficulty, continued worry about his daughter
              (Rajeshwari’s) future, shows a notable capacity for
              reform and personal growth;
(b) the Appellant-convict’s continued incarceration has
              had a negative impact on Rajeshwari, who is really
              struggling to cope with life. Interactions with her,
              threw light on a gentle, loving side of the Appellant-
convict. She has also reported experiencing auditory
              hallucinations which is a direct impact of loneliness
              she has been enduring.
16.        Recently, this Court undertook a detailed examination of
the past cases wherein the sentence of death has been modified
to that of imprisonment for the remainder of natural life. [See:
Ramesh A. Naika v. Registrar General21] A
perusal of the
factors elucidated therein show that (a) lack of criminal
antecedents; (b) satisfactory conduct in prison; (c) possibility of
21
2025 SCC OnLine SC 575
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                                Page 21 of 23
reformation; as a criteria, apply to the instant case. Regarding
the last one, it can be said that given there is mixed opinion on
whether he shall or shall not be able to reform his way, the Court
will err on the side of caution just as when there are two possible
interpretations of a given set of facts or circumstances, the one
that favours the accused is to be adopted.
17.   While we affirm the findings of the Courts below regarding
the Appellant-convict’s conviction for the barbaric and ruthless
murders of his family members, D-1 to D-5. However, on the
aspect of sentencing, we hold that despite having considerable
information before it, the High Court did not consider it
appropriately and sufficiently, in view of the findings recorded in
the said reports. Considering the sum-total of circumstances that
drove the Appellant-convict to this point of committing this
crime of a most reprehensible nature, the death penalty may not
be appropriate. We are of the view that he should spend his days
in jail attempting to repent for the crimes committed by him. As
such, these appeals are partly allowed to the extent that he is
released from death row. Instead, he shall await his last breath in
prison, without remission.
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                             Page 22 of 23
Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
…………………………J.
                                         (VIKRAM NATH)



                                      …………………………J.
                                        (SANJAY KAROL)



                                      …………………………J.
                                        (SANDEEP MEHTA)
New Delhi
July 16, 2025.
Crl A Nos.2490-91 of 2023                            Page 23 of 23