[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Arun Kumar Sharma vs State Of Madhya Pradesh on 14 July, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 826                                                           REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3263-3264 OF 2025

             ARUN KUMAR SHARMA & ORS                                 ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                  VERSUS


             STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ORS                        …RESPONDENT(S)

                                              JUDGMENT
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J.
1.             Access to justice is inextricably connected to maintaining

             integrity in the process of invocation and conduct of remedial

             proceedings before Courts and Tribunals. We have entertained

             these civil appeals after sufficient warning that, in the event we

             accept the objections of the respondent about the deliberate non-

             disclosure of parallel proceedings initiated before the High Court,

             and that the original application before the Tribunal is not

             bonafide as it is intended to subserve personal interest of appellant

             no. 3, conducting rival business, these civil appeals will be

             dismissed with exemplary costs. This approach is necessary to
Signature Not Verified
ensure earnest and bonafide actions before the tribunals for
Digitally signed by
KAPIL TANDON
Date: 2025.07.14
15:53:20 IST
Reason:
protecting environment and ecology.
1
2.     Short Facts and Prayer before the Tribunal: The short facts

leading to filing of the present appeals are that the three appellants

approached the National Green Tribunal1 invoking
Section 14
of

the NGT Act for restraining respondents 4, 5 and 6 from setting up

a Petrol Pump at Khasra No. 109/1/2 (S) situated on SH 10 Bhopal

to Berasia road, Village- Intkhedi Road, Tehsil-Huzur, District-

Bhopal. The prayers made in the original application are as follows:
“7. PRAYER
         In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances as explained
         herein above, it is most respectfully prayed that Hon’ble Tribunal
         may graciously be pleased to allow the present Application and
         7.1 Quash the Consent letter dated 19.07.2023; and
         7.2 Quash the No-Objection Letter dated 07.02.2024 issued by
         Respondent No. 3; and
         7.3 Direct the Respondents not to establish petrol pump within
         the proximity of designated residential area.
         7.4 Allow the Applicant to add, delete, modify, substitute, amend
         the present Application and submit additional documents, if
         occasion so arises; and
         7.5 Cost of the matter may also be awarded;
7.6 Till the pendency of the present matter ad interim relief by
         way of restraining the Respondent No. 4 & 5 to stop construction
         of petrol pump activities may also be granted in the interest of
         justice.
7.7 Any other relief, which Hon’ble Tribunal may deem just and
         proper may also be awarded in favour of the Applicant as
         against the Respondents.”
3.     It is clear from the above referred prayers that the appellants

have specifically challenged, (i) the consent to operate dated


1 Hereinafter referred to as ‘NGT’.
2
19.07.2023 issued by the Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board

Bhopal under the
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,

1974
and the
Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981
and (ii) the NOC dated 07.02.2024 issued by the Collector enabling

installation of the petrol pump retail outlet as per the application

made by the contesting respondents.
4.   Apart from other grounds, the decision of District Collector

dated 07.02.2024 is challenged on the ground that he has not

applied his mind while issuing the said NOC and that it is contrary

to the Petroleum Rules, 2002. The relevant grounds of challenge

are as follows:
“4.17 However, the Respondent No. 3, without looking into
      various aspects, issued No-Objection Certificate to the
      Respondent no. 4 & 5 vide NOC dated 07.02.2024.
4.18. It is submitted that the Applicant vide Notice dated
      24.12.2023 & 13.02.2024 to the Respondents requested to stay
      the illegal construction by the Respondent No. 4 & 5 for
      establishment of petrol pump at the Said Land, citing the various
      environmental issues.
4.19. In the letter dated 24.12.2023 & 13.02.2024, the Applicant
      raised the issues that the Respondent No. 3 is required to issue
      No-Objection Certificate in accordance with the Rule 144 of the
      Petroleum Rules, 2002, in the prescribed proforma. The Rule 144
      prescribes the District Authority, i.e. the Respondent No. 3 to
      issue license if there is no objections to the Applicant receiving a
      license for the site proposed. Further, the District Authority is
      also required to protect the interest of public, especially facility
      like schools, hospitals or proximity to places.
      4.20. Now, the Respondent No. 4 & 5 are establishing petrol
      pump at the Said Land in sheer violation of Hon'ble NGT Orders,
CPC
B Guidelines and PESO Guidelines.
3
4.21. That establishment of petrol pump in a residential area
      poses multifaceted risks and hazards, both to the environment
      and to the health and safety of the residents. The
CPC
B
      Guidelines clearly stipulate the minimum distance requirements
      for setting up petrol pumps from residential areas, school,
      hospitals, and other sensitive establishments. It is evident that
      the Said Land fails to comply with these crucial safety
      regulations, thereby jeopardizing the lives and well-being of the
      residents.
4.22. Furthermore, the establishment of a petrol pump in close
      proximity to designated residential area raises serious concerns
      regarding air, water and noise pollution. The operation of fuel
      dispensing units, vehicular traffic, and other associated
      activities are known to emit harmful pollutants, including volatile
      organic compounds (VOCs), particulate matter, and noise, which
      can have detrimental effects on both the environment and public
      health.
4.23. Additionally,
CPC
B guidelines and NGT Orders, which aim
      to mitigate the adverse environmental impacts associated with
      fuel retailing activities. Failure to adhere to these guidelines not
      only undermines the regulatory framework put in place to
      safeguard the environment but also sets a dangerous precedent
      for füture development projects.
4.24. Considering the gravity of the situation and the potential
      ramifications for the environment and public health, by way of
      the present Application, the Applicant urge the Hon'ble National
      Green Tribunal to intervene expeditiously and cancel the NOC
      Issued by the Respondent No. 3 and Consent letter issued by
      Respondent No. 1 to prevent the establishment of the
      Respondent no. 4 & 5 petrol pump in the designated residential
      area and school. In the present Application, the Applicant is only
      bringing the environmental issues for adjudication before the
      Hon'ble NGT. For other procedural and substantial illegalities
      being committed by the Respondents, the Applicant reserves its
      right to approach appropriate forum, at appropriate stage.”
5.   While issuing notice on 21.03.2024, the NGT constituted a

Joint Committee and directed it to submit a factual report within

six weeks.
4
6.     Various permissions already obtained by the respondents:
Pending enquiry and report from the Joint Committee, the

contesting respondents 4, 5 and 6 filed a detailed counter affidavit

as per which the following permissions have already been

obtained.
(i)     Firstly, on 30.04.2024, the Ministry of Petroleum and
             Explosives Safety Organization (PESO) granted NOC in
             favour of Reliance BP Mobility Ltd.
(ii)    Secondly, on 26.04.2023, the CEO of Janpad Panchayat
             Phanda, Bhopal, M.P. issued NOC
(iii)   Thirdly, Madhya Pradesh Road Development Corporation
             also issued NOC on 26.05.2023
(iv)    Fourthly, on 26.04.2023, Madhya Pradesh Electricity
             Board also issued NOC
(v)     Fifthly, on 10.04.2023, the Industrial Department also
             issued its NOC
(vi)    Sixthly, on 19.07.2023, the Madhya Pradesh Pollution
             Control Board issued its consent to operate under the
             Water and Air Act, and
(vii)   Finally, on 07.02.2024, the Collector also issued the NOC
             in favour of the contested respondent.
7.     It is an admitted fact that all the above referred NOCs as well

as the consent to operate were issued prior to the filing of the

original application before the NGT on 15.03.2024.
8.     Findings of the Joint Committee constituted by NGT: The Joint

Committee submitted its report on 09.07.2024. The procedure

adopted for conducting the enquiry, the field observations,
5
information provided by the Revenue Department and the

Pollution Control Board, along with the findings, are extracted

herein below for ready reference.
“4. Field Observations: -
4.1. Joint committee on dated 07/06/2024 conducted a site visit
      of Khasra No. 109/1/20 (S) stiuated on SH 10 Bhopal to Berasia
      road, Village- Intkhedi Road, Tehsil-Huzur, District-Bhopal.
Apart from the Joint Committee members following officers
      namely Ms. Prakamya Tiwari, AE, RO, MPPCB, Bhopal, Shri
      Kanak Meena, Deputy Controller, PESO, Bhopal and Shri
      Kailash Sharwa, Patwari, Halka-Intkhedi Sadak, Gram
      Panchayat-Intkhedi Sadak were also present during the site
      visit. The Advocate of petitioner Shri Prateek Jain was informed
      by the nodal department about the visit of committee and he was
      present during the visit. Also, the representative of petrol pump
      Shri Aman Ahmed Khan was present. The Geographical
      locations, photographs and visual observations were recorded
      during inspection. The Photographs and Google Maps are
      enclosed as Annexure I.
      4.2. During inspection, Joint Committee visited the site of Petrol
      Pump mentioned in the petition. The details observed during the
      inspection are mentioned as under: -
4.2.1. The site is located on SH 10, Intkhedi Road, Village-
Intkhedi Road, Tehsil-Huzur, District-Bhopal. The geographical
      location of the site is latitude 23°22'20.95" N and longitude
      77º23'58.41 E".
4.2.2. The SH 10 road is situated on the East of the petrol pump.
      The New Government Higher Secondary School is located at a
      distance of approximately 120 meters away to the South-West
      of the petrol pump.
4.2.3. On north side of the petrol pump there are some
      commercial establishments located at a distance of
      approximately 30 meters away, the north of the petrol pump.
      4.2.4. On south side of the petrol pump there are some
      commercial buildings, incomplete building structures named as
      Maruti Udyog, one cement shop, steel TMT bar Shop as per the
      sign boards placed on the shops, which are located at a distance
      of approximately 30 meters away.
4.2.5. The primary development work for the establishment of
      Petrol Pump was found in progress.
6
4.2.6. The residential colonies as mentioned in the petition are
located on the west side of the petrol pump.
4.2.7. The distance from the dispensing unit to the boundary of
the Petrol pump towards residential colonies on west side is
approx. 38 meters.
4.2.8. During visit of the Joint Committee, no residential houses
were found constructed in the above residential colonies and no
habitation were observed.
4.2.9. No high tension line was found passing through the petrol
pump site.
5. Information provided by the Revenue Department,
Tehsil-Huzur, Bhopal
5.1. Letter vide dated 19/06/2024 was issued by MPPCB
(Nodal Department) to SDM, Tehsil-Huzur to provide the
information of permissions / locations of Petrol Pump, School,
Hospital and Residential colony within 50 meter distance from
the Petrol Pump as per revenue records. The copy is enclosed as
Annexure Il.
5.2. SDM, Tehsil-Huzur, Bhopal vide letter dated 03/07/2024
provided the information. The copy of the letter is enclosed as
Annexure III. The main points of the letter are mentioned as
under:-
No      Main Points               As per Revenue
                                      Record
    1       Petrol     Pump   is      The Petrol Pump is located
            proposed on Khasra        on part of Khasra no.
            No. 109/1/2 located       109/1/2 and on Khasra
            at Village-Intekhedi      no.    109/1/2     Village-
            Road, Tehsil-Huzur,       Intekhedi Road Tehsil-
            District-Bhopal.          Huzur, District-Bhopal of
                                      area 0.19 hectares, which
                                      is      registered      for
                                      commercial purpose in the
                                      name of Aman Ahmed
                                      Khan S/o Jameel Ahmed
                                      Khan.
    2       The         residential   The residential colonies
            colonies respectively     respectively        Anjani
            Anjani Nandan Dham        Nandan       Dham      and
            and Ramnagar are          Ramnagar established at
            established         for   Khasra No. 108, 109/2
            residential purpose at    and       109/1/1       are
            Khasra     No.    108,    Unauthorised residential
            109/2 and 109/1/1         colonies.
7
near the site (Petrol
            Pump),
    3       Government Higher        No        Hospital        or
            Secondary School is      Government/private
            located 50 meters        school located within a
            from the petrol pump     periphery of 50 meters
and a hospital is also   from the petrol pump and
            located nearby.          there is no residential
                                     activity within a periphery
                                     of 50 meters from the fuel
                                     section of the petrol pump
                                     is operated.
4       Information of the       The             designated
            designated               residential area, school
            residential    area,     and hospital are not
            school and hospital      within the periphery of 50
            located around the       meters from Petrol Pump.
            said petrol pump.        The              traditional
                                     settlement/population of
                                     Village-Intkhedi Road is
                                     600 meters away from the
                                     under construction Petrol
                                     Pump.


6. Information of MPPCB:-
6.1 As per the application submitted by Project proponent of
Petrol Pump for establishing a Petrol Pump, MPPCB vide outward
No:24612 dated 19/07/2023 issued Consent to Establish under
Section 25
of the Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act,
1974 and
Section 21
of the Air (Prevention & Control of Pollution)
Act, 1981. The copy is enclosed as Annexure IV
6.2 The Consent to Establish was issued with the conditions that
new petrol pump should be at least 50 meters away from school,
hospital and residential areas. If Petrol pump located within 50
meters radius of any school, hospital and residential complex it
must obey provisions of Petroleum Rules, 2002, administered by
Petroleum and Explosive safety organization. No high-tension
wire should be passed through outlet.
7. Findings of the Joint Committee:-
7.1 The committee finds that the residential colonies near the
petrol pump as mentioned in the petition are unauthorized
residential colonies and as per the record of Revenue department
there is no designated residential colony within 50 meters
distance from dispensing unit of petrol pump.
8
7.2 It is also found that there are no schools or hospitals exist
      within 50 meters distance from the petrol pump.
      7.3 The nearest habitation of people around the Village is 600
      meters away from the Petrol Pump that is under construction at
      Village- Intkhedi road.
7.4 Committee has referred the Section - H of Central Pollution
      Control Board Guidelines (
CPC
B) for setting of new Petrol Pump
      dated 07/01/2020. The copy is enclosed as Annexure V. The
      section - H is reproduced as under:
“Section - H : In case of siting criteria for petrol pumps new Retail
      Outlets shall not be located within a radial distance of 50 meters
      (from fill point/ dispensing units/ vent pipe whichever is nearest)
      from schools, hospitals (10 beds and above) and residential
      areas designated as per local laws. In case of constraints in
      providing 50 meters distance, the retail outlet shall implement
      additional safety measures as prescribed by PESO. In no case
      the distance between new retail outlet from schools, hospitals
      (10 beds and above) and residential area designated as per local
      laws shall be less than 30 meters. No high tension line shall
      pass over the retail outlet.
7.5 It is humbly submitted that Prior Approval granted to M/s
      Reliance B.P. Mobility, by the O/o JCCE, PESO, Bhopal, in Form-
XIV of Petroleum Rules, 2002, Consent to Establish granted by
      MP Pollution Control Board, Bhopal and No Objection Certificate
      granted by the District Collector, Bhopal are issued as per the
      prevailing Rules and Regulations. It is also submitted that above
      said Approval/Consent/No-objection Certificates are issued in
      conformity to the Siting Criteria prescribed in the guidelines
of
      CPC
B and no valid establishment such as Residential colony,
      School, Hospital was found constructed within the periphery of
      50 meters from the new Petroleum Retail Outlet, of M/s Reliance
      B. P. Mobility, proposed on part of Khasra No. 109 and Khasra
      No.109/1/2, Village-Intekhedi Road Tehsil-Huzur, District-
      Bhopal.”
9.   Judgment of the NGT: By the order impugned before us the

NGT dismissed the original application. Before the NGT, apart from

questioning the findings of the Joint Committee, the appellants

challenged the grant of NOC by the District Collector dated

07.02.2024 on multiple grounds. The appellants have also raised
9
additional grounds which were considered and dismissed by the

NGT order impugned before us. The relevant portion of the findings

of the NGT are as follows:
“14. The main ground for challenge to the NOC dated
      07.02.2024 is that it is in violation of Rule 144 of Petroleum Rules
      2002, which issue cannot be raised before this Hon'ble Tribunal
      as per
Section 14
read with Schedule 1 of the
NGT Act
The
      environmental and safety concerns raised are safeguarded by
      the conditions imposed in the PESO approval dated 22.05.2023
      and Consent to Operate dated 19.07.2023 and therefore the
      application made is clearly frivolous and in fact premature. The
      said approval is testimony to the fact that the same has been
      granted pursuant to the Safety and Test Certificate as required
      under Rules 130 and 126 of the Petroleum Rules, 2002 issued
      by the competent person approved by CCE, Nagpur. Thus, all the
      safety measures as prescribed by PESO have been adhered to.
15. Notices were also sent to respondent no. 6, who in
      compliance of the order filed a reply, which is on record. Learned
      Counsel for the respondent no. 6, Mr. Rohit Sharma has argued
      that the Petroleum Rules are not covered under the scheduled Act
      of National Green Tribunal and the allegations regarding blatant
      violation
of CPC
B Guidelines remained unsubstantiated even as
      per the observations furnished by the Joint Committee Members
      comprising of Members from District Administration, Bhopal,
      PESO & Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board. The
      Answering Respondent No.6 is the rightful owner of a land
      forming part of Khasa No. 109/1/2 where a Petrol Pump
      belonging to Reliance BP Mobility is being established after
      procuring all the valid permissions from the competent
      departments.
16. It is further argued that the google map, which has been
      placed on record by the petitioner shows incorrect measurement
      and the joint committee has submitted the exact map, which
      clarifies that the distance between the retail outlet of the
      answering respondent no. 6 and the nearest government school
      is approximately 135 meters. Further contention of the
      respondents are that the Petroleum Rules, 2002 are not falling
      within the schedule of
National Green Tribunal Act, 2010
and
      any objection with respect to The Petroleum Rules, 2002 cannot
      be entertained under the
NGT Act, 2010
.
17. Learned counsel for the applicant has filed the objection
      against the findings of the joint inspection report and submitted
      that Collector has wrongly issued NOC or the diagram prepared
10
by the joint committee is not as per guidelines for setting up new
petrol pumps or that the committee is not as per guidelines for
setting up new petrol pumps or that the committee has
misinterpreted the guidelines.
18. It is further argued that the entries in plot no. 109/2 and 108
are transferred of land to private owners which discloses that it
is for the residential purposes. The applicant has further
challenged the authority of the revenue officials to convert the
residential land into the commercial plots and that the provisions
contained in Section 172 of the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue
Code, 1959 and Madhya Pradesh Gram Panchayat
(Development of Colonies) Rule, 2014 has not been properly
followed. Rejoinder to reply filed by the respondent no. 6 and
rejoinder reply filed by the respondent nos. 4 and 5 have also
been filed.
19. During the course of hearing learned counsel for the State
Mr. Prashant M. Harne and Mr. Rohit Sharma learned counsel
for the respondent have submitted that the crux of the matter is
distance from the hospital, private school etc. and it is clearly
mentioned that no hospital or school is located within 50 meters
from the periphery of the petrol pump and there is no residential
activity within the periphery of 50 meters from the section/ petrol
pump. The findings of the committee 7.3 says that the nearest
habitation, pupil around the village is 600 meters away from the
petrol pump.
20. Learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that the
perusal of the land records reveals that several persons have
purchased the land and their names are mutated. The revenue
entries shows the mutation of the year 2023-24. The contention
of the respondents / project proponent and the State counsel are
that the application was entertained in the year 2022 dated
14.04.2022     and    after    comprehensive     scrutiny   and
documentation the M/s Reliance B. P. Mobility granted the
dealership vide intend letter dated 30.11.2022 and consent to
establish and NOC was issued accordingly.
21. We are of the view that the matter with regard to change of
user of land or validity of the colony or construction of the houses
are within the domain of revenue authorities. Only thing which
is required to be considered is compliance of the guidelines
issued by
the CPC
B for establishment of petrol pump and this
application has been filed on the ground of distance which was
found to be not in violation of any guidelines and thus this
application is not maintainable and not tenable.
22. In view of the above facts, argument and records submitted
by the parties, this application is devoid of any merit and
deserves to be dismissed and dismissed accordingly.”
11
10. Order in the review petition: The review petition filed by the

appellants on the ground that the Joint Committee has not given

sufficient notice and opportunity was considered and dismissed by

the NGT on 17.10.2024.
11. Civil Appeals before this Court and Preliminary objections of

the respondents: The appellants filed the present civil appeals

challenging the judgment of NGT dated 09.08.2024 and also the

order in review dated 17.10.2024. Pursuant to issuance of notice,

when the respondents appeared and raised objections about the

bonafides of the appellants and also alleged that the appellants

have suppressed the initiation of parallel proceedings before the

High Court, this Court directed the appellants to respond to the

said allegations and also cautioned that in the event respondent’s

contentions were accepted by this Court then the civil appeals will

be dismissed with costs.
12. The appellants responded to the preliminary objections by

filing their reply. In the said reply, the appellants have, for the first

time, brought to the notice of this Court the filing of writ petition

no. 41030 of 2024 by appellant no. 3. The appellants sought to

justify their action of not informing this Court about filing of the
12
subsequent writ petition by contending that the scope of

proceedings arising out of original application before NGT on the

one hand and proceedings arising out of writ petition before High

Court are distinct and also that the said fact could not be

mentioned in the civil appeals as the writ petition was filed after

the institution of the civil appeals.
13. Analysis: The appellants want this Court to believe that the

scope of the original application before the NGT is confined only to

violation of “Siting Criteria of Retail Outlets” as mentioned in the

office memorandum dated 07.01.2020 issued by the Central

Pollution Control Board. It is then submitted that the subsequently

filed writ petition is confined to challenging the NOC dated

07.02.2024 on the ground that it is violative of the M.P. Nagar

Tatha     Gram     Nivesh    Adhiniyam,      1973     as   the    contesting

respondents did not take the necessary permission from the

Director, Town and Country Planning for constructing the Petrol

Pump. This justification, as formulated in the affidavit in reply is

as follows:
“11. That on 18.12.2024 that is during the pendency of the
        present Civil Appeal a Writ Petition No. 41030 of 2024 (Ram
        Kumar Singh Vs Collector Bhopal & Ors) was preferred by the
        Appellant No.3 on a completely different ground and Question of
        Law as, Petrol Pump was being illegally constructed without
        'Development Permissions' as per the due process as envisaged
13
under Madhya Pradesh Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh Adhiniyam
      1973 and as the Respondent No. 4 & 5 required to take
      'Development Permission' from the Director Town and Country
      Planning for starting construction of the Petrol Pump.”
14. We have examined the matter in detail. Having considered

grounds of challenge, the prayers in the original application and

submissions as recorded by the NGT and having contrasted them

with the grounds and prayers in the writ petition before the High

Court, we are of the opinion that this contention is an afterthought

and   also   lacks   candour.   The    following   references   clearly

demonstrate the fact.
15. At the outset, it is not correct to say that the original

application was confined only to “Siting Criteria of Retail Outlets”.
We have already reproduced the grounds taken in the original

application and it is apparent that while challenging the NOC dated

07.02.2024, the appellants have specifically pleaded that the NOC

is contrary to Rule 144 of the Petroleum Rules, 2002. In the original

application, the appellants have alleged that the district collector

has not applied his mind while granting the NOC. Further, in the

civil appeals filed before this Court, they specifically raised

questions of law and impugned the NOC dated 07.02.2024 on

various other grounds, which are as follows:
14
“(X). That however, without inquiring into the issues raised by
      the Appellants and in ignorance of the orders / directions given
      by the Hon'ble Tribunal is various cases prohibiting setting up of
      petrol pump outlets near the residential areas, Respondent no. 3
      issued a No Objection Certificate dated 07.02.2024 to
      Respondent no. 4 and 5.”
      …….
K. BECAUSE impugned orders and judgments are liable to be
      set aside for the reason that the proposed retail outlet is being
      constructed without complying with the terms and conditions laid
      down in the NOC dated 07.02.2024 granted by Respondent no.
3.
L. BECAUSE the Respondent No. 2 failed to ensure the
      implementation of additional safety measures as prescribed by
      the Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organization (PESO) in
      cases where the stipulated distance requirement is not met.”
16. The appellants have specifically challenged the grant of NOC

dated 07.02.2024 on the ground that the respondents have not

obtained development permission from the town and country

planning authority. The relevant portion of the ground is as

follows:
“N. BECAUSE the Joint Committee report is silent about the
      illegal construction being carried out by the Respondent on the
      proposed site of Petrol Pump, without obtaining Development
      Permission from the Town and Country Planning, which is
      mandated in the Collector's NOC dated 07.02.2024.”
17. Having extracted hereinabove the specific ground in the civil

appeals challenging the NOC on the ground that it is granted

without obtaining the development permission from the town and

country planning authority, which requirement arises under the
15
M.P. Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh Adhiniyam, 1973, the submission

that the proceedings before NGT were confined only to “Siting

Criteria of Retail Outlets” is false and is hereby rejected.
18. We will now refer to the grounds taken in the writ petition to

examine whether the said writ petition is really confined to

challenging the NOC dated 07.02.2024 on the grounds that the

said respondents have not obtained the development permission

under the M.P. Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh Adhiniyam, 1973. The

following grounds in the writ petition evidence that the writ petition

is not confined to that ground:
“5.7       It is submitted that before setting up the petrol pump,
       the Respondent No. 4 & 5 had also granted Prior Approval from
       the Respondent No. 3 i.e. PESO vide Prior Approval dated
       22.05.2023, which prescribes for safety as well as other norms.
Clause 5 of the prior approval clearly prescribes that necessary
       approval including NOC from Respondent No. 1 under Rule 144
       of the Petroleum Rules, 2002 is required to be obtain.”
       5.10      On receipt of the letter dated 30.01.2024, the
       Respondent No. 1 without considering the actual and factual
       aspect of the Said Land issued the NOC dated 07.02.2024
       ('Impugned NOC) to the Respondent No. 4 & 5 for establishment
       of petrol pump on the Side Land with various conditions
       attached.
5.12       It is submitted that the Impugned NOC was also not
       issued in accordance with the Petroleum Rules, 2002, which is
       blatant ignorance and violation of the Petroleum Rules, 2002.”
19. In view of the specific challenge to the NOC dated 07.02.2024

on grounds that it is violative of M.P. Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh
16
Adhiniyam, 1973 in the civil appeal, which arises out of

proceedings before the NGT, and also challenge to the NOC on

grounds that it is violative of Petroleum Rules, which challenge is

also taken in the writ petition filed before the High Court, we are of

the opinion that the appellants have initiated identical and parallel

proceedings. Having extracted the grounds raised in the original

application before the NGT, as well as in the writ petition filed

subsequently, when the present civil appeals were pending it is

clearly discernible from the pleadings that there is an overlap and

parallel challenges to the same NOC dated 07.02.2024. In the

original application, though the primary challenge is based on the

2020 Guidelines issued by
CPC
B, the appellants have raised

additional grounds with respect to Petroleum Rules and of violation

of municipal norms in the civil appeals. In the writ petition before

the High Court, though the appellants have taken the stand that

their grievance is limited only to violation of provisions of the

municipal laws, the Adhiniyam, 1973, grounds relating to

Petroleum Rules, 2002, which have anyway been raised before the

NGT are also taken. Even assuming that the scope and ambit of

challenge is distinct, which we have demonstrated that they are

not, the appellants should have taken the permission of this Court
17
for initiating the writ petition. The minimum that the appellants

could have done and infact should have done is to inform this

Court about initiation of the fresh proceeding challenging the NOC

dated 07.02.2024 before the High Court, particularly when the civil

appeals are pending consideration.
20. In the context of the above-referred facts, the submission of

the contesting respondents that this litigation is not bonafide and

that it is to subserve the personal interest of appellant no. 3,

running a parallel business, cannot be brushed aside easily.
21. Conclusion and directions: In view of the above, having

considered the grounds and relief sought in the original application

filed before the NGT and having contrasted it with the grounds and

prayers in the writ petition, we are of the opinion that the:
(a) appellants have suppressed the necessary facts and there is

reason to believe that the proceedings before NGT were initiated to

subserve business interest of appellant no. 3. In this view of the

matter, the civil appeals are dismissed with costs quantified at

Rs.50,000/- payable to the Supreme Court Advocates on Record

Association within four weeks from today.
18
(b)     We also clarify that we have not examined the issue relating

to violation of M.P. Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh Adhiniyam, 1973

raised in the writ petition pending before the High Court. Said writ

petition will be heard and disposed of on its own merits and without

being influenced by observations made by this Court in the present

case.
………………………………....J.
                            [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]


                                       ………………………………....J.
                                          [JOYMALYA BAGCHI]


NEW DELHI;
JULY 14, 2025
19