[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Bgm And M-Rpl-Jmct(Jv) vs Eastern Coalfields Limited on 18 July, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 874                                                             REPORTABLE


                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO……….. OF 2025
                                   (Arising out of SLP (C) Diary No. 21451/2024)


                            BGM AND M-RPL-JMCT (JV)                   …APPELLANT (S)

                                                      VERSUS

                            EASTERN COALFIELDS LIMITED               …RESPONDENT(S)




                                                JUDGMENT
MANOJ MISRA, J.
1.      Leave granted.
2.      This appeal impugns an order of the High Court1 dated

                            19.01.2024 whereby the application2 of the appellant, under

                            Section 11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 19963, was

                            dismissed on the ground that there exists no arbitration

                            agreement between the parties.
Signature Not Verified
1 The High Court at Calcutta
Digitally signed by
BORRA LM
A.P. No. 745 of 2023
2 VALLI
   Date: 2025.07.18

               1996 Act
   18:06:29 IST
   Reason: 3
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)     Page 1 of 26
FACTS
3.     The appellant and the respondent entered into a contract

        relating to transportation/handling of goods. Disputes arose

        between the parties during the subsistence of the contract.

        Clause 13 of the General Terms and Conditions, appended to

        the e-tender notice, which forms part of the contract and relied

        upon by the appellant as an arbitration agreement, is the

        subject matter of interpretation. The same is extracted below:
“13. SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
                  It is incumbent upon the contractor to avoid
                  litigation and disputes during the course of
                  execution. However, if such disputes take place
                  between the contractor and the department,
                  effort shall be made first to settle the disputes at
                  the company level.
The contractor should make request in writing to
                  the Engineer-in-charge for settlement of such
                  disputes/claims within 30 (thirty) days of arising
                  of the cause of dispute/ claim failing which no
                  disputes/ claims of the contractor shall be
                  entertained by the company.
Effort shall be made to resolve the dispute in two
                  stages.
In first stage dispute shall be referred to Area
                  CGM, GM. If difference still persist the dispute
                  shall be referred to a committee constituted by
                  the owner. The Committee shall have one
                  member of the rank of Director of the company
                  who shall be chairman of the company.
                  If differences still persist, the settlement of the
                  dispute shall be resolved in the following
                  manner:
In the event of any dispute or difference relating
                  to the interpretation and application of the
                  provisions of commercial contract(s) between
                  Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs)/ Port
                  Trusts inter se and also between CPSEs and
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)        Page 2 of 26
Government       Departments/      Organizations
                  (excluding disputes concerning railways, Income
                  Tax, Customs & Excise Departments), such
                  dispute or difference shall be taken up by either
                  party for resolution through AMRCD as
                  mentioned in DPE OM No. 4(1)/2013-DPE
                  (GM)/FTS-1835 dated 22-05-2018.
In case of parties other than Govt. Agencies, the
                  redressal of the dispute may be sought through
                  ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION ACT, 1996
                  as amended by AMENDMENT ACT OF 2015”

                                              (Emphasis supplied)
4.       Treating the underscored portion of clause 13 as an

        arbitration agreement, the appellant filed an application under

        Section 11(6) of the 1996 Act for appointment of an Arbitrator

        for settlement of the disputes inter se the parties.
5.       The respondent objected to the prayer for appointment

        of an Arbitrator, inter-alia, on the ground that clause 13 is

        bereft of the essential ingredients to constitute an arbitration

        agreement and therefore the application seeking appointment

        of an Arbitrator deserves rejection.
6.       The High Court accepted the objection and dismissed

        the application. While rejecting the prayer, the High Court laid

        emphasis on use of the word “may” before “be sought” in the

        underscored portion of clause 13 and, inter alia, relied on two

        decisions of this Court, namely,
Jagdish Chander vs. Ramesh
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)       Page 3 of 26
Chander and Others4
and
Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. vs.

          IVRCL AMR Joint Venture5
to hold that where the word “may”

          is used there is no clear intention of the parties to refer the

          dispute between them to arbitration and therefore, the prayer

          to appoint an Arbitrator is not sustainable.
7.          We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have

          perused the materials on record.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
8.          The learned counsel for the appellant contended that

          the use of the word “may” is only to indicate that parties to the

          agreement have an option to take recourse to settlement of

          dispute(s) through arbitration under the 1996 Act. However,

          once that option is exercised by any of the parties to the

          agreement, as in the present case, it becomes a binding

          contract to settle inter se dispute(s) through arbitration. It was

          contended that the decisions of this Court in
Jagdish

          Chander
(supra) and
Mahanadi Coalfields
(supra) dealt with

          entirely different clauses than the one in question and,

          therefore, the High Court erred in placing reliance on them to

          reject the application of the appellant.



4 (2007) 5 SCC 719
5 (2022) 20 SCC 636
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)     Page 4 of 26
9.     In addition to above, it was argued that at the stage of

        appointment of an arbitrator the court is required to examine

        whether arbitration agreement exists or not. Such examination

        is for the Court to satisfy itself that, prima facie, an arbitration

        agreement exists, though the final call on its existence is to be

        taken by the arbitral tribunal, which is competent to rule on its

        own jurisdiction, including ruling on any objections with

        respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement.

        Thus, it was argued, the appropriate course for the High Court

        was to appoint an arbitral tribunal and leave the issue open for

        the arbitral tribunal to decide.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
10.      Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent

        supported the impugned order and also referred to Clause 32

        of the Instructions to Bidders to contend that there was no

        definite agreement between the parties to settle their disputes

        through arbitration. According to the learned counsel for the

        respondent, the use of the word “may” in the so-called

        arbitration clause clearly indicates that at the time of entering

        the agreement, parties were not ad idem on referring present

        or future disputes between them to arbitration. The clause only
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)     Page 5 of 26
enabled the parties to agree on any future date to refer the

        disputes to arbitration. Therefore, in the absence of proof of any

        such agreement, reference to arbitral tribunal has been

        justifiably declined.
11.      In addition to above, by referring to Clause 32 of the

        Instructions to Bidders, the learned counsel for the respondent

        contended that disputes between the parties were to be settled

        through regular court proceedings and not through arbitration.

        Clause 32 is extracted below:
“Clause 32- Legal Jurisdiction: - Matters
                  relating to any dispute or difference arising
                  out of this tender and subsequent contract
                  awarded based on this tender shall be subject
                  to the jurisdiction of District Court where the
                  subject work is to be executed.”
12.      Besides above, the learned counsel for the respondent

        submitted that if, on a plain reading of the relevant clause,

        relied by any one of the parties as an arbitration agreement, it

        does not appear that parties are ad idem on settlement of inter

        se, present or future, disputes through arbitration to the

        exclusion of domestic courts, the very existence of an

        arbitration agreement comes into question, which can be taken

        notice of by the Court so as to decline the prayer for
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)      Page 6 of 26
appointment of an arbitral tribunal under Section 11 of the

             1996 Act.
ISSUES
13.      Having regard to the facts and the submissions made

             before us, we are of the view that following three issues arise

             for our consideration:
(i) Whether the question of existence of an arbitration

                   agreement should be left for the arbitral tribunal to decide?
(ii) Whether clause 13 (supra) would constitute an

                   arbitration   agreement      between     the    parties       as

                   contemplated under Section 7 of the 1996 Act?
(iii) Whether clause 32 of Instructions to Bidders negates

                   the existence of an arbitration agreement?
ISSUE (I)
14.      Insofar as issue (i) is concerned, a seven-Judge

             Constitution Bench of this Court in Interplay Between

             Arbitration Agreements under Arbitration, 1996 &
Stamp

             Act, 1899
, In re6, after surveying several decisions as also the

             impact of the 2015 Amendment on the 1996 Act, has settled

             the law in the following terms:
6 (2024) 6 SCC 1
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)         Page 7 of 26
“164. The 2015 Amendment Act has laid down
                  different parameters for judicial review under
Section 8
and
Section 11
. Where
Section 8
requires the Referral Court to look into the prima
                  facie existence of a valid arbitration agreement,
Section 11
confines the Court's jurisdiction to
                  the    examination     of    the existence of    an
                  arbitration agreement. Although the object and
                  purpose behind both
Sections 8
and
11
is to
                  compel parties to abide by their contractual
                  understanding, the scope of power of the Referral
                  Courts under the said provisions is intended to
                  be different. The same is also evident from the
                  fact that
Section 37
of the Arbitration Act allows
                  an appeal from the order of an Arbitral Tribunal
                  refusing to refer the parties to arbitration under
Section 8
, but not from
Section 11
. Thus, the
                  2015 Amendment Act has legislatively overruled
                  the dictum of Patel Engg. [SBP & Co. v. Patel
                  Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618] where it was held
                  that
Section    8
and
Section    11
are
                  complementary in nature. Accordingly, the two
                  provisions cannot be read as laying down a
                  similar standard.
165. The legislature confined the scope of
                  reference under
Section 11
(6-A) to the
                  examination of the existence of an arbitration
                  agreement. The use of the term “examination” in
                  itself connotes that the scope of the power is
                  limited to a prima facie determination. Since the
                  Arbitration Act is a self-contained code, the
                  requirement of “existence” of an arbitration
                  agreement draws effect from
Section 7
of the
                  Arbitration Act.
In
Duro Felguera [Duro Felguera,
                  S.A. v. Gangavaram Port Ltd.
, (2017) 9 SCC 729
                  : (2017) 4 SCC (Civ) 764] , this Court held that
                  the Referral Courts only need to consider one
                  aspect to determine the existence of an
                  arbitration agreement — whether the underlying
                  contract contains an arbitration agreement
                  which provides for arbitration pertaining to the
                  disputes which have arisen between the parties
                  to the agreement. Therefore, the scope of
                  examination under
Section 11
(6-A) should be
                  confined to the existence of an arbitration
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)        Page 8 of 26
agreement on the basis of
Section 7
. Similarly,
                  the validity of an arbitration agreement, in view
                  of
Section 7
, should be restricted to the
                  requirement of formal validity such as the
                  requirement that the agreement be in writing.
This interpretation also gives true effect to the
                  doctrine of competence-competence by leaving
                  the issue of substantive existence and validity of
                  an arbitration agreement to be decided by
                  Arbitral Tribunal under
Section 16
. We
                  accordingly clarify the position of law
laid down
                  in
Vidya Drolia [Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading
                  Corpn.
, (2021) 2 SCC 1 : (2021) 1 SCC (Civ) 549]
                  in the context of
Section 8
and
Section 11
of the
                  Arbitration Act.
166. The burden of proving the existence of
                  arbitration agreement generally lies on the party
                  seeking to rely on such agreement. In
                  jurisdictions such as India, which accept the
                  doctrine of competence-competence, only prima
                  facie proof of the existence of an arbitration
                  agreement must be adduced before the Referral
                  Court. The Referral Court is not the appropriate
                  forum to conduct a mini-trial by allowing the
                  parties to adduce the evidence in regard to the
                  existence or validity of an arbitration agreement.
                  The determination of the existence and validity
                  of an arbitration agreement on the basis of
                  evidence ought to be left to the Arbitral Tribunal.
                  This position of law can also be gauged from the
                  plain language of the statute.
167.
Section 11
(6-A) uses the expression
                  “examination of the existence of an arbitration
                  agreement”. The purport of using the word
                  “examination” connotes that the legislature
                  intends that the Referral Court has to inspect or
                  scrutinise the dealings between the parties for
                  the existence of an arbitration agreement.
                  Moreover, the expression “examination” does not
                  connote or imply a laborious or contested
                  inquiry. [ P. Ramanatha Aiyar, The Law
                  Lexicon (2nd Edn., 1997) 666.] On the other
                  hand,
Section 16
provides that the Arbitral
                  Tribunal can “rule” on its jurisdiction, including
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)        Page 9 of 26
the existence and validity of an arbitration
                  agreement. A “ruling” connotes adjudication of
                  disputes after admitting evidence from the
                  parties. Therefore, it is evident that the Referral
                  Court is only required to examine the existence
                  of arbitration agreements, whereas the Arbitral
                  Tribunal ought to rule on its jurisdiction,
                  including the issues pertaining to the existence
                  and validity of an arbitration agreement. A
                  similar view was adopted by this Court in Shin-
                  Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd. v. Aksh Optifibre
                  Ltd. [Shin-Etsu    Chemical     Co.    Ltd. v. Aksh
                  Optifibre Ltd., (2005) 7 SCC 234]

                         xxx            xxx                xxx
169. When the Referral Court renders a prima
                  facie opinion, neither the Arbitral Tribunal, nor
                  the Court enforcing the arbitral award will be
                  bound by such a prima facie view. If a prima facie
                  view as to the existence of an arbitration
                  agreement is taken by the Referral Court, it still
                  allows the Arbitral Tribunal to examine the issue
                  in depth. Such a legal approach will help the
                  Referral Court in weeding out prima facie non-
                  existent arbitration agreements. It will also
                  protect the jurisdictional competence of the
                  Arbitral Tribunals to decide on issues pertaining
                  to the existence and validity of an arbitration
                  agreement.”
15.      The legal principles deducible from the above decision

        qua the scope of Referral Court’s power under
Section 11
of

        1996 Act are as follows:
(a)
Section 11
confines the Court's jurisdiction to the

              examination regarding the existence of an arbitration

              agreement.
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)         Page 10 of 26
(b) The use of the term “examination” in itself connotes

             that the scope of the power is limited to a prima facie

             determination.
(c) Referral Courts only need to consider one aspect to

             determine the existence of an arbitration agreement —

             whether the underlying contract contains an arbitration

             agreement which provides for arbitration pertaining to the

             disputes which have arisen between the parties to the

             agreement. Therefore, the scope of examination under
Section 11
(6-A) should be confined to the existence of an

             arbitration agreement on the basis of
Section 7
. Such a

             legal approach will help the Referral Court in weeding out

             prima facie non-existent arbitration agreements.
(d) The purport of using the word “examination” connotes

             that the legislature intends that the Referral Court has to

             inspect or scrutinise the dealings between the parties for

             the existence of an arbitration agreement. However, the

             expression “examination” does not connote or imply a

             laborious or contested inquiry.
(e) The burden of proving the existence of arbitration

             agreement generally lies on the party seeking to rely on

             such agreement. Only prima facie proof of the existence of
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)   Page 11 of 26
an arbitration agreement must be adduced before the

              Referral Court. The Referral Court is not the appropriate

              forum to conduct a mini-trial by allowing the parties to

              adduce the evidence in regard to the existence or validity

              of an arbitration agreement. The determination of the

              existence and validity of an arbitration agreement on the

              basis of evidence ought to be left to the Arbitral Tribunal.
(f)
Section 16
provides that the Arbitral Tribunal can

              “rule” on its jurisdiction, including the existence and

              validity of an arbitration agreement. A “ruling” connotes

              adjudication of disputes after admitting evidence from the

              parties. Therefore, when the Referral Court renders a

              prima facie opinion, neither the Arbitral Tribunal, nor the

              Court enforcing the arbitral award is bound by such a

              prima facie view. If a prima facie view as to the existence of

              an arbitration agreement is taken by the Referral Court, it

              still allows the Arbitral Tribunal to examine the issue in

              depth.
16.      What can be deduced from the above decision is that

        the Referral Court before appointing an arbitral tribunal will

        have to be prima facie satisfied that an arbitration agreement

        as contemplated in
Section 7
of the 1996 Act exists. For this
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)     Page 12 of 26
limited purpose it can scrutinize the documents relied upon by

        the parties in proof of its existence. Though the burden of

        proving the existence of arbitration agreement lies on the party

        seeking to rely on such agreement, only prima facie proof of its

        existence must be adduced before the Referral Court because

        the Referral Court is not the appropriate forum to conduct a

        mini-trial by allowing the parties to adduce the evidence in

        regard to its existence.
17.      However, where professed arbitration agreement is

        found in an undisputed document, no trial or inquiry is

        required as to its existence. In such a situation, the Court

        would have to simply peruse the same to satisfy itself whether

        it, prima facie, fulfills the essential ingredients of an arbitration

        agreement as contemplated under
Section 7
of the 1996 Act.

        But where the professed arbitration agreement is not contained

        in any one document and is to be inferred from two or more

        documents, such as exchange of letters or communications,

        parties may raise various pleas and place various documents

        to prove or disprove its existence. In such a scenario, if from

        the documents placed, existence of an arbitration agreement,

        as defined in
Section 7
, is prima facie made out, Referral Court,

        instead of undertaking a deeper probe or inquiry, should refer
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)      Page 13 of 26
the matter to the arbitral tribunal. More so, because opinion of

           the Referral Court as to existence of an arbitration agreement

           is neither binding on the arbitral tribunal nor the Court dealing

           with the arbitral award.
18.       In the instant case, the appellant is relying on just one

           clause in the contract which, according to the appellant,

           constitutes an arbitration agreement whereas according to the

           respondent, though the clause is not disputed, the same does

           not     constitute       an     arbitration       agreement.        In    such

           circumstances, the Court while exercising power under
Section

           11
would not have to hold a mini-trial or an enquiry into its

           existence rather a plain reading of the clause would indicate

           whether it is, or it is not, an arbitration agreement, prima facie,

           satisfying the necessary ingredients of it, as required by
Section

           7
of the 1996 Act. In our view, such a limited exercise would

           not transgress the limit set out by sub-section (6-A)7 of
Section

           11
of the 1996 Act as introduced by 2015 Amendment because

           the object of such an exercise (i.e., of examination) is to weed




7
Section 11
.
(6-A). The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court, while considering any
application under sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6), shall, notwithstanding
any judgment, decree or order of any Court, confine to the examination of the existence of an
arbitration agreement.
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)                  Page 14 of 26
out frivolous claims for appointment of an arbitrator/ reference

            to an arbitral tribunal.
19.        In view of the above discussion, the argument of the

            appellant that Referral Court should straight away refer the

            matter and leave it to the arbitral tribunal to decide whether

            the arbitration agreement exists or not cannot be accepted.

            Issue (i) is decided accordingly.
ISSUE (II)
20.       Before we proceed to consider whether Clause 13

            would constitute an arbitration agreement, it would be useful

            to examine the law as to when an arbitration agreement comes

            into existence. An arbitration agreement is the foundation of

            arbitration as it records the consent of the parties to submit

            their disputes to arbitration.
Section 2(b)
of the 1996 Act

            defines an arbitration agreement to mean an agreement

            referred to in Section 78. In Bihar State Mineral Development


8
Section 7
. Arbitration Agreement. - (1) In this Part, “arbitration agreement” means an
agreement by the parties to submit to arbitration all or certain disputes which have arisen or
which may arise between them in respect of a defined legal relationship, whether contractual or
not.
(2) An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an arbitration clause in a contract or in the
form of a separate agreement.
(3) An arbitration agreement shall be in writing.
(4) An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is contained in –
(a) a document signed by the parties;
(b) an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams or other means of telecommunication including
        communication through electronic means which provide a record of the agreement; or
(c) an exchange of statements of claim and defense in which the existence of the
        agreement is alleged by one party and not denied by the other.
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)                 Page 15 of 26
Corporation vs. Encon Builders9
, this Court culled out the

           essential ingredients of an arbitration agreement as follows: (a)

           there must be a present or future difference in connection with

           some contemplated affair; (b) the parties must intend to settle

           such difference by a private tribunal; (c) the parties must agree

           in writing to be bound by the decision of such tribunal; and (d)

           the parties must be ad idem.
21.
In
Cox and Kings Limited vs. SAP India Private

           Limited
and another10, a Constitution Bench of this Court

           held:
“61. An arbitration agreement is a contractual
                      undertaking by two or more parties to resolve
                      their disputes by the process of arbitration,
                      even if the disputes themselves are not based
                      on contractual obligations. An arbitration
                      agreement is a conclusive proof that the
                      parties have consented to submit their dispute
                      to an arbitral tribunal to the exclusion of
                      domestic courts. The basis for an arbitration
                      agreement is generally traced to the
                      contractual freedom of parties to codify their
                      intention to consensually submit their
                      disputes to an alternative dispute resolution
                      process.”




(5) The reference in a contract to a document containing an arbitration clause constitutes an
arbitration agreement if the contract is in writing and the reference is such as to make that
arbitration clause part of the contract.
9 (2003) 7 SCC 418
10 (2024) 4 SCC 1
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)                Page 16 of 26
22.      The    principles    regarding     what     constitutes        an

        arbitration agreement were summarized by this Court in
Jagdish Chander
(supra) in the following terms: -
“8. …..this Court held that a clause in a contract
                  can be construed as an 'arbitration agreement'
                  only if an agreement to refer disputes or
                  differences to arbitration is expressly or
                  impliedly spelt out from the clause. We may at
                  this juncture set out the well settled principles
                  in regard to what constitutes an arbitration
                  agreement :
(i) The intention of the parties to enter
                        into an arbitration agreement shall have to
                        be gathered from the terms of the
                        agreement. If the terms of the agreement
                        clearly indicate an intention on the part of
                        the parties to the agreement to refer their
                        disputes to a private tribunal for
                        adjudication and a willingness to be bound
                        by the decision of such tribunal on such
                        disputes, it is arbitration agreement. While
                        there is no specific form of an arbitration
                        agreement, the words used should disclose
                        a determination and obligation to go to
                        arbitration and not merely contemplate the
                        possibility of going for arbitration. Where
                        there is merely a possibility of the parties
                        agreeing to arbitration in future, as
                        contrasted from an obligation to refer
                        disputes to arbitration, there is no valid and
                        binding arbitration agreement.
(ii) Even if the words 'arbitration' and
                        'arbitral tribunal (or arbitrator)' are not
                        used with reference to the process of
                        settlement or with reference to the private
                        tribunal which has to adjudicate upon the
                        disputes, in a clause relating to settlement
                        of disputes, it does not detract from the
                        clause being an arbitration agreement if it
                        has the attributes or elements of an
                        arbitration agreement. They are : (a) The
                        agreement should be in writing. (b) The
                        parties should have agreed to refer any
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)        Page 17 of 26
disputes (present or future) between them
                       to the decision of a private tribunal. (c) The
                       private tribunal should be empowered to
                       adjudicate upon the disputes in an
                       impartial manner, giving due opportunity to
                       the parties to put forth their case before it.
(d) The parties should have agreed that the
                       decision of the private tribunal in respect of
                       the disputes will be binding on them.
(iii) Where the clause provides that in the
                       event of disputes arising between the
                       parties, the disputes shall be referred to
                       arbitration, it is an arbitration agreement.
Where there is a specific and direct
                       expression of intent to have the disputes
                       settled by arbitration, it is not necessary to
                       set out the attributes of an arbitration
                       agreement to make it an arbitration
                       agreement. But where the clause relating to
                       settlement of disputes, contains words
                       which specifically excludes any of the
                       attributes of an arbitration agreement or
                       contains anything that detracts from an
                       arbitration agreement, it will not be an
                       arbitration agreement. For example, where
                       an agreement requires or permits an
                       authority to decide a claim or dispute
                       without hearing, or requires the authority to
                       act in the interests of only one of the parties,
                       or provides that the decision of the
                       Authority will not be final and binding on
                       the parties, or that if either party is not
                       satisfied with the decision of the Authority,
                       he may file a civil suit seeking relief, it
                       cannot be termed as an arbitration
                       agreement.
(iv) But mere use of the word 'arbitration'
                       or 'arbitrator' in a clause will not make it an
                       arbitration agreement, if it requires or
                       contemplates a further or fresh consent of
                       the parties for reference to arbitration. For
                       example, use of words such as "parties can,
                       if they so desire, refer their disputes to
                       arbitration" or "in the event of any dispute,
                       the parties may also agree to refer the same
                       to arbitration" or "if any disputes arise
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)         Page 18 of 26
between the parties, they should consider
                       settlement by arbitration" in a clause
                       relating to settlement of disputes, indicate
                       that the clause is not intended to be an
                       arbitration agreement. Similarly, a clause
                       which states that "if the parties so decide,
                       the disputes shall be referred to arbitration"
or "any disputes between parties, if they so
                       agree, shall be referred to arbitration" is not
                       an arbitration agreement. Such clauses
                       merely indicate a desire or hope to have the
                       disputes settled by arbitration, or a
                       tentative arrangement to explore arbitration
                       as a mode of settlement if and when a
                       dispute arises. Such clauses require the
                       parties to arrive at a further agreement to go
                       to arbitration, as and when the disputes
                       arise. Any agreement or clause in an
                       agreement requiring or contemplating a
                       further consent or consensus before a
                       reference to arbitration, is not an
                       arbitration agreement, but an agreement to
                       enter into an arbitration agreement in
                       future.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
23.
In
Jagdish Chander
(supra), the issue that arose for

        consideration was whether paragraph 16 in the partnership

        agreement constituted an arbitration agreement. Clause 16

        under consideration there, is extracted below:
“16) If during the continuance of the
                  partnership or at any time afterwards any
                  dispute touching the partnership arises
                  between the partners, the same shall be
                  mutually decided by the partners or shall be
                  referred for arbitration if the parties so
                  determine.”
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)        Page 19 of 26
While holding that clause 16 did not constitute an arbitration

        agreement, this Court observed:
“9. Para 16 of the Partnership deed provides that
                  if there is any dispute touching the partnership
                  arising between the partners, the same shall be
                  mutually decided by the parties or shall be
                  referred to arbitration if the parties so determine.
                  If the clause had merely said that in the event of
                  disputes arising between the parties, they "shall
                  be referred to arbitration", it would have been an
                  arbitration agreement. But the use of the words
                  "shall be referred for arbitration if the parties so
                  determine" completely changes the complexion
                  of the provision. The expression "determine"
                  indicates that the parties are required to reach a
                  decision by application of mind. Therefore, when
                  clause 16 uses the words "the dispute shall be
                  referred for arbitration if the parties so
                  determine", it means that it is not an arbitration
                  agreement but a provision which enables
                  arbitration only if the parties mutually decide
                  after due consideration as to whether the
                  disputes should be referred to arbitration or not.
                  In effect, the clause requires the consent of
                  parties before the disputes can be referred to
                  arbitration. The main attribute of an arbitration
                  agreement, namely, consensus ad idem to refer
                  the disputes to arbitration is missing in clause
                  16 relating to settlement of disputes. Therefore,
                  it is not an arbitration agreement, as defined
                  under
section 7
of the Act. In the absence of an
                  arbitration agreement, the question of exercising
                  power under
section 11
of the Act to appoint an
                  Arbitrator does not arise.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
24.
In
Mahanadi Coalfields
(supra), this court was

        required to consider whether clause 15 constituted an

        arbitration agreement. Clause 15 under consideration there, is

        extracted below:
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)        Page 20 of 26
“15. Settlement of Disputes/Arbitration:
15.1 It is incumbent upon the contractor to avoid
                  litigation and disputes during the course of
                  execution. However, if such disputes take place
                  between the contractor and the department,
                  effort shall be made first to settle the disputes at
                  the company level. The contractor should make
                  request in writing to the Engineer-in-Charge for
                  settlement of such disputes/claims within 30
                  (thirty) days of arising of the case of
                  dispute/claim failing which no disputes/claims
                  of the contractor shall be entertained by the
                  company.
15.2 If differences still persist, the settlement of
                  the dispute with Govt. Agencies shall be dealt
                  with as per the Guidelines issued by the Ministry
                  of Finance, Govt. of India in this regard. In case
                  of parties other than Govt. Agencies, the
                  redressal of the disputes may be sought in the
                  Court of Law.”
25.      Following the decision in
Jagdish Chander
(supra),

        this Court, in
Mahanadi Coalfields
(supra), held that Clause

        15 of the Contract Agreement though is titled “Settlement of

        Disputes /Arbitration”, the substantive part of it makes it

        abundantly clear that there is no arbitration agreement

        between the parties to refer either present or future dispute to

        arbitration.
26.      What is clear from the judgment in
Mahanadi

        Coalfields
(supra) is that mere use of the word “arbitration” or

        “arbitrator” in a clause will not make it an arbitration

        agreement, if it requires or contemplates a further or fresh
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)        Page 21 of 26
consent of the parties for reference to arbitration.
In
Jagdish

        Chander
(supra), use of words such as "parties can, if they so

        desire, refer their disputes to arbitration", or "in the event of

        any dispute, the parties may also agree to refer the same to

        arbitration", or "if any disputes arise between the parties, they

        should consider settlement by arbitration", in a clause relating

        to settlement of disputes, were found not indicative of an

        arbitration agreement. Similarly, a clause which states that "if

        the parties so decide, the disputes shall be referred to

        arbitration" or "any disputes between parties, if they so agree,

        shall be referred to arbitration" would not constitute an

        arbitration agreement. Because such clauses merely indicate a

        desire or hope to have the disputes settled by arbitration, or a

        tentative arrangement to explore arbitration as a mode of

        settlement if and when a dispute arises. This is so, because

        such clauses require the parties to arrive at a further

        agreement to go to arbitration, as and when disputes arise.

        Therefore, any agreement, or clause in an agreement, requiring

        or contemplating a further consent or consensus before a

        reference to arbitration, is not an arbitration agreement.
27.      Now, the question which arises for our consideration is

        whether Clause 13 constitutes an arbitration agreement or it is
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)   Page 22 of 26
just an enabling provision for parties to agree to refer the

        dispute(s) for settlement through arbitration.
28.        Clause 13 in its first paragraph sets out intent to avoid

        litigation and advises the contractor to make effort to settle the

        dispute at the company level. Second paragraph sets out the

        procedure for raising the dispute/ claim for settlement at the

        company level. It provides that the contractor should make

        request in writing to the Engineer-in-charge for settlement of

        disputes/ claims within 30 days of arising of the cause of

        dispute/ claim failing which it shall not be entertained by the

        company. Thereafter, clause 13 provides for a two-stage

        procedure for resolution of the dispute. In the first stage,

        dispute is to be referred to Area CGM, GM. If difference persists,

        the dispute is to be referred to a committee constituted by the

        owner. If difference continues to persist, the second stage

        procedure becomes applicable. According to which, if the

        dispute or difference relates to the interpretation and

        application of the provisions of commercial contracts between

        Central Public Sector Enterprises CPSEs /Port Trusts inter se,

        or    is   between    CPSEs    and    Government     Departments/

        Organizations (excluding disputes concerning railways, income

        tax, Customs and Excise departments), such dispute or
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)      Page 23 of 26
difference shall be taken up by either party for resolution

        through AMRCD as mentioned in DPE OM No.4(1)/2013-DPE

        (GM)/FTS -1835 dated 22-05-2018. However, in case of parties

        other than Govt. Agencies, the redressal of the dispute may be

        sought through arbitration as per 1996 Act.
29.      The High Court opined that use of the words “may be

        sought through Arbitration…” indicate that at the stage of

        entering the contract, parties were not ad idem that inter se

        dispute shall be resolved through arbitration, therefore the said

        clause would not constitute an arbitration agreement.
30.      The argument of the learned counsel for the appellant

        is that clause 13 provides option to the parties, which include

        any of one of the parties, to seek dispute resolution through

        arbitration and, therefore, it is nothing but an arbitration

        clause. According to him, use of the word “may” in clause 13

        does not provide choice to the parties to agree, or not to agree,

        for arbitration, rather it is a choice given to either of the parties

        to seek a settlement through arbitration and, therefore, when

        one party exercises the option, the other party cannot resile

        from the agreement. In that sense, according to him, clause 13

        is an arbitration agreement.
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)      Page 24 of 26
31.      We do not agree with the aforesaid submission because

        clause 13 does not bind parties to use arbitration for settlement

        of the disputes. Use of the words “may be sought”, imply that

        there is no subsisting agreement between parties that they, or

        any one of them, would have to seek settlement of dispute(s)

        through arbitration. It is just an enabling clause whereunder,

        if parties agree, they could resolve their dispute(s) through

        arbitration. In our view, the phraseology of clause 13 is not

        indicative of a binding agreement that any of the parties on its

        own could seek redressal of inter se dispute(s) through

        arbitration. We are, therefore, of the considered view that the

        High Court was justified in holding that clause 13 does not

        constitute an arbitration agreement.
32.      As it is not the case of the appellant that parties at any

        later stage have agreed to refer the disputes to arbitration, in

        our view, the High Court was justified in rejecting the

        application seeking appointment of an arbitrator. Issue (ii) is

        decided in the aforesaid terms.
ISSUE (III)
33.      Having decided issue (ii) in the negative, deciding issue
(iii) is of no consequence. However, we may observe that clause

        32 does not exclude resolution of disputes through arbitration
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)    Page 25 of 26
agreement. It only fixes jurisdiction and in the event of there

        being an arbitration agreement could determine the juridical

        seat. However, since we have held that there is no arbitration

        agreement between the parties, decision of issue (iii) is of no

        consequence.
34.      In the light of our conclusion on the issues discussed

        above, the appeal fails and is, accordingly, dismissed.
35.      There is no order as to costs.
36.      Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
……..….............................................J.
                             (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)




                              …….................................................J.
                                                         (MANOJ MISRA)


        New Delhi;
July 18, 2025
CIVIL APPEAL NO………..OF 2025 (@ SLP (C) D.No. 21451/2024)            Page 26 of 26