[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shri Shri Swami Samarth Construction ... vs The Board Of Directors Of Nkgsb Co-Op. ... on 28 July, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 908


                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                             WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 684 OF 2025



    SHRI SHRI SWAMI SAMARTH CONSTRUCTION
    & FINANCE SOLUTION & ANR.                                               … PETITIONERS


                                                   VS.


    THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF NKGSB
    CO-OP. BANK LTD. & ORS.                                                … RESPONDENTS


                                            JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
1. This is a writ petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India by an

              enterprise registered under the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises

              Development Act, 20061.
2. The petitioning enterprise had executed a loan agreement with the NKGSB Co-
operative Bank2 but had failed in its obligation to repay the loan. In due course,

              the account of the petitioning enterprise was classified as a non-performing

              asset3. The authorised officer of the respondent no.2 issued a demand notice
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NITIN TALREJA
Date: 2025.07.30
16:58:35 IST
Reason:
1
MSME Act
2
respondent no.2
3
NPA
1
dated 13th May, 2024 under Section 13(2) of the Securitisation and

       Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act,

       20024, calling upon the petitioning enterprise to repay the dues of the

       respondent no.2 within 60 days. It does not appear from the writ petition, filed

       on 14th July, 2025, that the petitioning enterprise objected to classification of

       its account as NPA as well as issuance of the demand notice on the ground that

       the action of the respondent no.2 was in violation of Notification5 dated 29th

       May, 2015, containing the “FRAMEWORK FOR REVIVAL AND REHABILITATION OF MICRO,

       SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES”6 issued by the Joint Secretary to the Government

       of India, Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. The respondent no.2

       having moved an application before the relevant Magistrate under
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act, a Court Commissioner was appointed per order dated 3rd

       April, 2025. Such order was communicated by the Court Commissioner to the

       petitioning enterprise on 18th June, 2025.
3. Mr. Nedumpara, learned counsel appearing for the petitioning enterprise,

       submits that it was the obligation of the respondent no.2 to identify “incipient

       stress” in the loan account of the petitioning enterprise but it did not so identify

       prior to classifying the loan account as NPA which, according to him, is wholly

       illegal. Mr. Nedumpara further submits that the Notification is binding on the

       lending banks/secured creditors under the
SARFAESI Act
and, therefore, any

       measure taken under the
SARFAESI Act
without complying with the terms of

       the FRAMEWORK against a micro, small or medium enterprise7 would amount to
4
SARFAESI Act
5
Notification
6
FRAMEWORK
7
MSME
2
an act in excess of jurisdiction. The decision in
Pro Knits v. Canara Bank8
,

        forming part of the writ petition and though not formally cited, was referred to

        by Mr. Nedumpara in course of his arguments in support of this submission.

        Also, Mr. Nedumpara submits that such Notification/FRAMEWORK does not

        mandatorily require an MSME to notify the lending bank/secured creditor first

        that the MSME wishes to have incipient stress in its account identified;

        therefore, any defence that the MSME did not voluntarily initiate proceedings

        ought not to be allowed to be raised. He, thus, prayed for admission of the writ

        petition and grant of ad-interim relief against the respondents.
4. The respondents are not required to be noticed since we are not persuaded to

        agree with any of the submissions advanced by Mr. Nedumpara.
5. The Notification detailing the FRAMEWORK, more particularly paragraph 1 and its

        sub-paragraphs, have to be read together to make its terms effective and

        meaningful. Although, in the sequence of the FRAMEWORK “Identification by

        Banks or Creditors” comes first, it is immediately followed by “Identification by

        the Enterprise”. In terms of sub-paragraph 2, any MSME may choose to

        voluntarily initiate proceedings under the FRAMEWORK if it “reasonably

        apprehends failure of its business or its inability or likely inability to pay debts

        and before the accumulated losses of the enterprise equals to half or more of

        its entire net worth” (emphasis ours). The obligation of the MSME does not end

        there. For initiation of proceedings under the FRAMEWORK, the application has to

        be verified by an affidavit of an authorised person and upon receipt of a

        request, the lending bank/secured creditor is mandatorily bound to proceed in
8
(2024) 10 SCC 292
3
terms of the FRAMEWORK and to constitute a committee to identify incipient

   stress in the account.
6. The way Mr. Nedumpara urges us to read the Notification and the terms of the

   FRAMEWORK, if accepted, would lead to the conclusion that every lending

   bank/secured creditor under the
SARFAESI Act
would be obliged to find out in

   every event of continuing default, likely to give rise to classification of the

   relevant account as NPA, whether the borrower is an MSME to which the

   FRAMEWORK applies, whether its business has failed or whether it is suffering

   from any disability to pay its debts; and upon receiving a response, to apply

   the terms thereof by, inter alia, including the account in the Special Mention

   Account for the claim for a corrective action plan to be considered by the

   Committee for stressed MSMEs. This could not have been the intention behind

   introduction of the FRAMEWORK to aid the MSMEs which, for reasons personal to

   them, is unable to clear its debt and require revival and rehabilitation that the

   FRAMEWORK envisages. If indeed it is only the obligation of the lending

   bank/secured creditor to identify incipient stress in the account, sub-

   paragraphs 2 and 3 of paragraph 1 would be rendered redundant. An MSME,

   despite finding that its business is failing or that it is unable to pay its debts or

   accumulation of losses equals to half or more of its entire net worth and

   classification of its account as NPA is imminent, it would rest on its oars

   believing that it has no responsibility and that its account will not be classified

   as NPA because it is the entire obligation of the lending bank/secured creditor

   to do what the FRAMEWORK requires. We would read and interpret the seemingly

   confusing terms of the FRAMEWORK harmoniously to ensure that a right under
4
the
MSME Act
is not destroyed by the
SARFAESI Act
or vice versa. In our

   reading, the terms of the FRAMEWORK do not prohibit the lending bank/secured

   creditor (assuming that it has no conscious knowledge that the defaulting

   borrower is an MSME) to classify the account of the defaulting MSME as NPA

   and to even issue the demand notice under
Section 13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act

   without such identification of incipient stress in the account of the defaulting

   borrower (MSME); however, upon receipt of the demand notice, if such

   borrower in its response under
Section 13
(3-
A) of the SARFAESI Act
asserts

   that it an MSME and claims the benefit of the FRAMEWORK citing reasons

   supported by an affidavit, the lending bank/secured creditor would then be

   mandatorily bound to look into such claim keeping further action under the
SARFAESI Act
in abeyance; and, should the claim be found to be worthy of

   acceptance within the framework of the FRAMEWORK, to act in terms thereof for

   securing revival and rehabilitation of the defaulting borrower.
7. As has been noted above, the petitioning enterprise does not seem to have

   ever claimed the benefit of the terms of the FRAMEWORK after the demand notice

   under
Section 13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act was issued. It is at the stage of

   compliance with an order passed by the relevant Magistrate under
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act that this writ petition has been presented before this Court

   claiming benefits of the FRAMEWORK to restrain the respondent no.2 and its

   officers from proceeding further under the
SARFAESI Act
and other enactments

   except in the manner contemplated under the said Notification. We find the

   bona fides of the petitioning enterprise to be suspect.
5
8.
Pro-Knits
(supra) is a decision of a coordinate Bench of this Court holding,

   inter alia, that the Notification is binding on the lending banks/secured

   creditors. Finding to the contrary by the High Court of Bombay in the judgment

   and order under challenge in the appeal was, thus, quashed. Though while

   stressing that the terms of the FRAMEWORK need to be followed by the lending

   banks/secured creditors before the account of an MSME is classified as NPA,

   this decision also lays stress on the obligation of the MSMEs by holding that “it

   would be equally incumbent on the part of the MSMEs concerned to be vigilant

   enough to follow the process laid down under the said Framework, and bring

   to the notice of the Banks concerned, by producing authenticated and verifiable

   documents/material to show its eligibility to get the benefit of the said

   Framework”. It was cautioned that “if such an Enterprise allows the entire

   process for enforcement of security interest under the
SARFAESI Act
to be over,

   or it having challenged such action of the bank/creditor concerned in the court

   of law/tribunal and having failed, such an Enterprise could not be permitted to

   misuse the process of law for thwarting the actions taken under the
SARFAESI

   Act
by raising the plea of being an MSME at a belated stage”. This decision,

   however, left unsaid something which we have explained hereinabove while

   construing the terms consistently to prevent undermining of rights that one

   central enactment confers by another.
9. No case for interference under
Article 32
of the Constitution has been set up.

   There being no merit in the writ petition, the same is accordingly ordered to be

   dismissed. Pending applications, if any, stand closed.
6
10. Needless to observe, the petitioning enterprise will be at liberty to pursue its

    remedy under
Section 17
of the SARFAESI Act, in accordance with law.
………………………………………J.
                                                       (DIPANKAR DATTA)




                                                 ……………….………………………J.
                                                 (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)



    NEW DELHI;
JULY 28, 2025
7