[Cites
34
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Dhanasingh Prabhu vs Chandrasekar on 14 July, 2025
2025 INSC 831                                                              REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.________OF 2025
                         (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.5706 of 2024)

                   DHANASINGH PRABHU                                    …. APPELLANT

                                        VERSUS

                   CHANDRASEKAR & ANOTHER                              …. RESPONDENTS




                                                JUDGMENT
NAGARATHNA, J.
Leave granted.
Factual Background:
2.        Appellant has preferred the present criminal appeal

                   being aggrieved by the final judgment and order of the

                   Madras High Court dated 26.02.2024, whereby the High

                   Court allowed the Criminal Original Petition No.1533/2024

                   preferred by the respondents-accused and thereby quashed

                   Complaint bearing STC No.1106/2022 filed by the appellant-
complainant under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
BORRA LM VALLI
Act, 1881 (hereinafter “the Act”, for the sake of brevity)
   Date: 2025.07.14
   17:18:48 IST
   Reason:
against the respondents.
1
2.1     By virtue of a partnership deed, respondent Nos.1 and

2 are partners in the partnership firm ‘Mouriya Coirs’ and are

engaged in manufacturing and allied activities of coir

products in Periyamamarthupatti, Thenkumarapalayam Post,

Pollachi, Tamil Nadu.
2.2     From March 2019 to August 2019, the appellant,

through banking channels as well as by cash, advanced a

loan of Rs.21,00,000/- (Rupees Twenty-One Lakhs) to the

respondents for business purposes. In order to discharge the

debt,   on   01.02.2021,   respondent   No.1-accused   issued

Cheque No.802077 for Rs. 21,00,000/-(Rupees Twenty-one

Lakhs) in favour of the appellant-complainant from Account

No.4393002100113025 maintained at Punjab National Bank,

New Scheme Road, Pollachi, in the name of the partnership

firm. Notably, the cheque issued in the name of the firm was

signed only by respondent No.1. However, upon presentation

of the said cheque on 02.02.2021, it was returned as

dishonoured vide cheque return memo by noting that the

partnership firm’s account has been frozen.


2.3     As required under Section 138 of the Act, the

appellant-complainant issued a statutory notice to the
2
respondents on 01.03.2021 demanding discharge of the

legally enforceable debt within fifteen days. Subsequently on

23.04.2021,       the     appellant-complainant          filed      complaint

bearing STC No. 1106/2022 before the Court of the Judicial

Magistrate       No.II,    Pollachi       (hereinafter     “trial     Court”)

contending that the respondents have committed offences

under Section 138 read with Section 142 of the Act.


2.4     Our attention has been drawn to the uncontested fact

that   neither     was     the     statutory   notice     issued      to   the

partnership firm nor was the firm arraigned as an accused in

the    complaint.       Instead,    the   statutory      notice     and    the

complaint mentioned the names of both the respondents who

are the partners to the said firm.
2.5     During the pendency of the complaint, the respondents

preferred Criminal Original Petition being Crl. O.P. No

1533/2024 under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal

Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter “
CrPC
”) before the High Court to

quash the complaint in STC No. 1106 of 2022 pending on the

file of the trial Court. By the impugned order dated

26.02.2024, the High Court allowed the Criminal Original

Petition and proceeded to quash the complaint in STC No.
3
1106 of 2022 on the ground that while the cheque was issued

on behalf of the partnership firm, no statutory notice was

issued to the partnership firm and it was also not arraigned

as an accused in the complaint. Therefore, according to the

High Court, as the rigours of Section 141 of the Act were not

complied with, the complaint was not maintainable as against

both the respondents, who were merely partners in the firm.

Hence, the complaint was quashed.
2.6    Being   aggrieved,   the       appellant/complainant   has

preferred this appeal.
Submissions:
3.    Learned counsel for the appellant made the following

submissions to differentiate a partnership firm from other

entities with limited liability, such as a company, to support

his contention that the partners of a partnership firm are

liable to be prosecuted individually sans the partnership firm

being arraigned as an accused or being issued notice under

Section 138 of the Act or as required under Section 141 of the

Act, in the following manner:
4
(i)     Firstly, he submitted that unlike a company which is

        a separate legal entity from its shareholders, a

        partnership is only a compendious name for its

        partners. That the partners are jointly and severally

        liable for the profit and loss of the partnership firm

        and further, in a company, its shareholders have

        limited liability, whereas in a partnership firm, the

        partners have unlimited liability.
(ii)    Secondly, under
Section 42
of the Partnership Act,

        1932 (‘
Partnership Act
’ for short), subject to contract

        between the partners, a partnership firm           gets

        dissolved on events specified in sub-sections (a) to (d)

        of
Section 42
.
(iii)   Thirdly, a partnership firm cannot on its own create

        or enter into any contract and that either those

        partner(s) authorized by all the partners or all the

        partners of the firm, must execute the contract.
Further, subject to the partnership agreement, a

        partnership firm is made party to a contract only at

        the time of execution in order to make all the
5
partners and the firm jointly and severally liable to

       the contract.
(iv)   Fourthly, though Order XXX Rules 1 and 2
of the

       Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (hereinafter “
CPC
”)

       allow for suing of partners in the name of the firm, it

       is only a convenient method for referring to the

       persons who constitute the firm at the time of the

       accruing of the cause of action and that a decree in

       favour of or against a firm, in the name of the firm,

       has the same effect as a decree in favour of or against

       all the partners.
(v)    Fifthly, unlike a limited liability partnership or a

       company, an ordinary partnership is not a juristic

       person as such, and that the real legal entity is the

       partners themselves. That in an agreement involving

       a partnership firm, all partners in their individual

       capacity ought to additionally be part of such

       agreement    as     parties   and   execute   it   in   their

       individual capacity. This is because a partnership

       firm has no separate legal existence of its own.
6
3.1    On the above premise, learned counsel for the

appellant sought for setting aside of the impugned order and

restoration of the complaint on the file of the court of the

learned Magistrate.
4.    On the other hand, learned senior counsel for the

respondents, Sri S. Nagamuthu submitted that
Section

141(1)
of the Act does not define the expression ‘company’,

but Explanation (a) states that a “company” means any body

corporate and includes a firm or other association of

individuals. He submitted that the terms ‘association of

persons’ or ‘body of individuals’ have a legal connotation and

concern an entity having certain defined rights and duties as

opposed to a group of persons or body of individuals in the

literal sense. In this regard, the learned senior counsel

submitted that a partnership firm is not an association of

persons in the literal sense. He referred to
Section 4
of the

Partnership Act which defines the expression ‘partnership’

and the terms ‘partners’, ‘firm’, and ‘firm name’ to submit

that the expression ‘company’ in
section 141
of the Act

includes a partnership firm by a legal fiction.
7
4.1   Learned senior counsel, Sri Nagamuthu, then referred

to the expression ‘person’ in
Section 141
of the Act and

submitted that the said expression includes a company as

well as a natural person. Extending the above argument, he

submitted that the expression ‘person’ would also include a

partnership firm, as
Section 141
of the Act deems a

partnership firm to be a company. That this deeming fiction

is also evident in Explanation (b) to
Section 141
of the Act,

which defines the expression “director”, in relation to a firm,

to mean a partner in the firm.
4.2   In view of the above arguments, learned senior counsel

submitted that a firm is deemed to be a company and if a

firm commits an offence under
Section 138
of the Act, that

firm should also be added as an accused and found guilty.

Further, the partners of a firm should be arraigned as

accused along with the firm and such partners should be

liable for punishment vicariously/constructively for the

offence committed by the firm.
4.3   Learned senior counsel contended that in the absence

of the firm being issued the statutory notice or arraigned as

an accused in the complaint, the same was not maintainable
8
at all. Therefore, the High Court rightly quashed the

complaint and there is no merit in this appeal.


Points for consideration:
5.         On hearing the learned counsel for the appellant and the

learned senior counsel for the respondent, the points that

arise for our consideration revolve around the interpretation

of the expressions, company and director in the Explanation

to
Section 141
of the Act in the context of the partners of a

partnership firm. In other words, the questions are:
(i)    “Whether    the   High   Court   was   right   in

            dismissing the complaint on the ground that the

            name of the partnership firm was not mentioned

            in the statutory notice issued by the appellant /

            complainant to the respondents under
Section

            138
of the Act and was also not arraigned as an

            accused in the complaint filed by the appellant

            / complainant?
(ii) What order?”
9
6.    Before we proceed further, it is necessary to refer to the

judgments in the following cases cited by the learned senior

counsel, Sri S. Nagamuthu:
6.1
Aneeta Hada vs. Godfather Travels & Tours (P)

Ltd.
, (2012) 5 SCC 661 (“Aneeta Hada”) is a judgment of a

three Judge Bench of this Court wherein the core question

considered was, whether, in view of
Section 141
of the Act, a

company could have been made liable for prosecution without

being impleaded as an accused, and whether a director of a

company could have been prosecuted for offences punishable

under the provisions of the Act without the company being

arraigned as an accused. It is in the aforesaid context that

after referring to several judgments of this Court, it was

observed that the commission of an offence by a company is

an express condition precedent to attract the vicarious

liability of others such as directors or employees of a

company. Thus, the words “as well as the company”

appearing in the Section make it absolutely clear that when

the company could be prosecuted then only the persons

mentioned in the other categories could be vicariously liable

for the offence subject to the averments in the petition and
10
proof thereof. This is because a company is a separate juristic

person and thus the imperative for arraigning the company

as an accused for maintaining the prosecution under
Section

141
of the Act. It was therefore held that it is only when the

company is held to be guilty of the offence under Section 138

read with
Section 141
of the Act that the other categories of

offenders could also be proceeded against on the touchstone

of the principle of vicarious liability as the same has been

mandated by
Section 141
of the Act itself. It is necessary to

note that the company in the aforesaid case was a private

limited company incorporated under the provisions of the
Companies Act, 1956
.
6.2   In the said case, the three Judge Bench followed the

ratio of the judgment in
State of Madras vs. C.V. Parekh
,

(1970) 3 SCC 491         and opined that the judgment in
Sheoratan Agarwal vs. State of M.P.
, (1984) 4 SCC 352

did not lay down the correct law and was therefore overruled.
It was further observed that the decision of this Court in
Anil

Hada vs. Indian Acrylic Ltd.
, (2000) 1 SCC 1 was also not

the correct law insofar as it stated that the director or any

other officer of a company can be prosecuted without
11
impleadment of the company.
It was further observed that the

judgment of this Court in
U.P. Pollution Control Board vs.

Modi Distillery
, (1987) 3 SCC 684 was also restricted to its

own facts. In our view, the aforesaid decisions are not

applicable to the present case inasmuch as the said decisions

concerned the vicarious liability of the directors of a company

when the company itself was not prosecuted against or made

liable. We say so for the reason that the distinction between a

company and a partnership firm has to be borne in mind

while approaching these cases. Hence, the judgment of this

Court in Aneeta Hada is of no assistance to the respondent

herein.
6.3       In
Dilip Hariramani vs. Bank of Baroda
, 2022 SCC

OnLine SC 579 (“Dilip Hariramani”), the issues raised were
(i) whether the appellant therein, being a non-signatory to the

dishonoured cheque, could have been convicted under

Section 138 read with
Section 141
of the Act on the basis

that there was vicarious criminal liability of a partner; and (ii)

whether the partner could be convicted and held to be

vicariously liable when the partnership firm was not made an

accused and therefore not tried for a primary or substantive
12
offence. The facts of the case are necessary to be discussed

inasmuch as in this case the respondent-Bank of Baroda had

granted term loan on cash credit facility to a partnership

firm- M/s Global Packaging and the repayment of the loan by

the firm was through its authorized signatory who had issued

three cheques which were dishonoured on presentation due

to insufficient funds. A demand notice was issued to the

authorized signatory under
Section 138
of the Act by the

bank which later filed the complaint against the authorized

signatory as well as the appellant therein but the firm was

not made an accused. The authorized signatory of the

cheques of the appellant therein was shown as a partner of

the firm. It was contended that there was no assertion or

statement in the complaint made to establish the vicarious

liability of the appellant therein. Both the accused were

convicted by the trial court and sentenced to imprisonment

for six months and asked to pay compensation under
Section

357 (3)
of the CrPC and in default to suffer additional

imprisonment for one month. The appeal preferred before the

District and Sessions Court was allowed in part by reducing

the sentence till the rising of the court and enhancing the
13
compensation amount to Rs. One Crore Twenty Lakhs with

the stipulation that both the accused would suffer additional

imprisonment of three months in case of failure to pay. The

accused challenged the judgment before the Chhattisgarh

High Court which dismissed the appeal and hence the appeal

was preferred before this Court.           This Court noted the

following facts in the said case:
i.    The Demand Notice issued on 04.11.2015 by the bank

       through its Bank Manager was served solely to the

       authorized signatory of the firm.
ii.    The complaint dated 07.12.2015 under
Section 138
of

       the Act was made against the authorized signatory as

       well as the appellant therein.
iii.   The partnership firm was not made an accused or ever

       summoned to be tried for the offence.
6.4    After referring to Aneeta Hada, this Court considered
Section 141
of the Act which imposes vicarious liability by a

deeming    fiction   which   presupposes      and   requires   the

commission of the offence by the company or firm. It was

observed thus:
14
“14. … unless the company or firm has
      committed the offence as a principal accused,
      the person mentioned in sub-section (1) or (2)
      would not be liable and convicted as
      vicariously liable.
Section 141
of the Act
      extends vicarious criminal liability to officers
      associated with the company or firm when the
      one of the twin requirements of Section 141
      has been satisfied, which person(s) then, by
      deeming fiction, is made vicariously liable and
      punished. However, such vicarious liability
      arises only when the company or firm commit
      the offence as a primary offender”.
(underlining by us)

      In the above context, the appeal was allowed and the

conviction of the appellant therein was set aside.
6.5   The reason as to why relief was granted by this Court in

Dilip Hariramani was because it was observed that the

partnership firm was not said to have committed the offence

and was not made the principal accused. In such a

circumstance, there could be no vicarious criminal liability to

the officers associated with the company or firm. It is

necessary to note that the complainant bank in the aforesaid

case had not served the notice to the appellant therein but it

was served only on the authorized signatory of the firm.
Hence, relief was granted by this Court to the appellant

therein. On the other hand, in the instant case, the notice

was sent by the complainant to both the partners of the firm.
15
6.6     We are of the view that having regard to the distinct

facts in the aforesaid case, relief was granted by this Court

but the present case cannot be decided on the basis of the

aforesaid judgment.
The three significant facts noted in the aforesaid

judgment must be contrasted with the facts which arise in

the present case, which are as under:
i.    Notice of the complainant was not issued only to one

        partner or only to the authorized signatory of the

        partnership firm. It was issued to both partners in the

        present case.
ii.   The cheque was issued in the name of partnership firm

        “Mouriya Coirs”.    However both the partners were

        issued notice by the complainant which was not so in

        the aforesaid case, although the partnership firm was

        not issued any statutory notice.
iii. The complaint has been made against both the

        partners even though the firm has not been made an

        accused in the complaint in the instant case.
16
6.7   In fact, in an earlier judgement
G. Ramesh vs. Kanike

Harish Kumar Ujwal
, (2020) 17 SCC 239 which is also a

judgment of a two Judge Bench of this Court, it was noted

from the complaint considered in the said case that the same

contained a sufficient description of (i) nature of the

partnership; (ii) the business which was being carried out;
and (iii) role of each of the accused in the conduct of the

business and specifically in relation to the transaction which

took place with the complainant. In the averments, the

accused had been referred to in the plural sense. This Court

observed that Section 141 uses the expression “company” so

as to include a firm or association of a persons. That the first

accused in the said case was a partnership firm of which the

remaining two accused were the partners which fact had

been missed by the High Court and therefore the appeal was

allowed.
Paragraphs 11 and 12 of the judgment read as under:
“11. In terms of the explanation to Section 141,
      the expression “company” has been defined to
      mean any body corporate and to include a firm
      or other association of individuals. Sub-section
      (1) of Section 141 postulates that where an
      offence is committed under Section 138 by a
      company, the company as well as every person
      who, at the time when the offence was
17
committed, was in charge of and was
      responsible to the company for the conduct of
      the business shall be deemed to be guilty of the
      offence.
12. In determining as to whether the
      requirements of the above provision have been
      fulfilled, it is necessary to bear in mind the
      principle of law that a partnership is a
      compendious expression to denote the partners
      who comprise of the firm. By the deeming
      fiction in Explanation (a) the expression
      company is defined to include a firm.”


6.8   While holding that Section 141 is a deeming provision,

it was also observed that a partnership is a compendious

expression to denote the partners who comprise the firm

which means that a firm without a reference to its partners

has no juristic identity in law. By a deeming fiction, in

Explanation (a) to Section 141, the expression “company” has

been defined to include a firm. Since the High Court had lost

sight of the fact that a partnership firm has to be read within

the meaning of Section 141 which uses the expression

“company”, the appeal filed by the complainant therein was

allowed.
6.9   On considering the aforesaid judgments, we observe

that even if we have to come to the conclusion that the

juristic entity i.e., the partnership firm is the primary
18
accused in the instant case it would be necessary for us to

also state that such a juristic entity, namely, a partnership

firm is not distinct from the partners who comprise the

partnership.    In   other    words,    if   the   complainant     had

proceeded only against the partnership firm and not the

partners   it   possibly     could    have   been    held   that   the

partnership firm in the absence of its partners is not a

complete juristic entity which can be recognised in law and

therefore cannot be proceeded against. On the other hand, in

the instant case the complainant has proceeded against the

two partners. The complainant is aware of the fact that the

cheque has been issued in the name of the partnership firm

“Mouriya Coirs” and has been signed by one of the partners.

The complainant has proceeded against the partners only

without arraigning the partnership firm as an accused. It is

necessary to reiterate that a partnership firm in the absence

of its partners cannot at all be considered to be a juristic

entity in law. On the other hand, the partners who form a

partnership firm are personally liable in law along with the

partnership firm. It is a case of joint and several liability and

not vicarious liability as such. Therefore, if the complainant
19
herein has proceeded only against the partners and not

against the partnership firm, we think it is not something

which would go to the root of the matter so as to dismiss the

complaint on that ground. Rather, opportunity could have

been given to the complainant to implead the partnership

firm also as an accused in the complaint even though no

notice was sent specifically in the name of the partnership.


6.10    Alternatively, notice to the partners/accused could

have been construed as notice to the partnership firm also.

We say so for the reason that unlike a company which is a

separate    juristic   entity   from    its   directors   thereof,    a

partnership firm comprises of its partners who are the

persons directly liable on behalf of the partnership firm and

by themselves. Therefore, a partnership firm, in the absence

of the partners being arraigned as accused would not serve

the purpose of the case and would be contrary to law. On the

other hand, even in the absence of making a partnership firm

an accused in the complaint, the partners being made the

accused would be sufficient to make them liable inasmuch as

the    partnership     firm   without   the    partners   is   of    no

consequence and is not recognised in law. This is because in
20
the case of a partnership firm, the said juristic entity is

always understood as a compendious term namely, the

partnership firm along with its partners. Therefore, if the

appellant-complainant      had    proceeded    only   against   the

partnership firm and not its partners then possibly the

respondents would have been right in contending that the

complaint was not maintainable but here the case is

reversed. The complainant herein has not arraigned the firm

but has arraigned the partners of the firm as accused and

has also issued notice to them; therefore, we find that the

defect, if any, is not significant or incurable in these

circumstances. Permission is therefore to be granted to the

complainant to arraign the partnership firm also as an

accused in the complaint. Moreover, the cheque was issued

in the name of the firm and signed by one of the partners, for

and on behalf of the other also, therefore, the liability is

deemed to be on both the partners of the firm.
Hence permission is given to arraign the partnership

firm   as   an   accused    having    regard    to    the   peculiar

characteristics of a partnership firm and a company on which

aspect we will discuss further.
21
Difference between a partnership firm and a company:
7.    Predominantly a product of judge-made law, the law of

partnership was first codified in India by the
Indian

Partnership Act, 1932
. Prior to the coming in force of the
Partnership Act, Chapter XI of the Indian Contract Act, 1872
(hereinafter ‘ICA’) defined a partnership, outlined the rights

and obligations of partners and provided various provisions

governing the operation and existence of partnerships.

Section 239 of ICA defined a partnership as:
"Partnership is the relation which subsists
      between persons who have agreed to combine
      their property, labour or skill in some business
      and to share the profits thereof."
7.1
The Partnership Act
was promulgated as it was

considered expedient to define and amend the law relating to

partnership. As it stands today, partnership law is codified in

the
Partnership Act and the Limited Liability Partnership Act,

2008
. It is trite that these legislations, like all codifications of

partnership law in common law, are based on the law of

agency.
7.2
Section 4
of the Partnership Act defines a partnership,

partner, firm and firm name as follows:
22
“4. Definition of “partnership”, “partner”,
       “firm” and “firm name”.—
       “Partnership” is the relation between persons
       who have agreed to share the profits of a
       business carried on by all or any of them
       acting for all.
Persons who have entered into partnership
       with one another are called individually
       “partners” and collectively “a firm”, and the
       name under which their business is carried on
       is called the “firm name”.
(underlining by us)

7.3      The definition in
Section 4
of the Partnership Act is a

departure from the erstwhile definition of partnership in

Section 239 of ICA. A significant departure, inter alia, is the

insertion of “acting for all” which brings in the concept of

agency. An amendment of substantial import carried out by

the Special Committee was with the intent to elucidate clearly

the fundamental principle that the partners when carrying on

the business of the firm are agents as well as principals.1

Pollock & Mulla also notes the salient distinction between the

meanings of ‘partnership’ and ‘firm’. Tracing from
Section 4
,

Pollock & Mulla clarifies that the word “partnership” is used

throughout the
Partnership Act
in the defined sense of a

relationship     and     where     the    partners      are   referred     to

1 Chapter 2, Pollock & Mulla, The Indian Partnership Act, 8th Edn. Lexis Nexis
Butterworths.
23
collectively, the word “firm” is used. It is pertinent to recall

that Explanation to
Section 141
of the Act provides that for

the purposes of that section, a company includes a firm or

other association of individuals. Nevertheless, the distinction

is crucial because it lends credence to the interpretation that

reference in Section 141 is as much to the partners of the

firm as it is to directors of a company.
7.4   According to Pollock and Mulla, 8th Edition, the

definition of partnership in
Section 4
of the Partnership Act

contains three elements; (i) there must be an agreement

entered into by all the persons concerned; (ii) the agreement

must be to share the profits of a business; and (iii) the

business must be carried on by all or any of the persons

concerned, acting for all. All these elements must be present

before a group of associates can be held to be partners. These

three elements may appear to overlap, but they are

nevertheless distinct. The third element shows that the

persons of the group who conduct the business do so as

agents for all the persons in the group and are therefore liable

to account for all. This Court while elaborating the third

essential element has held that the position of a partner in
24
the firm is thus not of a master and a servant or employer

and   employee   which    concept   involves   an   element   of

subordination, but that of equality. It may be that a partner

is being paid some remuneration for any special attention

which he devotes but that would not involve any change of

status or bring him within the definition of employee, vide
Regional     Director,     Employees’      State    Insurance

Corporation vs. Ramanuja Match Industries
, (1985) 1

SCC 218, Paras 4 and 9.
7.5   In
Section 4
of the Partnership Act, it is clearly stated

that persons who have entered into partnership with one

another are individually called partners and collectively a firm

and the name under which their business is carried out is

called a firm name. Thus, while partnership is the relation

between persons who have agreed to share profits of the

business carried on by all or any of them acting for all, the

persons are collectively called a firm and the name of the firm

is the firm name which is a compendious or collective term of

partnership of the partners. The said Section also clearly

implies that a firm or partnership is not a legal entity,

separate and distinct from its partners.
25
7.6    As already stated above, the firm is a compendious

term not distinct of the individuals who compose the firm. In

other words, partnership is merely a convenient name to

carry out business by partners. Thus, a firm is not an entity

of persons in law but is merely an association of individuals

and firm name is only a collective name of those individuals

who constitute the firm. In other words, the firm name is

merely   an   expression,   only   a     compendious     mode    of

designating the persons who have agreed to carry on

business in partnership.
Thus, a firm may not be a legal entity in the sense of a

corporation or a company incorporated under the
Companies

Act, 1956
or 2013, but it is still an existing concern where

business is done by a number of persons in partnership.


7.7    Insofar as the statutory definition of a company is

concerned,     the   legislature   has    found   it   particularly

cumbersome to provide a descriptive and inclusive definition.

Perhaps this is why the Parliament in its wisdom defined

‘company’ in
Section 2(2)
of the Companies Act, 2013

(‘
Companies Act
’) not by enumerating the essential features of

a company but “as a company incorporated under this Act or
26
under any previous company law”.2 Keeping aside the

omnibus statutory definition, several jurists have attempted

to outline a definition of a company for doctrinal and

precedential analysis. Lindley, a Jurist and Judge defined a

company in the following terms:
“A company is an association of many persons
          who contribute money or monies worth to a
          common stock and employed in some trade or
          business and who share the profit and loss
          arising therefrom. The common stock so
          contributed is denoted in money and is the
          capital of the company. The persons who
          contribute to it or to whom it pertains are
          members. The proportion of capital to which
          each member is entitled is his share. The
          shares are always transferable although the
          right to transfer is often more or less
          restricted.”3
Section 9
of the Companies Act, 2013 provides as

follows:
“9. Effect of registration

          From the date of incorporation mentioned in
          the    certificate of  incorporation,  such
          subscribers to the memorandum and all other
          persons, as may, from time to time, become
          members of the company, shall be a body
          corporate by the name contained in the
          memorandum, capable of exercising all the
          functions of an incorporated company under
2
Section 2(2)
, Companies Act, 2013
3 N. Lindley, Lindley on Partnership (12th ed, Sweet & Maxwell, 2007)
27
this Act and having perpetual succession with
      power to acquire, hold and dispose of property,
      both movable and immovable, tangible and
      intangible, to contract and to sue and be sued,
      by the said name.”

7.8   While   modern   legislations   and   instruments   have

outlined and carved out more complex features, rights and

obligations of a ‘company’, the fundamentals of Lindley’s

definition continue to hold ground. The salient distinctions

between a company and a partnership, including the rights

and obligations flowing therefrom which are fundamental to

common law, as well as the relevant statutes promulgated by

the Parliament could be discussed at this stage.
Separate Legal Personality:
7.9   A partnership firm, unlike a company registered under

the
Companies Act
, does not possess a separate legal

personality and the firm’s name is only a compendious

reference for describing its partners. This fundamental

distinction between a firm and a company rests on the

premise that the company is separate from its shareholders.
In that context, the words of Lord Macnaghten in Salomon

vs. Salomon & Co. Ltd., [1897] AC 22 (HL), (“Salomon”)

are instructive:
28
“the company is at law a different person
        altogether from the subscribers......; and
        though it may be that after incorporation the
        business is precisely the same as it was before
        and the same persons are managers and the
        same hands receive the          proceeds, the
        company is not in law, the agent of the
        subscribers or trustee for them. Nor are the
        subscribers as members liable, in any shape or
        form, except to the extent and in the manner
        provided by the Act.”

7.10    This distinction does not, however, continue to hold

true for a partnership firm.
In the seminal case of
Bacha F.

Guzdar vs. CIT
, (1954) 2 SCC 563, this Court had an

opportunity to briefly address this distinction between a

partnership firm and a company, wherein it was observed

thus:
“13. It was argued that the position of
        shareholders in a company is analogous to that
        of partners inter se. This analogy is wholly
        inaccurate.     Partnership   is   merely   an
        association of persons for carrying on the
        business of partnership and in law the firm
        name is a compendious method of describing
        the partners. Such is, however, not the case of
        a company which stands as a separate juristic
        entity distinct from the shareholders.”

7.11    The partnership name being only a compendious

method of describing the partners, it stands to reason that a

reference to the partners in their capacity as partners of the
29
firm will be sufficient to impute liability on the partners

themselves, whereas directors of a company are made liable

vicariously through the company, upon whom falls the

primary liability. Thus, the partners and the partnership firm

are one and the same. Unlike a company, a partnership firm

has no independent corporate existence and has no distinct

legal persona independent of its partners. Similarly, the

partners of a firm are co-owners of the property of the firm

unlike shareholders in a company who are not co-owners of

the property of the company. This principle was also

explained by the Calcutta High Court in Re: The Kondoli

Tea Co. Ltd., (1886) ILR 13 Cal 43 where the transferors of

a tea estate claimed that they were eligible to claim exemption

from payment of ad valorem duty because the transferee was

a company in which they themselves were shareholders.
Negativing this contention, it was held that the company was

a separate person and the transfer of the tea estate was a

conveyance and in substance, a transfer to another person.


7.12    Although      the     course     of    jurisprudential

pronouncements led by the dictum of Privy Council in
Bhagwanji Morarji Goculdas vs. Alembic Chemical Works
30
Company Ltd.
, AIR 1948 PC 100 (“Bhagwanji Morarji

Goculdas”), intermittently understood that Indian law –

particularly, the
Partnership Act
– which has proceeded

beyond English law and attributed some degree of personality

to a partnership in accordance with the law in Scotland, a

clarification was provided by this Court through its decision

in
Dulichand Laksminarayan vs. CIT
, AIR 1956 SC 354

(“Dulichand”), which settled the position. It was held therein

that any treatment as a separate unit for purposes of

accommodating     mercantile    practices   and    commercial

convenience did not obliterate the fundamental principle in

law that a partnership firm is not a legal person. When this

Court acknowledged in Dulichand that Indian law had

relaxed its rigid notions to extend limited personality to a

firm, this Court referred to the gradual relaxation of

procedure to facilitate commercial convenience. For instance,

it was explained that merchants show a firm as a debtor to

each partner for what is brought into the common stock and

each partner is shown as a debtor to the firm for all that he

takes out of that stock. As traditionally, under the common

law, a firm, not being a legal entity, could not sue or be sued
31
in the firm name or sue or be sued by its own partner, for one

cannot sue oneself, the rigid law of procedure was relaxed to

give way to considerations of commercial convenience and a

firm was permitted to sue or be sued in the firm name much

like a corporate body. This Court further noted how
Order

XXX Rule 9 of the CPC
allowed a firm to sue or be sued by

another firm having some common partners or even to sue or

be sued by one or more of its own partners, as if the firm is

an entity distinct from its partners.
7.13   Similarly, it was explained that in taking partnership

accounts and in administering partnership assets, the law

has to some extent, adopted the mercantile view and the

liabilities of the firm are regarded as the liabilities of the

partners only in case they cannot be met and discharged by

the firm out of its assets.
7.14   Most pertinent is that despite noting these relaxations

in the rigid rules of procedure, this Court observed in

Dulichand that ‘a firm name is merely an expression, only a

compendious mode of designating the persons who have

agreed to carry on business in partnership’. Any relaxations,

either aforementioned or not, borne out of commercial
32
convenience or otherwise, do not deviate from the settled

position that the name of a partnership firm is a convenient

manner of referring to its partners.
7.15    We need not further dilate in extenso on this subject

than to simply revisit the following erudite words of Krishna

Iyer, J. in
CIT vs. R.M. Chidambaram Pillai
, (1977) 1 SCC

431 which also engage and follow this Court’s view in

Dulichand:
“5. First principles plus the bare text of the
       statute furnish the best guidelight to
       understanding the message and- meaning of
       the provisions of law. Thereafter, the
       sophisticated exercises in precedents and
       booklore. Here the first thing that we must
       grasp is that a firm is not a legal person
       even though it has some attributes of
       personality. Partnership is a certain
       relation between persons, the product of
       agreement to share the profits of a
       business. “Firm” is a collective noun, a
       compendious expression to designate an
       entity, not a person. In income tax law a firm
       is a unit of assessment, by special provisions,
       but is not a full person; which leads to the next
       step that since a contract of employment
       requires two distinct persons viz. the employer
       and the employee, there cannot be a contract
       of service, in strict law, between a firm and one
       of its partners. So that any agreement for
       remuneration of a partner for taking part in the
       conduct of the business must be regarded as
       portion of the profits being made over as a
       reward for the human capital brought in.
33
Section 13
of the Partnership Act brings into
focus this basis of partnership business.
xxx
16. The Indian law of partnership is
substantially the same and the reference in
counsel's submissions to the Scottish view of a
firm being a legal entity is neither here nor
there. Primarily our study must zero on the
Indian Partnership Act
and not borrow courage
from foreign systems. In Bhagwanji Morarji
Gokuldas [AIR 1948 PC 100 : (1948) 18 Comp
Cas 205, 209] the Privy Council ruled that the
Indian Partnership Act
went beyond the
English Partnership Act, 1890, the law in India
attributing personality to a partnership being
more in accordance with the law of Scotland.
Even so, Sir John Beaumont
,
in that case
,
pointed out that the Indian Act did not
make a firm a corporate body.
Moreover, we
are not persuaded by that ruling of the Privy
Council, particularly since a pronouncement of
this       Court        in
Dulichand [Dulichand
Laksminarayan v. CIT
, AIR 1956 SC 354 : 1956
SCR 154 : (1956) 2 ITR 535] strikes a contrary
note. We quote:
“In some systems of law this separate
    personality of a firm apart from its
    members has received full and formal
    recognition as, for instance, in
    Scotland. That is, however, not the
    English common law conception of a
    firm. English lawyers do not recognise
    a firm as an entity distinct from the
    members       composing      it.   Our
    partnership law is based on English
    law and we have also adopted the
    notions of English lawyers as regards a
    partnership firm.”

The life of the Indian law of partnership
depends on its own terms although habitually
34
courts, as a hangover of the past, have been
referring to the English law on the point. The
matter     is  concluded    by   the   further
observations of this Court:
“It is clear from the foregoing
   discussion that the law, English as
   well as Indian, has, for some specific
   purposes, some of which are
referred
   to above
, relaxed its rigid notions and
   extended a limited personality to a
   firm. Nevertheless, the general
   concept of a partnership, firmly
   established in both systems of law,
   still is that a firm is not an entity
   or ‘person’ in law but is merely an
   association of individuals and a
   firm name is only a collective name
   of those individuals who constitute
   the firm. In other words, a firm
   name is merely an expression, only
   a compendious mode of designating
   the persons who have agreed to
   carry on business in partnership.
According to the principles of English
   jurisprudence, which we have adopted,
   for the purposes of determining legal
   rights ‘there is no such thing as a firm
   known to the law as was said by
   James, L.J., in Ex parte Corbett : In re
   Shand [(1880) 14 Ch D 122, 126 : 42
   LT 164 : 28 WR 569] . In these
   circumstances to import the definition
   of the word ‘person’ occurring in
Section 3(42)
of the General Clauses
   Act, 1897, into
Section 4
of the Indian
   Partnership Act will, according to
   lawyers, English or Indian, be totally
   repugnant      to    the   subject     of
   partnership law as they know and
   understand it to be.”
35
In Narayanappa [Addanki Narayanappa v.
Bhaskara    Krishtappa, AIR 1966 SC 1300,
          1303 : (1966) 3 SCR 400] the view taken by this
          Court accords with the position above stated.”

                                       (emphasis supplied)


7.16       Finally, on this question, Krishna Iyer, J. speaking for

this Court noted that under Indian law, a partnership is only

a collective of separate persons and is not a legal person in

itself.
Perpetual Succession:
7.17       As a logical corollary of distinct and separate juristic

identity,     an   incorporated   company    also   has   perpetual

succession i.e., perpetual existence agnostic of transfer of

shares. A company does not ordinarily extinguish because of

change in shareholding. On the other hand, a partnership

firm’s fundamental identity is contingent on the partners and

undergoes a change with a change in partners, subject to

contract.
Section 42(c)
of the Partnership Act provides that

subject to contract between the partners, a firm is dissolved

by the death of a partner. Per contra, the position of a

company could not be made clearer than by the following
36
illustration   in   Professor   Gower’s   Principles   of   Modern

Company Law (3rd Edn. 1969), at p.76:
“During the war all the members of one private
       company, while in general meeting, were killed
       by a bomb. But the company survived; not
       even a hydrogen bomb could have destroyed
       it.”

7.18    Although one might argue that from the perspective of

a merchant or even income tax law, a firm appears to

continue irrespective of the entrance and exit of partners,

Lindley explained the orthodox legal view, which continues to

hold ground, on partnership, in the following words:
"The law, ignoring the firm, looks to the
       partners composing it; any change amongst
       them destroys the identity of the firm; what is
       called the property of the firm is their property,
       and what are called the debts and liabilities of
       the firm are their debts and their liabilities. In
       point of law, a partner may be the debtor or the
       creditor of his co-partners, but he cannot be
       either debtor or creditor of a firm of which he is
       himself a member."
(Underlining by us)
Liability of Partners:
7.19    The liability of partners for the debts of the business is

unlimited and they are jointly and severally liable for all

business obligations of the partnership firm.
Sections 25
and
37
26
of the Partnership Act are relevant in this regard, which

are reproduced as under:
“25. Liability of a partner for acts of the
       firm.—Every partner is liable, jointly with all
       the other partners and also severally, for all
       acts of the firm done while he is a partner.
26. Liability of the firm for wrongful acts of
       a partner.—Where, by the wrongful act or
       omission of a partner acting in the ordinary
       course of the business of a firm, or with the
       authority of his partners, loss or injury is
       caused to any third party, or any penalty is
       incurred, the firm is liable therefor to the same
       extent as the partner.”
Section 25
provides that every partner is liable jointly

with all the other partners and also severally for all acts of

the firm done by the partner. Since a firm is not a legal entity

but only a collective name for all the partners, it does not

have any legal existence apart from its partners. Therefore,

any liability of a firm has the same effect of a liability against

the partners. This is because, the partners remain liable

jointly and severally for all acts of the firm, vide
Dena Bank

vs. Bikhabhai Prabhudas Parekh and Co.
, (2000) 5 SCC
694.


7.20    Moreover, the partners of a firm have unlimited

liability to the creditors of the firm. This is as opposed to a
38
limited company or a limited liability partnership, wherein

the liability of the directors or the shareholders is to the

extent of their share in the limited company or limited

liability partnership and limited to the nominal value of the

shares held by them or the amount guaranteed by the

shareholder when it comes to a company. Thus, the debt of

the firm is the personal debt of a partner and the debt of the

firm has to be incurred by each partner as a financial

personal liability.
7.21    Insofar as criminal liability is concerned, once it is

established that an illegal act has been committed by the firm

or its partners, then the partners will be jointly liable for it.
Moreover, the act constituting an offence will also have to be

decided with reference to the statute creating such an offence

i.e. the
Negotiable Instruments Act
, which is the Act under

consideration. When
Section 25
of the Partnership Act is read

together with
Section 145
of the Act, in the context of

dishonour of a cheque, the partner of a firm who is also liable

jointly with a firm, can however rebut the statutory

presumption.
39
7.22     Conversely,
Section 26
states that where by the

wrongful act or omission of a partner, acting in the ordinary

course of the business of a firm, or with the authority of his

partners, loss or injuries are caused to any third party, or

any penalties are incurred, the firm is liable therefore to the

same extent as the partner. The liability of the firm for acts

done by the partner would arise when such acts are done in

the ordinary course of the business of the firm.


7.23   Moreover, since the firm by itself cannot transact any

business, if a partner of the firm commits any breach, all the

partners would become liable for the consequent penalties,

just as the firm would be liable. Further, if a penalty is

imposed on a partnership firm for contravention of a statute,

it amounts to levy of penalty on the partners also and there is

no separate or independent penalty on the partners for the

said contravention.
7.24     However, the liability of a shareholder in a company

is limited to the nominal value of shares held by them or the

amount    guaranteed   by   the    shareholder.    The   separate

property of the shareholder is beyond a creditor seeking to

enforce its dues against the company.
40
Firm Name:
8.    It is therefore appropriate to remind ourselves that a

partnership firm, unlike a company registered under the
Indian Companies Act
or a limited liability partnership

registered under the
Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008
,

is not a distinct legal entity and is only a compendium of its

partners. Even the registration of a firm does not mean that it

becomes a distinct legal entity like a company. Hence, the

partners of a firm are co-owners of the property of the firm,

unlike shareholders in a company who are not co-owners of

the property of the company.
8.1   According to Lindley and Banks on Partnership, 21st

Edition, it is important to identify the precise significance of a

firm name since it represents an attribute which tends to

encourage the commercial rather than the legal view of a

firm. According to Lindley, “……the name under which a firm

carries on business is in point of law a conventional name

applicable. Only to the persons who on each particular

occasion when the name is used, are members of the firm."


8.2     The firm name is thus a convenient method of

describing a group of persons associated together in business
41
at a certain point of time: no more or no less. If a number of

people carry on business under such name or style, anything

which they may do in that name or style will be just as

effective as if their individual names had been used. An

obvious example of this is the use of firm name on bills of

exchange and promissory notes.
9.   The aforesaid principles have to be applied to
Sections

138
and
141
of the Act. For immediate reference, the said

sections are extracted as under:
“138. Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency,
      etc., of funds in the account. — Where any
      cheque drawn by a person on an account
      maintained by him with a banker for payment
      of any amount of money to another person
      from out of that account for the discharge, in
      whole or in part, of any debt or other liability,
      is returned by the bank unpaid, either because
      of the amount of money standing to the credit
      of that account is insufficient to honour the
      cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged
      to be paid from that account by an agreement
      made with that bank, such person shall be
      deemed to have committed an offence and
      shall, without prejudice to any other provision
      of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for
      a term which may extend to two years, or with
      fine which may extend to twice the amount of
      the cheque, or with both:
Provided that nothing contained in this
      section shall apply unless—
42
(a) the cheque has been presented to the bank
    within a period of six months* from the
    date on which it is drawn or within the
    period of its validity, whichever is earlier;
(b) the payee or the holder in due course of the
    cheque, as the case may be, makes a
    demand for the payment of the said
    amount of money by giving a notice in
    writing, to the drawer of the cheque, within
    thirty days of the receipt of information by
    him from the bank regarding the return of
    the cheque as unpaid; and
(c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the
     payment of the said amount of money to
     the payee or as the case may be, to the
     holder in due course of the cheque within
     fifteen days of the receipt of the said
     notice.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
section, “debt or other liability” means a legally
enforceable debt or other liability.
xxx
141. Offences by companies.—

(1) If the person committing an offence under
Section 138 is a company, every person who,
at the time the offence was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to the company
for the conduct of the business of the
company, as well as the company, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this
sub-section shall render any person liable to
punishment if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge, or that he
43
had exercised all due diligence to prevent the
      commission of such offence.
Provided further that where a person is
      nominated as a Director of a company by
      virtue of his holding any office or employment
      in    the   Central   Government     or   State
      Government or a financial corporation owned
      or controlled by the Central Government or the
      State Government, as the case may be, he shall
      not be liable for prosecution under this
      chapter.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (1), where any offence under this Act
      has been committed by a company and it is
      proved that the offence has been committed
      with the consent or connivance of, or is
      attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any
      director, manager, secretary or other officer of
      the company, such director, manager,
      secretary or other officer shall also be deemed
      to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to
      be    proceeded       against   and     punished
      accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
      section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and
           includes a firm or other association of
           individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a
          partner in the firm.”


9.1
Section 138
of the Act creates an offence for dishonour

of a cheque for, inter alia, insufficiency of funds in the

account by a deeming fiction. The complainant who is a

victim of the dishonour of cheque issued by an accused has
44
the right to file a private complaint in terms of
Section 200
of

the CrPC, (equivalent to Section 223 of the Bharatiya Nagarik

Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (for short, “BNSS”)). When the said

offence is proved against an individual/natural person, he is

punished with imprisonment for a term which may be

extended to two years or with fine which may extend to twice

the amount of the cheque. But when such an offence is

committed by a company, which is an artificial juristic entity,
Section 141
of the Act applies. The said Section states that if

the person committing an offence under
Section 138
of the

Act is a company, every person who at the time the offence

was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the

company for the conduct of the business of the company, as

well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the

offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and

punished accordingly. Since an artificial juristic entity such

as a company cannot be punished with imprisonment, by a

deeming fiction certain persons associated with such an

artificial juristic entity are deemed to be guilty of the offence

and made liable to be proceeded against and punished

accordingly. This is an instance of vicarious liability on every
45
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in

charge of, and was responsible to the company for the

conduct of the business of the company. This is for the

reason that a company is a separate entity vis-à-vis its

shareholders or those who are in charge of the conduct of its

business since a company is an artificial juristic entity. Thus,

the liability would be on the company as well as on the

category of persons mentioned above. Such a person must be

both in charge of, as well as responsible to, the company for

the conduct of the business of the company. However, the

aforesaid category of person who is deemed to be guilty of the

offence along with the company, can escape punishment (i) if

he can prove that the offence was committed without his

knowledge; or (ii) that he had exercised all due diligence to

prevent the commission of such an offence. Hence, by way of

a proviso to sub-section (1) to
Section 141
of the Act, two

defences are provided for the category of persons named in

sub-section (1) of Section 141.
9.2    The second proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 141 is

an exception for a person who is a director of the company

who shall not be liable for prosecution under Chapter XVII of
46
the Act. The second proviso is not relevant for the purpose of

this case as the said proviso refers to ex-officio directors

representing the Central Government or state governments or

a financial corporation owned or controlled by the Central

Government or the state government, as the case may be.


9.3    Sub-section (2) of Section 141 begins with a non-

obstante clause. It extends the scope of categories of persons

associated with the company who could also be deemed to be

guilty of an offence under
Section 138
of the Act and shall be

liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Sub-section (2) of Section 141 states that where the offence

has been committed by a company and it is proved that the

offence has been committed with the (i) consent; or (ii)

connivance of; or (iii) is attributable to, any neglect on the

part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the

company, such aforesaid categories of persons shall also be

deemed to be guilty, proceeded against and punished

accordingly. While sub-section (1) of Section 141 restricts the

category of persons who would be deemed to be liable when

the offence is committed by a company, sub-section (2) of

Section 141 extends the scope of liability to further categories
47
of persons namely, director, manager, secretary or other

officer of the company to be made liable provided there is

proof that such category of persons associated with the

company had committed the offence with the consent or

connivance of, or due to any negligence on their part. The

expression “shall also be deemed to be guilty” in sub-section

(2) of
Section 141
of the Act would imply that the object and

purpose of the said provision is to encompass the categories

of persons mentioned in that sub-section owing to a criminal

intent or negligence attributable on their part.


9.4    Thus, while under sub-section (1) of
Section 141
of the

Act, the criminal liability on the category of persons named in

the said sub-section is owing to the position that person

holds in the company, when the company is said to have

committed the offence under Section 138 and therefore the

deeming fiction under sub-section (2) of
Section 141
of the

Act, on the other hand, there has to be a proof with regard to

consent or connivance for the committing of the offence or a

criminal negligence on the part of the director, manager,

secretary or other officer of the company who shall also be

deemed to be guilty of the offence under Section 138 of the
48
Act. Thus, under sub-section (2) of
Section 141
of the Act,

when the company is guilty of the offence under
Section 138
of the Act, a director, manager, secretary or other officer of

the company shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence

and liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly,

provided there is proof of mens rea on the part of such

category of persons. Hence, a director, manager, secretary or

other officer of the company cannot be proceeded against per

se by virtue of the position they hold in the company but can

be proceeded against only when there is proof that the offence

under Section 138 was committed by the company with their

consent or connivance or due to negligence on their part. The

standard of proof is higher under sub-section (2) of Section

141 vis-à-vis the category of persons mentioned therein with

regard to their specific role in the commission of the offence

under Section 138. This implies that the primary liability of

the company is transferred to the above categories of persons

who are deemed to be guilty vicariously having regard to the

deemed penal nature of the offence under
Section 138
of the

Act.
49
9.5    The Explanation to Section 141 has two clauses.

Clause (a) defines a company to mean any body corporate

and includes a firm or other association of individuals. The

expression “company” encompasses, inter alia, a body

corporate which refers to a company incorporated under the

provisions of the
Companies Act
or a statutory body. The

expression “company” is inclusive inasmuch as it includes a

firm, meaning thereby a partnership firm, as per the

provisions of the
Partnership Act
, as well as a limited liability

partnership or other association of individuals. Clause (b) of

the Explanation defines a director as mentioned in sub-

section (2) of
Section 141
of the Act in relation to a firm to

mean a partner in the firm. Thus by a legislative device an

inclusive definition is added by way of an Explanation to
Section 141
of the Act inasmuch as in jurisprudence and in

law, a company is a distinct body corporate and separate

juristic entity as compared to a partnership firm.


9.6    On a conjoint reading of the various clauses of Section

141, what emerges is that the expression “company” has been

used in an expansive way to include not just a company

incorporated under the provisions of the
Companies Act
50
stricto sensu but also any body corporate such as a statutory

company as well as other artificial juristic entity such as a

partnership firm or other association of individuals. Hence,

the expression “director” in sub-section (2) of Section 141 is

not restricted to a director of an incorporated company or a

statutory body, but also includes a partner of a firm. The

expression “director” in sub-section (2) of
Section 141
of the

Act in relation to a firm means a partner, which is also a

legislative device adopted by the Parliament knowing fully

well and being conscious of the fact that a partnership firm,

jurisprudentially speaking, does not stand on par with a

director of a body corporate. Since the Parliament has used

the expression “company” encompassing all types of juristic

persons, it was necessary to give an expanded definition to

the expression “director” in relation to a firm to mean a

partner in the firm. Therefore, the inclusion of a firm within

the meaning of the expression “company” is by a legal fiction

and by way of a legislative device only for the purpose of

creating a liability on the partners of the firm, which in any

case, they are liable under the law of partnership in India.

But the definition of the word        company including a
51
partnership firm has been incorporated in the Explanation for

the sake of convenience, as otherwise a similar provision

would have to be inserted for the very same purposes. Instead

of replicating the same definition for different kinds of juristic

entities, the Parliament has thought it convenient to add an

Explanation to define a company for the purpose of
Section

141
of the Act in the context of an offence committed by, inter

alia, a company, as understood within the meaning of the
Companies Act
, and also include a firm or other association

of individuals within the definition of company. Similarly,

under clause (b) of the explanation, the expression “director”,

in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.


9.7    This also demonstrates the fact that while a director is

a separate persona in relation to a company, in the case of a

partnership firm, the partner is not really a distinct legal

persona. This is because a partnership firm is not really a

legal entity separate and distinct as a company is from its

directors but can have a legal persona only when the

partnership firm is considered along with its partners. Thus,

the partnership firm has no separate recognition either

jurisprudentially or in law apart from its partners. Therefore,
52
while a director of a company can be vicariously liable for an

offence committed by a company, insofar as a partnership

firm is concerned, when the offence is committed by such a

firm, in substance, the offence is committed by the partners

of the firm and not just the firm per se. Therefore the

partners of the firm are liable for the dishonour of a cheque,

even though the cheque may have been issued in the name of

the firm and the offence is committed by the firm. Therefore,

in law and in jurisprudence, when a partnership firm is

proceeded against, in substance, the partners are liable and

the said liability is joint and several and is not vicarious. This

is unlike a company which is liable by itself and since it is an

artificial juristic entity, the persons in charge of the affairs of

the company or who conduct its business only become

vicariously liable for the offence committed by the company.


9.8    However, jurisprudentially speaking, the partners of a

partnership firm constitute the firm and a firm is a

compendious term for the partners of a firm. This is opposed

to the position of a director in a company which is a body

corporate stricto sensu and such a company is a separate

juristic entity vis-à-vis the directors. On the other hand, a
53
partnership firm has no legal recognition in the absence of its

partners. If a partnership firm is liable for the offence under
Section 138
of the Act, it would imply that the liability would

automatically extend to the partners of the partnership firm

jointly and severally. This underlying distinction between a

partnership firm and a company which is a body corporate

has to be borne in mind while dealing with an offence

committed by a company or a partnership firm, as the case

may be, within the meaning of Section 138 read with
Section

141
of the Act. To reiterate, in the case of a partnership firm,

there is no concept of vicarious liability of the partners as

such. The liability is joint and several because a partnership

firm is the business of partners and one cannot proceed

against only the firm without the partners being made liable.


9.9    Therefore, even in the absence of partnership firm

being named as an accused, if the partners of the partnership

firm are proceeded against, they being jointly and severally

liable along with the partnership firm as well as inter-se the

partners of the firm, the complaint is still maintainable. The

accused in such a case would in substance be the partners of

the partnership firm along with the firm itself. Since the
54
liability is joint and several, even in the absence of a

partnership firm being proceeded against by the complainant

by issuance of legal notice as mandated under
Section 138
of

the Act or being made an accused specifically in a complaint

filed under
Section 200
of CrPC, (equivalent to Section 223 of

the BNSS), such a complaint is maintainable.


9.10   Thus, when it is a case of an offence committed by a

company which is a body corporate stricto sensu, the

vicarious liability on the categories of persons mentioned in

sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) of
Section 141
of the Act

accordingly would be proceeded against and liable for the

offence under
Section 138
of the Act. In the case of a

partnership firm on the other hand, when the offence has

been proved against a partnership firm, the firm per se would

not be liable, but liability would inevitably extend to the

partners of the firm inasmuch as they would be personally,

jointly and severally liable with the firm even when the

offence is committed in the name of the partnership firm.


9.11   To reiterate, when the partnership firm is only a

compendious name for the partners of the firm, any offence

committed under Section 138 read with Section 141 of the
55
Act would make the partners of the firm jointly and severally

liable with the firm. If, on the other hand, the Parliament

intended that the partners of the firm be construed as

separate entities for the purpose of penalty, then it would

have provided so by expressly stating that the firm, as well as

the partners, would be liable separately for the offence under
Section 138
of the Act. Such an intention does not emanate

from
Section 141
of the Act as the offence proved against the

firm would amount to the partners of the firm also being

liable jointly and severally with the firm. Therefore, there is

no separate liability on each of the partners unless sub-

section (2) of Section 141 applies, when negligence or lack of

bona fides on the part of any individual partner of the firm

has been proved.
10.    In view of the aforesaid discussion, we hold that the

High Court was not right in rejecting or dismissing the

complaint for the reason that the partnership firm was not

arraigned as an accused in the complaint or that notice had

not been issued to it under
Section 138
of the Act. In view of

the aforesaid discussion, the notice issued to the partners of

the firm in the instant case shall be construed to be a notice
56
issued to the partnership firm also viz., ‘Mouriya Coirs’.

Permission is granted to arraign the partnership firm as an

accused in the complaint.
11.   Consequently, the impugned order of the High Court is

set aside. The complaint bearing STC No.1106/2022 is

restored on the file of the Court of the learned Judicial

Magistrate No. II, Pollachi. The trial court is directed to

dispose of the complaint in accordance with law.
12.    The appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms.
….……………………………………..J.
                            (B.V. NAGARATHNA)




                            ….……………………………………..J.
                            (SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA)

NEW DELHI;
JULY 14, 2025.
57