[Cites
28
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Suresh Chandra(Deceased) Thr. Lrs vs Parasram on 18 July, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 873
                                                                              REPORTABLE



                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NOS……….. OF 2025
                                      (Arising out of SLP (C) Nos.15900-15902/2022)



                             SURESH CHANDRA (DECEASED) THR. LRS. & ORS.
                                                                           …APPELLANT (S)
                                                             VERSUS
                            PARASRAM & ORS.                               …RESPONDENT (S)




                                                         JUDGMENT
MANOJ MISRA, J.
1.        Leave granted.
2.        These appeals arise from Civil Suit No.13 of 1983

                            (renumbered 16A of 1997), which was dismissed by the trial

                            court and decreed by the first appellate court. On second

                            appeal1 before the High Court2, by the impugned order dated

                            21.02.2022, the appeal of the appellant(s) herein was

                            declared to have abated due to non-substitution of the legal
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
1 VALLI
   BORRA LM    Second Appeal No.446 of 2001
   Date: 2025.07.18
   17:59:03 2
   Reason:     The High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Gwalior
              IST
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)               Page 1 of 58
representatives (for short LRs) of Ram Babu (i.e., appellant

              no.2 in the second appeal) within time.           By the second

              impugned order dated 04.08.2022, the High Court rejected

              the applications3 preferred for condonation of delay in

              applying to set aside abatement and for substitution of the

              LRs of deceased Ram Babu.
FACTS:
3.        The facts relevant for deciding the present appeal are

              as follows:
(i) Suit No.13 of 1983 (renumbered as 16A of 1997) was

                    instituted against Suresh Chandra (predecessor-in-
interest of the appellants herein) and Ram Babu by the

                    respondent seeking declaration, recovery of possession,

                    mesne profits in respect of a house.
(ii) Plaintiff claimed exclusive title over the suit property

                    through its ancestor Tej Singh and pleaded that the

                    defendants were his tenant.
(iii) Defendants i.e., Suresh Chandra and Ram Babu,

                    filed a joint written statement in the suit.
3
MCC No.697 and MCC No.700 of 2022
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)              Page 2 of 58
(iv) Suresh Chandra died during the suit proceeding, his

                LRs, namely, the appellants, also filed their written

                statements.
(v) In the written statement, while denying the alleged

                tenancy, the defendants claimed title over the suit

                property through their ancestor late Gokul Prasad who,

                according to them, had derived exclusive interest in the

                suit property through a partition with his brothers in the

                year 1947.
(vi) The trial court dismissed the suit against which an

                appeal was preferred by the plaintiff.
(vii) The first appellate court decreed the suit of the

                plaintiff against which the LRs of Suresh Chandra and

                Ram Babu filed the second appeal.
(viii)      During the pendency of the second appeal,

                appellant     no.2 (Ram Babu) died on 19.08.2015.

                Information of his death was given to the Court on

                04.04.2016. However, his LRs were not brought on

                record within time.
(ix) The High Court vide first impugned order dated

                21.02.2022 declared the appeal to have abated.
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)       Page 3 of 58
(x) To set aside abatement and to substitute the LRs of

                Ram Babu two set of applications were filed along with

                delay condonation applications. One set, namely, MCC

                No.700 of 2022 was filed by the appellants (i.e., LRs of

                Suresh Chandra, who were already on record) and the

                other set, namely, MCC No.697 of 2022 was filed by LRs

                of Ram Babu. Both were rejected by second impugned

                order dated 04.08.2022.
4. Aggrieved by the aforesaid orders, the appellants are

          before us.
5. We have heard Shri Jayant Mehta, learned Senior

          Counsel for the appellants; Shri N.K. Mody, learned Senior

          Counsel for the contesting respondent; and have perused the

          record.
APPELLANTS’ SUBMISSIONS
6.         The learned counsel for the appellants submitted

          that, on non-substitution of legal heirs of a dead co-

          appellant, to determine whether the appeal abated partially,

          or wholly, what needs to be examined first is whether the

          surviving appellant has an independent right to pursue the

          appeal. If yes, whether he could seek for reversal of the entire

          decree under appeal. If not, then whether the decree in
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)       Page 4 of 58
favour of the surviving appellant would result in a decree

             contradictory or conflicting with the one qua the deceased

             party.       According to him, the appellants’ (L.Rs of Suresh

             Chandra’s) right was independent of the deceased appellant

             (Ram Babu) and as under Order XLI Rule 44 of the Civil

             Procedure Code, 19085 one of the defendants can seek

             reversal of the whole decree, when the decree is based on

             ground common to all, there could be no abatement of the

             appeal. In the alternative, it was submitted that abatement

             can always be set aside when substitution of LRs is applied

             for by showing sufficient cause for the delay.
It was

             contended that the appellants as well as LRs of deceased

             Ram Babu applied for substitution by showing sufficient

             cause for the delay, therefore, the High Court ought to have

             set aside the abatement and proceeded to decide the appeal

             on merit. Certain decisions6 were cited by appellants’ counsel

             which shall be dealt with, if considered necessary.
4
Order XLI Rule 4. One of several plaintiffs or defendants may obtain reversal of whole decree where it
proceeds on ground common to all.—Where there are more plaintiffs or more defendants than one in a suit, and the
decree appealed from proceeds on any ground common to all the plaintiffs or to all the defendants, any one of the
plaintiffs or of the defendants may appeal from the whole decree, and thereupon the Appellate Court may reverse or
vary the decree in favour of all the plaintiffs or defendants, as the case may be.
5
CPC
6
Decisions cited by the appellant: (
i) Delhi Development Authority v. Diwan Chand Anand
, (2022) 10 SCC 428;
(
ii) Sakharam v. Kishanrao
, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 2035; (
iii) Gurnam Singh v. Gurbachan Kaur
, (2017) 13 SCC 414;
and (
iv) State of Punjab v. Shamlal Murari
, (1976) 1 SCC 719; (
v) Baij Nath v. Ram Bharose
, AIR 1953 All 565
=1953 SCC OnLine All 43.
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                                     Page 5 of 58
RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS
7. Per contra, the learned counsel for the contesting

          respondent submitted, firstly, the heirs of Ram Babu have

          neither filed Special Leave Petition nor have joined as

          petitioners, though impleaded as proforma- respondents,

          therefore the order rejecting their substitution application

          cannot be questioned. Secondly, the decree against the

          defendants was joint and indivisible, therefore, if the decree

          stands against Ram Babu, a decree in favour of Suresh

          Chandra (through LRs) would result in a conflicting decree.

          Further, the provisions of Order XLI Rule 4 do not exclude

          the applicability of Order XXII Rule 3.                   Thus, once all

          defendants join to file an appeal, death of one of the

          appellants would necessitate a substitution, if the right to

          sue does not survive on the surviving appellants alone.

          Therefore, Order XLI Rule 4 would not come to the rescue of

          the appellants. Hence, the whole appeal abated. To buttress

          his    submissions       learned     counsel        for   the   contesting
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                  Page 6 of 58
respondent cited certain decisions7 which we shall deal with,

             if considered necessary.
ISSUES
8. Based on the rival submissions, following issues fall for

             our consideration:
(a) Whether the order rejecting application(s) seeking

                   condonation of delay for setting aside abatement and

                   substitution         of    legal    representatives           of   deceased-
appellant Ram Babu suffers from any legal infirmity?
(b) If the answer to (a) is in the negative, whether the

                   second appeal abated wholly or partially, or not at all,

                   on account of non-substitution of LRs of deceased

                   defendant-appellant no.2 (i.e., Ram Babu)?

             ANALYSIS

             Issue (a)
9. Issue (a) arises for our consideration because the High

             Court rejected two set of applications. One filed by LRs of

             Ram Babu and the other filed by LRs of Suresh Chandra (i.e.,
7
Decisions cited by contesting respondent’s counsel: (
i) Baij Nath v. Ram Bharose
, AIR 1953 Allahabad 565 =
1953 SCC OnLine All 43; (
ii) State of Punjab v. Nathu Ram
, AIR 1962 SC 89 = 1961 SCC OnLine SC 137; (
iii)
Ram Sarup v. Munshi
, AIR 1963 SC 553 = 1962 SCC OnLine SC 168; (
iv) Pandit Shri Chand and others v. Jagdish
Parshad Kishan Chand and others
, AIR 1966 SC 1427 = 1966 SCC OnLine SC 206; (
v) Badni v. Shri Chand
, AIR
1999 SC 107; (vi) Hemareddi (dead) through Legal Representatives v. Ramchandra Yallappa Hosmani, (2019) 6
SCC 756;
Delhi Development Authority v. Divan Chand Anand & Ors.
(supra); Ashok Transport Agency v.
Awadesh Kumar & Ors., (1999) SCC 567;
Gurnam Singh v. Gurbachan Kaur
(supra);
Amba Bai v. Gopal
, (2001) 5
SCC 570; and Venigalla Koteswarmma v. Madampati Suryamba, (2021) 4 SCC 246.
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                                Page 7 of 58
the surviving appellants of the second appeal) who were

              already impleaded. Both were filed after the High Court had

              declared the appeal to have abated for non-substitution of

              LRs of Ram Babu. No doubt, the Court has power to condone

              the delay in filing an application for setting aside abatement

              as well as for substitution and can set aside the abatement

              in exercise of its power under
Order XXII Rule 98 of CPC
. But

              before condoning the delay the Court must consider whether

              sufficient cause has been shown for condonation.
10.           In the instant case, death of Ram Babu took place

              on 19.08.2015; 90 days period of limitation to move an

              application for substitution9, and 60 days limitation period

              to set aside abatement10, expired in the month of January

              2016 itself. Importantly, through IA No.1621 of 2016 filed

              by the respondent, the Court was informed about the death

              of Ram Babu in 2016 itself, yet no application was moved till
8
Order XXII Rule 9. Effect of abatement or dismissal. – (1) Where a suit abates or is dismissed under this Order,
no fresh suit shall be brought on the same cause of action.
(2) The plaintiff or the person claiming to be the legal representative of a deceased plaintiff or the assignee or the
receiver in the case of an insolvent plaintiff may apply for an order to set aside the abatement or dismissal; and if it is
proved that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from continuing the suit, the Court shall set aside the abatement
or dismissal upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit.
(3) The provisions of
Section 5
of the Indian limitation Act, 1877 (15 of 1877), shall apply to applications under sub-
rule (2).
Explanation. -- Nothing in this rule shall be construed as barring, in any later suit, a defense based on the facts which
constituted the cause of action in the suit which had abated or had been dismissed under this Order.
9
Article 120
of the
Schedule to The Limitation Act, 1963
10
Article 121
of the
Schedule to The Limitation Act, 1963
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                                            Page 8 of 58
2022. In fact, the applications were filed after the appeal was

            declared to have abated. Besides that, the surviving

            appellant(s) and the deceased appellant were close relatives,

            therefore, it cannot be believed that they were not aware of

            the      death      of    co-appellant          Ram       Babu.           In     these

            circumstances, if the High Court found there was no

            sufficient cause to condone the delay, no fault can be found

            with its order as to justify our interference under
Article 136
of the Constitution. Issue (a) is decided accordingly.

            Issue (b)
11.         Now the question arises whether the second appeal

            abated wholly or partially on death of sthe deceased

            appellant.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES RELATING TO ABATEMENT OF
            AN APPEAL
12.         Before we set out to address the aforesaid issue, an

            overview of the provisions governing abatement of an appeal

            under
the CPC
would be apposite.
Order XXII Rule 111 of the

            CPC
lays down the general principle that if the right to sue

            survives, the suit shall not abate on death of either the
11
Order XXII Rule 1 – No abatement by party’s death if right to sue survives. - The death of a plaintiff or
defendant shall not cause the suit to abate if the right to sue survives.
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                                Page 9 of 58
plaintiff or the defendant. Order XXII Rule 1112 makes it clear

              that all previous rules i.e., rules 1 to 10 of Order XXII would

              apply to appeals and for that purpose reference to the word

              ‘plaintiff’ would include an appellant; ‘defendant’ would

              include a respondent; and suit would include an appeal. As

              a logical corollary thereof, the right to sue includes the ‘right

              to appeal’.           Rule 213 of Order XXII deals with a situation

              where one of the plaintiffs or defendants to a suit dies and

              the right to sue survives to the surviving plaintiff(s) or

              defendant(s). In a situation governed by Rule 2, the suit does

              not abate; only a note is to be put that the right to sue

              survives to the surviving plaintiff(s) or defendant(s). Order

              XXII Rule 314 deals with a situation where one of two or more

              plaintiffs dies and the right to sue survives, though not to the

              surviving plaintiff(s) alone, or where the sole plaintiff dies
12
Order XXII Rule 11 – Application of Order to appeals. – In the application of this Order to appeals so far as
may be, the word ‘plaintiff’ shall be held to include an appellant, the word ‘defendant’ a respondent, and the word
‘suit’ an appeal.
13
Order XXII Rule 2 – Procedure where one of several plaintiffs or defendants dies and right to sue survives.
- Where there are more plaintiffs or defendants than one, and any of them dies, and where the right to sue survives to
the surviving plaintiff or plaintiffs alone, or against the surviving defendant or defendants alone, the court shall cause
an entry to that effect to be made on the record, and the suit shall proceed at the instance of the surviving plaintiff or
plaintiffs, or against the surviving defendant or defendants.
14
Order XXII Rule 3 – Procedure in case of death of one of several plaintiffs or of sole plaintiff. – (1) Where
one of two or more plaintiffs dies and the right to sue does not survive to the surviving plaintiff or plaintiffs alone, or
a sole plaintiff or sole surviving plaintiff dies and the right to sue survives, the court on the application made in that
behalf, shall cause the legal representative of the deceased plaintiff to be made a party and shall proceed with the suit.
(2) Where within the time limited by law no application is made under sub-rule (1) the suit shall abate so far as the
deceased plaintiff is concerned, and, on the application the defendant, the court may award to him the costs which he
may have incurred in defending the suit, to be recovered from the estate of the deceased plaintiff.
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                                            Page 10 of 58
and the right to sue survives. In such a case, if within time

              limited by law no application is made for substituting the

              legal representatives of the deceased plaintiff or plaintiffs, the

              suit would abate so far as the deceased plaintiff is concerned.

              Rule 415 of Order XXII is a provision corresponding to Rule 3

              to deal with a situation where one of several defendants or

              the sole defendant dies and the right to sue survives, though

              not against the surviving defendant alone.
13.           A plain reading of Rules 3 and 4 of
Order XXII of the

              CPC
would create an impression that in absence of

              substitution of the legal representatives of the deceased
15
Order XXII Rule 4 – Procedure in case of death of one of several defendants or of sole defendant. – (1) Where
one of two or more defendants dies and the right to sue does not survive against the surviving defendant or defendants
alone, or a sole defendant or sole surviving defendant dies and the right to sue survives, the court, on an application
made in that behalf, shall cause the legal representative of the deceased defendant to be made a party and shall proceed
with the suit.
(2) Any person so made a party may make an any defence appropriate to his character as legal representative of the
deceased defendant.
(3) Where within the time limited by law no application is made under sub-rule (1), the suit shall abate as against the
deceased defendant.
(4) The Court whenever it thinks fit, may exempt the plaintiff from the necessity of substituting the legal
representatives of any such defendant who has failed to file a written statement or who, having filed it, has failed to
appear and contest the suit at the hearing; and judgment may, in such case, be pronounced against the said defendant
notwithstanding the death of such defendant and shall have the same force and effect as if it has been pronounced
before death took place.
(5) Where --
(a) the plaintiff was ignorant of the death of a defendant, and could not, for that reason, make an
         application for the substitution of the legal representative of the defendant under this rule within the period
         specified in the
Limitation Act, 1963
(36 of 1963), and the suit has, in consequence, abated, and
(b) the plaintiff applies after the expiry of the period specified therefor in the
Limitation Act, 1963
(36 of 1963), for setting aside the abatement and also for the admission of that application under
Section 5
of that Act on the ground that he had, by reason of such ignorance, sufficient cause for not making the
         application within the period specified in the said Act,
the court shall, in considering the application under the said
Section 5
have due regard to the fact of such ignorance,
if proved.
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                                            Page 11 of 58
plaintiff    or   defendant, or   the   deceased appellant or

               respondent, as the case may be, abatement is qua the

               deceased plaintiff or defendant alone, in the context of a suit,

               or the deceased appellant or respondent alone, in the context

               of an appeal, provided the right to sue does not survive to the

               surviving plaintiff(s) or appellant(s) alone, or against the

               surviving defendant(s) or respondent(s) alone, as the case

               may be. Though this is all that Rules 3 and 4 declare, the

               law has evolved that in certain kinds of litigation the

               consequences of abatement qua a party are not limited to the

               deceased party alone; rather, it affects the litigation in its

               entirety.
14.         As to when an appeal would abate in its entirety for

               non-substitution of legal representatives of a deceased party

               depends upon the facts and circumstances of an individual

               case. The law in this regard has been discussed in detail and

               summarized by a five-Judge Bench of this Court in
Sardar

               Amarjit Singh Kalra (Dead) by LRs and Others v. Pramod

               Gupta (Smt.) (Dead) by LRs and Others16
as under:
“21. ……………….. (a) In case of “joint and
                           indivisible decree”, “joint and inseverable or
                           inseparable    decree”,   the  abatement    of
16
(2003) 3 SCC 272
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)             Page 12 of 58
proceedings in relation to one or more of the
                      appellant(s) or respondent(s) on account of
                      omission or lapse and failure to bring on record
                      his or their legal representatives in time would
                      prove fatal to the entire appeal and require to be
                      dismissed in toto, as otherwise inconsistent or
                      contradictory decrees would result and proper
                      reliefs could not be granted, conflicting with the
                      one which had already become final with respect
                      to the same subject-matter vis-à-vis the others;
(b) the question as to whether the court can deal
                      with an appeal after it abates against one or the
                      other would depend upon the facts of each case
                      and no exhaustive statement or analysis could
                      be made about all such circumstances wherein
                      it would or would not be possible to proceed with
                      the appeal, despite abatement, partially; (c)
                      existence of a joint right as distinguished from
                      tenancy-in-common alone is not the criterion
                      but the joint character of the decree, dehors the
                      relationship of the parties inter se and the frame
                      of the appeal, will take colour from the nature of
                      the decree challenged; (d) where the dispute
                      between two groups of parties centered around
                      claims or was based on grounds common
                      relating to the respective groups litigating as
                      distinct groups or bodies — the issue involved for
                      consideration in such class of cases would be
                      one and indivisible; and (e) when the issues
                      involved in more than one appeal dealt with as a
                      group or batch of appeals, are common and
                      identical in all such cases, abatement of one or
                      the other of the connected appeals due to the
                      death of one or more of the parties and failure to
                      bring on record the legal representatives of the
                      deceased parties, would result in the abatement
                      of all appeals.
xxxx              xxxx              xxxx
30. The question, therefore, as to when a
                      proceeding before the court becomes or is
                      rendered impossible or possible to be proceeded
                      with, after it had partially abated on account of
                      the death of one or the other party on either side
                      has been always considered to depend upon the
                      fact as to whether the decree obtained is a joint
                      decree or a severable one and that in case of a
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)            Page 13 of 58
joint and inseverable decree if the appeal abated
                      against one or the other, the same cannot be
                      proceeded with further for or against the
                      remaining parties as well. If otherwise, the
                      decree is a joint and several or separable one,
                      being in substance and reality a combination of
                      many decrees, there can be no impediment for
                      the proceedings being proceeded with among or
                      against those remaining parties other than the
                      deceased. …
31. But, in our view also, as to what those
                      circumstances are to be, cannot be exhaustively
                      enumerated and no hard and fast rule for
                      invariable application can be devised. With the
                      march and progress of law, the new horizons
                      explored and modalities discerned and the fact
                      that the procedural laws must be liberally
                      construed to really serve as handmaid, make it
                      workable and advance the ends of justice,
                      technical objections which tend to be stumbling
                      blocks to defeat and deny substantial and
                      effective justice should be strictly viewed for
                      being discouraged, except where the mandate of
                      law inevitably necessitates it. …… At times, one
                      or the other parties on either side in the litigation
                      involving several claims or more than one,
                      pertaining to their individual rights may settle
                      among themselves the dispute to the extent their
                      share of proportion of rights is concerned and
                      may drop out of context, bringing even the
                      proceedings to a conclusion so far as they are
                      concerned. If all such moves are allowed to
                      boomerang adversely on the rights of the
                      remaining parties even to contest and have their
                      claims adjudicated on merits, it would be a
                      travesty of administration of justice itself.
32. The area of differences in the catena of
                      decisions brought to our notice is not so much
                      with reference to the principles to be applied to
                      different nature of decrees but only as to which
                      of the decree(s) falls, when or under what
                      circumstances under one or the other of the
                      classification i.e. joint and inseverable or joint
                      and severable or separable. This aspect seems to
                      have been adjudged in different cases depending
                      upon the nature/source of rights, the cause of
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)               Page 14 of 58
action, the manner they were asserted by the
                      parties themselves and the contradictory nature
                      of decrees impossible of execution, likely to
                      result when considered differently. It is for this
                      reason any standardized formula was avoided
                      and the matter left for the consideration of
                      courts, on the peculiar nature of the cases
                      coming for determination. ……
33. Even assuming that the decree appealed
                      against or challenged before the higher forum is
                      joint and several but deals with the rights of
                      more than one recognized in law to belong to
                      each one of them on their own and unrelated to
                      the others, and the proceedings abate in respect
                      of one or more of either of the parties, the courts
                      are not disabled in any manner to proceed with
                      the proceedings so far as the remaining parties
                      and part of the appeal is concerned. As and when
                      it is found necessary to interfere with the
                      judgment and decree challenged before it, the
                      court can always declare the legal position in
                      general and restrict the ultimate relief to be
                      granted by confining it to those before the court
                      only rather than denying the relief to one and all
                      on account of a procedure lapse or action or
                      inaction of one or the other of the parties before
                      it. The only exception to this course of action
                      should be where the relief granted and the decree
                      ultimately passed would become totally
                      unenforceable and mutually self-destructive and
                      unworkable vis-à-vis the other part, which had
                      become final. As far as possible, courts must
                      always aim to preserve and protect the rights of
                      parties and extend help to enforce them rather
                      than deny relief and thereby render the rights
                      themselves otiose, “ubi jus ibi remedium” (where
                      there is a right, there is a remedy) being a basic
                      principle of jurisprudence. Such a course would
                      be more conducive and better conform to a fair,
                      reasonable and proper administration of justice.
34. In the light of the above discussion, we hold:
(1) Wherever the plaintiffs or appellants or
                      petitioners are found to have distinct, separate
                      and independent rights of their own and for the
                      purpose of convenience or otherwise, joined
                      together in a single litigation to vindicate their
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)             Page 15 of 58
rights, the decree passed by the court thereon is
                      to be viewed in substance as the combination of
                      several decrees in favour of one or the other
                      parties and not as a joint and inseverable decree.
The same would be the position in the case of
                      defendants or respondents having similar rights
                      contesting the claims against them.
(2) Whenever different and distinct claims of
                      more than one are sought to be vindicated in one
                      single proceedings, as the one now before us,
                      under the
Land Acquisition Act
or in similar
                      nature of proceedings and/or claims in assertion
                      of individual rights of parties are clubbed,
                      consolidated and dealt with together by the
                      courts concerned and a single judgment or
                      decree has been passed, it should be treated as
                      a mere combination of several decrees in favour
                      of or against one or more of the parties and not
                      as joint and inseparable decrees.
(3) The mere fact that the claims or rights
                      asserted or sought to be vindicated by more than
                      one are similar or identical in nature or by
                      joining together of more than one of such
                      claimants of a particular nature, by itself would
                      not be sufficient in law to treat them as joint
                      claims, so as to render the judgment or decree
                      passed thereon a joint and inseverable one.
                      (4) The question as to whether in a given case the
                      decree is joint and inseverable or joint and
                      severable or separable has to be decided, for the
                      purposes of abatement or dismissal of the entire
                      appeal as not being properly and duly
                      constituted or rendered incompetent for being
                      further proceeded with, requires to be
                      determined only with reference to the fact as to
                      whether the judgment/decree passed in the
                      proceedings vis-à-vis the remaining parties
                      would suffer the vice of contradictory or
                      inconsistent decrees. For that reason, a decree
                      can be said to be contradictory or inconsistent
                      with another decree only when the two decrees
                      are incapable of enforcement or would be
                      mutually     self-destructive   and    that    the
                      enforcement of one would negate or render
                      impossible the enforcement of the other.”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)            Page 16 of 58
15.
In
State of Punjab vs. Nathu Ram17
, which was

                noticed and followed by the five-Judge Bench in
Sardar

                Amarjit Singh
(supra), this Court enumerated certain tests

                to determine whether the whole appeal would abate on

                account of non-substitution of the legal representatives of

                one or some of the deceased parties. In this regard it was

                observed:
“6. The question whether a court can deal with
                                 such matters or not, will depend on the facts of
                                 each case and therefore no exhaustive statement
                                 can be made about the circumstances when this
                                 is possible or is not possible. It may, however, be
                                 stated that ordinarily the considerations which
                                 weigh with the court in deciding upon this
                                 question are whether the appeal between the
                                 appellants and the respondents other than the
                                 deceased can be said to be properly constituted
                                 or can be said to have all the necessary parties
                                 for the decision of the controversy before the
                                 court. The test to determine this has been
                                 described in diverse forms. Courts will not
                                 proceed with an appeal (a) when the success of
                                 the appeal may lead to the court coming to a
                                 decision which be in conflict with the decision
                                 between the appellant and the deceased
                                 respondent and therefore which would lead to
                                 court passing a decree which will be
                                 contradictory to the decree which had become
                                 final with respect to the same subject-matter
                                 between the appellant and the deceased
                                 respondent; (b) when the appellant could not
                                 have brought the action for the necessary relief
                                 against those respondents alone who are still
                                 before the court; and (c) when the decree against
                                 the surviving respondents, if the appeal
17
Referred to in Footnote 7
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                        Page 17 of 58
succeeds, be ineffective that is to say, it would
                                 not be successfully executed.”
                                                             (Emphasis supplied)
16.
In
Ram Sarup vs. Munshi18
there was a decree of

                pre-emption against the defendant-appellants who had

                bought the property from the co-defendants in the suit. One

                of the appellants died and his legal representatives were not

                brought on record. The issue which fell for consideration was

                whether the whole appeal abated, or the abatement was qua

                the deceased appellant only.              Argument on behalf of the

                surviving appellants was whatever might be the position as

                regards the share to which the deceased appellant was

                entitled in the property purchased, the interest of the

                deceased was distinct and separate from that of the others

                and that the abatement could, in any event, be only partial

                and would not affect the continuance of the appeal by the

                surviving appellants at least as regards their share in the

                property. To deal with the above argument, this Court called

                for the sale deed by which the appellants had purchased the

                property. Upon consideration of the sale deed, the Court

                found that it was not a case of sale of any separated item of
18
Referred to in Footnote 7
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                      Page 18 of 58
property in favour of the deceased appellant but of one set of

          properties to be enjoyed by vendees in equal shares. Based

          on that, the five-Judge Bench of this Court held:
“It is clear law that there can be no partial pre-
                        emption because pre-emption is the substitution
                        of the pre-emptor in place of the vendee and if
                        the decree in favor of the pre-emptor in respect
                        of the share of the deceased Mehar Singh has
                        become final it is manifest that there would be
                        two conflicting decrees if the appeal should be
                        allowed and the decree for pre-emption insofar
                        as appellants 2 to 5 are concerned is interfered
                        with. Where a decree is a joint one and a part of
                        the decree has become final, by reason of
                        abatement, the entire appeal must be held to be
                        abated.”
                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
17.        Having regard to the aforesaid decisions, the law

          governing determination of the issue as to whether

          abatement of an appeal on non-substitution of a deceased

          party is partial or whole, can be summarized as under:
1.        The answer to the question whether the

                   entire appeal abates or it abates partially qua the

                   deceased party alone, will depend on facts of each

                   case and, therefore, no exhaustive statement about

                   the circumstances in which the entire appeal would

                   abate can be made.
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)              Page 19 of 58
2.       As a matter of course courts will not proceed

                   with an appeal (a) when the success of the appeal

                   may lead to the court coming to a decision which is

                   in conflict with the decision between the appellant

                   and the deceased respondent which had become

                   final with respect to the same subject-matter

                   between       the    appellant      and    the   deceased

                   respondent; (b) when the appellant could not have

                   brought the action for the necessary relief against

                   those respondents alone who are still before the

                   court; and (c) when the decree against the surviving

                   respondents, if the appeal succeeds, be ineffective

                   that is to say, it would not be successfully executed.
3.       In a case of “joint and indivisible decree” or

                   “joint and inseverable or inseparable decree”, the

                   abatement of appeal in relation to one or more of

                   the appellant(s) or respondent(s) on account of

                   failure to bring on record his or their legal

                   representatives in time would prove fatal to the

                   entire appeal because proceeding qua the surviving

                   party or parties may give rise to inconsistent or

                   contradictory decrees.
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)            Page 20 of 58
4.       The question as to whether the decree is

                   joint and inseverable, or joint and severable or

                   separable, must be decided, for the purposes of

                   abatement or dismissal of the entire appeal, only

                   with reference to the fact as to whether the

                   judgment/decree passed in the proceedings vis-à-
vis the remaining parties would suffer the vice of

                   contradictory or inconsistent decrees.
5.       A decree can be said to be contradictory or

                   inconsistent with another decree only when the two

                   decrees are incapable of enforcement or would be

                   mutually self-destructive and that the enforcement

                   of one would negate or render impossible the

                   enforcement of the other which means that the two

                   decrees are mutually irreconcilable or totally

                   inconsistent, that is, if laid side by side, the only

                   impression would be that one is in the teeth of the

                   other.
6.       Where the plaintiffs or appellants have

                   distinct, separate and independent rights of their

                   own i.e., not inter-dependent upon the other, and

                   for the purpose of convenience, or otherwise, joined
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)        Page 21 of 58
together in a single litigation to vindicate their

                           rights, the decree passed by the court thereon is to

                           be viewed in substance as a combination of several

                           decrees in favour of one or the other parties and not

                           as a joint and inseverable decree.
7.     Existence of a joint right as distinguished

                           from tenancy-in-common is not the criterion of a

                           joint or inseverable or inseparable decree. The joint

                           character of the decree will take colour from the

                           nature of the decree challenged.
ILLUSTRATIVE CASES WHERE ENTIRE APPEAL STOOD
                ABATED ON NON-SUBSTITUTION OF A DECEASED
                PARTY
18.          Now, we shall examine those decisions where this

                Court held appeal to have abated in its entirety on non-

                substitution of legal representatives of one of the deceased

                parties.
19.
In
Hemareddi     vs.   Ramachandra19
,        one

                Govindareddi, the propositus died, leaving behind two

                sons and a daughter. The plaintiffs were children of one of

                the two sons. The second defendant was the wife of the
19
Referred to in Footnote 7
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                Page 22 of 58
other son. The suit properties were alleged to be the

          properties of the joint family of Govindareddi and his sons.

          Suit was filed for injunction as also for declaration that

          defendant no.1 is not the adopted son. Trial court

          dismissed the suit and upheld the adoption. Against

          which, an appeal was filed. During the pendency of the

          appeal, one of the plaintiff-appellants died. His LRs were

          not brought on record. The High Court took the view that

          the entire appeal abated. The matter travelled to this

          Court. The question that fell for consideration was whether

          the whole appeal abated, or it abated qua the deceased

          appellant only. Upholding the decision of the High Court,

          this Court reasoned thus:
“17. ………. The appeal having abated in
                        regard to the late brother, the decree of the
                        trial court has become final qua the deceased
                        brother of the appellant. The effect of the same
                        is that the adoption is found legal. The result
                        of the appeal being allowed to proceed further
                        and succeed in the appeal would be the
                        passing of a decree by the High Court. The said
                        decree would be to the effect that the adoption
                        is invalid. The suit which was jointly filed by
                        the appellant and his late brother would have
                        to be decreed whereas the suit filed by the
                        appellant and his late brother stands
                        dismissed by the trial court. Both the decrees
                        cannot stand together. There would be
                        irreconcilable conflict. The defendants are
                        common. They would be faced with two
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)            Page 23 of 58
decrees regarding the same subject matter
                        which are irrevocably conflicting.”
20.
In
State of Punjab vs. Nathu Ram
(supra), the

          State acquired on lease certain parcels of land belonging to

          Labhu Ram and Nathu Ram for military purposes under the
Defence of India Act, 1939
. Labhu Ram and Nathu Ram,

          brothers, refused to accept the compensation offered to them

          by the Collector and applied to the Punjab Government

          through the Collector, under rule 6 of the Punjab Land

          Acquisition (Defence of India) Rules, 1943. The State

          Government referred the matter to an arbitrator under rule

          10, who, after inquiry, passed an award ordering the

          payment of an amount higher than what was offered by the

          Collector. The State Government appealed against the award

          to the High Court of Punjab. During the pendency of the

          appeal, Labhu Ram, one of the respondents, died. The High

          Court held that the appeal abated against Labhu Ram and

          that its effect was that the appeal against Nathu Ram also

          abated. The State Government appealed to this Court. While

          dismissing the appeal, this Court, inter alia, observed:
“9. …… the award of the arbitrator in each of
                      these cases was a joint one, in favor of both the
                      respondents Labhu Ram and Nathu Ram. To
                      illustrate the form of the award, we may quote
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)           Page 24 of 58
the award for the year 1945-46 in the
                      proceedings leading to Civil Appeal No.635 of
                      1957. It is:
“On the basis of the report of S Lal Singh,
                            Naib Tehsildar (Exhibit PW9/1) and
                            Sheikh Aziz Din, Tehsildar, (Exhibit
                            PW9/2), the applicants are entitled to
                            sum of Rs. 4140 on account of rent, plus
                            Rs.3872/ 8/0 on account of income tax
                            etc., due to the inclusion of Rs. 6193/8/0
                            in their total income, plus such sum as
                            the petitioners have to pay to the Income
                            Tax Department on account of the
                            inclusion of Rs. 4140 in their income as
                            awarded by this award.”
                      The result of the abatement of the appeal against
                      Labhu Ram is therefore that his legal
                      representatives are entitled to get compensation
                      on the basis of this award even if they are to be
                      paid separately on calculating their rightful
                      share in the land acquired, for which this
                      compensation is decreed. Such calculation is
                      foreign to the appeal between the State of Punjab
                      and Nathu Ram. The decree in the appeal will
                      have to determine not what Nathu Ram's share
                      in this compensation is, but what is the correct
                      amount of compensation with respect to the land
                      acquired for which this compensation has been
                      awarded by the arbitrator. The subject matter for
                      which the compensation is to be calculated is
                      one and the same. There cannot be different
                      assessments of the amount of compensation for
                      the same parcel of land. The appeal before the
                      High Court was an appeal against a decree
                      jointly in favour of Labhu Ram and Nathu Ram.
                      The appeal against Nathu Ram alone cannot be
                      held to be properly constituted when the appeal
                      against Labhu Ram had abated. To get rid of the
                      joint decree, it was essential for the appellant,
                      the State of Punjab, to include both the joint
                      decree holders in the appeal. In the absence of
                      one joint-decree holder, the appeal is not
                      properly framed. It follows that the State appeal
                      against Nathu Ram alone cannot proceed.”
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)           Page 25 of 58
While holding so, the argument on behalf of the State

          that Labhu Ram had an equal share in the land acquired

          and, therefore, the appeal against Nathu Ram alone could

          deal with half the amount of the award was rejected,

          reasoning thus:
“10. …The mere record of specific shares in the
                      revenue records is no guarantee of their
                      correctness. The appellate court will have to
                      determine the share of Nathu Ram and
                      necessarily the share of Labhu Ram in the
                      absence of his legal representatives. This is not
                      permissible in law. Further, the entire case of
                      Labhu Ram and Nathu Ram, in their application
                      to the Government for the appointment of an
                      arbitrator, was that the land jointly belonged to
                      them and had been acquired for military
                      purposes, that a certain amount had been paid
                      to them as compensation, that they received that
                      amount under protest and that they were
                      entitled to a larger amount mentioned in the
                      application and also for the income tax they
                      would have to pay on account of the
                      compensation received being added to their
                      income. Their claim was a joint claim based on
                      the allegation that the land belonged to them
                      jointly. The award and the joint decree are on
                      this basis and the appellate court cannot decide
                      on the basis of the separate shares.”

              The aforesaid observations make it clear that a mere

          assertion that surviving party’s own share could be

          determined would not save the proceeding from abatement

          on non-substitution of the legal representatives of the

          deceased co-sharer if the pleadings reflected a joint claim
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)           Page 26 of 58
based on an allegation that the subject matter of the suit

                belonged to them jointly.
21.
In
Venigalla   Koteswaramma    vs.   Malampati

                Suryamba and Others20
, a suit was instituted, inter alia,

                for partition, separate possession of plaintiff’s one-fourth

                share and recovery of mesne profits in respect of immovable

                properties described in Schedule A and movable properties

                described in Schedule B of the plaint. The plaintiff pleaded,

                inter alia, that plaintiff and defendants 1 to 3 were siblings,

                born from the first wife of the propositus; on death of his first

                wife, propositus married another lady on whom suit

                properties vested after the death of the propositus; however,

                the second wife died intestate and issue less; as a result, the

                plaintiff and defendants 1 to 3 became owners of the suit

                properties, each having one-fourth share. The said suit was

                instituted by impleading several other defendants who had

                been intermeddling with the suit properties. In the suit, the

                defendants 1 to 3 supported the plaintiff’s case. However, the

                other defendants contested the suit by setting up their rights

                through the second wife of the propositus either under an
20
Referred to in Footnote 7
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)              Page 27 of 58
agreement or a Will, or other instruments. The trial court

          discarded the Will and the agreement and decreed the suit

          in part while excluding certain properties. Against the trial

          court decree, two separate appeals were filed. One by those

          who claimed under the agreement; and the other by those

          who claimed under the Will.             During the pendency of the

          appeal, defendant no.2 died, but no application was made for

          substitution of his legal representatives. The High Court,

          however, proceeded to decide the appeals on merit by

          dismissing the appeal of those who claimed under the Will

          and allowing the appeal of those who claimed under the

          agreement. As a result, the property covered by the

          agreement was excluded from partition. Against such

          modification of the decree, the plaintiff filed an appeal by

          special leave before this Court.           In the appeal before this

          Court, one of the points urged was that the whole appeal

          before the High Court had abated due to non-substitution of

          the legal representatives of deceased defendant no.2 and,

          therefore, the High Court’s decree is liable to be set aside.
This Court accepted the submission and after surveying

          several decisions including five-Judge Bench decision of this

          Court in
Sardar Amarjit Singh
(supra) observed:
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)            Page 28 of 58
“45.1. When we apply the principles aforesaid to
                      the present case, it is not far to seek that the said
                      appeal by Defendants 16 to 18, after having
                      abated against Defendant 2 could not have been
                      proceeded against the surviving respondents i.e.,
                      the plaintiff and Defendants 1 and 3. This is for
                      the simple reason that the trial court had
                      specifically returned the findings that the
                      agreement Ext. B-10 was not valid and
                      Defendants 16 to 18 (appellants of AS No.1887
                      of 1988) derived no rights thereunder. The trial
                      court has also ordered that Defendants 13, 14
                      and 16 were liable for mesne profits in respect of
                      the immovable properties in their possession
                      belonging to Annapurnamma till they deliver
                      possession of those items to plaintiff and
                      defendants 1 to 3. Such findings in relation to
                      the invalidity of the agreement Ext. B-10 and
                      consequential decree for partition, for delivery of
                      possession and for recovery of mesne profits
                      attained finality qua Defendant 2 Malempati
                      Radha Krishnamurthy; and his entitlement to
                      one-fourth share in the suit properties (including
                      the property covered by Ext. B-10) also became
                      final when the appeal filed by Defendant 16 to 18
                      abated qua him. If at all the appeal was
                      proceeded with and the alleged agreement Ext.
                      B-10 was upheld (which the High Court has
                      indeed done), inconsistent decrees were bound
                      to come in existence and have in fact come in
                      existence.
45.2. As noticed, the High Court has proceeded
                      to hold that Ext. B-10 agreement is valid and
                      binding on the plaintiff and Defendants 1 to 3.
This part of decree is in stark contrast, and is
                      irreconcilable, with the decree in favour of
                      Defendant 2 which has attained finality that the
                      said agreement Ext. B-10 is neither valid nor
                      binding on Defendant 2. The High Court has
                      gone a step further to say that the plaintiff and
                      Defendants 1 to 3 were under obligation to
                      execute sale deed in favour of defendant 16 to
18. Though making of such an observation in
                      this suit, that heirs of Annapurnamma were
                      under obligation to execute a sale deed in favor
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)               Page 29 of 58
of defendant 6 to 18, remains seriously
                         questionable in itself but, in any event, this
                         observation could not have been made qua the
                         deceased Defendant 2.
46. When the inconsistencies galore are writ
                         large on the face of the record, the inescapable
                         conclusion is that the appeal filed by Defendants
                         16 to 18 could not have proceeded further after
                         its abatement against Defendant 2 (Respondent
3).”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
22.
In
Sunkara Lakhminarasamma vs. Sagi Subba

               Raju and Others21
, three suits were instituted. Suits A and

               B were, inter alia, for: (a) partition; (b) setting aside

               alienation; and (c) eviction of certain defendants from some

               of the properties. Suit C was for specific performance of an

               agreement to sell in respect of one of the suit properties. Trial

               court dismissed suits A and B, but partly decreed suit C to

               the extent of one-third of the property. The first appellate

               court affirmed the decree. Three second appeals were filed

               before the High Court. Two second appeals arising from suits

               A and B were dismissed whereas second appeal arising from

               suit C was allowed and the suit for specific performance was

               decreed fully in terms prayed for. Before this Court, the

               contentions of appellants i.e., plaintiffs in suits A and B were

               that Wills relied by defendants were not proved; moreover,
21
(2019) 11 SCC 787
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)              Page 30 of 58
those bequests conferred no right, therefore, remaining

          defendants, who claimed as transferees from the legatee,

          were liable to be evicted. The respondents in the aforesaid

          case, refuted those contentions and pleaded that the appeals

          were not maintainable since a number of defendants

          (purchasers from the legatee), were deleted from the array of

          parties, and some of the defendants have died and their legal

          representatives were not brought on record; as a result, the

          decree passed in favour of such defendants had attained

          finality. In other words, the validity of the Wills as well as the

          sale deeds stood confirmed qua the deceased/deleted

          defendants and, therefore, the appeals, pending against

          other defendants, were liable to be dismissed in view of the

          fact that if any order is passed adverse to the interest of the

          remaining defendants (i.e., respondents in the appeal), it

          would be in conflict with the judgment and decree which

          stood     confirmed       as   against      the     deceased/   deleted

          defendants. Accepting the aforesaid submissions of the

          respondents, a three-Judge Bench of this Court held:
“13. In the matter on hand, the absence of
                      certain defendants who have been deleted from
                      the array of parties along with the absence of
                      legal representatives of a number of deceased
                      defendants will prevent the court from hearing
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)               Page 31 of 58
the appeals as against the other defendants. We
                         say so because in the event of these appeals
                         being allowed as against the remaining
                         defendants, there would be two contradictory
                         decrees in the same suit in respect of the same
                         subject-matter. One decree would be in favor of
                         the defendants who are deleted or dead and
                         whose legal representatives have not been
                         brought on record; while the other decree would
                         be against the defendants who are still on record
                         in respect of the same subject matter. The
                         subject matter in the suit is the validity of the
                         two Wills. The courts including the Division
                         Bench of the High Court have consistently held
                         that the two Wills are proved, and thus
                         Veeraswamy being the beneficiary under the two
                         Wills had become the absolute owner of the suit
                         properties in question. Such decree has attained
                         finality in favor of the defendants who are either
                         deleted or dead and whose legal representatives
                         have not been brought on record. In case these
                         appeals are allowed in respect of the other
                         defendants, the decree to be passed by this court
                         in these appeals would definitely conflict with the
                         decree already passed in favour of the other
                         defendants.
14. As mentioned supra, the court cannot be
                         called upon to make two inconsistent decrees
                         about the same subject matter. In order to avoid
                         conflicting decrees, the court has no alternative
                         but to dismiss the appeals in their entirety.
15. In view of the above, the appeals fail not only
                         on the ground of non-maintainability, but also
                         on merits, and are dismissed.”
                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
23.
In
Budh Ram and Others vs. Bansi and Others22
plaintiffs instituted a suit for declaration to the effect that

               they and proforma defendant no.6 were co-owners and co-
22
(2010) 11 SCC 476
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                Page 32 of 58
sharers in joint possession to a certain extent of the property

          in dispute. They also prayed for permanent prohibitory

          injunction to restrain the defendants 1 to 5 from ousting

          them. Defendant no.6, namely, Smt Parwatu, did not enter

          appearance in the suit. However, defendants 1 to 5, who were

          appellants before this Court, contested the suit by claiming

          title over the suit land through adverse possession. The trial

          court decreed the suit in favour of the plaintiffs and

          defendant no.6. Against the trial court decree the defendants

          1 to 5 preferred an appeal to the High Court in which

          defendant no.6 was arrayed as one of the respondents.

          However, during the pendency of appeal, defendant no.6 died

          but no substitution was brought within time. Later, when

          substitution application was filed, it was dismissed for want

          of sufficient cause for the delay. Consequent thereto, the

          High Court held that as the trial court had passed a joint

          decree, the appeal stood abated in toto. Challenging the

          order of the High Court, appeal was laid before this Court.

          Affirming the order of the High Court, this Court observed:
“19. In the instant case a declaratory decree was
                      passed in favor of the respondent plaintiffs and
                      Smt Parwatu to the effect that they were co-
                      owners, though, they had specific shares but
                      were held entitled to be in joint possession. The
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)           Page 33 of 58
appellant applicants had sought relief against
                           Smt Parwatu before the first appellate court as
                           there was a decree in her favour, passed by the
                           trial court where Smt Parwatu had been
                           impleaded by the appellant applicants as pro
                           forma respondent. In such a fact situation, she
                           had a right to contest the appeal. Once a decree
                           had been passed in her favor, a right had vested
                           in her favor. On her death on 19-11-2000, the
                           said vested right devolved upon her heirs. Thus,
                           the appeal against Smt. Parwatu stood abated.
                           In the instant case, the first appellate court
                           rejected the application for condonation of delay
                           as well as the substitution of LRs of Smt
                           Parwatu, Respondent 4 therein.
20. The only question remains as to whether the
                           appeal is abated in toto or only in respect of the
                           share of Smt Parwatu. The High Court has
                           rightly reached the conclusion that there was a
                           possibility for the appellate court to reverse the
                           judgment of the trial court and in such an
                           eventuality, there could have been two
                           contradictory decrees, one in favor of Smt
                           Parwatu and the other, in favor of the present
                           appellants. The view taken by the High Court is
                           in consonance with the law
laid down by
this
                           court consistently. The facts of the case do not
                           warrant any further examination of the matter.”
                                                        (Emphasis supplied)
24.
In
Pandit Sri Chand and Others vs. Jagdish

                Parshad Kishan Chand and Others23
five persons stood

                sureties for satisfaction of the decree under a common surety

                bond which recited that the five sureties mortgaged the

                properties specified in the schedule thereto and jointly and

                severally agreed that if any decree was passed against X they
23
Refer to Footnote 7
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                 Page 34 of 58
shall comply with the same and in default the amount

          payable under the decree subject to a ceiling shall be realized

          from the properties mortgaged. In the suit, decree was

          passed which was put to execution. Sureties raised multiple

          objections to execution of the decree against them. The

          execution court rejected the objection and the appellate court

          (i.e., the High Court) confirmed the order of the execution

          court. The matter was appealed to this Court by three out of

          the five sureties. During the pendency of the appeal here, one

          of the appellants died. Application for bringing his LRs on

          record being belated was dismissed for want of sufficient

          cause for the delay. During hearing of the appeal, the

          respondent counsel contended that the appeal had abated in

          its entirety as the heirs had not been brought on record and

          the ground on which the judgment of the High Court

          proceeded was common to all the parties. Accepting the

          submission of the respondent counsel, this Court held:
“6. …The order of the High Court holding that
                      the sureties are liable to satisfy the claim
                      notwithstanding the objections raised by Basant
                      Lal has become final. In the appeal filed by the
                      appellants 1 and 3 if this court holds that the
                      High Court was in error in deciding that the
                      surety bond was not enforceable because it was
                      not registered, or that the first respondent has
                      done some act which has discharged the sureties
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)          Page 35 of 58
from liability under the bond, there would
                      unquestionably be inconsistent orders -- one
                      passed by the High Court holding that the surety
                      bond was enforceable, and the other, the view of
                      this Court that it is not enforceable.
xxx              xxx               xxx
9. When the decree in favor of the respondents is
                      joint and indivisible, the appeal against the
                      respondents,     other     than   the   deceased
                      respondent cannot be proceeded with if the
                      appeal against the deceased respondent has
                      abated.”
25.        The underlying principle in the aforesaid decisions is

          that in respect of the subject matter of a suit or a proceeding

          arising therefrom, the court cannot pass inconsistent

          decrees. In consequence, if, due to non-substitution of LRs

          of a deceased party, the decree qua the deceased party has

          attained finality by abatement of proceedings qua him, the

          Court cannot proceed further if a reversal or modification of

          the decree under appeal would result in conflicting or

          inconsistent decrees. Therefore, in such a situation, the

          appeal would abate in its entirety.
ORDER XLI RULE 4
CPC
CANNOT PREVENT ABATEMENT
          OF AN APPEAL OF THE DECEASED CO-APPELLANT ON
          NON-SUBSTITUTION OF HIS LRS
26.        Now, we shall consider whether the provisions of
Order XLI Rule 4 of CPC
can prevent abatement of an appeal

          of the deceased co-appellant on non-substitution of his LRs.
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)           Page 36 of 58
27.
Order XLI Rule 4 of CPC
provides that where there

               are more plaintiffs or more defendants than one in a suit,

               and the decree appealed from proceeds on any ground

               common to all the plaintiffs or to all the defendants, any one

               of the plaintiffs or the defendants may appeal from the whole

               decree, and thereupon the appellate court may reverse or

               vary the decree in favor of all the plaintiffs or defendants, as

               the case may be.
28.        Interplay between the provisions of Order XXII and
Order XLI Rule 4 of CPC
came for consideration before a

               three-Judge Bench of this Court in Rameshwar Prasad and

               Others vs. Shambehari Lal Jagannath and Another24. In

               that case nine persons including one Kedar Nath instituted

               a suit for ejectment and recovery of rent against two

               defendants on the allegation that defendant 1 was the

               tenant-in-chief who had sub-let the premises to defendant 2.

               The suit for ejectment was decreed against both the

               defendants, and for arrears of rent against defendant 1. On

               appeal by defendant 2, the District Judge set aside the decree

               for ejectment against defendant 2 and confirmed the rest of
24
1963 SCC OnLine SC 146 : AIR 1963 SC 1901 : (1964) 3 SCR 549
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)            Page 37 of 58
the decree against defendant 1. Against this decree, 9

          original plaintiffs filed second appeal in the High Court.

          During the pendency of appeal, appellant 3 died. No

          application for bringing his legal representatives on the

          record was made within the prescribed time. Later, however,

          two applications were filed in the High Court. One, for

          condonation of the delay in filing the application for

          substitution and the other for substitution in which it was

          prayed that the sons of Kedar Nath, the deceased, be

          substituted in place of the deceased. Those two applications

          were rejected with the result that the appeal stood abated as

          against Kedar Nath. When the appeal of the appellants, other

          than Kedar Nath, came up for hearing, a preliminary

          objection was taken for the respondent that the entire appeal

          had abated. On behalf of the surviving appellants it was

          contended that the deceased belonged to a joint Hindu family

          and other members of the family were already on the record

          and that it was not necessary to bring on record any other

          person. The court allowed parties to file proof of the deceased

          being a member of the joint Hindu family. On exchange of

          affidavits in that regard, a serious dispute regarding

          existence of a joint Hindu family surfaced. Consequently, at
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)      Page 38 of 58
the hearing of the appeal, the only point urged on behalf of

          the surviving appellants was that they were competent to

          continue the appeal in view of
Order XLI Rule 4 of CPC
. This

          contention, however, was rejected by the High Court and the

          appeal was declared to have abated. Aggrieved by this, the

          appellants appealed to this Court. One of the contentions

          raised before this court was that the surviving appellants

          could have instituted the appeal against the entire decree in

          view of the provisions of Order XLI Rule 4 of the Code; that

          they were, therefore, competent to continue the appeal even

          after the death of Kedar Nath and that the court could have

          reversed or varied the whole decree in favor of all the original

          plaintiffs and could have granted relief with respect to the

          rights and interests of Kedar Nath as well. Rejecting the

          aforesaid contention, this Court, in reference to the

          provisions of Oreder XLI
Rule 1 of CPC
, held:
“These provisions enable one of the plaintiffs or
                      one of the defendants to file an appeal against
                      the entire decree. The second appeal filed in the
                      High Court was not filed by any one or by even
                      some of the plaintiffs as an appeal against the
                      whole decree, but was filed by all the plaintiffs
                      jointly, and, therefore, was not an appeal to
                      which the provisions of Rule 4 of Order 41 could
                      apply.
The appeal could not have been taken to be an
                      appeal filed by some of the plaintiffs against the
                      whole decree in pursuance of the provisions of
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)            Page 39 of 58
Rule 4 of Order 41 from the date when the appeal
                      abated so far as Kedar Nath was concerned. If
                      the appeal could be treated to have been so filed,
                      then, it would have been filed beyond the period
                      prescribed for the appeal. At that time, the
                      decrees stood against the surviving plaintiffs and
                      the legal representatives of Kedar Nath. The legal
                      representatives could not have taken advantage
                      of Rule 4 of Order 41. It follows that Rule 4 of
                      Order 41 would not be available to the surviving
                      plaintiffs at that time.
Further, the principle behind the provisions of
                      Rule 4 seems to be that any one of the plaintiffs
                      or defendants, in filing such an appeal,
                      represents all the other non-appealing plaintiffs
                      or defendants as he wants the reversal or
                      modification of the decree in favor of them as
                      well, in view of the fact that the original decree
                      proceeded on a ground common to all of them.
                      Kedar Nath was alive when the appeal was filed
                      and was actually one of the appellants. The
                      surviving appellants cannot be said to have filed
                      the appeal as representing Kedar Nath.
                      Kedar Nath’s appeal has abated and the decree
                      in favor of the respondents has become final
                      against his legal representatives. His legal
                      representatives cannot eject the defendants from
                      the premises in suit. It will be against the scheme
                      of the Code to hold that Rule 4 of Order 41
                      empowered the Court to pass a decree in favor of
                      the legal representatives of the deceased on
                      hearing an appeal by the surviving appellants
                      even though the decree against him has become
                      final. This court said in
State of Punjab versus
                      Nathu Ram
:
“The abatement of an appeal means
                            not only that the decree between the
                            appellant and the deceased respondent
                            has become final, but also, as a
                            necessary corollary, that the appellate
                            court cannot, in any way, modify that
                            decree directly or indirectly. The
                            reason is plain. It is that in absence of
                            the legal representatives of the
                            deceased respondent, the appellate
                            court cannot determine anything
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)             Page 40 of 58
between the appellant and the legal
                            representatives which may affect the
                            rights of the legal representatives
                            under the decree. It is immaterial that
                            the modification which the court will
                            do is one to which exception can or
                            cannot be taken.”
                      No question of the provisions of Rule 4 of Order
                      41 overriding the provisions of Rule 9 of Order
                      22 arises. The two deal with different stages of
                      the     appeal    and     provide     for    different
                      contingencies. Rule 4 of Order 41 applies to the
                      stage when an appeal is filed and empowers one
                      of the plaintiffs or defendants to file an appeal
                      against     the    entire    decree     in     certain
                      circumstances. He can take advantage of this
                      provision, but he may not. Once an appeal has
                      been filed by all the plaintiffs the provisions of
                      Order 41, Rule 4 became unavailable. Order 22
                      operates during the pendency of an appeal and
                      not at its institution. If some party dies during
                      the pendency of the appeal, his legal
                      representatives have to be brought on record
                      within the period of limitation. If that is not done
                      the appeal by the deceased appellant abates and
                      does not proceed any further. There is thus no
                      inconsistency between the provisions of Rule 9 of
                      Order 22 and those of Rule 4 of
Order 41 CPC
.
They operate at different stages and provide for
                      different contingencies. There is nothing
                      common in their provisions which make the
                      provisions of one interfere in any way with those
                      of the other.
We do not consider it necessary to discuss the
                      cases referred to at the hearing. Suffice it to say
                      that the majority of the High Courts have taken
                      the correct view that the appellate court has no
                      power to proceed with the appeal and to reverse
                      and vary the decree in favor of all plaintiffs or
                      defendants under Order 41, Rule 4 when the
                      decree proceeds on a ground common to all the
                      plaintiffs or defendants, if all the plaintiffs or the
                      defendants appeal from the decree and any of
                      them dies and the appeal abates so far as he is
                      concerned under Order 22 Rule 3.”
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                Page 41 of 58
29.        The decision of this Court in Rameshwar Prasad

            (supra) was followed in
Pandit Sri Chand
(supra) and the

            same principle of law has been adopted in a recent two-Judge

            Bench decision of this Court in
Goli Vijayalakshmi and

            Others vs. Yenduj Sathiraju (Dead
) through LRs and

            Others25 where this Court declined to accept the argument

            that despite non-substitution of LRs of a deceased appellant,

            the other appellants could prosecute the appeal with the aid

            of
Order XLI Rule 4 of CPC
.           The relevant portion of the

            judgment is extracted below:
“23. The submission of the learned counsel for
                       the appellants is that even if the appeals stood
                       abated qua Appellant 2, the other appellants
                       would be entitled to prosecute the appeals
                       relying on the principle of Order 41 Rules 4 and
                       33
CPC
. Suffice it to say that once the appeal
                       stood abated against Appellant 2 (Defendant 2)
                       and the decree which stands confirmed qua
                       Appellant 2 (Defendant 2) cannot indirectly be
                       reopened to challenge at the behest of persons
                       claiming through him by relying on provisions of
                       Order 41 Rules 4 and 33
CPC
as prayed for.”
30.
In
Mahabir Prasad vs. Jage Ram and Others26
,

            this Court explained Rameshwar Prasad (supra) in the light

            of an earlier decision of this Court in
Ratan Lal Shah vs.

            Firm Lalmandas Chhadammalal27
and thereby limited its
25
(2019) 11 SCC 352
26
(1971) 1 SCC 265
27
(1969) 2 SCC 70
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)           Page 42 of 58
applicability to a situation where the deceased party was a

          co-appellant and not the one impleaded as a proforma-

          respondent.
In
Mahabir Prasad
(supra) this Court held that

          if a decree is made on common ground against the plaintiffs

          or the defendants and the appeal against the same is filed by

          any one or some of the plaintiffs, or defendants, as the case

          may be, by impleading the remaining of those plaintiff(s) or

          defendant(s) as proforma-respondent(s), on non-substitution

          of LRs of such proforma respondent(s) the appeal would not

          abate as the appellants would be entitled to prosecute the

          appeal with the aid of
Order XLI Rule 4 of CPC
. The relevant

          portion of the judgment is extracted below:
“5.
In support of their view the High Court relied
                      upon the judgment of this court in
Rameshwar
                      Prasad v. Shyam Beharilal Jagannath
. That was a
                      case in which nine persons instituted a suit for a
                      decree in ejectment and for recovery of rent against
                      two defendants and obtained a decree. In appeal
                      the District Judge set aside the decree, against one
                      of the defendants. The plaintiffs filed a second
                      appeal in the High Court and when the appeal was
                      pending one of the plaintiffs (appellants in the High
                      Court) died. No application for bringing his legal
                      representatives on the record was made within the
                      prescribed time. The respondents objected that the
                      entire appeal had abated because the interest of the
                      surviving appellants and of the deceased appellant
                      was joint and indivisible and that in the event of
                      the success of the appeal there would be two
                      inconsistent and contradictory decrees. The
                      surviving appellants claimed that the appeal was
                      maintainable on the ground that without
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)             Page 43 of 58
impleading the plaintiff who had died they could
                      have appealed against the entire decree in view of
                      the provisions of
Order 41, Rule 4 of the Code of
                      Civil Procedure
and on that account they were
                      competent to continue the appeal, even after the
                      death of one of the joint decree holders and
                      abatement of the appeal so far as he was
                      concerned, and the court had the power to hear the
                      appeal and to reverse or vary the whole decree. This
                      court held that the provisions of
Order 41, Rule 4
                      of the Code of Civil Procedure
were not applicable
                      for the second appeal in the High Court was filed
                      by all the plaintiffs jointly, and the surviving
                      appellants could not be said to have filed the appeal
                      as representing the deceased appellant. The
Court
                      further held
that the appellate court had no power
                      to proceed to hear the appeal and to reverse or vary
                      decree in favor of all the plaintiffs or defendants
                      under
Order 41, Rule 4 of the Code of Civil
                      Procedure
, when the decree proceeded on the
                      ground common to all the plaintiffs, or defendants,
                      if all the plaintiffs or the defendants appealed from
                      the decree and any of them died, and the appeal
                      abated in so far as he was concerned under
Order
                      22, Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure
.
Rameshwar          Prasad      case    is   obviously
                      distinguishable from the present case. In
                      Rameshwar Prasad case all the plaintiffs whose
                      suit had been dismissed had filed an appeal and
                      thereafter one of them died and his heirs were not
                      brought on the record. In the present case there is
                      an order against the decree holders but all the
                      decree holders did not appeal; only one of them
                      appealed and the other two were joined as party
                      respondents.
6.
In a later judgment of this court in
Ratan Lal
                      Shah v. Firm Lalmandas Chhadammalal
the
                      plaintiffs obtained joint decree against two persons
                      – Ratan Lal and Mohan Singh. Against the decree
                      Ratan Lal alone appealed to the High Court of
                      Allahabad. Mohan Singh was impleaded as a party
                      respondent to the appeal. Notice of appeals sent to
                      Mohan Singh was returned unserved, and no steps
                      were taken to serve him with notice of the appeal.
                      The High Court dismissed the appeal holding that
                      there was a joint decree against Ratan Lal and
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)             Page 44 of 58
Mohan Singh in a suit founded on a joint cause of
                      action and the decree against Mohan Singh had
                      become final. The appellant could not, on that
                      account claimed to be heard in his appeal; if he was
                      heard and his claim was upheld, the High Court
                      observed that there would be two conflicting
                      decisions between the same parties and in the
                      same suit based on the same cause of action. This
                      court set aside the judgment of the High Court
                      observing that even though Mohan Singh was not
                      served with notice of appeal, the appeal filed by
                      Ratan Lal was maintainable, in view of the
                      provisions of
Order 41 Rule 4 of the Code of Civil
                      Procedure
.
In
Ratan Lal Shah
case this court
                      allowed the appeal to be prosecuted, even though
                      one of the joint decree-holders impleaded as a party
                      respondent had not been served with the notice of
                      appeal. In the present case one of the respondents
                      had died and his heirs have not been brought on
                      the record.
No distinction in principle may be made
                      between
Ratan Lal Shah
case and the present case.
                      Competence of the appellate authority to pass a
                      decree appropriate to the nature of the dispute in
                      an appeal filed by one of several persons against
                      whom a decree is made on a ground which is
                      common to him and others is not lost clearly
                      because of the person who was jointly interested in
                      the claim has been made a party respondent and
                      on his death his heirs have not been brought on the
                      record. Power of the appellate court under Order
                      41, Rule 4, to vary or modify the decree of a
                      subordinate court arises when one of the persons
                      out of many against whom a decree or order has
                      been made on a ground which was common to him
                      and others has appealed. That power may be
                      exercised when other persons who were parties to
                      the proceeding before the subordinate court and
                      against whom a decree proceeded on a ground
                      which was common to the appellant and to those
                      other persons are either not impleaded as parties
                      to the appeal or are impleaded as respondents. The
                      view taken by the High Court cannot therefore be
                      sustained.”
                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)            Page 45 of 58
31.        Upon consideration of the decisions on the interplay

          between the provisions of Order XLI Rule 4 and
Order XXII

          of CPC
qua abatement of an appeal, the law that emerges is

          summarized below:
i.   Rule 4 of Order XLI applies to the stage when an

                appeal is filed and empowers one of the plaintiffs or

                defendants to file an appeal against the entire decree in

                certain circumstances. A plaintiff or defendant can take

                advantage of this provision, but he may not. Therefore,

                once an appeal is filed by all the plaintiffs or defendants

                aggrieved by the decree, the provisions of Order XLI,

                Rule 4 become unavailable.
ii. Rule 4 of Order XLI is to enable one of the parties to

                a suit to obtain relief in appeal when the decree appealed

                from proceeds on a ground common to him and others.
The court in such an appeal may reverse or vary the

                decree in favour of all the parties who are having the

                same interest as the appellant, even though they have

                not appealed against the decree. This is so, because it

                is not the law that when a decree is passed on a ground

                common to all the parties, the appeal is to be filed by all

                the parties or not at all.
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)        Page 46 of 58
iii. Order    XXII     applies    without     exception   to   all

                proceedings covered by it.             It operates during the

                pendency of a proceeding including an appeal and not

                at its institution. Therefore, if an appellant dies during

                the pendency of the appeal, his legal representatives

                must be brought on record within the period of

                limitation. If that is not done, the appeal by the deceased

                appellant abates.
iv. Where an appeal is filed by any one or some of the

                plaintiffs, or defendants, aggrieved by the decree, by

                impleading other such plaintiff(s) or defendant(s) as

                proforma-respondent(s), in the event of death of such

                proforma-respondent, the benefit of the provisions of

                Order XLI Rule 4 would be available to continue the

                appeal regardless of substitution of LRs of such

                proforma-respondent.
v. There is no inconsistency between the provisions of

                Order XXII and those of Rule 4 of
Order XLI CPC
. They

                operate at different stages and provide for different

                contingencies. There is nothing common in their

                provisions which make the provisions of one interfere in

                any way with those of the other.
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)               Page 47 of 58
DECISIONS CITED ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS
32.      Now we shall consider the decisions cited by the

                learned counsel for the appellants. The decisions cited by

                the learned counsel for the appellant are referred to in

                footnote 6, which shall be dealt with serially below:
(
a) Delhi Development Authority vs. Diwan Chand

                      Anand and Others28
: In this case two out of six

                      persons, in whose favour the deeds of conveyance were

                      executed, instituted a suit against the state-respondents

                      including DDA by impleading the remaining co-owners

                      as defendants. The suit was decreed by trial court

                      against which DDA filed appeal impleading plaintiffs as

                      well as other defendants, who were alleged co-owners,

                      as respondents. One of the plaintiff-respondent and

                      some of the defendant-respondent who were co-owners

                      died during the pendency of the appeal. On ground of

                      non-substitution of all the heirs of deceased plaintiff-
respondent and the legal representatives of the deceased

                      defendant-respondent(s) who were also one of the co-

                      owners, the appellate court declared the appeal to have
28
See Footnote 6
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)             Page 48 of 58
abated. When the matter travelled to this court, it was,

                      inter alia, argued on behalf of the appellant that the suit

                      was instituted by some of the co-owners for self and on

                      behalf of the other co-owners, as is permissible in law,

                      and since some of the heirs of the deceased plaintiff-

                      respondent were already on record, the appeal would not

                      abate on non-substitution of the legal representatives of

                      deceased defendant-respondent as their estate stood

                      duly represented by the other co-sharer, namely, the

                      plaintiff-respondent. In that context, this Court while

                      setting aside the decision of the High Court observed:
“34. As observed and held by this court in A.
                            Vishwanatha Pillai29, the co-owner is as much an
                            owner of the entire property as a sole owner of the
                            property. No co-owner has a definite right, title and
                            interest in any particular item or a portion thereof.
                            On the other hand, he has the right, title and
                            interest in every part and parcel of the joint
                            property. He owns several parts of the composite
                            property along with others and it cannot be said
                            that he is only a part owner or a fractional owner
                            in the property. It is observed that, therefore, one
                            co-owner can file a suit and recover the property
                            against strangers and the decree would enure to all
                            the co-owners. The aforesaid principle of law would
                            be applicable in the appeal also. Thus, in the
                            instant case, when the original plaintiffs -- two co-
                            owners instituted the suit with respect to the entire
                            suit land jointly owned by the plaintiffs as well as
                            defendants 9 to 39 and when some of the
                            respondent-defendants in appeal died, it can be
                            said that estate is represented by others, more
29
A. Vishwanatha Pillai v. LAO, (1991) 4 SCC17
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                   Page 49 of 58
particularly the plaintiffs/heirs of the plaintiffs and
                          it cannot be said that on not bringing the legal
                          representatives     some     of    the     co-sharers,
                          respondent- defendants in appeal, the appeal
                          would abate as a whole.”
                                                          (Emphasis supplied)


                           In our view, this decision would not be of much help

                      to the appellants herein because here there was no suit

                      by co-sharer(s) for self as well as for other non-suing co-
sharer. Even the appeal was jointly filed by both the

                      defendants against the decree and not by one of them

                      with the aid of
Order XLI Rule 4 CPC
. Therefore, the

                      surviving co-sharer was not representing the estate of

                      the deceased co-sharer.
(
b) Sakharam (since deceased) Through LRs &

                      Another vs. Kishanrao30
: In this case one of the two

                      plaintiff-respondents in a second appeal died and the

                      High Court dismissed the appeal as having abated on

                      non-substitution of his LRs. In that context, this Court

                      while allowing the appeal observed:
“6. When two plaintiffs joined together and secured
                          a decree of declaration and possession of an
                          immovable property, the death of one of the decree
                          holders will not make the second appeal abate. As
                          against the surviving successful plaintiff, the cause
                          of action survived. Abatement occurs only when the
30
See Footnote 6
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                   Page 50 of 58
cause of action does not survive upon or against
                          the surviving party.”

                           In our view, the aforesaid decision, which is by a

                      two-Judge Bench, cannot be taken as a binding

                      precedent since it does not at all deal with the possibility

                      of conflicting or inconsistent decrees arising from

                      abatement    of   appeal   qua the      deceased   plaintiff-
respondent. In fact, the judgment does not at all deal

                      with earlier binding precedents of larger Benches

                      including the one rendered by a five-Judge Bench which

                      we have discussed in the earlier part of this judgment.
We, therefore, hold the same to be per incuriam.
(c) Gurnam Singh (Dead) through
LRs and Others vs.

                      Gurbachan Kaur (Dead) by LRs.31
: In this case, it was

                      held by this Court that where parties to an appeal had

                      expired and the legal representatives of the deceased

                      parties were not brought on record the proceedings

                      would abate and the decree passed in ignorance thereof

                      would be a nullity.   In our view, this judgment is of no

                      help to the appellant.
31
See Footnote 6
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)               Page 51 of 58
(
d) State of Punjab vs. Shamlal Murari32
: This

                      decision does not deal with the issue of abatement. We,

                      therefore, find it not relevant for discussion.
(
e) Baij Nath & Another vs. Ram Bharose and

                      Others33
: In this case a Full Bench of the Allahabad

                      High Court held:
“36. …
1.    If, in a suit, a plaintiff, makes a claim
                          against a number of defendants on common
                          grounds and all the defendants also contest the
                          suit on common grounds and the suit is decided
                          in favor of the plaintiff against all the defendants,
                          an appeal filed by all the defendants can be
                          heard in favor of the remaining defendants after
                          one of the appealing defendants has died during
                          the pendency of the appeal and his legal
                          representatives have not been brought on record
                          so that his appeal has abated, only if the rights
                          and interests of the surviving defendants were
                          not joint and indivisible with those of the
                          deceased defendant, and in the event of the
                          success of the appeal, it does not lead to two
                          inconsistent and contradictory decrees.
2.    While the appeal of the remaining
                          defendants can be heard, the decision in it will
                          not enure to the benefit of the legal
                          representatives of the deceased defendant
                          appellant.”
                                                         (Emphasis supplied)

                         In our view
,
the above decision
of the Allahabad High

                      Court makes it clear that the appeal filed can be heard

                      in favour of the remaining defendant-appellants only if
32
See Footnote 6
33
See Footnote 6
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                   Page 52 of 58
the rights and interests of the surviving defendants were

                 not joint and indivisible with those of the deceased

                 defendant, and in the event of the success of the appeal,

                 it does not lead to two inconsistent and contradictory

                 decrees which is also the law
laid down by
five-Judge

                 Bench of this Court in
Sardar Amarjit Singh Kalra
(supra).
CONTINUANCE   OF   APPEAL  MAY   RESULT                                IN
          INCONSISTENT OR CONTRADICTORY DECREES
33.        In the instant case, the civil suit was instituted by

          the first respondent (i.e., Parasram), inter alia, for declaration

          of title and possession of suit property by claiming that his

          grandfather (i.e., Tej Singh) was the sole owner of the suit

          property which he got constructed from his own funds and

          was recorded as such in the municipal records since 1938;

          that    on    his   death    in   1965,     plaintiff’s   father’s   (i.e.,

          Ramswarup) name was mutated in municipal records on

          1.3.1967 and he became owner in possession; in between,

          defendants presented application for mutation which was

          rejected with liberty to them to bring a suit before competent

          court, which they did not; that tenants have been residing in

          the suit property since 1937 and they used to pay rent to the
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                Page 53 of 58
plaintiff’s grandfather and on his death to the plaintiff’s

          father; that on 9.10.1979, partition was carried out,

          according to which, suit property came to the share of the

          plaintiff and plaintiff’s name was recorded in municipal

          records vide resolution dated 31.1.1981; that defendants

          had been residing in the third floor of the disputed building

          as tenants of previous owner on a monthly rent of Rs.50/-

          p.m. and since 9.10.1979 they are tenants of the plaintiff;

          that defendants encroached upon the vacant portion of the

          ground floor of the disputed building and opened a Hotel for

          their son, in respect of which plaintiff served notice on

          12.12.82, but despite service of notice, possession has not

          been handed over; that, in fact, defendants sublet certain

          portion of ground floor to Raghuveer without the permission

          of the plaintiff, for this reason also, plaintiff is entitled to

          possession of the building from the defendants; that

          defendants denied ownership of the plaintiff and on this

          ground also plaintiff is entitled to possession. Thus, by

          claiming termination of tenancy, suit was instituted.
34.        Defendants Suresh Chandra and Ram Babu filed

          written statement, inter alia, claiming that disputed building

          has never been in the ownership of Tej Singh, if his name
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)       Page 54 of 58
was mutated in the revenue record it was by playing fraud.
Similarly, if father of the plaintiff got his name mutated it

          was by fraud, which confers no right or title. Defendants

          claimed title and possession over the suit property extending

          for last 38 years as owners thereof. They denied tenancy and

          claimed that father of the defendants, namely, Gokul Prasad,

          received the property in mutual partition held with his

          brothers, namely, Tej Singh, Jwala Prasad, Gajadhar Prasad

          in the year 1947 and after the death of Gokul Prasad in the

          year     1950,    defendants       became      complete   owners   in

          possession over disputed buildings. With the aforesaid

          averments, they prayed for dismissal of the suit.
35.        The trial court dismissed the suit, inter alia, holding

          that plaintiffs failed to prove that they were the exclusive

          owner of the suit property and they also failed to establish

          that defendants were tenants thereof.
36.        Aggrieved with the judgment and decree of the trial

          court, the first respondent filed civil appeal. The first

          appellate court allowed the appeal and decreed the plaintiff’s

          suit, inter alia, holding that plaintiff is the owner of the suit

          property; defendants’ father Gokul Prasad did not get the

          property in partition, therefore defendants who claim
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)            Page 55 of 58
through Gokul Prasad are not the owners, rather are

          tenants.
37.        The aforesaid facts make it clear that the defendants

          claimed a joint interest in the suit property flowing from their

          father Gokul Prasad whereas the plaintiff claimed title

          through his own father with an additional claim that the

          defendants were his tenants through his predecessors-in-

          interest. The first appellate court accepted plaintiff’s case

          and held the plaintiff to be owner of the suit property and

          defendants to be its tenants. In such circumstances, if, on

          non-substitution of the legal representatives of one of the

          defendant-appellants, the second appeal abated qua him, the

          decree as against him, holding him to be tenant and plaintiff

          the owner, attained finality. Therefore, if the second appeal

          is allowed to proceed, on it being allowed, possibility of

          conflicting and contradictory decrees, in respect of same

          subject matter, coming into existence cannot be ruled out

          because one, which attained finality, held the plaintiff to be

          owner of the suit property and the deceased defendant its

          tenant whereas the other could hold the surviving defendant

          to be its owner. What is important is that both defendants

          had set up a common defense of having a joint title over the
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)        Page 56 of 58
suit property flowing through their father, who, admittedly,

          was not found owner by the first appellate court. In such

          circumstances, the decree that came into existence was an

          indivisible/inseparable decree and if the second appeal had

          been allowed to proceed there was possibility of conflicting

          decrees coming into existence, hence, abatement of the

          second appeal qua the deceased defendant-appellant would

          result in abatement of the entire second appeal. Issue (b) is

          decided in the above terms.
CONCLUSIONS:
38.        In the light of discussion above, we summarize our

          conclusions as under:
(a) The finding returned by the High Court that there

                was no sufficient cause for condonation of delay in filing

                application for substitution and setting aside abatement

                does not suffer from any illegality or perversity as to

                warrant an interference.
(b) On abatement of second appeal qua the second

                appellant Ram Babu, the entire second appeal abated as

                continuance of the second appeal would have given rise

                to a possibility of inconsistent decrees i.e., one in favour

                of the plaintiff against the deceased defendant-appellant
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)         Page 57 of 58
and the other in favour of the surviving defendant

                appellant, even though both defendants claimed joint

                interest in the suit property flowing from their father.
(c) As the second appeal was jointly filed by the two

                defendants, the benefit of the provisions of
Order XLI

                Rule 4 CPC
was not available to the surviving defendant

                appellant to continue with the second appeal and seek

                for reversal or modification of the decree operating

                against the deceased-appellant as well.
39.        In view of our conclusions above, we find no merit in

          these appeals. The same are accordingly dismissed. Pending

          application(s), if any, stand disposed of. Parties to bear their

          own costs.
……..….............................................J.
                                     (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)




                                     ……..................................................J.
                                                                 (MANOJ MISRA)

          NEW DELHI;
JULY 18, 2025
Civil Appeal Nos……….of 2025 (SLP (C) Nos. 15900-15902/2022)                      Page 58 of 58