[Cites
17
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Jai Prakash vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 16 July, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Vikram Nath
2025 INSC 861




                                                                           REPORTABLE


                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 331 - 332 OF 2022


                         JAI PRAKASH                                  … APPELLANT(S)


                                                        Versus


                         STATE OF UTTARAKHAND                         …RESPONDENT(S)




                                                  JUDGMENT
SANJAY KAROL, J.
Signature Not Verified   1.    A simple afternoon of play and frolic with family members
Digitally signed by
NAVEEN D
Date: 2025.07.16
18:11:55 IST
yielded catastrophic results for a 10-year-old female child. The
Reason:
most innocent desire of either a candy or a toy was exploited in the
Criminal Appeal Nos.331-332/2022                 Page 1 of 17
worst manner possible by the appellant. He lured innocent children
to his dwelling, took his pick from among them and let the others
go. He allegedly assaulted and exploited her, killed her and then, if
the prosecution is to be believed, lied to the parents of the victim
saying that he was not aware of her whereabouts. The Courts below
have concurrently found the appellant to be guilty of offences
against the victim and also of taking her life. This Court is now
called upon to examine the correctness of these conclusions.
2.      The present Appeals arise from the final judgment and order
dated 7th January 2020, passed by the High Court of Uttarakhand at
Nainital in Criminal Jail Appeal No.64 of 2019 & Criminal
Reference No.02 of 2019, whereby the Judgment and sentencing
Order dated 26th/28th August 2019 passed by Fast Track Court,
Special Judge (POCSO)/Additional District and Sessions Judge,
Dehradun, in Special Sessions Trial Number 119/2018, convicting
the appellant under
Sections 376
,
377
,
302
of the Indian Penal Code,
18601 and Section 5/6 of the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Act, 20122 came to be affirmed. The punishment handed
down to the appellant by the Courts below was of death penalty, for
the murder of the victim, whose name3 stands redacted in view of
the judgment of this Court in
Nipun Saxena v. Union of India4
.
1
hereinafter referred to as ‘
IPC
’
2
hereinafter referred to as ‘POCSO’
3
hereinafter referred to as ‘X’
4
(2019) 2 SCC 703
Criminal Appeal Nos.331-332/2022                  Page 2 of 17
Prosecution Case
3.     The case set out by the prosecution against the appellant, as
emerging from the record and also as set out by the Courts below, is
as under :
3.1   On 28th July 2018, at around 12:30 p.m., while playing
       outside her house, with cousins and friends, X the child of
       PW1 went missing. Concerned, PW1 - Sant Pratap (father of
       the victim) started looking for his daughter. On enquiry, from
       other children present, he got to know that the appellant took
       all the children to his hut and gave them Rs.10/- each to go to
       the shop. Somwati - PW13, his sister-in-law also corroborated
       the version of the children. When he asked the appellant
       regarding the whereabouts of her daughter, he was apparently
       told that she had taken the gift of 10 rupees note and left the
       place. Eventually, after a few hours of exasperated searching,
       which included Kulbhushan - PW2 sending one Mohd. Alam
- PW3, to search the hut of the appellant, the victim was found
       dead underneath empty cement bags. PW1, therefore, lodged
       an FIR at P.S. Sahaspur, District – Dehradun. It was stated
       therein that he resided with his family in a hut, in the under-
construction premises of Shivalik Engineering College,
       narrating the facts as above, asking for action to be taken
       against the appellant.
Criminal Appeal Nos.331-332/2022                   Page 3 of 17
3.2      After registration of the abovementioned FIR, the
       Investigating Officer commenced the investigation. The
       inquest report was prepared, and the body of X was sent for
       post-mortem to Dr. Chirag Bahugana - PW4. The cause of
       death came to be determined as ‘manual throttling by hand
       causes asphyxia.’ After completion of the investigation,
       charges were framed against the appellant under
Sections
       302
,
201
,
376
and
377
IPC and
Section 6
of the POCSO Act.
Reasoning of the Courts below
4.     The Trial Court, after careful consideration of the evidence-
on-record, vide judgment and order dated 26th/28th August 2019,
convicted the appellant under
Sections 376(AB)
,
377
,
302
of the
IPC and
Section 5
/
6
of POCSO.              The Court arrived at the
following findings :
4.1 Master Rakesh - PW11, Rani @ Radha Rani - PW12, and
             PW13 - Somwati have proven that X was last seen with
             the appellant;
4.2 PW1, PW2, PW3, SI Lakshmi Joshi - PW5, Rani W/o Sant
             Partap - PW8 and PW12 have proven the recovery of the
             body of X from the hut of the appellant. Their testimonies
             have withstood cross-examination;
Criminal Appeal Nos.331-332/2022                    Page 4 of 17
4.3 The DNA evidence obtained from X, matches with the
              samples of the appellant. Dr. Manoj Kumar Aggarwal,
              Scientific     Officer,   Forensic   Science    Laboratory,
              Dehradun - PW17, has proven the report, Ex.Ka-43, to
              that effect;
4.4 In view of the above circumstances, the prosecution has
              proven its case beyond reasonable doubt;
4.5 The cruelty of the crime is displayed by strangulation by
              hand of a defenseless child. The case at hand is ‘rarest of
              rare’ and, therefore, the punishment of death penalty is
              just and proper;
4.6 The order of sentencing highlighted the grave nature of the
              crime. It was observed that the rarest of the rare test comes
              into play when a person, by way of his crime which is
              heinous or brutal, challenges the harmonious and peaceful
              co-existence of the society, with reference to
Sunderajan
              v. State5
. It was held that the accused was in his 30s and
              himself is the father of two children with one of these
              children being similar in age to X. Since, as per his age,
              he was mature enough to understand the implications of
              his acts, no benefit could be given on this count. In the
              sum total of facts and circumstances of this case, the
5
(2013) 3 SCC 215
Criminal Appeal Nos.331-332/2022                       Page 5 of 17
extreme penalty of death by hanging was found to be
            justified.
5.       The appellant preferred an Appeal before the High Court of
Uttarakhand at Nainital, which came to be numbered as Criminal
Jail Appeal No.64 of 2019. A reference for confirmation of the
death sentence was also submitted to the High Court, which came to
be numbered as Criminal Reference No.02 of 2019, in consonance
with
Section 366
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. Vide the
impugned Judgment, the High Court confirmed the conviction and
death sentence awarded to the appellant, inter alia, recording that
the appellant himself admitted to being in his room on the date of
the offence and since the body of X was also found in his room, later
point to his having committed the crime. That apart, the DNA of
the appellant matched with the DNA which was found on the
undergarments of X, thereby directly pointing to his involvement
and guilt. The argument that PW-11 and PW12, who are child
witnesses, have been tutored, was rejected on account of the fact that
there is other evidence corroborating their statements against the
appellant. Regarding DNA, evidence reference has been made to
the report prepared by PW17, the relevant extract whereof is as
under:
“Conclusion:-
The DNA test performed on the exhibits provided as
            sufficient to conclude that,
Criminal Appeal Nos.331-332/2022                    Page 6 of 17
1. The DNA obtained from Exhibits-4 and 5 (hair
              recovered from deceased and underwear of accused) are
              from a single male human source and matching with the
              DNA obtained from the Exhibit-24 (blood sample of
              accused).
2. The DNA obtained from the Exhibit-9 (underwear of
              deceased) is matching with the DNA obtained from the
              Exhibits – 23 and 24 (blood sample of deceased and
              blood sample of accused).
3. The DNA obtained from the Exhibits –
              13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20 and 22 (throat swab, throat
              slide, internal vaginal swab, internal vaginal slide,
              internal vaginal swab, internal vaginal slide and nails
              clipping of victim) are from a single female human
              source and matching with the DNA obtained from
              Exhibit-23 (blood sample of deceased).”


      On the aspect of sentencing, the concurring judgment makes
      reference to a judgment of this Court
Ram Naresh v. State of
      Chattisgarh6
which has attempted to list out aggravating and
      mitigating circumstances. In the end, it was observed that there
      was no doubt as to the culpability of the appellant and in
      actuality, the conclusion reached by the Court was from a point
      of absolute certainty that this case qualified as the rarest of rare.
Issue for consideration
6.        The question that arises for consideration before this Court is
whether the conviction and sentence imposed by the Trial Court, as
affirmed by the High Court, are sustainable in law or not.
6
(2012) 4 SCC 257
Criminal Appeal Nos.331-332/2022                          Page 7 of 17
Our View
7.     We have heard the learned Senior counsel for the appellant
and counsel for the Respondent-State. The case of the prosecution,
relies on the following circumstances against the appellant:
(a) Recovery of the body of X from the appellant’s hut.
(b) Last seen theory.
(c) DNA evidence, linking the appellant to X.
8.     17 witnesses came to be examined by the prosecution. A
tabular chart capturing their role in the investigation and their
relationship with X is as below:
PW         Name                    Role               Relation to
                                                                X
       1.   Sant Pratap     Complainant / Spot witness      Father of X
       2.   Kulbhushan      Spot witness                     Employer
       3.   Mohd. Naiyar    Spot witness / Recovered dead        -
                            body
       4.   Dr.      Chirag Conducted post-mortem         Doctor
            Bahugana
       5.   S.I.    Lakshmi Initiated panchanama of          -
            Joshi           deceased / Recovery of dead
                            body
       6.   Yogesh          Resided with the appellant       -
       7.   Constable       Recorded GD entry of the         -
            Harishankar     crime in question
       8.   Rani            Spot witness                Mother of X
       9.   Prasun Shukla   Verified age of X           Principal of
                                                          School
      10.   SI Raj Vikram Sent items for FSL                 -
            Singh Panwar
      11.   Master Rakesh   Child witness (last seen)     Cousin
Criminal Appeal Nos.331-332/2022                   Page 8 of 17
12.   Rani            Child witness (last seen)         Cousin
      13.   Somwati         Spot witness                     Aunt of X
      14.   Constable       Sent case property for FSL           -
            Rajeev Kumar    testing
      15.   Dr. R.C. Arya   Conducted              medical         -
                            examination of the appellant
      16.   SI N.S. Rathore Investigating officer                  -
      17.   Dr.       Manoj FSL examination of recovered           -
            Kumar           articles
            Aggarwal
9.     There is no dispute about the identity or the cause of death of
X. Dr. Chirag Bahugana - PW4, conducted the post-mortem of X.
In his deposition, he stated that the injuries on the body indicate
sexual assault. All injuries were caused prior to the death. The
causation of death was ascertained as strangulation by hand, after
the commission of forceful rape. The age of X also cannot be
doubted, on the basis of the evidence of PW9, the Headmaster of the
School, in which X was enrolled for studies. He verified that the
date of birth of X was 20th October 2008, which makes her 10 years
old on the date of the incident.
10.    Coming to the recovery of the body, Mohd. Naiyar - PW-3,
had, at the first instance, searched the hut of the appellant. In his
deposition, he stated that the Contractor of the site (PW-2), told him
to go and search the hut of the appellant for X. Upon his search, he
discovered the dead body of X concealed under empty cement bags
in the corner of the hut.      He identified his signatures on the
panchnama and the appellant in Court. His testimony stood the test
Criminal Appeal Nos.331-332/2022                    Page 9 of 17
of cross-examination and nothing was brought about to impeach his
credit or doubt his testimony. PWs 1 and 2, who support his
testimony, do state that PW3 informed them about the discovery of
X’s body, after which, the police report came to be lodged. They
identified their signatures on the recovery memos. SI Raj Vikram
Singh, PW10, deposed on similar lines, stating that the dead body
of X was lying in the hut of the appellant. Given the testimonies of
these witnesses, this circumstance has been rightly held by the
Courts below, as against the appellant.
11.   The next circumstance against the appellant is that of last seen
theory. Somwati - PW13, deposed that she saw X and her children
being taken by the appellant, however only her children (two in
number) had left the hut. She also identified the appellant in Court.
This witness also stood the test of cross-examination. The children
who had accompanied X, also lend support to the last-seen theory.
Master Rakesh - PW10, deposed that the appellant handed them
Rs.10/- each, but stopped X in his hut, while he left with Rani. Rani
- PW11, supports this chain of events. Despite being minors, there
is nothing on record to disbelieve their testimonies, for we find the
witnesses to be inspiring in confidence and the children’s deposition
to be in a natural form.   It cannot be doubted, therefore, in fact,
proven beyond doubt that the appellant was last seen with X inside
his hut on the date of the incident, and this was immediately prior to
Criminal Appeal Nos.331-332/2022                  Page 10 of 17
the occurrence of the incident. In fact, they clearly established the
presence of the appellant inside the hut where no one else other than
him was present. It is nobody’s case that the other two roommates
residing with the appellant in the very same hut were also present
there. None has deposed about their presence either inside or
outside the hut or anywhere near the scene of occurrence of the
incident.
12.    Coming to the DNA evidence of the case at hand, we must
advert to the testimony of, Dr. Manoj Kumar Aggarwal - PW17,
who conducted the FSL examination. Upon such examination, Ext.4
(hair found on the dead body of X) matched with Ext.5 (underwear
of the appellant), both of which matched with the DNA sample of
the appellant. Furthermore, the DNA obtained from Ext.9
(underwear of the appellant) matches with samples of both X and
the appellant. There is no infirmity which has been brought about in
the chain of the seizure of these articles and their consequent
examination by the appellant. Taking a cumulative view of all the
above circumstances, in our view, the prosecution has proven its
case against the appellant, beyond reasonable doubt.
13.   In view of the above, we are not inclined to interfere with the
findings of conviction concurrent in nature against the appellant.
The Courts below have correctly placed reliance on the last-seen
theory and DNA evidence against the appellant. In our view, no
Criminal Appeal Nos.331-332/2022                  Page 11 of 17
ground for interference, pointing out any infirmity in the findings of
the Courts below has been made out by the appellant, warranting
interference as far as conviction is concerned.
14.       We now proceed to examine the sentence that has been
handed down to the appellant, i.e., death penalty. The case at hand
is one, based on admittedly circumstantial evidence. This Court in
Mohd. Farooq Abdul Gafur v. State of Maharashtra7
, expounded:
“164. Capital sentencing is not a normal penalty
               discharging the social function of punishment. In this
               particular punishment, there is a heavy burden on the
               Court to meet the procedural justice requirements, both
               emerging from the black letter law as also conventions.
               In terms of rule of prudence and from the point of view
               of principle, a Court may choose to give primacy to life
               imprisonment over death penalty in cases which are
               solely based on circumstantial evidence or where the
               High Court has given a life imprisonment or acquittal.
165. At this juncture, it will be pertinent to assess the
               nature of the rarest of rare expression. In the light of
               serious objections to disparity in sentencing by this
               Court flowing out of varied interpretations to the rarest
               of rare expression, it is clear that the test has to be more
               than what a particular Judge locates as rarest of rare in
               his personal consideration. There has to be an objective
               value to the term “rarest of rare”, otherwise it will fall
               foul of
Article 14.
In such a scenario, a robust approach
               to arrive at the rarest of rare situations will give primacy
               to what can be called the consensus approach to the test.
In our tiered court system, an attempt towards
               deciphering a common view as to what can be called to
               be the rarest of rare, vertically across the trial court, the
               High Court and Apex Court and horizontally across a
7
(2010) 14 SCC 641
Criminal Appeal Nos.331-332/2022                                Page 12 of 17
Bench at any particular level, will introduce some
               objectivity to the precedent on death penalty which is
               crumbling down under the weight of disparate
               interpretations. This is only a rule of prudence and as
               such there is no statutory provision to this effect.”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
15.       Keeping the above exposition of law in mind, we are also
conscious of the brutality of the crime in question. A helpless child
was at first, mercilessly raped after being lured into the appellant’s
hut on the pretext of buying sweets with the offered money.
Thereafter, to hide the evidence of his crime, the child was
strangulated by hand, in a defenseless condition. That being said,
this Court in
Gudda v. State of M.P.8
, while commuting the sentence
of the appellant therein from death penalty to life imprisonment,
where the victims of the crime were a pregnant lady and a five-year
old child, had reiterated that the brutality of a crime cannot be the
only criterion for determining whether a case falls under the “rarest
of the rare” category. The Courts below have only commented on
the brutality of the crime in question, to hand down the death penalty
to the appellant. No other circumstance came to be discussed by the
Courts in reaching the conclusion that the case forms part of the
“rarest of the rare” category. Such an approach in our view cannot
be sustained.
8
(2013) 16 SCC 596
Criminal Appeal Nos.331-332/2022                            Page 13 of 17
16.
In
Gudda
(supra), it was further observed:
“32. In a civilised society — a tooth for a tooth and an
               eye for an eye ought not to be the criterion to clothe a
               case with “the rarest of the rare” jacket and the courts
               must not be propelled by such notions in a haste resorting
               to capital punishment. Our criminal jurisprudence
               cautions the courts of law to act with utmost
               responsibility by analysing the finest strands of the
               matter and it is in that perspective that a reasonable
               proportion has to be maintained between the brutality of
               the crime and the punishment. It falls squarely upon the
               court to award the sentence having due regard to the
               nature of offence such that neither is the punishment
               disproportionately severe nor is it manifestly inadequate,
               as either case would not subserve the cause of justice to
               the society. In jurisprudential terms, an individual's right
               of not to be subjected to cruel, arbitrary or excessive
               punishment cannot be outweighed by the utilitarian
               value of that punishment.”
17.        More recently, in
Manoj v. State of M.P.9
, this Court had
recognized the disparity in the application of the “rarest of rare” test
for imposition of the death penalty and re-emphasized the two-step
process to determine whether a case belongs to the rarest of rare
category:
“224. This aspect was dealt with extensively in
Santosh
               Bariyar [Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar v. State
               of Maharashtra
, (2009) 6 SCC 498, para 112 : (2009) 2
               SCC (Cri) 1150] where the Court articulated the test to
               be a two-step process to determine whether a case
               deserves the death sentence — firstly, that the case
               belongs to the “rarest of rare” category, and secondly,
               that the option of life imprisonment would simply not
9
(2023) 2 SCC 353
Criminal Appeal Nos.331-332/2022                               Page 14 of 17
suffice. For the first step, the aggravating and mitigating
               circumstances would have to be identified and
               considered equally. For the second test, the court had to
               consider whether the alternative of life imprisonment
               was unquestionably foreclosed as the sentencing aim of
               reformation was unachievable, for which the State must
               provide material.”
                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
18.       The Courts below have failed to make any detailed reference
to the aggravating and mitigating circumstances surrounding the
appellant. Moreover, the High Court, which was the Reference
Court for confirmation of death sentence, though expounded on the
requirement of law to consider aggravating and mitigating
circumstances, failed to consider any of these circumstances – only
dealing with the brutality of the incident.
19.
In similar circumstances in
Sundar @ Sundarrajan v. State
by Inspector of Police10
, this Court commuted the death sentence
awarded to the appellant therein, for murder of a seven-year-old
child while observing:
“81. No such inquiry has been conducted for enabling a
               consideration of the factors mentioned above in case of
               the petitioner. Neither the trial court, nor the appellate
               courts have looked into any factors to conclusively state
               that the petitioner cannot be reformed or rehabilitated. In
               the present case, the Courts have reiterated the gruesome
               nature of crime to award the death penalty.
               ….
10
2023 SCC Online SC 310
Criminal Appeal Nos.331-332/2022                              Page 15 of 17
83. The duty of the court to enquire into mitigating
          circumstances as well as to foreclose the possibility of
          reformation and rehabilitation before imposing the death
          penalty has been highlighted in multiple judgments of
          this Court. Despite this, in the present case, no such
          enquiry was conducted and the grievous nature of the
          crime was the only factor that was considered while
          awarding the death penalty.”
20.    Coming to the mitigating circumstances relating to the
appellant, this Court vide 2nd March 2022, had called for the reports
of the probation officer, jail administration and psychological
evaluation of the appellant. It is borne from the report of the District
Probation Officer, Ayodhya, dated 12th April 2022, that the
condition of the family of the appellant is “very pathetic” and they
earned their livelihood by doing labor work.
21.    The psychological report of the appellant was prepared on
19th April 2022. It is stated therein that the appellant could not
attend school due to the socio-economic condition of the family and
had started working at the age of twelve. He has good relations with
other inmates. He does not suffer from any psychiatric disturbance.
22.    In light of the above discussion, taking into account the
above mitigating circumstances and the threshold of “rarest of rare”
category, we deem it appropriate to award life imprisonment without
remission extending to the natural life of the appellant instead of the
punishment of the death penalty.
Criminal Appeal Nos.331-332/2022                       Page 16 of 17
23.    Therefore, the present Appeals are partly allowed. The
impugned order dated 7th January 2020 passed by the High Court of
Uttarakhand at Nainital in Criminal Jail Appeal No.64 of 2019 &
Criminal Reference No.02 of 2019, is modified to the above extent.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
………..….…………J.
                                             (VIKRAM NATH)



                                           …….…..….…………J.
                                            (SANJAY KAROL)



                                           ……..……..…………J.
                                           (SANDEEP MEHTA)
New Delhi
July 16, 2025
Criminal Appeal Nos.331-332/2022                 Page 17 of 17