[Cites
33
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Khursheed Ahmad Chohan vs Union Of Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir on 21 July, 2025
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
2025 INSC 876




                                                           REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S).                  OF 2025
                             (Arising out of SLP(Criminal) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023)

                            KHURSHEED AHMAD CHOHAN                 ..APPELLANT(S)


                                                    VERSUS


                            UNION OF TERRITORY OF
                            JAMMU AND KASHMIR
                             & ORS. ETC.                       …..RESPONDENT(S)


                                                   JUDGMENT
Mehta, J.
1.    Heard.
2.    Leave granted.
3.    The present appeals by special leave, arise out
                            of the final judgment and order dated 18th September,
                            2023, passed by the learned Single Judge of the High
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEETU KHAJURIA
Date: 2025.07.21
17:54:19 IST
Reason:
1
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          Court of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh at Srinagar1
          in Criminal Miscellaneous Petition No. 111 of 2023
          connected with Writ Petition (Civil) No. 592 of 2023,
          whereby the High Court dismissed the said inter-
          connected petitions, filed by the appellant (victim)
          seeking registration of the FIR against the police
          personnel; transfer of the investigation to Central
          Bureau of Investigation2; and quashing of the FIR
          filed against the appellant.
Background facts:-
4.     The facts necessary for adjudication of the
          present appeals, as evident from the records, are as
          follows: -
4.1 The appellant is a police constable in the
          Department of Police who, at the time of the alleged
          incident,        was      posted       at    the   District   Police
          Headquarters, Baramulla, Jammu and Kashmir. On
          17th February, 2023, the appellant received a signal
          from Aijaz Ahmad Naiko, Deputy Superintendent of
          Police, Kupwara, Jammu and Kashmir, directing him
          to report to the Office of the Senior Superintendent of

          1 Hereinafter referred to as ‘High Court.’
          2 Hereinafter referred to as ‘CBI.’
2
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          Police on 20th February, 2023, in connection with an
          enquiry related to a narcotics matter. The appellant
          alleges that no sooner he reached the Office of the
          Senior Superintendent of Police, he was detained and
          subjected       to      brutal   custodial   torture   for   six
          consecutive days. His genital organs and testicles
          were amputated. Pepper was sprinkled on his private
          parts, and he was given electric shocks which led to
          a fracture of his foot. The appellant, who suffered
          grave injuries during the custodial torture, was
          shifted to the District Hospital, Kupwara, in a
          comatose condition. Due to his serious medical
          condition, he was transferred first to the District
          Hospital, Baramulla, and then to the Sher-i-Kashmir
          Institute of Medical Sciences (‘SKIMS’), Soura-
Srinagar, on 26th February, 2023. At SKIMS, the
          appellant, who was accompanied by Asiq Hussain,
          Sub-Inspector, underwent surgery for the injury
          caused by amputation of his testicles, which had
          been brought to the hospital in a polythene bag by
          the said Sub-Inspector. On the same day, i.e., 26th
          February, 2023, an FIR3 was registered against the
3 FIR No. 32 of 2023.
3
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          appellant by Munner Ahmad, Sub-Inspector and In-
Charge, Police Post Tad, Karnah, for the offence
          punishable under
Section 309
of the Indian Penal
          Code, 1860.4 The contents of the said FIR are
          reproduced hereinbelow for ready reference:
“Dear Sir, Details of investigation are as
                        under. At this time S.I. Muneer Ahmad
                        108/KP presently posted as Officer Chowki
                        Police Taad presented himself before the
                        said Police Station with a written Docket in
                        order to register it the contents, which are
                        as under: From Chowki Police Taad Camp
                        JIC Kupwara Time 11.20 hrs. Dated
                        26.02.2023. To SHO Police Station
                        Kuwpara. Dear Sir, the brief Contents of the
                        case under FIR No.17 of the year 2023
                        under the offence 08/21-29
NDPS Act
Police
                        Station Kamah are as under. Mr. Khursheed
                        Ahmad Chohan (sic) son of Late Ghulam
                        Mustafa Chohan (sic) resident of Abkote
                        Kamah at present Housing colony Ompora
                        Budgam who is an employee of the Police
                        department working as SG constable and is
                        presently posted at District Baramulla was
                        found involved in the said case under
                        discussion in the Police department and in
                        this connection, the said person was called
                        in JIC Kupwara for investigation. Today at
                        about 11: 15 noon, the said person was lying
                        in a bed in a residential Bark at JIC and
                        tried to suicide by cutting his vein with a
                        shogun blade while covering himself in a
                        blanket, and the said person was taken to
                        hospital in an injurious condition for
                        hospitalization with the help of other

          4 Hereinafter referred to as ‘
IPC
.’
4
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
                       personal and Police staff present in the Bark
                       and in the said action, cognizance of the
                       police has been found. Hence through the
                       medium of said Docket it is requested that
                       the matter may be recorded in the Daily
                       Diary and action in the matter be taken. Sd/
                       in English of SI Muneer Ahmad 108/KP I/C
                       PP TAD CAMP JIC Kupwara.”

                                                     [emphasis supplied]

          4.2 Upon learning of the appellant’s condition, his
          wife, Rubina Aktar, immediately approached Station
          House Officer5, Police Station, Kupwara, requesting
          the registration of an FIR against the police personnel
          responsible for subjecting the appellant to brutal
          custodial       torture       and       inflicting      life-threatening
          injuries to him. However, no action was taken by the
          SHO on the pleas of the lady. Aggrieved, she
          approached Senior Superintendent of Police, District
          Kupwara,         who       also        refused     to     initiate   any
          proceedings         against       the     erring     police    officials.
Consequently, the appellant’s wife, through her
          Advocate, served a legal notice dated 2nd March, 2023
          upon Deputy Inspector General of Police, North Circle
          (Kupwara/Baramulla); Station House Officer, Police
          Station, Kupwara; and Senior Superintendent of


          5 Hereinafter referred to as ‘SHO.’.
5
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          Police, District Kupwara, but failed to get any
          response.
4.3 Aggrieved by the inaction of the authorities, the
          appellant filed a Writ Petition No. 592 of 2023 under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India before the
          High Court of Jammu & Kashmir seeking, inter alia,
(a) a direction to the SHO, Police Station, Kupwara,
          Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir to immediately
          register an FIR based on the complaint and
          supporting documents sent to him via registered
          post; (b) a direction to Deputy Inspector General of
          Police,   North     Circle      (Kupwara/Baramulla)        to
          constitute a Special Investigation Team (SIT) headed
          by a Gazetted Officer and assisted by two senior
          officers to conduct a thorough investigation into the
          matter, thereby ensuring that the interests of justice
          are served; and (c) in the alternative, and if the
          Hon’ble High Court deemed it appropriate, given the
          gravity of the offences and the potential influence of
          the accused police officials, a direction to refer the
          matter to the CBI to ensure a fair and impartial
          investigation.    Parallelly,    the   appellant   filed   a
          Criminal Miscellaneous Petition, being CRM (M) No.
6
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          111 of 2023, under
Section 482
of the Code of
          Criminal Procedure, 19736, seeking quashing of FIR
          No. 32 of 2023 dated 26th February, 2023 filed
          against the appellant, on the ground that the
          allegations       made    in     the   FIR   were    inherently
          improbable, mala fide, and an abuse of the process
          of law. It was contended that the FIR had been lodged
          with an ulterior motive to harass the appellant and
          settle personal scores. The appellant also submitted
          that even if the allegations were taken at face value,
          they did not disclose the commission of any
          cognizable offence.
4.4 The         High     Court    vide   order      dated   18th
          September, 2023, disposed of both petitions vide a
          common judgment. In the writ petition seeking
          registration of the FIR, the Court directed that a
          detailed preliminary enquiry be conducted by the
          Senior Superintendent of Police into the allegations.
          If the said enquiry substantiated the claims, an FIR
          was to be registered, and the investigation was to be
          entrusted to a Deputy Superintendent of Police. In
          the criminal miscellaneous petition seeking quashing


          6 For short, “
CrPC
”.
7
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          of the FIR, the High Court held that at this early
          stage, it would not be appropriate to quash the FIR,
          as the investigation was in its infancy and should be
          allowed   to   proceed    to   ascertain   the     truth.
          Accordingly, the High Court rejected the quashing
          petition and allowed the investigation in FIR No. 32
          of 2023 to continue unhindered.
4.5 Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the High
          Court, the appellant has filed the present appeals by
          way of special leave before this Court.
Submissions on behalf of the appellant: -
5.   Learned senior counsel appearing for the
          appellant vehemently and fervently submitted that
          the present matter concerns a deeply disturbing case
          of brutal custodial torture inflicted on a police
          constable, who was kept in illegal detention and later
          falsely implicated through a fabricated FIR in an
          attempt to shield the real perpetrators of the crime.
          Despite   compelling     medical   evidence,     multiple
          representations, and the egregious nature of the
          allegations, the High Court fell into grave error by
          refusing to direct the registration of an FIR or to
8
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          ensure supervised independent investigation. In this
          regard, he has advanced the following submissions to
          urge:
5.1 The present case involves grave allegations of
          custodial torture which the perpetrators tried to
          cover up as a suicide attempt by the appellant. A
          close examination of the timeline and the nature of
          injuries suffered by the appellant cast serious doubt
          on   the   respondent’s     narrative.   Learned   senior
          counsel submitted that the appellant was summoned
          on 17th February, 2023 and remained in custody from
          20th to 26th February, 2023. However, FIR No. 17 of
          2023, under which the appellant was purportedly
          summoned, was registered only on 23rd February,
          2023, three days after his detention had commenced.
This temporal gap renders the appellant’s detention
          from 20th to 22nd February, 2023 prima facie illegal
          ab-initio, as it was not backed by any lawful
          authority. Learned counsel further urged that the
          medical    report    from     SKIMS,       Soura-Srinagar
          categorically records grievous injuries that are
          incompatible with any form of self-inflicted harm to
          support the suicide theory, including a 10 cm x 5 cm
          laceration on the scrotum with both testicles
9
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          surgically      removed,   bruises   on    the   buttocks
          extending to the thighs, tenderness on the palms and
          soles indicative of blunt trauma, the presence of
          vegetative particles in the rectum, and multiple
          fractures. These injuries, inflicted on the appellant
          while he was continuously kept under illegal
          detention at the Joint Interrogation Centre, Kupwara
          under the exclusive control of police personnel, are
          consistent with established methods of custodial
          torture designed to minimise external bruising and
          detection. On the other hand, the post facto
          registration of the FIR7 dated 23rd February, 2023,
          and the implausibility of the suicide theory strongly
          suggest an orchestrated attempt to shield the
          perpetrators and to legitimise an otherwise apparent
          incident of unlawful custody and brutal custodial
          torture.
5.2      Learned senior counsel vehemently submitted
          that despite the appellant and his wife making
          persistent and desperate attempts to approach
          various authorities seeking justice for the barbaric
          custodial torture inflicted upon the appellant, there
7 FIR No. 17 of 2023.
10
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          has been a complete and systematic denial of justice
          at every level. Immediately after coming to know
          about the condition of the appellant, his wife filed a
          complaint on 1st March, 2023, followed by a formal
          legal notice through counsel on 2nd March 2023,
          vividly detailing the brutal custodial torture and
          seeking registration of FIR against the perpetrators of
          the   heinous        crime.   Learned      senior    counsel
          emphasised that despite these timely complaints that
          clearly made out cognizable offences punishable
          under Sections 307, 330, 331, 326 and other
          provisions of the
IPC
, the authorities turned a blind
          eye and deaf ear and instead of registering an FIR
          against the involved police officials, they maliciously
          registered a patently false FIR No. 32 of 2023 against
          the victim (appellant) under
Section 309
of the IPC.
          Learned senior counsel further submitted that the
          appellant’s   wife     was    compelled     to      move   an
          application under the
Right to Information Act, 2005
,
          to obtain his Medical Reports from SKIMS, Soura-
          Srinagar, as even basic medical records were being
          withheld to suppress evidence of the brutal custodial
          torture. Left with no recourse, the appellant was
          constrained     to    move    the   High    Court    seeking
11
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          registration of an FIR. Despite the High Court
          acknowledging the gravity of the allegations and
          expressing sufficient doubts regarding the official
          narrative, it stopped short of granting substantive
          relief and instead directed a preliminary enquiry by
          the very officer whose subordinates were implicated
          in the alleged custodial violence.
5.3     The High Court, in the Impugned Order, failed
          to appreciate that
Section 309
of the IPC has been
          rendered completely redundant by virtue of Section
          115 of the Mental Healthcare Act, 20178. Learned
          Counsel urged that Section 115 of the MH Act creates
          an irrebuttable presumption that any person who
          attempts to commit suicide shall be presumed to be
          under severe stress and shall not be tried and
          punished under
Section 309
of the IPC. Learned
          senior counsel, with utmost vehemence, urged that
          this position has been categorically settled by this
          Court in
Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India9
,
          wherein it was categorically held that
Section 309
of
          the IPC has become largely ineffective, and instead of


          8 Hereinafter referred to as ‘MH Act.’


          9 (2018) 10 SCC 1 at Para 247.
12
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          being a criminal offence, the Government has an
          affirmative duty to provide care and rehabilitation.
          Hence, the FIR No. 32 of 2023 is nothing but a
          fabricated and bogus case registered merely to create
          a false defence for the errant police officers, and the
          same is liable to be quashed as it fails to disclose any
          cognizable offence in view of the
Navtej Johar
(supra)
          and the provisions of the MH Act.
5.4 That the learned High Court has committed a
          grave error in law by failing to recognise the clear and
          egregious violation of the appellant’s fundamental
          rights under
Articles 14
and
21
of the Constitution of
          India, and committed grave injustice by merely
          ordering       a    preliminary       enquiry   rather    than
          mandatorily directing the registration of an FIR. The
          settled position of law, as
laid down by
the
          Constitution Bench in
Lalita Kumari v. State of
          U.P.10
, unequivocally mandates the registration of an
          FIR    upon        disclosure    of   a   cognizable   offence,
          particularly where public officials are alleged to have
          committed such offences. In the present case, the
          appellant’s wife, Rubina Aktar, submitted a written


          10 (2014) 2 SCC 1 at Para 119.
13
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          complaint on 1st March, 2023, within three days of
          the incident, clearly narrating acts of custodial
          torture and grievous assault amounting to grave
          cognizable offences. In view of this, there existed no
          legal basis for deferring the registration of the FIR or
          substituting the statutory mandate under
Section
          154
CrPC (corresponding Section 173 of Bharatiya
          Nagarik        Suraksha          Sanhita,   202311)     with    a
          preliminary inquiry. The High Court’s failure to
          adhere to this binding precedent not only dilutes the
          legal safeguards against custodial violence but also
          effectively sanctions immunity for the illegal acts
          committed by the errant officials under the colour of
          public       authority,          thereby    undermining        the
          appellant’s fundamental right to equality before law
          and protection of life and personal liberty.
          5.5     That      the     unprecedented      severity   of     the
          custodial torture inflicted upon the appellant, who is
          a serving constable in the Jammu & Kashmir Police,
          and the systematic cover-up orchestrated by the local
          police apparatus, necessitates immediate transfer of
          investigation to the CBI in order to ensure a fair,


          11 Hereinafter referred to as ‘BNSS.’
14
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          impartial, and credible inquiry. The High Court’s
          direction, in the impugned order, entrusting the
          inquiry to the very Senior Superintendent of Police,
          whose signal dated 17th February, 2023 led to the
          appellant’s    illegal   summoning   and    subsequent
          torture, constitutes a clear violation of the principles
          of natural justice, rendering the inquiry inherently
          biased and devoid of credibility. For over a year, the
          appellant and his wife have been compelled to
          approach multiple forums merely to seek the
          registration of an FIR. In these deeply disturbing
          circumstances, only a CBI investigation can vindicate
          the rule of law, restore public trust and confidence in
          the system, and ensure that the perpetrators of such
          inhuman       and   shocking   offences    do   not   go
          unpunished.
On these grounds, learned senior counsel
          appearing for the appellant implored the Court to
          accept these appeals, set aside the impugned
          judgment and prayed that this is a fit case warranting
          exercise of this Court’s extraordinary jurisdiction
          under
Article 136
read with
Article 142
of the
          Constitution of India so as to direct registration of the
          FIR against the respondents and transfer the said
15
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          investigation to the CBI, in the interest of justice and
          to uphold the rule of law.
Submissions on behalf of the respondents: -
6.    Per contra, learned Additional Advocate General
          for the respondents/Union Territory, has opposed
          the submissions advanced by learned senior counsel
          for the appellant.      He presented the following
          pertinent submissions imploring this Court to
          dismiss the present appeals:
6.1   That the appellant’s allegations of custodial
          torture are nothing but a bundle of lies cooked up
          with an intent to cover up his attempted suicide and
          to divert attention from his own culpability in the
          offences under investigation, thereby discrediting the
          investigation and maligning the authorities involved.
All injuries, as alleged by the appellant, were self-
          inflicted during attempted suicide. He urged that the
          appellant had complete access to all areas within the
          Joint Interrogation Centre, Kupwara including the
          bathroom from where he obtained a shaving razor
          blade on the morning of 26th February, 2023. The
          CCTV footage corroborates that the appellant was
16
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          seen walking normally with other jawans until 09:00
          am, after which he entered the barracks and was not
          seen until 11:15 am, which was when the other
          constables had discovered his injuries. The forensic
          evidence further supports this version; the FSL report
          confirms that DNA extracted from blood stains on the
          seized razor and mattress matched the appellant’s
          blood sample, prima facie establishing that the razor
          was used by the appellant himself. The medical
          officer at Sub District Hospital, Kupwara has
          categorically stated in his signed statement that the
          superficial cuts on the appellant’s right arm were
          consistent with persons having suicidal tendencies,
          and no other injuries were found beyond those
          mentioned in the injury form. Learned counsel urged
          that the allegations of custodial torture are entirely
          fabricated and malicious, designed solely to prejudice
          the investigation of grave offence punishable under
          Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act,
          198512 in which the appellant was found involved.
          6.2 Rebutting the appellant’s claims of illegal
          detention, the learned counsel urged that the entire


          12 Hereinafter referred to as ‘
NDPS Act
’
17
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          procedure was a part of lawful investigation. The
          appellant was initially summoned through proper
          channels,        a signal was flashed by District Police
          Office Kupwara, to District Police Office Baramulla on
          14th February, 2023, followed by another signal on
          17th February, 2023, directing the appellant to report
          to Senior Superintendent of Police, Kupwara on 20th
          February, 2023, for questioning in connection with
          FIR No. 01 of 2023 registered on 1st January, 2023
          under
Sections 8
,
21
and
29
of the NDPS Act and
          under
Sections 13
,
18
,
20
,
23
, and
38
of Unlawful
          Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.13 Learned counsel
          urged that the appellant was not under any form of
          custody but was asked to remain available for
          investigation         purposes            due   to   his   suspected
          involvement in serious offences of narcotic trade. The
          appellant, being hailing from Tehsil Karnah (67
          kilometres away) and posted in District Baramulla
          (49 kilometres away), chose to stay at JIC Kupwara
          for convenience during the winter season. Learned
          counsel submitted that the appellant’s assertion
          about the fact that he had been summoned in


          13 Hereinafter referred to as ‘
UAP Act
’
18
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          relation to FIR No. 17 of 2023 before its registration
          is misconceived because he was actually summoned
          in connection with FIR No. 01 of 2023, and during
          this investigation, fresh evidence emerged leading to
          registration of FIR No. 17 of 2023 on 23 rd February,
          2023 under
Sections 8
,
21
, and
29
of the NDPS Act,
          wherein accused Farooq Hussain, who was arrested
          followed by recovery of 2.674 kilograms of Heroin,
          disclosed the appellant’s involvement. The District
          Superintendent of Police, Baramulla and Deputy
          Inspector   General    North   Kashmir      Range   were
          telephonically informed about the investigational
          developments,    demonstrating     proper    procedural
          compliance.
6.3    The appellant’s reliance on Section 115 of the
          MH Act, raising the presumption of severe stress is
          rebuttable and has been negated in this case.
          Learned counsel urged that until 25th February,
          2023, the appellant was found to be hale and hearty,
          and showed no abnormality in behaviour which
          might suggest some mental distress that could lead
          to attempted suicide. The initial medical examination
          report prima facie negates the presumption of severe
          stress sought to be drawn under Section 115 of the
19
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          MH Act. Learned counsel contended that the
          appellant’s suicide attempt was not driven by mental
          illness but was a calculated move to derail the
          investigation of the serious NDPS cases (i.e., FIR Nos.
          01 of 2023 and 17 of 2023) in which his involvement
          was duly established. Learned counsel urged that FIR
          No. 32 of 2023 under
Section 309
of the IPC is validly
          registered as the evidence clearly establishes a
          deliberate suicide attempt to evade investigation
          rather than any mental health crisis, making the case
          fall outside the protective ambit of the MH Act.
On these grounds, the learned counsel for the
          respondent/Union Territory contended that the
          present appeals should be dismissed, and in view of
          the extensive preliminary enquiry already conducted,
          the prayer for transfer of the case to the CBI is
          unwarranted and ought to be declined.
Discussion and Analysis: -
7. We have given anxious consideration to the
          submissions advanced at bar and have gone through
          the impugned judgment. With the assistance of
20
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          learned counsel for the parties, we have perused the
          material placed on record.
8. The primary issues that arise for our consideration
          in the present case are as follows:
I.   Whether the facts and circumstances disclosed
                in the complaint filed by the appellant’s wife
                dated 1st March 2023, supported by compelling
                medical evidence of grievous injuries, including
                complete    genital    mutilation,     mandatorily
                required registration of an FIR?
II.   Whether the gravity of the alleged custodial
                torture, the systematic cover-up by local police
                machinery, and the inherent conflict of interest
                arising from the pendency of cases punishable
                under
NDPS     Act
against      the   appellant
                necessitate transfer of investigation to the
                Central Bureau of Investigation to ensure a fair,
                impartial and credible inquiry?
III.   Whether FIR No. 32 of 2023 dated 26th
                February,    2023,     registered     against   the
                appellant under
Section 309
of IPC should be
                quashed as being manifestly mala fide and
                constituting an abuse of the process of law?
21
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
9.     In the present case, it is undisputed that the
          appellant, who is serving as a constable in the
          Jammu & Kashmir Police, was summoned for an
          inquiry concerning alleged violations under the
NDPS
          Act
and, in compliance with the said summons of
          higher officials, he had reported to the Joint
          Interrogation Centre, Kupwara on 20th February,
          2023. It is admitted that between 20th February and
          26th    February,   2023,   the   appellant   sustained
          numerous injuries including castration of his genital
          regions and was admitted to SKIMS Hospital at 2:48
          pm on 26th February, 2023. It is also undisputed that
          the dismembered genitalia were brought to the
          hospital in a separate plastic bag by a Sub-Inspector,
          a fact that shocks our conscience. The medical
          documents issued from SKIMS, Soura-Srinagar
          conclusively establish the horrific nature of the
          injuries which inter alia include, complete mutilation
          of genitalia with both testicles removed, a 10 cm x 5
          cm laceration on the scrotum, tenderness on palms
          and feet, bruises on buttocks extending to thighs,
          multiple vegetative particles in the rectum, and
          fractures throughout the body. The Discharge
          Summary further provides unequivocal medical
22
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          evidence that the appellant underwent an extensive
          surgical procedure, including “exploration and repair
          of corporal bodies with end-to-end anastomosis of
          urethra, ligation of spermatic cord, repair of scrotal
          laceration, and debridement of necrotic tissue,” and
          was discharged on 2nd March, 2023. The appellant’s
          wife, Rubina Aktar, had filed a complaint dated 1st
          March, 2023, within three days of the incident
          levelling clear allegations, disclosing cognizable
          offences committed by the police personnel. However,
          no action was taken upon the said complaint. These
          facts, standing alone and uncontroverted, establish a
          prima facie case of the most heinous form of custodial
          torture and the total apathy of the local police officials
          in taking action against the perpetrators of custodial
          violence.
I. On the Issue of Registration of an FIR
10. The question of mandatory registration of FIR
          has been conclusively settled by the Constitution
          Bench of this Court in
Lalita Kumari
(supra), which
          laid down unambiguous principles that brook no
          exception or deviation. The Constitution Bench
          categorically held that registration of an FIR is
23
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          mandatory       under
Section       154
of     CrPC
          (corresponding      Section     173      of   BNSS)       when
          information     disclosing      the    commission        of   a
          cognizable offence is received by the police, and no
          preliminary inquiry is required or permissible in such
          cases. The Constitution Bench emphasised that the
          police have no discretion in the matter of registration
          of an FIR once alleged facts disclose commission of
          cognizable offences.
The relevant paragraphs and
          guidelines framed in
Lalita Kumari
(supra) are
          reproduced hereinbelow:
“119. But, if the information given clearly
                     mentions the commission of a cognizable
                     offence, there is no other option but to
                     register    an     FIR     forthwith.     Other
                     considerations are not relevant at the stage
                     of registration of FIR, such as, whether the
                     information is falsely given, whether the
                     information is genuine, whether the
                     information is credible, etc. These are the
                     issues that have to be verified during the
                     investigation of the FIR. At the stage of
                     registration of FIR, what is to be seen is
                     merely whether the information given ex
                     facie discloses the commission of a
                     cognizable offence. If, after investigation, the
                     information given is found to be false, there
                     is always an option to prosecute the
                     complainant for filing a false FIR.”
120. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we
                    hold:
24
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
                    120.1. The registration of FIR is mandatory
                    under Section 154 of the Code, if the
                    information discloses commission of a
                    cognizable offence and no preliminary
                    inquiry is permissible in such a situation.
120.2. If the information received does not
                    disclose a cognizable offence but indicates
                    the necessity for an inquiry, a preliminary
                    inquiry may be conducted only to ascertain
                    whether cognizable offence is disclosed or
                    not.
120.3. If the inquiry discloses the
                    commission of a cognizable offence, the FIR
                    must be registered. In cases where
                    preliminary inquiry ends in closing the
                    complaint, a copy of the entry of such closure
                    must be supplied to the first informant
                    forthwith and not later than one week. It
                    must disclose reasons in brief for closing the
                    complaint and not proceeding further.
120.4. The police officer cannot avoid his
                    duty of registering offence if cognizable
                    offence is disclosed. Action must be taken
                    against erring officers who do not register the
                    FIR if information received by him discloses
                    a cognizable offence.
120.5. The scope of preliminary inquiry is
                    not to verify the veracity or otherwise of the
                    information received but only to ascertain
                    whether the information reveals any
                    cognizable offence.”

                                             [Emphasis Supplied]
11. In the present case, the allegations made by the
          appellant and his wife unequivocally disclose the
25
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          commission of cognizable offences perpetrating from
          custodial torture. On 20th February, 2023, the
          appellant reported at the Joint Interrogation Centre
          (JIC), Kupwara, where he alleges illegal detention for
          six days without any formal arrest or FIR. During this
          period of alleged unlawful custody, he claims to have
          been    subjected       to     brutal     physical    torture.
          Furthermore, the        medical reports issued           from
          SKIMS, Soura-Srinagar provide concrete proof of
          grievous    injuries,        including     complete   genital
          mutilation, systematic beatings, and torture marks,
          ruling out the scope for subjective interpretation or
          discretionary exercise. These medical findings, taken
          in conjunction with the appellant’s forced detention
          at the Joint Interrogation Centre, Kupwara from 20th
          to   26th   February     2023,      part    of   which   was
          undoubtedly illegal, clearly establish the commission
          of cognizable offences by persons in authority,
          making registration of FIR not merely advisable but
          mandatory     under      the
Lalita     Kumari
(supra)
          framework.
12. The Constitution Bench in
Lalita Kumari
(supra) specifically carved out exceptions where a
26
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          preliminary     inquiry      may   be     conducted   but
          categorically excluded cases involving allegations
          against public servants, discharging their official
          capacity, particularly in matters involving custodial
          violence. The Court recognised that allowing a
          preliminary inquiry in such cases would enable
          institutional cover-up and defeat the very purpose of
          criminal law, designed to protect citizens from state
          excesses. In the present case, the allegations of
          custodial violence are levelled against police officers
          of the Joint Interrogation Centre, Kupwara who
          illegally   detained   the    appellant    and   allegedly
          subjected him to systematic torture resulting in
          permanent disability and trauma. The nature of
          custodial violence, where the victim is completely at
          the mercy of state authorities, demands immediate
          registration of an FIR being a constitutional mandate
          required to preserve evidence, protect witnesses, and
          ensure that the institutional machinery does not get
          time and opportunity to fabricate defence or destroy
          incriminating material.
13. The failure of local police authorities to register
          an FIR despite clear disclosure of cognizable offences
27
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          supported        by     compelling     medical      evidence
          constitutes a direct violation of the appellant’s
          fundamental rights under
Articles 14
and
21
of the
          Constitution of India.
14. The High Court committed a grave error in law
          by failing to exercise the writ jurisdiction and in
          refusing to apply the mandatory principles
laid down
          by
the Constitution Bench in
Lalita Kumari
(supra).
          Instead of ordering immediate registration of FIR, the
          High     Court    directed    the     very   same        Senior
          Superintendent of Police, Kupwara who had issued
          the Signal dated 17th February, 2023 summoning the
          appellant and under whose jurisdiction the alleged
          torture occurred, to conduct an inquiry into his own
          subordinates’ actions. This direction constitutes a
          flagrant violation of the fundamental principles of
          natural justice encapsulated in the Latin maxim
          “nemo judex in causa sua” (no one should be a judge
          in his own cause). The High Court’s approach, by
          treating this as a case requiring a preliminary inquiry
          rather    than        immediate     registration    of     FIR,
          demonstrates a complete misunderstanding of the
          settled legal position and has resulted in the denial
28
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          of justice to the appellant who is the victim of
          custodial torture.
II. On the Issue of Transfer of the Investigation
          to CBI
15. It is a settled position of law that the credibility
          of    an    investigation     agency      should       be    both
          impeachable and unquestionable. The power to
          transfer investigations to a certain investigating
          agency must be sparingly used in the interest of
          justice and to maintain public trust in the institution.
          If the investigating agency is privy to the dispute, it
          may     raise    doubts     on    the    credibility    of    the
          investigation and thus, would be a valid ground to
          transfer the investigation.
In this regard, gainful
          reference may be made to the decision of this Court
          in
Mohd. Anis v. Union of India14
, wherein it was
          held as follows:
“5. … Fair and impartial investigation by an
                  independent agency, not involved in the
                  controversy, is the demand of public interest. If
                  the investigation is by an agency which is
                  allegedly privy to the dispute, the credibility of
                  the investigation will be doubted and that will
                  be contrary to the public interest as well as the

          14 1994 Supp (1) SCC 145.
29
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
                  interest of justice.” (SCC p. 148, para 5) “2. …
                  Doubts were expressed regarding the fairness of
                  the investigation as it was feared that as the
                  local police was alleged to be involved in the
                  encounters, the investigation by an officer of the
                  U.P. Cadre may not be impartial.”
16.     Similarly, this Court in the case of
R.S.
          Sodhi v. State of U.P.15
, noted that:
“2. … We have perused the events that have
                  taken place since the incidents but we are
                  refraining from entering upon the details thereof
                  lest it may prejudice any party but we think that
                  since the accusations are directed against the
                  local police personnel it would be desirable to
                  entrust the investigation to an independent
                  agency like the Central Bureau of Investigation
                  so that all concerned including the relatives of
                  the deceased may feel assured that an
                  independent agency is looking into the matter
                  and that would lend the final outcome of the
                  investigation credibility. However faithfully the
                  local police may carry out the investigation, the
                  same will lack credibility since the allegations
                  are against them. It is only with that in mind
                  that we having thought it both advisable and
                  desirable as well as in the interest of justice to
                  entrust the investigation to the Central Bureau
                  of Investigation forthwith and we do hope that it
                  would complete the investigation at an early
                  date so that those involved in the occurrences,
                  one way or the other, may be brought to book.
                  We direct accordingly.”
                                              (Emphasis Supplied)




          15 1994 Supp (1) SCC 143.
30
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
17. Thus, the power to transfer an investigation to
          the CBI is not to be exercised as a matter of course.
          The Constitution Bench in
State of West Bengal v.
          Committee
for Protection of Democratic Rights,
          West Bengal (CPDR)16, examined the circumstances
          under which Constitutional Courts may invoke their
          jurisdiction to direct a CBI investigation. The Court
          observed       that    while   the     power   to   transfer
          investigation to the CBI must be exercised with
          circumspection          and     only      in    exceptional
          circumstances, such power is nonetheless available
          to be exercised when it is necessary to secure the
          ends of justice or to prevent infringement of
          fundamental rights. The
Court further held
that such
          extraordinary jurisdiction may be invoked to ensure
          a fair and impartial investigation where state
          machinery appears to be ineffective, biased, or
          complicit. The relevant observations from
the said
          judgment
are extracted below:
“70. Before parting with the case, we deem it
                   necessary to emphasise that despite wide
                   powers conferred by
Articles 32
and
226
of the
                   Constitution, while passing any order, the
                   Courts must bear in mind certain self-imposed

          16 (2010) 3 SCC 571.
31
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
                  limitations on the exercise of these
                  constitutional powers. The very plenitude of
                  the power under the said articles requires
                  great caution in its exercise. Insofar as the
                  question of issuing a direction to CBI to
                  conduct investigation in a case is concerned,
                  although no inflexible guidelines can be laid
                  down to decide whether or not such power
                  should be exercised but time and again it has
                  been reiterated that such an order is not to be
                  passed as a matter of routine or merely
                  because a party has levelled some allegations
                  against the local police. This extraordinary
                  power must be exercised sparingly, cautiously
                  and in exceptional situations where it becomes
                  necessary to provide credibility and instil
                  confidence in investigations or where the
                  incident may have national and international
                  ramifications or where such an order may be
                  necessary for doing complete justice and
                  enforcing the fundamental rights. Otherwise
                  CBI would be flooded with a large number of
                  cases and with limited resources, may find it
                  difficult to properly investigate even serious
                  cases and in the process lose its credibility and
                  purpose with unsatisfactory investigations.”

                                            (Emphasis Supplied)
18.    The settled principle of law that emerges from
          the abovementioned decisions is that the power to
          transfer the investigation of a criminal case to the CBI
          is    an extraordinary measure, which must be
          exercised sparingly with great caution, and only in
          rare and exceptional circumstances. This jurisdiction
          must not be invoked lightly or in a routine fashion,
32
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          but only where the facts of the case disclose a
          compelling    necessity     to      ensure       fairness    in
          investigation, preservation of public faith in the
          administration      of   justice     and     protection      of
          fundamental rights of the parties involved. In
          examining the prayer made by an aggrieved person
          seeking transfer of investigation to the CBI, the Court
          must necessarily be guided by the strict parameters
laid down in
binding precedents. These include, inter
          alia, instances where the State police authorities
          appear to be biased or complicit, where the
          investigation has been tainted by delay, irregularity,
          suppression    of    material      facts,   or    where     the
          complexity and inter-State ramifications of the
          matter necessitate the involvement of a central
          agency.
19. The unprecedented gravity of this case involving
          brutal and inhuman custodial torture, characterised
          by the complete mutilation of the appellant’s
          genitalia, represents one of the most barbaric
          instances of police atrocity which the State is trying
          to defend and cover up with all pervasive power. The
          medical evidence conclusively establishes that such
33
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          injuries are impossible to be self-inflicted.           The
          respondent’s theory of suicide attempt crumbles
          under scrutiny when examined against the timeline
          and the medical evidence. The appellant was
          summoned      to   the     Joint   Interrogation   Centre,
          Kupwara on 17th February, 2023 through a signal
          communication, which, notably, made no reference
          to any specific FIR. The relevant portion of the signal
          is reproduced herein:
“DD Extract report No.25 daily dairy dated
                    20-02-2023 on behalf of lines Officer DPL
                    Baramulla

                    Departure Report:- Time 1145 hours.
Be it registered that as per signal
                    No.ESTT/DE/2023/8135 dated 17-02-2023
                    issued by District Police Headquarters
                    Baramulla SgCt Khursheed Ahmad 489/B
                    under PID No.EXK-001355 presently posted in
                    Estate Section DPL Baramulla is deputed to
                    District Police Headquarters Kupwara in
                    connection with enquiry of narcotic Drugs.”

             Despite there being no reference of a registered
          case, the respondents subsequently claim that the
          appellant   was     summoned        for   questioning    in
          connection with FIR No. 01 of 2023. However, this
          claim is contradicted by the fact that FIR No. 17 of
          2023,   under      which    the    appellant    was   later
34
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          implicated, was not registered until 23rd February
          2023, and was based on the alleged disclosure made
          by co-accused Farooq Hussain, who was arrested
          following the recovery of a narcotic substance. This
          temporal anomaly exposes the fabricated nature of
          the respondent’s case and conclusively establishes
          illegal detention of the appellant from 20th February,
          2023 to 26th February, 2023.
20. More significantly, the respondent’s suicide
          theory is demolished when assessed in light of the
          medical evidence, which decisively rules out the
          theory of the harm being self-inflicted. The complete
          surgical removal of both testicles, the extensive
          injuries to the appellant’s palms and soles, consistent
          with custodial torture techniques such as falanga,
          the presence of multiple vegetative particles in the
          rectum, and bruising on the buttocks extending to
          the thighs all points to a pattern of sustained and
          systematic torture. These injuries are medically
          impossible to be self-inflicted, particularly in the
          absence of fatal hemorrhage or loss of consciousness,
          as would have occurred had the mutilation been self-
          administered.     The    respondent’s      reliance   on
35
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          superficial cuts to the forearm as indicative of a
          suicide   attempt    pales   in   comparison      to   the
          magnitude and nature of the injuries sustained.
          Furthermore, CCTV footage showing the appellant
          walking normally until 9:00 am on 26th February,
          2023 only intensifies the doubts surrounding the
          respondent’s account, as it leaves unexplained how
          such grievous and complex injuries could be self-
          inflicted in the narrow window between 9:00 am and
          11:15 am, without any signs of struggle, distress, or
          intervention   by   others   within   a    secured     and
          surveilled facility. These glaring inconsistencies and
          manifest contradictions render the respondent’s
          version   wholly    implausible   and      reinforce   the
          necessity of an independent investigation.
21.   The respondent’s narrative reveals a disturbing
          pattern of systematic cover-up and abuse of authority
          that further strengthens the appellant’s claim for CBI
          investigation. Though the appellant’s wife attempted
          to file a complaint immediately after the incident
          through a legal notice dated 2nd March, 2023, the
          respondents dismissively stated in their response
          given in Court that the allegations were frivolous,
36
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          having no substance and hence were not replied. This
          cavalier dismissal of serious allegations of custodial
          torture demonstrates the institutional bias and
          predetermined mindset to protect the accused police
          officers. The influence being exercised by local police
          officials is evident from the fact that no proper
          investigation was initiated despite clear medical
          evidence of torture, and instead, a counter FIR No. 32
          of 2023 was registered against the victim himself
          under
Section 309
of the IPC to create a false
          narrative. The respondent’s assertion that the
          appellant and his wife were making attempts to
          somehow deter the respondents and the Police
          authorities from investigating the heinous offences
          involving the appellant, reveals the mindset of
          viewing    torture   victims    as   impediments       to
          investigation rather than victims deserving justice.
22. While the respondents seeks to justify the
          appellant’s prolonged detention and subsequent
          torture by referring to his alleged involvement in FIR
          No. 01 of 2023 and FIR No. 17 of 2023 under the
NDPS Act
, this very argument strengthens the case
          for an independent investigation. The pendency of
37
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          these cases creates a conflict of interest where the
          same police machinery that is accused of custodial
          torture is also investigating the NDPS cases against
          the appellant. This creates an inherent bias where
          the investigating officers have a vested interest in
          suppressing      the    torture   allegations    to   protect
          themselves while simultaneously trying to indict the
          appellant   in    NDPS     offences.   The      respondent’s
          argument that the appellant attempted suicide ‘to
          dodge the investigation’ is not only medically
          impossible given the nature of injuries but also
          logically flawed.      It is foolhardy to suggest that a
          rational person would subject himself to complete
          genital mutilation and cause injuries at inaccessible
          body parts so as to avoid questioning in a drug case.
          The investigation of the custodial torture allegations
          and the NDPS cases require complete separation and
          independence, which can only be achieved through
          the transfer of investigation to an independent
          agency. The current scenario, where the accused
          officers continue to investigate the very person, they
          allegedly tortured, makes a mockery of the criminal
          justice system and violates the very principle of
          fairness and transparency.
38
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
23. We are of the considered opinion that in
          rejecting the writ petition, the High Court grossly
          erred   in   failing    to   exercise   its   constitutional
          obligation of protecting the fundamental rights of a
          citizen, his dignity and right to life.         It failed to
          consider the gravity of offences committed as well as
          the influence that could be exerted by accused
          persons being police officials.         There was a clear
          requirement and a constitutional mandate to refer
          the matter to the CBI for investigation so that fair and
          uninfluenced investigation could be conducted. The
          High Court’s failure to appreciate that the accused
          are not ordinary citizens but police officers wielding
          considerable power and influence within the local
          administrative         and    investigative      machinery
          demonstrates a fundamental misunderstanding of
          the dynamics of custodial torture cases. Police
          officers, by virtue of their position, have access to
          evidence, witnesses, and investigative records, and
          possess the institutional authority to manipulate,
          suppress, or destroy crucial evidence that could
          establish their culpability.
39
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
24. This Court has addressed the grave issue of
          custodial torture, inhuman treatment, and custodial
          deaths in a series of notable judgments including
D.K
          Basu v. State of West Bengal17
,
State of M.P. v.
          Shyamsunder Trivedi18
and
Nilabati Behera v.
          State       of    Orissa.19    This
Court        has not only
          condemned the nature and extent of such violations
          as affronts to human dignity and constitutional
          rights but has also underscored the imperative for a
          thorough, impartial, and effective investigation into
          every instance of custodial violence. The Court has
          repeatedly emphasised that accountability must be
          ensured          through    proper      legal   and   procedural
          mechanisms so that such acts do not go unchecked
          or unpunished.
25.
In
D.K. Basu
(supra), this Court, while laying
          down        effective      guidelines     for   police   officials
          emphasised the procedures to be followed during
          arrest and detention to prevent custodial torture and
          to safeguard the rights of the accused. The Court
          noted that:
17 (1997) 1SCC 416.
18 (1995) 4 SCC 262.
19   (1993) 2 SCC 746.
40
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
                “9. Custodial violence, including torture and
                death in the lock-ups, strikes a blow at the rule
                of law, which demands that the powers of the
                executive should not only be derived from law
                but also that the same should be limited by law.
                Custodial violence is a matter of concern. It is
                aggravated by the fact that it is committed by
                persons who are supposed to be the protectors of
                the citizens. It is committed under the shield of
                uniform and authority in the four walls of a
                police station or lock-up, the victim being totally
                helpless. The protection of an individual from
                torture and abuse by the police and other law-
                enforcing officers is a matter of deep concern in
                a free society.
11. “Custodial torture” is a naked violation of
                human dignity and degradation which destroys,
                to a very large extent, the individual personality.
                It is a calculated assault on human dignity and
                whenever human dignity is wounded, civilisation
                takes a step backward — flag of humanity must
                on each such occasion fly half-mast.”
26. Further, this Court in
Shyamsunder Trivedi
(supra), held that:
“17. Tortures in police custody, which of late are
                on the increase, receive encouragement by this
                type of an unrealistic approach of the courts
                because it reinforces the belief in the mind of the
                police that no harm would come to them, if an
                odd prisoner dies in the lock-up, because there
                would hardly be any evidence available to the
                prosecution to directly implicate them with the
                torture. The courts must not lose sight of the fact
                that death in police custody is perhaps one of the
                worst kind of crimes in a civilised society,
                governed by the rule of law and poses a serious
                threat to an orderly civilised society. Torture in
41
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
                custody flouts the basic rights of the citizens
                recognised by the Indian Constitution and is an
                affront to human dignity. Police excesses and the
                maltreatment of detainees/undertrial prisoners
                or suspects tarnishes the image of any civilised
                nation and encourages the men in ‘Khaki’ to
                consider themselves to be above the law and
                sometimes even to become law unto themselves.
                Unless stern measures are taken to check the
                malady, the foundations of the criminal justice
                delivery system would be shaken and the
                civilization itself would risk the consequence of
                heading towards perishing. The courts must,
                therefore, deal with such cases in a realistic
                manner and with the sensitivity which they
                deserve, otherwise the common man may lose
                faith in the judiciary itself, which will be a sad
                day.”
27. Considering the unprecedented gravity of this
          custodial torture case, the systematic cover-up
          orchestrated    by     local   police      machinery,       the
          institutional bias demonstrated in the handling of the
          complaint,     and    the    complete      failure   of    local
          authorities to conduct a fair investigation and the
          unrelenting stand taken by the respondent State, we
          are constrained to direct transfer of investigation to
          the   CBI.   The     local   police   at    Kupwara        have
          demonstrated complete institutional failure by first
          illegally detaining the appellant from 20th February,
          2023, then subjecting him to barbaric and systematic
          torture resulting in permanent mutilation and finally
42
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          refusing to register the complaint filed by the
          appellant’s     wife    while     simultaneously          creating
          counter-narratives to shield the perpetrators from
          accountability.        By     directing     the    very    Senior
          Superintendent         of   Police,   who     summoned         the
          appellant at the Joint Interrogation Centre, Kupwara,
          just to conduct an enquiry at such a belated stage,
          combined with the pendency of NDPS cases, creates
          a conflict of interest, making it impossible for any fair
          investigation to be conducted at the local level. Only
          investigation by an independent agency, i.e., CBI can
          restore public faith in the criminal justice system,
          ensure that this dehumanising crime does not go
          unpunished, and guarantee that the truth emerges
          without any institutional bias or cover-up attempts.
          The majesty of law demands nothing less than
          complete      independence            and     impartiality      in
          investigating crimes that shock the conscience of
          society and violate the most fundamental principles
          of human dignity enshrined in
Article 21
of the
          Constitution     of     India.    Hence,     the    transfer    of
          investigation     to    the    CBI    becomes       not    merely
          advisable but constitutionally imperative to ensure
          justice and uphold the rule of law.
43
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          III. On the issue of quashing of the FIR filed
          against the appellant: -
28.       This Court has, in a catena of judgments,
          consistently held that at the stage of considering a
          petition for quashing criminal proceedings, it is not
          the function of the Court to meticulously examine the
          truthfulness, reliability, or veracity of the allegations
          contained in the FIR or accompanying materials.
          Nonetheless, it remains a settled principle of law that
          the allegations, even if accepted at their face value,
          must disclose the commission of a cognizable offence.
          Whether such disclosure arises from the FIR itself,
          the chargesheet, or any other material placed on
          record,    the   essential   requirement   is   that   the
          ingredients of the alleged offence must be prima facie
          satisfied. It is the duty of the Constitutional Courts
          to safeguard the machinery of criminal law from
          being reduced to a means of vengeance, oppression,
          or personal vendetta. Where it is evident that the
          initiation or continuation of proceedings amounts to
          an abuse of process or is intended to harass the
          accused, the Court is not only empowered but
          obligated to intervene and quash such proceedings in
44
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          the interest of justice. Thus, while the threshold for
          interference at the preliminary stage is high, it does
          not preclude judicial scrutiny altogether. Discretion
          under
Section 482
of the CrPC (corresponding
          Section 528 of the BNSS) must be exercised
          judiciously, especially in cases where the allegations
          are inherently improbable, absurd, or lack the factual
          substratum necessary to constitute a prosecutable
          offence.
29. This Court in a locus classicus judgment,
State
          of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal20
, on the subject has laid
          down parameters for quashing of an FIR and the
          subsequent        proceedings     thereof.    The     relevant
          paragraphs are reproduced hereinbelow:
“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation
                   of the various relevant provisions of the Code
                   under Chapter XIV and of the principles of
                   law enunciated by this Court in a series of
                   decisions relating to the exercise of the
                   extraordinary power under
Article 226
or the
                   inherent powers under Section 482 of the
                   Code which we have extracted and
                   reproduced above, we have given the
                   following categories of cases by way of
                   illustration wherein such power could be
                   exercised either to prevent abuse of the
                   process of any court or otherwise to secure

          20 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335.
45
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
                 the ends of justice, though it may not be
                 possible to lay down any precise, clearly
                 defined and sufficiently channelised and
                 inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and to
                 give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of
                 cases wherein such power should be
                 exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the
                     first information report or the
                     complaint, even if they are taken at
                     their face value and accepted in their
                     entirety do not prima facie constitute
                     any offence or make out a case against
                     the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first
                     information      report    and     other
                     materials, if any, accompanying the
                     FIR do not disclose a cognizable
                     offence, justifying an investigation by
                     police officers under Section 156(1) of
                     the Code except under an order of a
                     Magistrate within the purview of
                     Section 155(2) of the Code.
(3)    Where      the    uncontroverted
                     allegations made in the FIR or
                     complaint and the evidence collected in
                     support of the same do not disclose the
                     commission of any offence and make
                     out a case against the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do
                     not constitute a cognizable offence but
                     constitute only a non-cognizable
                     offence, no investigation is permitted
                     by a police officer without an order of a
                     Magistrate as contemplated under
                     Section 155(2) of the Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the
                     FIR or complaint are so absurd and
                     inherently improbable on the basis of
                     which no prudent person can ever
46
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
                       reach a just conclusion that there is
                       sufficient ground for proceeding
                       against the accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar
                       engrafted in any of the provisions of the
                       Code or the concerned Act (under
                       which a criminal proceeding is
                       instituted) to the institution and
                       continuance of the proceedings and/or
                       where there is a specific provision in
                       the Code or the concerned Act,
                       providing efficacious redress for the
                       grievance of the aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is
                       manifestly attended with mala fide
                       and/or where the proceeding is
                       maliciously instituted with an ulterior
                       motive for wreaking vengeance on the
                       accused and with a view to spite him
                       due to private and personal grudge.”
30. Recently, a coordinate bench of this Court in the
          case of
Mohammad Wajid v. State of U.P.21
, noted
          that:
“34. At this stage, we would like to observe
                    something important. Whenever an accused
                    comes before the Court invoking either the
                    inherent powers under
Section 482
of the Code of
                    Criminal Procedure (
CrPC
) or extraordinary
                    jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution
                    to get the FIR or the criminal proceedings quashed
                    essentially on the ground that such proceedings
                    are manifestly frivolous or vexatious or instituted
                    with the ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance,
                    then in such circumstances the Court owes a duty
                    to look into the FIR with care and a little more

          21 2023 SCC OnLine SC 951.
47
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
                  closely. We say so because once the complainant
                  decides to proceed against the accused with an
                  ulterior motive for wreaking personal vengeance,
                  etc., then he would ensure that the FIR/complaint
                  is very well drafted with all the necessary
                  pleadings. The complainant would ensure that the
                  averments made in the FIR/complaint are such
                  that they disclose the necessary ingredients to
                  constitute the alleged offence. Therefore, it will not
                  be just enough for the Court to look into the
                  averments made in the FIR/complaint alone for
                  the purpose of ascertaining whether the necessary
                  ingredients to constitute the alleged offence are
                  disclosed or not. In frivolous or vexatious
                  proceedings, the Court owes a duty to look into
                  many other attending circumstances emerging
                  from the record of the case over and above the
                  averments and, if need be, with due care and
                  circumspection try to read in between the lines.
                  The Court while exercising its jurisdiction under
Section 482
of the CrPC or
Article 226
of the
                  Constitution need not restrict itself only to the
                  stage of a case but is empowered to take into
                  account the overall circumstances leading to the
                  initiation/registration of the case as well as the
                  materials collected in the course of investigation.
                  Take for instance the case on hand. Multiple FIRs
                  have been registered over a period of time. It is in
                  the background of such circumstances the
                  registration of multiple FIRs assumes importance,
                  thereby attracting the issue of wreaking vengeance
                  out of private or personal grudge as alleged.”

                                                 (Emphasis Supplied)
31. In the present case, the authorities, instead of
          registering the complaint of the appellant regarding
          custodial torture, filed a counter FIR against him
          under
Section 309
of the IPC. Perusal of the
48
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          contents of FIR (supra) reflect that the allegations
          made     therein      are      vague     and    manifestly
          contradictory to the established medical evidence.
          The FIR states that the appellant tried to cut his
          vein with a blade, however, the medical records,
          above discussed, reveal that the injuries are much
          graver and more extensive than what is depicted in
          this manifestly fabricated narrative. The stark
          disparity between the trivial description of ‘cutting
          his vein’ in the FIR and the barbaric reality of
          complete castration and systematic torture exposes
          the mala fide intent behind registering this counter-
          FIR.
32.
In our considered view, the present case
          squarely falls within parameters (1) and (7) laid
          down by this Court in
Bhajan Lal
(supra) whereby,
          this Court authoritatively held that quashing is
          justified where: (i) the allegations made in the FIR
          or complaint, even if taken at face value and
          accepted    in     entirety,    do     not   disclose   the
          commission of any offence, or (ii) the criminal
          proceedings are manifestly tainted by mala fides,
          having been instituted maliciously with the ulterior
49
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          purpose of wreaking vengeance. The registration of
          FIR No. 32 of 2023 against the victim of custodial
          torture    constitutes   a     classic     example    of
          institutional abuse and perversion of criminal
          justice machinery to shield the real perpetrators
          while     victimizing    the     complainant.        The
          transformation of a torture victim into an accused
          through a concocted theory of attempted suicide,
          based on manifestly implausible medical opinion
          and     glaring   procedural     violations,    reflects
          institutional malice of the highest order. The timing
          and manner of registration of this FIR, which was a
          sequel to the torture incident and in complete
          disregard of nature, number and location of injuries
          caused to the victim, demonstrates that it was
          conceived as a pre-emptive defense mechanism
          rather than a genuine police action based on a
          truthful investigation. This is not merely a case of
          investigative error or overreach; it is a calculated
          effort to fabricate charges, distort the narrative, and
          shield the real perpetrators of crime of custodial
          torture. The use of State machinery to invert the
          roles of victim and offender represents a grave
          subversion of the criminal process and compels the
50
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          intervention     of    this      Court    to     prevent   the
          miscarriage of justice.
33. Upon evaluating the present case and the
          material on record, we find that the High Court
          gravely erred in declining to exercise its jurisdiction
under
Section 482
of the CrPC to quash FIR No. 32
of 2023 and the proceedings arising therefrom.
          Faced with a clear abuse of process, where a
          custodial torture victim is falsely implicated to
          shield the perpetrators, the High Court was duty-
          bound to intervene.
34. Before we conclude, we deem it necessary to
          address the question of compensation to the
          appellant, who is a victim of brutal and inhuman
          custodial torture. It is now well-settled in Indian
          constitutional        jurisprudence            that    where
          fundamental rights, particularly the right to life and
          personal liberty under
Article 21
of the Constitution
          of   India   are      violated    by     State    machinery,
          appropriate monetary compensation may be an
          effective remedy.
In
D.K. Basu
(supra), this Court
          held that pecuniary compensation is an appropriate
          and effective remedy for the infringement of
51
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          fundamental rights caused by State officials and
          that    the     defence        of    sovereign     immunity   is
          inapplicable.          The     Court       noted    that   such
          compensation must focus on the compensatory
          element and serve as a balm to the victim, without
          prejudice to other remedies in civil or criminal law.
35. The principle has been reiterated in
Nilabati
          Behera
(supra) and
Sube Singh v. State of
          Haryana22
,             where        this   Court    held   that
          compensation may be awarded when the violation
          of
Article 21
is patent, incontrovertible, and of a
          magnitude that shocks the conscience of the Court.
          The relevant observations from
the said judgment
are extracted below:
“46. In cases where custodial death or custodial
                  torture or other violation of the rights guaranteed
                  under
Article 21
is established, the courts may
                  award compensation in a proceeding under
Article 32
or 226. However, before awarding
                  compensation, the Court will have to pose to
                  itself the following questions: (a) whether the
                  violation of
Article 21
is patent and
                  incontrovertible, (b) whether the violation is
                  gross and of a magnitude to shock the
                  conscience of the court, (c) whether the custodial
                  torture alleged has resulted in death or whether



          22 (2006) 3 SCC 178.
52
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
                custodial torture is supported by medical report
                or visible marks or scars or disability.”
36. We are of the unequivocal opinion that the
          present case meets all such criteria. The injuries
          caused to the appellant during his illegal detention,
          particularly   the   complete     mutilation     of      his
          genitalia, use of pepper/chilly powder and electric
          shocks on his genitalia, are grave reminders of the
          inhuman torture meted out to the appellant while
          detaining him illegally. The cumulative effect of all
          these facts is deeply shocking to the conscience of
          this Court.
37. Accordingly, considering the gravity and
          magnitude of the custodial torture established
          through medical records and the institutional
          apathy that followed, we are of the considered
          opinion that this is a fit case for awarding
          compensation to the victim of the violence, i.e., the
          appellant herein. The violation of
Article 21
is not
          only evident but egregious. The appellant, a police
          constable himself, suffered life-debilitating injuries
          while in the custody of fellow state actors, and
          despite repeated complaints, no effective redress
          was provided. In line with the decisions referred
53
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
          above, and in discharge of the Court’s duty to
          uphold constitutional protections, we direct the
          State to pay interim compensation to the tune of
          Rs.50,00,000/-     (Rupees      Fifty   Lakhs)   to   the
          appellant. This compensation is without prejudice
          to the appellant’s right to pursue further remedies
          for additional compensation before appropriate
          forum. The State Government shall be under an
          obligation to recover the said amount from the
          officials found guilty upon completion of the
          investigation/disciplinary proceedings.
Conclusion & Directions: -
38. In exercise of our extraordinary jurisdiction
          under
Article 136
read with
Article 142
of the
          Constitution of India and in furtherance of the
          constitutional   mandate       to   protect   fundamental
          rights, we hereby issue the following directions: -
I.   The   Director,   CBI,    shall   forthwith     direct
                registration of a RC in relation to the incidents
                of custodial violence and illegal detention of the
                appellant at the Joint Interrogation Centre,
                Kupwara during the period from 20th February,
54
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
                2023 to 26th February, 2023, under relevant
                provisions of the penal statutes, based on the
                complaint filed by the appellant’s wife dated 1st
                March, 2023 and the medical evidence on
                record. The RC shall be registered within 7 days
                of this order.
II.   The   entire      material      collected   in     enquiry
                conducted        so    far,     including   all     related
                documents, medical records, CCTV footage,
                forensic evidence, and case diary, shall be
                immediately handed over to the competent
                officer of the CBI. The Director, CBI, shall
                constitute a Special Investigation Team headed
                by    an   officer      not     below   the       rank   of
                Superintendent of Police to investigate this
                matter. The police officials found responsible for
                the custodial torture shall be arrested forthwith
                and not later than a period of one month from
                today. The investigation shall be completed
                within 90 days of the date of registration of the
                RC.
III.   The CBI shall also conduct a comprehensive
                inquiry into the systemic issues at the Joint
                Interrogation         Centre,    Kupwara,         including
55
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
               examination of all CCTV systems, interrogation
               from all personnel present during the relevant
               period, forensic examination of the premises,
               and review of all protocols and procedures
               followed for detention and interrogation of
               suspects.
IV.   FIR No. 32 of 2023, registered against the
               appellant under
Section 309
of the IPC at Police
               Station Kupwara, is hereby quashed being
               prima facie fabricated as, in our considered
               view, the same was registered with mala fide
               intent to shield the guilty officers and prejudice
               the rights of the appellant.
V.   A sequel to the above discussion and in order to
               provide some solace to the victim and his family
               for the barbaric acts of custodial torture leading
               to complete castration, we hereby direct the
               Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir to pay
               compensation of Rs.50,00,000/- (Rupees Fifty
               Lakhs) to the appellant (victim).         The said
               amount shall be recoverable from the officer(s)
               concerned     against   whom     a     departmental
               proceeding shall be initiated upon conclusion of
               the investigation by the CBI.         The CBI shall
56
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
               submit its status report to this Court by 10th
               November, 2025.
39. At the outset, we deem it necessary to clarify
          that the observations made herein concerning the
          investigation into the allegations of custodial torture
          are strictly limited to the adjudication of the
          appellant’s case and the impugned proceedings
          under consideration. Nothing contained in this order
          shall be construed as expressing any opinion on the
          merits of any other prosecution, and it is expressly
          provided that any proceedings arising therefrom shall
          go on independently and uninfluenced by the present
          findings, in accordance with law.
40. In view of the above discussion, the impugned
          judgment dated 18th September, 2023, passed by the
          learned Single Bench of the High Court of Jammu &
          Kashmir and Ladakh at Srinagar in Criminal
          Miscellaneous Petition No. 111 of 2023 connected
          with Writ Petition (Civil) No. 592 of 2023, rejecting the
          appellant’s prayer for transfer of investigation to the
          CBI, is hereby quashed and set aside.
41. The present appeals are, accordingly, allowed.
57
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023
42. Any     pending   application(s),      if   any,   stand
          disposed of accordingly.
43. List again on 17th November, 2025, for receiving
          the status report.
…..…………………J.
                                            (VIKRAM NATH)


                                            .…………………….J.
                                            (SANDEEP MEHTA)
          NEW DELHI;
JULY 21, 2025.
58
Crl Appeal @ SLP (Crl.) No(s). 13751-13752 of 2023