[Cites
26
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Stemcyte India Therapeutics Pvt ... vs C.C.E. And St, Ahmedabad - Iii on 14 July, 2025
1


2025 INSC 841                                                                       REPORTABLE
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3816-3817 OF 2025


             M/S. STEMCYTE INDIA THERAPEUTICS
             PVT. LTD.                                                            ... APPELLANT

                                                        VERSUS


             COMMISSIONER OF CENTRAL EXCISE AND
             SERVICE TAX, AHMEDABAD - III                                        ... RESPONDENT


                                                    JUDGMENT
R. MAHADEVAN, J.
1.             These appeals have been preferred by the appellant / assessee challenging

             the common Final Order dated 02.08.2024 passed by the Customs, Excise and

             Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, West Zonal Bench at Ahmedabad 1, in Service

             Tax Appeal Nos. 12168/2018 and 11738/2016. By the impugned order, the

             CESTAT rejected the appeals filed by the appellant and upheld the orders

             passed by the lower authorities. In doing so, it held that the services of

             enrolment, collection, processing, and storage of umbilical cord blood stem

             cells, provided by the appellant during the period from 01.07.2012 to
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHANDRESH
Date: 2025.07.14
16.02.2014, do not fall within the scope of “Healthcare Services”.
   18:38:51 IST
   Reason:
1
For short, “CESTAT”
2
Consequently, the appellant was held liable to pay service tax on the said

services along with interest and penalties.
2.     The basic facts of the case, as projected by the appellant, are as follows:
2.1.   The appellant is a joint venture company of M/s. Stemcyte Inc., USA,

M/s. Apollo Hospital Enterprises Ltd., and M/s. Cadila Pharmaceuticals Ltd.,

established in 2008. It is engaged in the collection, processing, testing, and

storage of umbilical cord blood units and their therapeutic application. The

appellant is a member of the Association of Stem Cell Banks of India.
2.2.   On 27.12.2011, the          Ministry of        Health      and     Family

Welfare, Government of India, issued notification No.

GSR    899(E)      notifying        the       Drugs    and    Cosmetics        (3rd

Amendment) Rules, 2011. Under these rules, cord blood

banks were required to obtain registration. Part XII-
D of the Rules set out detailed requirements relating to the

collection, processing, testing, and release of umbilical

cord blood-derived stem cells.
2.3.   Subsequently, the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, issued

Notification No.25/2012–Service Tax dated 20.06.2012, which provided a

consolidated list of services exempt from service tax. Under Serial No.2 of the

said notification, “Healthcare Services” were exempted. This notification

superseded the earlier Notification No. 12/2012–Service Tax dated 17.03.2012.
3
Accordingly, with effect from 01.07.2012, the negative list regime of service

tax was introduced, rendering all services taxable unless specifically included in

the in the negative list or expressly exempted otherwise.

2.4.   On 21.09.2012, the Association of Stem Cell Banks of India submitted a

representation to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of

India, seeking clarification on whether the services rendered by stem cell banks

qualified as “Healthcare Services”. In response, the Ministry, after consultation

with the National AIDS Control Organization, issued an Office Memorandum

dated 22.05.2013, clarifying that the services rendered by stem cell banks are

part of “Healthcare Services” and may be considered for exemption from

service tax.
2.5.   On 24.10.2013, the appellant obtained Service Tax Registration No.

AALCS7174BSD001 under the category “healthcare services by clinical

establishment, health check-up / diagnosis, etc.” from the Central Board of

Excise and Customs.
2.6.   Subsequently,    the   Deputy    Commissioner        of   Central   Excise,

Ahmedabad-III, issued a letter dated 02.12.2013 to the appellant requiring them

to submit documents relating to the services provided by it. The appellant

submitted the requested documents on 30.12.2013.
2.7.   Thereafter, a search was conducted at the appellant’s premises on

06.01.2014, during which, statements were recorded and a panchnama was

drawn.
4
2.8.   In the meanwhile, the Ministry of Finance issued Notification No.

4/2014-ST dated 17.02.2014, inserting Entry 2A, which exempted from service

tax the services provided by cord blood banks by way of preservation of stem

cells or any other services in relation to such preservation.

2.9.   Subsequently, the Commissioner issued summons and letters to the

appellant demanding service tax for the period from 01.07.2012 to 16.02.2014.

In response, the appellant submitted replies along with the necessary documents

and deposited a sum of Rs. 40,00,000/-, stating that the payment was made

under protest, as the services provided by it, were exempt under Notification

No.25/2012-ST dated 20.06.2012 under the heading “Healthcare Services”.

2.10. On 26.03.2015, the appellant filed an application seeking refund of the

deposited amount of Rs.40,00,000/-. However, by communication dated

27.03.2015, the Superintendent of Central Excise, Ahmedabad-III, refused to

refund the said amount.
2.11. Thereafter, the Commissioner issued a show cause notice dated

08.04.2015 calling upon the appellant to show cause why their refund claim

should not be rejected under
Section 11B
of the Central Excise Act, 1944. The

appellant filed a written reply, but the Commissioner passed Order-in-Original

No. 108/Ref/ST/DC/2015-16 dated 31.08.2015, rejecting the refund claim on

the ground that the investigation was still pending. The Commissioner

(Appeals) also dismissed the appellant’s appeal by Order-in-Appeal dated
5
28.07.2016. Aggrieved, the appellant preferred a further appeal before the

CESTAT under
Section 86(1)
of the Finance Act, 1994.
2.12. During the pendency of the aforesaid appeal, the Commissioner, CGST &

Central Excise, Gandhinagar issued a show cause notice dated 28.07.2017

demanding service tax of Rs. 2,07,29,576/- along with interest for services

rendered between 01.07.2012 and 16.02.2014, and also proposed imposition of

penalties under
sections 77(1)(a)
,
77(1)(d)
,
77(2)
and
78
of the Finance Act,

1994. The appellant filed a detailed reply.
2.13. Meanwhile, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare issued

Notification No. GSR 334(E), notifying the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment)

Rules, 2018, wherein, stem cell and cell-based products were classified as

‘Drugs’. The appellant submitted an additional reply to the show cause notice,

on 04.05.2018. Thereafter, the Commissioner passed Order-in-Original dated

18.05.2018, confirming the demand and penalties. Aggrieved, the appellant

filed a statutory appeal before the CESTAT.
2.14. By a common order dated 02.08.2024, the CESTAT dismissed both the

appeals filed by the appellant and upheld the Orders-in-Original. The appellant

is therefore before this Court by way of the present appeal.
3.    The learned senior counsel for the appellant submitted that the CESTAT

failed to properly consider the various documents, expert opinions, and

submissions placed on record. These included the Office Memorandum
6
No.X.11035/41/2012-DFQC (Pt.) dated 22.05.2013 issued by the Ministry of

Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, clarifying that the services

rendered by the appellant – relating to enrolment, collection, processing, and

storage of umbilical cord blood stem cells – fall within the ambit of “Healthcare

Services”, and are thus exempt under Serial No.2 of Notification No. 25/2012-

ST dated 20.06.2012. It was further contended that the subsequent insertion of

Entry 2A by Notification No.4/2014-ST dated 17.02.2014 was merely

clarificatory in nature and did not imply that the services were not covered

earlier under Entry 2.
3.1.   It was submitted that the exemption under Entry 2 is broad and does not

distinguish between types of illnesses based on their frequency or severity. The

CESTAT erred in narrowly interpreting the term “Healthcare Services” holding

that although stem cells stored and supplied by the appellant are used for

treatment of grave illnesses, these would not qualify as health care services as

they are not used for treatment of regular illnesses.
3.2.   It was argued that “Healthcare Services” have always been exempt under

the
Finance Act, 1994
and that such exemption continued under the negative list

regime from 01.07.2012. Referring to Clause 2(t) of Notification No.25/2012-

ST, the learned senior counsel submitted that the expression “any service” used

therein must be interpreted liberally, covering services for diagnosis, treatment,

or care of illness, injury, deformity, abnormality, or pregnancy. Judicial
7
precedents including
K.P. Mohammed Salim v. Commissioner of Income-tax
2,

and
Lucknow Development Authority v. M.K. Gupta
3, were relied upon to

demonstrate that the word “any” has wide import and must be read expansively.

3.3.      It was further submitted that the CESTAT failed to appreciate the

beneficial nature of the exemption under Notification No. 25/2012-ST. Such

exemptions, being in furtherance of public health, must be interpreted liberally

in favour of the assessee. The later insertion of Entry 2A could not curtail the

scope of Entry 2, as both pertain to the same class of services.

3.4.      The learned senior counsel further argued that the CESTAT’s finding –

that the appellant’s services are not part of any recognized system of medicine –

is perverse and unsupported by evidence. This finding merely reiterated the

reasoning of the Order-in-Original dated 18.05.2018 without independently

evaluating the appellant’s submissions.
3.5.      It was pointed out that the appellant’s services are regulated under the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act
and the 2011 Third Amendment Rules. Part XII D of

these Rules prescribes conditions for registration and regulation of stem cell

banks. Furthermore, Notification No. 213 dated 04.04.2018 classifies stem cell-

based products as “drugs”, thereby placing the services within a recognized

statutory framework. The appellant, having obtained all necessary registrations

and certifications, acted under a bona fide belief that their services were exempt.
2
2008 (11) SCC 573
3
(1994) 1 SCC 243
8
3.6.   The learned senior counsel further contended that the extended period of

limitation invoked by the department was impermissible. The demand raised

after more than three years from the conclusion of the investigation is barred by

limitation. In the absence of suppression, misstatement, or intent to evade, the

invocation of the extended limitation period was unjustified.

3.7.   It was also submitted that the penalties imposed under
Section 78
were

unwarranted. Given the appellant’s reasonable and bona fide belief regarding

exemption, their conduct falls within the protective ambit of
section 80
of the

Finance Act, 1994.
3.8.   In support of the submissions, the learned senior counsel placed reliance

on a compilation of judgments of this Court.
3.9.   Accordingly, it was submitted that the appellant is not liable to pay

service tax, interest, or penalties for the disputed period and hence, the

impugned order is liable to be set aside.
4.     On the contrary, the learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for

the respondent submitted that there existed an element of mutual trust and

confidence between the department and the appellant regarding compliance

with service tax provisions. Based on such mutual trust, the appellant was

required to maintain statutory records under the Service Tax Rules. However,

the appellant breached this trust and contravened Section 68 of the Finance Act,
9
1994, read with Rule 6 of the Service Tax Rules, 1994, by failing to pay service

tax for the relevant period.
4.1.   It was further argued that the services provided by the appellant cannot be

classified as falling within the ambit of “Healthcare Services by clinical

establishments”. Therefore, as per clause 2(t) of Notification No. 25/2012-ST,

the activities of enrolment, collection, processing, and storage of umbilical cord

blood stem cells are not covered under the said notification for exemption.

4.2.   It was also submitted that the exemption for the appellant’s services was

specifically introduced only by Notification No. 4/2014-ST dated 17.02.2014

through insertion of Entry 2A. Hence, during the period from 01.07.2012 to

16.02.2014, the appellant’s services were neither covered under the Negative

List nor exempted by Notification No. 25/2012-ST and they are chargeable to

service tax.
4.3.   The learned counsel further submitted that the appellant had failed to

obtain proper service tax registration for the said services and also failed to

declare and assess the correct value of taxable services. Consequently, the

appellant was rightly held liable to pay penalties under
Sections 77(1)(a)
,
77(1)
(d), 77(2) and 78 of the
Finance Act, 1994
.
4.4.   Accordingly, the learned counsel submitted that the impugned order calls

for no interference and that the present appeal deserves to be dismissed.
10
5.    We have considered the rival submissions and carefully perused the

materials placed on record.
6.    Admittedly, the appellant is engaged in the business of stem cell banking

services, and has been issued a registration certificate under the category of

“Healthcare Services by clinical establishments” as per the provisions of the
Finance Act, 1994
. As per Entry 2 of Notification No.25/2012-ST dated

20.06.2012, services provided by clinical establishments in the nature of health

care were exempt from service tax. Subsequently, Notification No.4/2014-ST

dated 17.02.2014 introduced Entry 2A, specifically exempting services

provided by cord blood banks for the preservation of stem cells or related

services. During investigation, the appellant deposited a sum of Rs.40,00,000/-

with the department under protest. Observing that the activity of enrolment,

collection, processing and storage of umbilical cord blood stem cells performed

by the appellant is a taxable service during the period from 01.07.2012 to

16.02.2014, show cause notice dated 28.07.2017 came to be issued to the

appellant, and the same culminated in Order-in-Original dated 18.05.2018, the

operative portion of which reads as follows:
“(i) I confirm the demand of Service Tax amounting to Rs.2,07,29,576/- (Rupees
      Two crore seven lakhs Twenty-nine thousand five hundred and seventy-Six only)
      not paid by them, during the period from 01.07.2012 to 16.02.2014 on activity of
      enrollment, collection, processing and storage of Umbilical Cord Blood Stem
      Cells …
(ii) as of
Section 73(2)
of the Finance Act, 1994 by invoking the extended, and
      order it to be recovered from them. Since an amount of Rs.40,00,000/- (Rupees
      Forty Lakhs only) has already been deposited by them, I order it to be
11
appropriated towards the above Service Tax liability payable by them against
      the said demand;
(iii) I order to recover interest at appropriate rate, on the Service Tax
      amounting to Rs.2,07,29,576/- (Rupees Two crore seven lakhs twenty-nine
      thousand five hundred and seventy-six only) from them under
Section 75
of the
      Finance Act, 1994, as amended from time to time.
(iv) I impose penalty of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten thousand only) upon them
      under
Section 77(1)(a)
of the Finance Act, 1994 for their failure to obtain
      service tax registration for the said service within the stipulated time frame;
(v) I impose penalty of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten thousand only) upon them under
Section 77(l)(d)
of the Finance Act, 1994 for their failure to pay service tax
      through internet banking;
(vi) I impose penalty of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten Thousand Only) upon them
      under
Section 77(2)
of the Finance Act, 1994 for their failure to assess their
      service tax liability & failure to file prescribed returns in Form ST-3 within
      stipulated time frame for the said service under
Section 70
of the Finance Act,
      1994;
(vii) I impose penalty of Rs.1,03,64,788/- (Rupees One Crore Three Lakhs Sixty
      Four Thousand Seven Hundred and Eighty Eight Only) (Fifty percent of the
      service tax demanded) upon them under
Section 78
of the Finance Act, 1994 for
      non-payment of service tax on account of misstatement / suppression of facts and
      contravention of provisions of the
Finance Act, 1994
and Service Tax Rules,
      1994 with intent to evade payment of Service Tax.”



      The CESTAT confirmed the demand of service tax, interest and penalties

imposed, and the rejection of refund claim made by the appellant, by the order

impugned herein.
7.    Now, the primary dispute involved herein, relates to the period between

01.07.2012 and 16.02.2014 and whether the appellant’s services during this

period fell within the ambit of “Healthcare Services” and are therefore, eligible

for exemption from payment of service tax.
12
8.     The contentions raised by the appellant can be summarised under two

broad grounds: first, that the show cause notice is barred by limitation; and

second, that the services rendered by it fall within the ambit of “Healthcare

Services”.
9.     In the present case, the disputed period is from 01.07.2012 to 16.02.2014.

However, the show cause notice was issued only on 28.07.2017, demanding a

sum of Rs.2,07,29,576/- towards service tax, by invoking the extended period of

limitation. Under
section 73(1)
of the Finance Act, 1994, a show cause notice

must ordinarily be issued within one year from the relevant date. The proviso to
section 73(1)
allows an extended period of up to five years only where the non-

payment or short payment of service tax is due to fraud, collusion, wilful

misstatement, suppression of facts, or contravention of the provisions of the Act

or Rules, with an intent to evade payment of service tax.
9.1.   It is evident from the communication dated 02.12.2013 issued by the

Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise, Ahmedabad-III, directing the

appellant to furnish the documents relating to their activities, that the

department was already aware of the nature of the appellant’s operations as

early as in 2013. Despite such awareness, the department issued the show cause

notice after an inordinate delay, well beyond the ordinary period of limitation,

and sought to justify it by invoking the extended period.
13
9.2.      There is no dispute that the services rendered by the appellant were not

exempt from service tax until Notification No. 25/2012-ST dated 20.06.2012

was issued. The records reveal that the appellant was under a bona fide belief

that the activity of enrolment, collection, processing, and storage of umbilical

cord blood stem cells fell within the scope of exempted “Healthcare Services”

and therefore, was not liable to service tax. There is nothing on record to

suggest that the appellant suppressed any material facts. On the contrary, they

responded promptly to departmental communications and even deposited a sum

of Rs. 40,00,000/- during the investigation. There was no allegation or evidence

of fraud, collusion, wilful misstatement, or contravention of statutory provisions

with intent to evade tax.
9.3.      It is a settled principle of law that, for the department to invoke the

extended period of limitation, there must be an active and deliberate act on the

part of the assessee to evade payment of tax. Mere non-payment of tax, without

any element of intent or suppression, is not sufficient to attract the extended

limitation period. In this regard, reference may be made to the following

judgments:
(
i) Padmini Products v. CCE4
“12.
Shri V. Lakshmi Kumaran, learned counsel for the appellant drew our
          attention to the observations of this Court in
CCE v. Chemphar Drugs and
          Liniments, Hyderabad
[(1989) 2 SCC 127 : 1989 SCC (Tax) 245] where at p.
131 of the report, this Court observed that in order to sustain an order of the
          Tribunal beyond a period of six months and up to a period of five years in view
          of the proviso to sub-section (1) of
Section 11-A
of the Act, it had to be
4
(1989) 4 SCC 275
14
established that the duty of excise had not been levied or paid or short-levied or
short-paid, or erroneously refunded by reasons of either fraud or collusion or
wilful misstatement or suppression of facts or contravention of any provision of
the Act or Rules made thereunder, with intent to evade payment of duty. It was
observed by this Court that something positive other than mere inaction or
failure on the part of the manufacturer or producer of conscious or deliberate
withholding of information when the manufacturer knew otherwise, is required
to be established before it is saddled with any liability beyond the period of six
months. Whether in a particular set of facts and circumstances there was any
fraud or collusion or wilful misstatement or suppression or contravention of any
provision of any Act, is a question of fact depending upon the facts and
circumstances of a particular case. The Tribunal, however, had held contrary to
the contention of the appellant. The Tribunal noted that dhoop sticks are
different products from agarbatis even though they belonged to the same
category and the Tribunal was of the view that these were to be treated
differently. Therefore, the clarification given in the context of the agarbatis
could not be applicable to dhoop sticks etc. and the Tribunal came to the
conclusion that inasmuch as the appellant had manufactured the goods without
informing the central excise authorities and had been removing these without
payment of duty, these would have to be taken to attract the mischief of the
provisions of Rule 9(2) and the longer period of limitation was available. But the
Tribunal reduced the penalty. Counsel for the appellant contended before us that
in view of the trade notices which were referred to by the Tribunal, there is
scope for believing that agarbatis were entitled to exemption and if that is so,
then there is enough scope for believing that there was no need of taking out a
licence under Rule 174 of the said Rules and also that there was no need of
paying duty at the time of removal of dhoop sticks, etc. Counsel further
submitted that in any event apart from the fact that no licence had been taken
and for which no licence was required because the whole duty was exempt in
view of Notification No.111 of 1978, referred to hereinbefore, and in view of the
fact that there was scope for believing that it was exempt under Schedule
annexed to the first notification i.e. No.55 of 1975, being handicrafts, the
appellant could not be held to be guilty of the fact that excise duty had not been
paid or short-levied or short-paid or erroneously refunded because of either any
fraud or collusion or wilful misstatement or suppression of facts or
contravention of any provision of the Act or Rules made thereunder. These
ingredients postulate a positive act. Failure to pay duty or take out a licence is
not necessarily due to fraud or collusion or wilful misstatement or suppression
of facts or contravention of any provision of the Act. Suppression of facts is not
failure to disclose the legal consequences of a certain provision. Shri Ganguly,
appearing for the Revenue, contended before us that the appellant should have
taken out a licence under Rule 174 of the said Rules because all the goods were
not handicrafts and as such were not exempted under Notification No. 55 of
1975 and therefore, the appellant were obliged to take out a licence. The failure
15
to take out the licence and thereafter to take the goods out of the factory gate
without payment of duty was itself sufficient, according to Shri Ganguly, to infer
that the appellant came within the mischief of
Section 11-A
of the Act. We are
unable to accept this position canvassed on behalf of the Revenue. As mentioned
hereinbefore, mere failure or negligence on the part of the producer or
manufacturer either not to take out a licence in case where there was scope for
doubt as to whether licence was required to be taken out or where there was
scope for doubt whether goods were dutiable or not, would not attract
Section
11-A
of the Act. In the facts and circumstances of this case, there were materials,
as indicated to suggest that there was scope for confusion and the appellant
believing that the goods came within the purview of the concept of handicrafts
and as such were exempt. If there was scope for such a belief or opinion, then
failure either to take out a licence or to pay duty on that behalf, when there was
no contrary evidence that the producer or the manufacturer knew these were
excisable or required to be licensed, would not attract the penal provisions of
Section 11-A
of the Act. If the facts are otherwise, then the position would be
different. It is true that the Tribunal has come to a conclusion that there was
failure in terms of
Section 11-A
of the Act.
Section 35-L
of the Act, inter alia,
provides that an appeal shall lie to this Court from any order passed by the
appellate tribunal relating, among other things, to the determination of any
question having a relation to the rate of duty of excise or to the value of goods
for purpose of assessment. Therefore, in this appeal, we have to examine the
correctness of the decision of the Tribunal. For the reasons indicated above, the
Tribunal was in error in applying the provisions of
Section 11-A
of the Act.
There were no materials from which it could be inferred or established that the
duty of excise had not been levied or paid or short-levied or short-paid or
erroneously refunded by reason of fraud, collusion or any wilful misstatement or
suppression of facts, or contravention of any of the provisions of the Act or of
the Rules made thereunder. The Tribunal in the appellate order has, however,
reduced the penalty to Rs 5000 and had also upheld the order of the confiscation
of the goods. In view of the fact that the claim of the Revenue is not sustainable
beyond a period of six months on the ground that these dhoop sticks, etc. were
not handicrafts entitled to exemption, we set aside the order of the Tribunal and
remand the matter to the Tribunal to modify the demand by confining it to the
period of six months prior to issue of show-cause notice and pass consequential
orders in the appeal on the question of penalty and confiscation. The appeal is
allowed to the extent indicated above and the matter is, therefore, remanded to
the Tribunal with the aforesaid directions. This appeal is disposed of
accordingly.”
16
(ii) CCE v. Chemphar Drugs and Liniments5

          “7. The respondent filed an appeal before the Tribunal. The Tribunal considered
          the matter and noted that the appellant’s case was that the demand for duty for
          the period beyond six months was time-barred; and the respondent’s case was
          that the demand for the period beyond 6 months from the receipt of show-cause
          notice, was time-barred inasmuch as there was no suppression or misstatement
          of facts by the appellant with a view to evade payment of duty. In support of its
          claim the respondent produced classification list approved by the authorities
          during the period 1978-79, and also produced extracts from the survey register
          showing that the officers had been visiting its factory from time to time and also
          taking note of the previous goods manufactured by the respondent. The plea of
          the Revenue was that there was suppression and/or mis-declaration and/or
          wrong information furnished in the declaration itself. The Tribunal noted the
          facts as follows:
“We observe it is not denied by the Revenue that the appellants had been
          submitting their classification lists from time to time showing the various
          products manufactured by them including those falling under T.I. 14-E and 68
          also these containing alcohol. The officers who visited the factory as seen from
          the survey register at the factory also took note of the various products being
          manufactured by the appellants. It cannot be said that the appellants had held
          back any information in regard to the range and the nature of the goods
          manufactured by them. The appellants have maintained that the value of the
          exempted goods under T.I. 68 and also value of medicines containing alcohol,
          according to their interpretation, were not required to be included for the
          purpose of reckoning of the total excisable goods cleared by them. There is
          nothing on record to show that the appellants non-bona fidely held back
          information about the total value of the goods cleared by them with a view to
          evade payment of duty. Their explanation that it was only on the basis of their
          interpretation that the value of the exempted goods were not required to be
          included that they did not include the value of the exempted goods which they
          manufactured at the relevant time and falling under T.I. 68 is acceptable in the
          facts of that case. The departmental authorities were in full knowledge of the
          facts about manufacture of all the goods manufactured by them when the
          declaration was filed by the appellants. That they did not include the value of the
          product other than those falling under T.I. 14-E manufactured by the appellants
          has to be taken to be within the knowledge of the authorities. They could have
          taken corrective action in time. We therefore find there was no warrant in
          invoking longer time-limit beyond six months available for raising the demand.
          So far as the demand for the period within six months reckoned from the date of
          receipt of the show-cause notice is concerned, we observe that the appellants’
          case is that value of the goods under T.I. 68 was not required to be included but
5
(1989) 2 SCC 127
17
the Revenue’s plea is that only value of the specified goods under Notifications
          Nos. 71/78 and 80/80 was not required to be excluded.”
8. On the aforesaid view the Tribunal came to the conclusion that the demand
          raised on this for a period beyond 6 months was not maintainable.
9. Aggrieved thereby, the Revenue has come up in appeal to this Court. In our
          opinion, the order of the Tribunal must be sustained. In order to make the
          demand for duty sustainable beyond a period of six months and up to a period of
          5 years in view of the proviso to sub-section (1) of
Section 11-A
of the Act, it has
          to be established that the duty of excise has not been levied or paid or short-
levied or short-paid, or erroneously refunded by reasons of either fraud or
          collusion or wilful misstatement or suppression of facts or contravention of any
          provision of the Act or Rules made thereunder, with intent to evade payment of
          duty. Something positive other than mere inaction or failure on the part of the
          manufacturer or producer or conscious or deliberate withholding of information
          when the manufacturer knew otherwise, is required before it is saddled with any
          liability, before (sic beyond) the period of six months. Whether in a particular
          set of facts and circumstances there was any fraud or collusion or wilful
          misstatement or suppression or contravention of any provision of any Act, is a
          question of fact depending upon the facts and circumstances of a particular
          case. The Tribunal came to the conclusion that the facts referred to hereinbefore
          do not warrant any inference of fraud. The assessee declared the goods on the
          basis of their belief of the interpretation of the provisions of the law that the
          exempted goods were not required to be included and these did not include the
          value of the exempted goods which they manufactured at the relevant time. The
          Tribunal found that explanation was plausible, and also noted that the
          department had full knowledge of the facts about manufacture of all the goods
          manufactured by the respondent when the declaration was filed by the
          respondent. The respondent did not include the value of the product other than
          those falling under T.I. 14-E manufactured by the respondent and this was in the
          knowledge, according to the Tribunal, of the authorities. These findings of the
          Tribunal have not been challenged before us or before the Tribunal itself as
          being based on no evidence.”
(
iii) Pushpam Pharmaceuticals Co. v. CCE6
“4. Section 11-A empowers the Department to reopen proceedings if the levy
          has been short-levied or not levied within six months from the relevant date. But
          the proviso carves out an exception and permits the authority to exercise this
          power within five years from the relevant date in the circumstances mentioned in
6
1995 Supp (3) SCC 462
18
the proviso, one of it being suppression of facts. The meaning of the word both
          in law and even otherwise is well known. In normal understanding it is not
          different that what is explained in various dictionaries unless of course the
          context in which it has been used indicates otherwise. A perusal of the proviso
          indicates that it has been used in company of such strong words as fraud,
          collusion or wilful default. Infact it is the mildest expression used in the proviso.
          Yet the surroundings in which it has been used it has to be construed strictly. It
          does not mean any omission. The act must be deliberate. In taxation, it can have
          only one meaning that the correct information was not disclosed deliberately to
          escape from payment of duty. Where facts are known to both the parties the
          omission by one to do what he might have done and not that he must have done,
          does not render it suppression.”
(
iv) CCE v. Punjab Laminates (P) Ltd.7
“12. At no point of time, the Revenue doubted the correctness or otherwise of the
          manufacturing process or the ingredients disclosed by the respondent. The stand
          of the respondent that the industry as such had adopted the same manufacturing
          process and had been extended the benefit of the exemption notification of 1989
          has not been called in question. If the stand of the manufacturer is correct, there
          was no reason as to why it should be singled out.
13. This Court decided Bakelite Hylam Ltd. [(1997) 10 SCC 350] on 10-3-1997.
          The impugned notice was issued only on 9-12-1997 evidently relying on or on
          the basis thereof.
14. It is not a case where the respondents had not disclosed the activities of
          manufacturing products carried out by them by declaration or otherwise. They
          responded to each and every query of the appellant, as and when called upon to
          do so. The authorities of the appellant must have verified the said disclosures. At
          least they are expected to do so. The disclosure made by the respondent was
          acceptable to them. Their bona fides were never questioned.
15. The applicability of the extended period of limitation is, therefore, required
          to be considered in the aforementioned context. The proviso, it is trite, provides
          for an exception. It is not the rule. A case, therefore, has to be made out for
          attracting the same.
16.
In
Primella Sanitary Products (P) Ltd. v. CCE
[(2005) 10 SCC 644 : (2005)
          184 ELT 117] a three-Judge Bench of this Court was dealing with a case where
          a concession was made by a counsel appearing on behalf of the Revenue. The
7
(2006) 7 SCC 431
19
Court opined that although the item was put under the right classification list
       but they had not been permitted to take a different stand stating: (SCC p. 648,
       para 13)
       “As the matter of classification has proceeded on a matter of concession of facts
       we do not allow the appellants to withdraw from that concession. They are now
       not permitted to argue on the question of classification.”
17.
In
Pahwa Chemicals (P) Ltd. v. CCE
[(2005) 189 ELT 257] this Court held:
“The appellants have all along claimed that merely because they were affixing
       the label of a foreign party, they did not lose the benefit of Notification No.
       175/86-CE as amended by Notification No. 1/93-CE The view taken by the
       appellants had, in some cases, been approved by the Tribunal which had held
       that mere use of the name of a foreign party did not disentitle a party from
       getting benefit of the notifications. It is only after larger Bench held in
Namtech
       Systems Ltd. v. CCE
[(2000) 115 ELT 238 (cegat)] that the position has become
       clear. It is settled law that mere failure to declare does not amount to wilful
       misdeclaration or wilful suppression. There must be some positive act on the
       part of the party to establish either wilful misdeclaration or wilful suppression.
       When all facts are before the Department and a party in the belief that affixing
       of a label makes no difference does not make a declaration, then there would be
       no wilful misdeclaration or wilful suppression. If the Department felt that the
       party was not entitled to the benefit of the notification, it was for the Department
       to immediately take up the contention that the benefit of the notification was
       lost.”
18. Keeping in view the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, we are of
       the opinion that it is not a fit case where this Court should interfere. The appeal
       is, therefore, dismissed. The parties shall, however, pay and bear their own
       costs.”



9.4.   Therefore, in the absence of fraud, collusion, wilful misstatement, or

suppression of facts with an intent to evade payment of service tax, the

invocation of the extended period of limitation under
Section 73
of the Finance

Act, 1994 is wholly unwarranted. Mere non-payment of service tax, by itself,

does not justify the invocation of the extended limitation period. Accordingly,
20
the show cause notice issued by the department is clearly time-barred. On this

ground alone, the impugned order deserves to be set aside.
10.   We next come to the question of the period between 01.07.2012 to

17.02.2014, for the purpose of exemption from the levy of service tax.

Undoubtedly, the services provided by cord blood banks, including preservation

of stem cells or any other services related to such preservation, are exempt from

service tax, under Entry 2A of Notification No. 4/2014-ST dated 17.02.2014.

According to the appellant, the said notification is clarificatory in nature and

therefore, ought to be applied retrospectively with effect from 01.07.2012.

10.1. In the present case, since we have rendered a finding that stem cell

banking services constitute a healthcare service, which was specifically so

stated by the notification dated 17.02.2014, the said notification must

necessarily be held to be illustrative and clarificatory to that extent. This

clarification/specific exemption, coupled with our finding that stem cell banking

services fall within the ambit of “Healthcare Services”, must necessarily inure

to the benefit of the appellant.
This is not to say that the notification dated

17.02.2014 is retrospective in operation. In other words, the said notification

cannot be applied to cases where assessments have already been made and

service tax has been paid without demur. However, in respect of pending

claims, ongoing assessments, and existing disputes that are sub judice, it can be

said that the notification dated 17.02.2014 is in the nature of a clarification to
21
the earlier notification dated 01.07.2012. At this juncture, it is pertinent to

mention that we have also noted and perused the judgment of the Madras High

Court in
Life Cell International (P) Ltd. v. Union of India and others
8, wherein

the nature of the 2014 notification was considered and it was held that the

amendment introduced by Notification No. 4/2014-ST cannot be construed as

clarificatory and hence, does not have retrospective effect. However, the Court

explicitly stated that it did not render any finding on whether the activities of the

petitioner therein, fell within the ambit of “Healthcare Services” so as to qualify

for the exemption. For better appreciation, the relevant paragraphs of
the said

decision
are extracted below:
“24. Reverting to the case on hand, the so-called amendment, admittedly, has
         been inserted by way of Entry 2A into the exemption Notification, dated
         20.6.2012 by Notification No. 4/2014-ST dated 17.2.2014 to the effect that
         “Services provided by cord blood banks by way of preservation of stem cells or
         any other service in relation to such preservation”. Therefore, the intention of
         the legislature is clear that bringing the services provided by cord blood banks
         by way of preservation of stem cells under the exemption Notification in order to
         give exemption of service tax, however, it has not been specifically mentioned
         that the said amendment should be with effect from the date of exemption
         Notification. i.e. 20.6.2012, wherein, originally, Entry No. 2 has been inserted,
         giving exemption towards healthcare services by clinical establishment, an
         authorised medical practitioner or para-medics. Therefore, by virtue of such
         amendment, it should be construed that the establishments which provides the
         above said services will get exemption of service tax with effect from the date of
         amendment, i.e. 17.2.2014 only and they cannot claim it with retrospective
         effect. The uncontroverted position is that before the amendment came into
         force, for the services provided by the cord blood banks were leviable and in
         fact, the petitioner has also paid Rs. 1 Crores each towards service tax with
         effect from 01.07.2012. Therefore, from 17.2.2014 onwards, by virtue of
         amendment, the said services were exempted from levy of service tax, which by
         itself explicit that the said amendment is extending remedial effect to the cord
         blood banks from being levied with service tax. Therefore, having regard to the
8
(2016) 6 VST-OL 50
22
same, this Court is of the considered view that the so-called amendment is only a
remedial nature and it can have prospective effect only. If at all the legislature
thought it fit to extend exemption with retrospective effect, it would have
certainly expressed by mentioning specifically to the effect that the amendment
would be with effect from 20.6.2012. Since the amendment having been brought
into force from a particular date, i.e. 17.2.2014, no retrospective operation
thereof can be contemplated prior thereto.
25. As regards the decisions (cited supra) relied upon by the learned senior
counsel for the petitioner are concerned, I am of the view that those decisions
will no way helpful to the case of the petitioner.
In
“WPIL Ltd.
, case (cited
supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court, having considered the fact that already, the
Government issued Notification dated 1.3.1994, giving exemption from imposing
excise duty on parts of power driven pumps used in the factory premises for
manufacture of power driven pumps and to clarify the position, the subsequent
notification dated 25.4.1994 was issued giving exemption towards the goods that
are used within the factory of production in the manufacture, held that the
subsequent notification was not a new one granting exemption for the first time
in respect of parts of power driven pumps to be used in the factory and
therefore, the subsequent notification is clarificatory nature and it has to be
given with retrospective effect. But in the present case, it is not in dispute that
the so-called amendment Notification issued by the Government, giving
exemption for the first time towards the services provided by cord blood banks
by way of preservation of stem cells and hence, it cannot be considered as
clarificatory in order to give retrospective effect.
26. In “Golden Coin case (cited supra), the expression “income” in the statute
appearing in
Section 2(24)
of the Act has been clarified to mean that it is an
inclusive definition and includes losses, that is, negative profit.
This has been
held so by the Apex Court on the strength of its earlier judgments in
“CIT v. Harprasad and Co. (P) Ltd.
[(1975) 3 SCC 868: 1975 SCC (Tax) 158:
(1975) 99 ITR 118] and followed in
“Reliance Jute and Industries
Ltd. v. CIT
[(1980) 1 SCC 139: 1980 SCC (Tax) 67: (1979) 120 ITR 921]. After
an elaborate and detailed discussion, the Apex Court held with reference to the
charging provisions of the statute that the expression “income” should be
understood to include losses. The expression “profits and gains” refers to
positive income whereas “losses” represents negative profit or in other words
minus income. Considering this aspect of the matter in greater detail, the Apex
Court overruled the view expressed by the two learned Judges in “Virtual Soft
Systems [(2007) 9 SCC 665: (2007) 289 ITR 83]. The Apex Court adopted the
proposition of law that though retrospectivity is not to be presumed and rather
there is presumption against retrospectivity, it is open for the legislature to enact
laws having retrospective operation. This can be achieved by express enactment
or by necessary implication from the language employed and if it is a necessary
implication from the language employed that the legislature intended a
particular section to have a retrospective operation, the courts will give it such
23
an operation and in the absence of a retrospective operation having been
      expressly given, the courts may be called upon to construe the provisions and
      answer the question whether the legislature had sufficiently expressed that
      intention giving the statute retrospectivity. When this ratio is applied to the case
      on hand, I am of the view that the language used in the so-called amendment is
      clear that the exemption is given towards the services provided by cord blood
      banks by way of preservation of stem cells and it cannot be construed that such
      exemption shall have retrospective effect.
27. For the foregoing discussion, I am of the considered opinion that the so-
      called amendment cannot be viewed as a clarificatory one and therefore, this
      Court is unable to countenance the argument advanced by the learned senior
      counsel that the so-called amendment is only a clarificatory nature.
28. Accordingly, the Writ Petition fails and it is dismissed. No costs.
      Consequently, connected MPs are closed. However, it is once again made clear
      that this Court has not rendered any finding regarding whether the activities of
      the petitioner would fall within the ambit of “health care service” and thereby,
      the so-called amendment would apply in order to claim exemption of service tax.
      The authorities are at liberty to determine this aspect in accordance with law.”



10.2. It is a well-settled principle of law that unless a notification or circular

explicitly provides for retrospective operation, it must be construed as

prospective.
Admittedly, the said notification does not contain any express

provision indicating retrospective effect. Therefore, it can only be applied

prospectively. However, for the reasons stated in the preceding paragraphs,

while we concur with the decision of the Madras High Court to the extent that

Notification No. 4/2014-ST cannot be considered to be retrospective, we are

of the considered opinion that the said amendment is indeed clarificatory. To

this limited extent, the judgment in
Life Cell International (P) Ltd.
(supra)

stands overruled in principle. Accordingly, the impugned order overlooks the

comprehensive scope of the exemption and is therefore, liable to be set aside.
24
11.   The next aspect to be considered herein is, whether the services rendered

by the appellant – relating to enrolment, collection, processing, and storage of

umbilical cord blood stem cells – fall within the definition of "Healthcare

Services", so as to qualify for exemption from service tax during the disputed

period.
11.1. Notification No.25/2012-ST dated 20.06.2012 issued by the Ministry of

Finance, provided a consolidated list of services exempt from service tax. Under

Serial No.2, “Healthcare Services” are exempt and the same reads as under:
“2. Healthcare services by a clinical establishment, an authorized medical
      practitioner or para-medics”.
Clause 2(t) of the said Notification defines “health care services” broadly

covering diagnosis, treatment, or care for illness, injury, deformity, abnormality,

or pregnancy in any recognised system of medicines in India. The said clause

reads as under:
“"health care services" means any service by way of diagnosis or treatment or
      care for illness, injury, deformity, abnormality or pregnancy in any recognised
      system of medicines in India and includes services by way of transportation of
      the patient to and from a clinical establishment, but does not include hair
      transplant or cosmetic or plastic surgery, except when undertaken to restore or
      to reconstruct anatomy or functions of body affected due to congenital defects,
      developmental abnormalities, injury or trauma.”



It is clear that the use of the phrase “any service” gives an expansive scope to

the term. Though the terms “diagnosis”, “treatment”, and “care” are not

specifically defined under the
Finance Act, 1994
, their ordinary meanings (as

per Oxford and Black’s Law Dictionaries) include acts like identifying illness
25
causes, curing diseases or injuries, and ensuring well-being or preventive

healthcare.
11.2. The appellant qualifies as a clinical establishment under clause 2(j) of the

Notification No.25/2012-ST, which fact is not disputed by the Department. The

appellant’s core activities – collection and preservation of umbilical cord blood

(UCB) stem cells – are preventive in nature, with potential curative applications

for life-threatening diseases. The processing, testing, cryopreservation, and

eventual release for transplantation constitute integral components of healthcare

aimed at future diagnosis, treatment, and care.
11.3. The appellant has submitted various materials – brochures, laboratory

processes, transplant coordination protocols, clinical trials, and scientific

articles – demonstrating that their services include not only storage but also vital

diagnostic and therapeutic support. Stem cell transplantation depends on

extensive matching and testing conducted by the appellant. Doctors, who have

utilised their services have certified the critical role played by the appellant in

treating blood-related disorders.
11.4. Further, the appellant is actively involved in post-transplant monitoring,

clinical trials (including those for spinal cord injuries), and collaborations with

international medical experts. Their services also support research on conditions

like autism and cerebral palsy. Recognition under the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act
(post-amendment dated 17.12.2012) reinforces their status as a legitimate

healthcare provider.
26
11.5. The Department contends that the appellant’s services were exempted

only from 17.02.2014 under Entry 2A of Notification No. 4/2014-ST. However,

the insertion of Entry 2A does not curtail the scope of Serial No.2 under

Notification No. 25/2012-ST. The absence of express inclusion of cord blood

services in earlier notifications does not alter their essential healthcare nature.

Therefore, the appellant’s services are well within the ambit of “Healthcare

Services”.
11.6. The Andhra Pradesh High Court in
M. Satyanarayana Raju Charitable

Trust v. UOI9
, interpreted “Healthcare Services” to include preventive services.

Being a beneficial exemption, the provision must be liberally construed. The

following paragraphs of
the said judgment
is pertinent:
“18. Where the second respondent appears to have gone wrong is that the
         second respondent has taken the services provided by the petitioner for the
         wellbeing of an individual, as something out of the purview of the diagnosis or
         treatment. The second respondent has fallen into an error in thinking so, due to
         a fundamental misconception that is normally prevalent in society. While
         allopathic system of medicine is only for diagnosis and treatment of illness,
         many of the indigenous system of medicines, seek to prevent rather than
         prescribe.
…
20. Therefore, an exemption notification, which is understood by the
         respondents to confer a benefit upon the clinical establishments, cannot be made
         inapplicable to a holistic health care institution such as the petitioner herein, as
         the same would tantamount to killing our indigenous system of health and well
         being. A system of medicine which focused mainly on healthy living and not
         merely a prolonged existence cannot be denied the benefit of the exemption
         notification on the basis of a misconception that a clinical establishment is one
         that would treat people after they fall ill and not one which will prevent people
         from falling ill.”
9
2017 SCC OnLine Hyd 168
27
11.7.
In
CCE, Bombay-I & Anr. vs. Parle Exports Pvt. Ltd.
10, this Court held

that an exemption notification has statutory force equivalent to that of the Act.
The relevant paragraphs are extracted as under:
“17. ……………. The expressions in the Schedule and in the notification for
           exemption should be understood by the language employed therein bearing in
           mind the context in which the expressions occur. The words used in the
           provision, imposing taxes or granting exemption should be understood in the
           same way in which these are understood in ordinary parlance in the area in
           which the law is in force or by the people who ordinarily deal with them. It is,
           however, necessary to bear in mind certain principles. The notification in this
           case was issued under Rule 8 of the Central Excise Rules and should be read
           along with the Act. The notification must be read as a whole in the context of the
           other relevant provisions. When a notification is issued in accordance with
           power conferred by the statute, it has statutory force and validity and, therefore,
           the exemption under the notification is as if it were contained in the Act itself.
           ……………….
While interpreting an exemption clause, liberal interpretation should be
           imparted to the language thereof, provided no violence is done to the language
           employed. It must, however, be borne in mind that absurd results of construction
           should be avoided.
18.
In
Hindustan Aluminium Corpn. Ltd. v. State of U.P.
[(1981) 3 SCC 578 :
1981 SCC (Tax) 280 : (1982) 1 SCR 129] this Court emphasised that the
           notification should not only be confined to its grammatical or ordinary parlance
           but it should also be construed in the light of the context. This Court reiterated
           that the expression should be construed in a manner in which similar expression
           have been employed by those who framed relevant notification. The court
           emphasised the need to derive the intent from a contextual scheme. In this case,
           therefore, it is necessary to endeavour to find out the true intent of the
           expressions “food products and food preparations” having regard to the object
           and the purpose for which the exemption is granted bearing in mind the context
           and also taking note of the literal or common parlance meaning by those who
           deal with those goods, of course bearing in mind, that in case of doubt only it
           should be resolved in favour of the assessee or the dealer avoiding, however, an
           absurd meaning. Bearing the aforesaid principles in mind, in our opinion, the
           revenue is right that the non-alcoholic beverage bases in India cannot be treated
           or understood as new “nutritive material absorbed or taken into the body of an
           organism which serves for the purpose of growth, work or repair and for the
10
(1989) 1 SCC 345
28
maintenance of the vital process” and an average Indian will not treat non-
alcoholic beverage bases as food products or food preparations in that light.”


Additionally, in Advance Ruling No. KAR ADRG 24/2020, the Karnataka

Authority for Advance Ruling held that stem cell donor - related services are

exempt as healthcare services.
11.8. Notably, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, through an Office

Memorandum dated 22.05.2013 clarified in consultation with the National

AIDS control Organization that stem cell banking is a part of “health care

services” and qualifies for exemption. The said O.M. is reproduced below, for

the sake of reference:
X-11035/41/2012-DFQC (Pt)
                                   Government of India
                           Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
                         Department of Health and Family Welfare
                                     (DFQC Section)
                                                        Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi
                                                        Dated the 22 May, 2013

                                OFFICE MEMORANDUM
             Subject: Service Tax Exemption to Stem Cell Banks – Regarding.
The undersigned is directed to refer to representations dated 24.07.2012,
      21.09.2012, 27.02.2013, 08.03.2013 and 20.03.2013 of Association of Stem Cell
      Banks of India on the subject cited above and to say that this Department has
      examined the matter in consultation with National Aids Control Organization,
      Department of Aids Control, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. In this
      connection, this Department recommends that the services rendered by the Stem
      Cell Banks are part of healthcare services and hence they may be considered for
      service tax exemption.
2. This issues with the approval of the Secretary
              (Health and Family Welfare).
(Sudhir Kumar)
                                      Under Secretary to the Government of India
                                                  Telefax: 23062419
      The Secretary,
29
Department of Revenue,
      Ministry of Finance,
      North Block, New Delhi.
12.   Thus, it is evident that the appellant’s services fall within the ambit of

“Healthcare Services” as defined under the exemption notification. These

services are preventive and curative in nature and encompass diagnosis,

treatment, and care.
13.   As regards the imposition of penalties, it is evident that the appellant

neither suppressed nor concealed any material facts from the Department. On

the contrary, they were in constant communications with the Department,

seeking clarifications on whether their services were exempt from the levy of

service tax. As already held by us, the show cause notice issued by the

Department is time-barred. Therefore, the imposition of penalties is not

warranted.
13.1. Further, there is nothing on record to indicate any intent on the part of the

appellant to evade payment of service tax. All relevant information and

documents were duly disclosed and furnished to the Department. The appellant

acted under a bona fide belief that their activities were covered under Entry 2 of

the Exemption Notification dated 20.06.2012. The records substantiate that the

appellant had addressed multiple representations – dated 24.07.2012,

21.09.2012, 27.02.2013, 08.03.2013 and 20.03.2013 to the Ministry, seeking
30
clarifications on the applicability of the exemption. Their consistent engagement

with the authorities further reinforces their bona fide conduct.

13.2. Moreover, during the course of investigation, the appellant deposited a

sum of Rs. 40,00,000/- on 30.03.2014. It is a well settled legal position that

penal provisions are meant to deter deliberate contravention of statutory

provisions and are not intended to penalize bona fide taxpayers. In this context,

the imposition of penalties and interest appears arbitrary, unjust, and

unsustainable in law.
14.   For the foregoing reasons, the impugned order is set aside in its entirety.

Accordingly, these appeals stand allowed. The deposit of Rs. 40,00,000/- made

by the appellant shall be refunded to them within a period of four weeks from

the date of receipt of this judgment. No costs. Connected miscellaneous

application(s), if any, shall stand closed.
…………………………… J.
[J.B. Pardiwala]



                                                    …………………………… J.
[R. Mahadevan]

New Delhi;
July 14, 2025