[Cites
22
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shiv Baran vs State Of U.P on 16 July, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Prashant Kumar Mishra
2025 INSC 860




                                                                                      Reportable

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 3008 OF 2025
                                      (Arising out of SLP(Crl.)No.3993 of 2025)


                                 SHIV BARAN                                …APPELLANT(S)

                                                             VERSUS

                                 STATE OF U.P. & ANR.                      .…RESPONDENT(S)



                                                            JUDGMENT
SANJAY KAROL, J.
Leave Granted
2.      The instant appeal         preferred   by   the    appellant-
                            complainant, arises out of judgment and order dated 23 rd July
                            2024 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in
                            Criminal Revision No.5517 of 2023, quashing the summons
                            issued against Rajendra Prasad Yadav, Respondent No.2 herein,
                            under
Section 319
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19731
                            vide order dated 28th September 2023 passed by the Additional
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
RAJNI MUKHI
Date: 2025.07.16
17:30:28 IST
Reason:                  1 Hereinafter ‘
CrPC
Crl.A.@ SLP(Crl.)No.3993/2025                             Page 1 of 17
Sessions Judge, Kaushambi2 in Sessions Trial No.109 of 2018,
arising out of Case Crime No.303 of 2017.
3.       Brief facts giving rise to the present appeal are :
(i)    Two FIRs were lodged in respect of an incident which
              allegedly took place on 29th November 2017. First
              FIR3 was registered by the appellant-complainant,
              namely, Shiv Baran4, under
Sections 302
,
307
,
504
and
506
of the Indian Penal Code, 18605 against four
              persons, namely, Rahul, Dinesh, Rajendra and Shiv
              Moorat6, alleging the said accused of having, with the
              common intention, entered his house and assaulted his
              brother, who, when taken to the Hospital, succumbed
              to the injuries.
(ii)   Second FIR7 was lodged by one Suresh Kumar under
Sections 452
,
323
,
504
,
506
and
325
of IPC, alleging
              that the accused persons entered his house, hurled
              abuses, and assaulted the first informant and his wife.
Here, we may clarify that the matter pertains only to
              the first FIR.
2 Hereinafter “Trial Court”
3 Case Crime No. 303 of 2017
4 The first informant
5 Hereinafter ‘
IPC
’
6 Moorat and Murat are referred for the same person in the record.
7 Case Crime No.315 of 2017
Crl.A.@ SLP(Crl.)No.3993/2025                                        Page 2 of 17
(iii) The Investigating Officer, based on the material

            collected     during   the   course   of   investigation,
            concluded that the accused, Rajendra Prasad, not to
            have played any role in the alleged crime and, as
            such, in connection with the first FIR, submitted a
            chargesheet dated 24th February 2018 only with
            respect to accused persons, viz., Dinesh Yadav and
            Shiv Murat Yadav, in relation to offences committed
            under
Sections 302
,
307
,
504
and
506
read with
Section 34
of the IPC.
(iv) During the course of the said trial, finding witnesses

            PW1 - Shiv Baran Yadav, PW2 - Raj Baran and PW3
- Subhash Yadav, to have deposed about the role of
            accused Rajendra Prasad Yadav, the complainant
            moved an application under
Section 319
CrPC
            praying therein to add his name as co-accused, which
            application, though initially stood rejected by the
            Sessions Court vide order dated 31st January 2022 but
            on remand by the High Court, was eventually allowed
            by the Trial Court vide order dated 28th September
            2023.
(v)   In a petition preferred by Rajendra Prasad Yadav, the
            High Court while setting aside the said order of
            summoning passed by the Trial Court, inter alia
Crl.A.@ SLP(Crl.)No.3993/2025                            Page 3 of 17
observed that PW-1 had not ascribed any role to the
            accused and that the testimonies of PWs 2 and 3 could
            not be said to be implicating the said accused, for
            there being no specific reference with regard to the
            description and the manner of occurrence of the
            incident. Further, they had not ascribed any motive to
            the crime. Unless and until there is evidence of a
            strong motive, a person cannot be summoned as an
            accused. In the absence of any cogent material prima
            facie indicating complicity of the said accused, the
            Trial Court committed an error in passing the order
            impugned.
(vi) Challenging this order of the High Court, the

            complainant/first informant is before us.
4.     Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
record.
5.     Here only, it would be pertinent to extract the relevant
provision of
CrPC
:
“319 Power to proceed against other persons appearing
            to be guilty of offence - (1) Where, in the course of any
            inquiry into, or trial of, an offence, it appears from the
            evidence that any person not being the accused has
            committed any offence for which such person could be
            tried together with the accused, the Court may proceed
            against such person for the offence which he appears to
            have committed.
Crl.A.@ SLP(Crl.)No.3993/2025                                  Page 4 of 17
(2) Where such person is not attending the Court, he
            may be arrested or summoned, as the circumstances of
            the case may require, for the purpose aforesaid.
            (3) Any person attending the Court, although not under
            arrest or upon a summons, may be detained by such
            Court for the purpose of the inquiry into, or trial of, the
            offence which he appears to have committed.
            (4) Where the Court proceeds against any person under
            sub-section (1) then—
(a) the proceedings in respect of such person shall be
            commenced afresh, and the witnesses re-heard;
(b) subject to the provisions of clause (a), the case may
            proceed as if such person had been an accused person
            when the Court took cognizance of the offence upon
            which the inquiry or trial was commenced.”

                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
6.     A perusal of the said section would reveal it to be an
enabling provision, empowering the Court to proceed against
any person, even if not cited as an accused, based on the
evidence collected during the inquiry or trial, revealing the
complicity of such a person to be arrayed as an accused. The
object is to ensure that no guilty person should be allowed to
escape the process of law, which is based on the doctrine of
judex damnatur cum nocens absolviture (Judge is condemned
when guilty is acquitted). The provision casts duty upon the
Court to ensure that the real culprit does not get away
unpunished, for the same to be part of a fair trial. However, the
power under the said Section has to be invoked only upon the
satisfaction of cogent material brought on record, necessitating
such impleadment. The power to be exercised, needless to add,
Crl.A.@ SLP(Crl.)No.3993/2025                                   Page 5 of 17
is to be with utmost caution and not in a casual, callous or
cavalier manner – for the same is only to advance the cause of
justice and not be a tool to harass the individual or result into an
abuse of the process of law.
7.     The question whether the word 'evidence' used in
Section
319(1)
CrPC means only evidence tested by cross-examination
or the statements made in the examination-in-chief would be
sufficient for exercising the power under this Section, has been
answered by the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Hardeep
Singh v. State of Punjab8
in the following manner :
“89. … Once examination-in-chief is conducted, the
            statement becomes part of the record. It is evidence as
            per law and in the true sense, for at best, it may be
            rebuttable. An evidence being rebutted or controverted
            becomes a matter of consideration, relevance and
            belief, which is the stage of judgment by the court. Yet
            it is evidence and it is material on the basis whereof the
            court can come to a prima facie opinion as to
            complicity of some other person who may be connected
            with the offence.
90. As held in
Mohd. Shafi [Mohd. Shafi v. Mohd
.
Rafiq, (2007) 14 SCC 544 : (2009) 1 SCC (Cri) 889 :
AIR 2007 SC 1899] and Harbhajan Singh [(2009) 13
            SCC 608 : (2010) 1 SCC (Cri) 1135] , all that is
            required for the exercise of the power under
Section
            319
CrPC is that, it must appear to the court that some
            other person also who is not facing the trial, may also
            have been involved in the offence. The prerequisite for
            the exercise of this power is similar to the prima facie
            view which the Magistrate must come to in order to
            take cognizance of the offence. Therefore, no
8 (2014) 3 SCC 92
Crl.A.@ SLP(Crl.)No.3993/2025                                   Page 6 of 17
straitjacket formula can and should be laid with respect
            to conditions precedent for arriving at such an opinion
            and, if the Magistrate/court is convinced even on the
            basis of evidence appearing in examination-in-chief, it
            can exercise the power under
Section 319
CrPC and can
            proceed against such other person(s). It is essential to
            note that the section also uses the words “such
            person could be tried” instead of should be tried.
            Hence, what is required is not to have a mini-trial at
            this stage by having examination and cross-examination
            and thereafter rendering a decision on the overt act of
            such person sought to be added. In fact, it is this mini-
            trial that would affect the right of the person sought to
            be arraigned as an accused rather than not having any
            cross-examination at all, for in light of sub-section (4)
            of
Section 319
CrPC, the person would be entitled to a
            fresh trial where he would have all the rights including
            the right to cross-examine prosecution witnesses and
            examine defence witnesses and advance his arguments
            upon the same. Therefore, even on the basis of
            examination-in-chief, the court or the Magistrate can
            proceed against a person as long as the court is
            satisfied that the evidence appearing against such
            person is such that it prima facie necessitates bringing
            such person to face trial. In fact, examination-in-chief
            untested by cross-examination, undoubtedly in itself, is
            an evidence.
…
92. Thus, in view of the above, we hold that power
            under
Section 319
CrPC can be exercised at the stage of
            completion of examination-in-chief and the court does
            not need to wait till the said evidence is tested on cross-
            examination for it is the satisfaction of the court which
            can be gathered from the reasons recorded by the court,
            in respect of complicity of some other person(s), not
            facing the trial in the offence.
…
Crl.A.@ SLP(Crl.)No.3993/2025                                   Page 7 of 17
117.4. Considering the fact that under
Section 319
CrPC a person against whom material is disclosed is
            only summoned to face the trial and in such an event
            under
Section 319(4)
CrPC the proceeding against such
            person is to commence from the stage of taking of
            cognizance, the court need not wait for the evidence
            against the accused proposed to be summoned to be
            tested by cross-examination.”
                                             (Emphasis supplied)
8.     This Court in
Labhuji Amratji Thakor v. State of
Gujarat9
reiterated the test of satisfaction
laid down in
Hardeep Singh
(supra) to be the one that is more than a prima
facie case required at the time of framing of charges, but less
than the satisfaction that would warrant conviction :
“9. Answering Issue (iv) as noticed above in
Hardeep
            Singh [Hardeep Singh v. State of Punjab
, (2014) 3
            SCC 92 : (2014) 2 SCC (Cri) 86], in paras 105 and
            106 of the judgment, the following was
laid down by
the Constitution Bench:
“105...
106. Thus, we hold that though only a
                 prima facie case is to be established from
                 the evidence led before the court, not
                 necessarily tested on the anvil of cross-
examination, it requires much stronger
                 evidence than mere probability of his
                 complicity. The test that has to be applied is
                 one which is more than prima facie case as
                 exercised at the time of framing of charge,
                 but short of satisfaction to an extent that the
                 evidence, if goes unrebutted, would lead to
                 conviction. In the absence of such
                 satisfaction, the court should refrain from
                 exercising power under
Section 319
CrPC.
                 In
Section 319
CrPC the purpose of

9 (2019) 12 SCC 644
Crl.A.@ SLP(Crl.)No.3993/2025                              Page 8 of 17
providing if “it appears from the evidence
                  that any person not being the accused has
                  committed any offence” is clear from the
                  words “for which such person could be
                  tried together with the accused”. The words
                  used are not “for which such person could
                  be convicted”. There is, therefore, no scope
                  for the court acting under
Section 319
CrPC
                  to form any opinion as to the guilt of the
                  accused.”
                                           (Emphasis supplied)
9.     This Court, in
Ramesh Chandra Srivastava v. State of
U.P.10
reiterated that the power under
Section 319
CrPC should
only be exercised when strong and cogent evidence is presented
against a person and the test to be applied is one that is more
than a prima facie case, as applied at the time of framing of
charges.
10.    The Court, under this Section, can also proceed against a
person who, though named in FIR, is not implicated by the
Investigating Officer in the chargesheet, provided the statutory
mandates are fulfilled.
In
S. Mohammed Ispahani v. Yogendra
Chandak11
, it was observed :
“35. It needs to be highlighted that when a person is
            named in the FIR by the complainant, but police, after
            investigation, finds no role of that particular person and
            files the charge-sheet without implicating him, the
            Court is not powerless, and at the stage of summoning,
            if the trial court finds that a particular person should be

10 (2021) 12 SCC 608
11 (2017) 16 SCC 226
Crl.A.@ SLP(Crl.)No.3993/2025                                    Page 9 of 17
summoned as accused, even though not named in the
            charge-sheet, it can do so. At that stage, chance is given
            to the complainant also to file a protest petition urging
            upon the trial court to summon other persons as well
            who were named in the FIR but not implicated in the
            charge-sheet. Once that stage has gone, the Court is still
            not powerless by virtue of
Section 319
CrPC. However,
            this section gets triggered when during the trial some
            evidence surfaces against the proposed accused.”

                                                (Emphasis supplied)

            [See also
Hardeep Singh
(supra); and
Labhuji Amratji
            Thakor
(supra)]
11.    Most recently, this Court in
Omi v. State of M.P.12
,
summarized the principles that need to be kept in mind for the
summoning of additional accused :
“19. The principles of law as regards Section 319CrPC
            may be summarised as under:
19.1. On a careful reading of Section 319CrPC as well
            as the aforesaid two decisions, it becomes clear that the
            trial court has undoubted jurisdiction to add any person
            not being the accused before it to face the trial along
            with other accused persons, if the Court is satisfied at
            any stage of the proceedings on the evidence adduced
            that the persons who have not been arrayed as accused
            should face the trial. It is further evident that such
            person even though had initially been named in the FIR
            as an accused, but not charge-sheeted, can also be
            added to face the trial.
19.2. The trial court can take such a step to add such
            persons as accused only on the basis of evidence
            adduced before it and not on the basis of materials
            available in the charge-sheet or the case diary, because
            such materials contained in the charge-sheet or the case
            diary do not constitute evidence.
12 (2025) 2 SCC 621
Crl.A.@ SLP(Crl.)No.3993/2025                                  Page 10 of 17
19.3. The power of the court under Section 319CrPC is
            not controlled or governed by naming or not naming of
            the person concerned in the FIR. Nor the same is
            dependent upon submission of the charge-sheet by the
            police against the person concerned. As regards the
            contention that the phrase “any person not being the
            accused” occurred in
Section 319
excludes from its
            operation an accused who has been released by the
            police under
Section 169
of the Code and has been
            shown in Column 2 of the charge-sheet, the contention
            has merely to be stated to be rejected. The said
            expression clearly covers any person who is not being
            tried already by the Court and the very purpose of
            enacting such a provision like
Section 319(1)
clearly
            shows that even persons who have been dropped by the
            police during investigation but against whom evidence
            showing their involvement in the offence comes before
            the criminal court are included in the said expression.
            19.4. It would not be proper for the trial court to reject
            the application for addition of new accused by
            considering records of the investigating officer. When
            the evidence of complainant is found to be worthy of
            acceptance then the satisfaction of the investigating
            officer hardly matters. If satisfaction of investigating
            officer is to be treated as determinative then the purpose
            of
Section 319
would be frustrated.”

                                                (Emphasis supplied)
12.    We may emphasize that this Court in
S. Mohammed
Ispahani
(supra) has already observed that the ‘evidence’ led
before the Court has to be considered, and statements recorded
under 161
CrPC
could only be treated as corroborative material
and not as independent evidence.
13.
In
Brijendra Singh v. State of Rajasthan
13, this Court
observed that 'evidence' recorded during the trial was nothing
13 (2017) 7 SCC 706
Crl.A.@ SLP(Crl.)No.3993/2025                                  Page 11 of 17
more than the statements which were already there under
Section 161
CrPC; the Trial Court ought to have looked into the
evidence collected during the investigation which suggested
otherwise and to see whether much stronger evidence than the
mere possibility of complicity of accused person has come on
record.
OUR VIEW
14.    The foregoing discussion would reveal the following
statutory requisites for summoning any person not being the
accused:
(a) such person has committed an offence; (b) his
      complicity is revealed from the evidence collected during
      inquiry or trial; and (c) for such offence, he can be tried
      together with the accused already facing trial.
15.    The principles that the Trial Court ought to follow while
exercising power under this Section are :
(a)     This provision is a facet of that area of law which
      gives protection to victims and society at large, ensuring
      that the perpetrators of crime should not escape the force
      of law;
(b) It is the duty cast upon the Court not to let the guilty
      get away unpunished;
(c) The Trial Court has broad but not unbridled power as
      this power can be exercised only on the basis of evidence
Crl.A.@ SLP(Crl.)No.3993/2025                           Page 12 of 17
adduced before it and not any other material collected
      during investigation;
(d)    The Trial Court is not powerless to summon a person
      who is not named in the FIR or Chargesheet; they can be
      impleaded if the evidence adduced inculpates him;
(e)     This power is not to be exercised in a regular or
      cavalier manner, but only when strong or cogent evidence
      is available than the mere probability of complicity;
(f)    The degree of satisfaction required is much stricter
      than the prima facie case, which is needed at the time of
      framing of charge(s);
(g) The Court should not conduct a mini-trial at this stage
      as the expression used is 'such person could be tried’ and
      not ‘should be tried’.
16.    Reverting to the facts of the case, it is pertinent to
reproduce the relevant extract of the FIR, wherein the name of
Respondent No.2 was referred :
“....I was sitting with my brother Yadunath at my
            doorstep taking sun bath when Rahul and Dinesh, sons
            of Hurbalal Rajendra, son of Lallu, Shivamust, son of
            Kamta, from my own village, came to my door with
            sticks, batons and axes in their hands with the intention
            of killing me and started abusing me....”
Crl.A.@ SLP(Crl.)No.3993/2025                                  Page 13 of 17
17.     PW1, in his statement recorded before the Trial Court on
21st August 2018, deposed :
“…I and my brother Yadunath were at the door, we
             were sitting and taking sunlight. Rahul, Dinesh, Rajesh,
             Shivmurat of my own village came with sticks and axes
             and started abusing us…”
18.     PW1’s statement was again recorded on 10th March 2021
after the consolidation of Case No.146/201814 and Session Trial
No.109/2018, where he deposed :
“..I and my brother Yadunath were sitting at the door
             taking sun. Rajendra, Dinesh, Rahul and Shivmurti of
             my own village were carrying axes. Dinesh and Rahul
             were carrying sticks... Rajendra had a baton. They
             came together and started abusing us…”
19.     A perusal of the three extracted statements would reveal
four persons being consistently named by this witness; it is only
in the statement dated 21st August 2018 that Rajesh, instead of
Rajendra, is mentioned. The remaining three names remained
the same. Not only is he named, but a specific role is assigned
to him, i.e., carrying a baton (weapon of offence).
20.     Here, we may clarify, as is evident from our order dated
3rd March 2025, that Rajesh and Rajendra are the same person.
21.     PW2 also deposed that when his father and uncle were
basking under the sun, 'Rajendra armed with stick’ came to the

14 Against accused-Rahul
Crl.A.@ SLP(Crl.)No.3993/2025                                  Page 14 of 17
door of his house with a common objective and started
assaulting him and his family members. PW3 also deposed to
the effect that Rajendra, who had a stick, started assaulting both
his father and grandfather.
22.    The evidence from all three alleged eyewitnesses,
although prima facie, suggests the complicity of Rajendra
(Respondent No. 2); a specific role being assigned to him,
indicating that he was present at the scene of the occurrence,
armed with a stick. The High Court tried to apply the same
standard in deciding this application as is ordinarily used at the
end of the trial in determining the conviction or otherwise of the
accused. Whereas it ought to have considered that the standard
of satisfaction required is short of the standard necessary for
passing a final judgment after trial.
23.    Rajendra, although not charge sheeted, was named in the
FIR, and the evidence thus far, leads, prima facie, to reveal his
role. Therefore, at this stage, there is sufficient material to put
him on trial; whether he will ultimately be convicted or not is
left to be determined by a full-fledged inquiry at the end of the
trial. It would be premature to comment anything on his
conviction. The first informant categorically mentioned him as
the one who came along with the others, with a common intent,
abusing and beating, causing the death of his brother, apart from
causing serious injuries to the others.
Crl.A.@ SLP(Crl.)No.3993/2025                          Page 15 of 17
24.    In our considered view, the High Court proceeded to
conduct a mini trial solely relying upon the affidavits submitted
before the Superintendent of Police qua the innocence of
Respondent No.2. It erred in giving a categorical finding on the
merits of PW1, the injured eyewitness not to have named
Respondent No.2, which we find is based on erroneous
assumption and contrary to the factual position emerging from
the record. The High Court erred in observing that witnesses
have stated nothing about the motive of the crime; that the
depositions are silent on the aspect of common intention;
absence of the manner or sequence of occurrence of the
incident; or that it cannot be inferred who is the aggressor. All
these questions, amongst others, are relevant or not is a matter
to be considered at the stage of final adjudication.
25.    It is a settled law that the power under
Section 319
CrPC
must be exercised sparingly. However, where the evidence
reveals the complicity of the prospective accused, it becomes
obligatory for the authority to exercise the power provided
under the said Section.
26.    With the aforesaid observations, the appeal is accordingly
allowed. The impugned order dated 23rd July 2024 is set aside,
and the summoning order dated 28th September 2023, passed by
the Trial Court in Sessions Trial No.109/2018, is restored.
Crl.A.@ SLP(Crl.)No.3993/2025                          Page 16 of 17
27.    Parties are directed to appear before the Trial Court on
28th August, 2025. We direct them to fully co-operate and not
take any unnecessary adjournments. The trial is expedited to be
positively completed within a period of 18 months.
28.    Pending application(s), if any, are disposed of.
…………………………J.
                                         (SANJAY KAROL)



                                      ………………………….J.
                                       (JOYMALYA BAGCHI)

New Delhi;
July 16, 2025.
Crl.A.@ SLP(Crl.)No.3993/2025                             Page 17 of 17