[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Vijay Kumar vs Central Bank Of India on 15 July, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 848                                                                       Reportable

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO.            OF 2025
                                    (Arising out of SLP (C) No.________of 2025
                                              (@ D No.39502/2024)


                            Vijay Kumar                                      …..Appellant(s)

                                                      VERSUS


                            Central Bank of India & Ors.                     …..Respondent(s)


                                                JUDGMENT
Joymalya Bagchi, J.
1. Delay condoned. Leave granted.
2. Appeal is directed against judgment dated 22.04.2024 passed

                            by the Patna High Court to the extent the Court upheld

                            reduction of one­third of the pension payable to the appellant

                            under    the   Central   Bank    of     India   (Employees’)   Pension

                            Regulations, 19951.
3. Appellant while working as Chief Manager, a scale IV officer in
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SATISH KUMAR YADAV
Date: 2025.07.15
17:19:23 IST
Reason:
the respondent No.1­bank was served with a Memorandum of
            1 Hereinafter, Pension Regulations.
Page 1 of 14
Charge alleging that, during his tenure as Branch Manager,

      Dhanbad Branch he sanctioned loans in respect of 12

      accounts, inter alia, without proper appraisal of income, non­

      verification       of    KYC      compliance,   without   post­sanction

      inspection etc. exposing the bank to potential financial loss of

      huge amount.
4. A.K. Roy, Assistant General Manager (a scale V officer) was

      appointed as the Inquiry Authority (IA). During the inquiry,

      appellant attained superannuation on 30.11.2014 but the

      enquiry was continued under Regulation 20(3)(iii) of Central

      Bank of India (Officers’) Service Regulations, 1979 2. He

      submitted inquiry report holding the appellant failed to

      discharge his duties with utmost integrity and honesty which

      was unbecoming of a Bank officer and exposed the Bank to

      huge financial loss for his pecuniary gain. Inquiry report was

      served on the appellant, and he replied to it. After considering

      his reply disciplinary authority i.e., Deputy General Manager (a

      scale VI officer) upheld the findings of the inquiry officer and

      imposed major penalty of compulsory retirement under Rule 4
(h) of Central Bank of India Officer Employees’ (Discipline and

2 Hereinafter, Service Regulations.
Page 2 of 14
Appeal)      Regulations,         19763       with   effect   from   date   of

      superannuation.           Appellant       submitted     an     appeal   before

      appellate authority i.e., Field General Manager (a scale VII

      officer).
5. During pendency of the appeal, Regional Manager, Purnea, a

      scale IV officer, i.e., equivalent to scale of the appellant, on

      05.08.2015 recommended minimum payable pension under

      compulsory retirement i.e., two­third pension to the appellant.

      Field General Manager by order dated 07.08.2015 concurred

      with the Regional Manager and recommended award of two­

      third       compulsory         retirement       pension.      Thereafter,   on

      30.12.2015 the said Field General Manager as the appellate

      authority dismissed the appellant’s appeal and upheld the

      penalty imposed on the latter.
6. The appellant initially approached the High Court challenging

      validity of Regulation 20(3)(iii) of Service Regulations which

      enabled the Bank to continue disciplinary proceedings even

      after superannuation and for setting aside the order of

      compulsory retirement including disbursal of full retiral




3 Hereinafter, Discipline and Appeal Regulations.
Page 3 of 14
benefits but subsequently he restricted his challenge only to

  disbursal of full retiral benefits.
7. During hearing High Court was informed while the Bank had

  not passed any order forfeiting gratuity, it had taken decision

  to award two­third of the pension payable to the appellant. In

  these circumstances, High Court while directing release of

  gratuity upheld the decision of the Bank to reduce one­third of

  the pension payable to the appellant.
8. Being aggrieved by the reduction of one­third pension,

  appellant has approached this Court. Bank has contested the

  appellant’s plea and produced additional documents, namely,

  recommendation letter of Regional Manager, Purnea for grant

  of minimum pension and the sanction letter of such pension

  by Field General Manager awarding two­third pension to the

  appellant.
9. Mr. Neeraj Shekhar contended pension is not a bounty and

  appellant’s right to pension is constitutionally protected under
Article 300A.
Such right could not be taken away save and

  except by a clear prescription of law. High Court erred in

  holding that a compulsorily retired employee is not entitled to

  pension at all unless an order under regulation 33(1) of the
Page 4 of 14
Pension Regulations is passed. Regulation 33 (1) and (2) must

      be harmoniously construed to mean in cases where penalty of

      compulsory retirement is imposed, such employee has a right

      to receive pension not less than two­third of the full pension

      and such deduction can be made only after prior consultation

      with the Board of Directors.
10.     Per contra, Mr. Dhruv Mehta, learned Senior Counsel

      submitted a plain reading of regulation 33 (1) and (2) would

      show the clauses are mutually exclusive and operate in

      different circumstances which do not overlap each other. As

      per clause (1), an authority higher than the authority

      competent to impose compulsory retirement penalty may grant

      pension at a rate not less than two­third whereas clause (2)

      permits   the   competent      authority   awarding   compulsory

      retirement to award less than full pension in exercise of its

      original, appellate or reviewing powers. Only in the latter case

      consultation with Board of Directors is necessary.        As the

      pension was reduced by the Field General Manager, a scale VII

      officer who is an authority higher in rank than the disciplinary

      authority, a scale VI officer no prior consultation was
Page 5 of 14
necessary, and the impugned decision did not call for

   interference.
11. The controversy centres around interpretation of regulation

   33 of the Pension Regulations which provides for compulsory

   retirement pension as follows: ­

          “33. Compulsory Retirement Pension ­ 1. An employee
          compulsorily retired from service as a penalty on or after 1st
          day of November, 1993 in terms of Central Bank of India
          Officer Employees' (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976
          or awards/settlements may be granted by the authority
          higher than the authority competent to impose such penalty,
          pension at a rate not less than two­thirds and not more than
          full pension admissible to him on the date of his compulsory
          retirement if otherwise he was entitled to such pension on
          superannuation on that date.
2. Whenever in the case of a bank employee the Competent
          Authority passes an order (whether original, appellate or in
          exercise of power of review) awarding a pension less than the
          full compensation pension admissible under these
          regulations, the Board of Directors shall be consulted before
          such order is passed.
3. A pension granted or awarded under clause (1) or, as the
          case may be, under clause (2), shall not be less than the
          amount of rupees three hundred and seventy­five per
          mensem.”
12.     Clause (1) provides for granting pension at a rate not less

   than two­third and not more than full pension by an authority

   higher than the authority competent to impose penalty of

   compulsory      retirement.    Clause     (2)   enjoins    whenever     a

   competent authority passes an order awarding pension less

   than full compensation pension in exercise of original,
Page 6 of 14
appellate or review powers, Board of Directors must be

       consulted before such order is passed. In no case the pension

       awarded shall be less than Rs.375/­ per mensem.
13.        ‘Competent Authority’ is defined in both Discipline and

       Appeal Regulations and Pension Regulations as an authority

       appointed by the Board for the purpose of such regulations. In

       the Discipline and Appeal Regulations, it is further clarified

       Competent Authority must be superior to the delinquent and

       not an officer holding rank lower than scale IV officer. Clause

       3(b) of Discipline and Appeal Regulations read with Schedule 4

       shows that an officer not below rank of Assistant General

       Manager and holding a rank higher than the disciplinary

       authority is the appellate authority under such regulation. A

       combined reading of the provisions in both the regulations

       would indicate a Field General Manager (holding a rank

       superior to disciplinary authority and higher than Assistant

       General Manager) is not only an authority superior to the

       disciplinary authority empowered to reduce pension under

       clause (1) but also the appellate authority under Discipline

4 Schedule to Discipline and Appeal Regulations “2. Any Officer employee of the Bank
higher in rank and status than the Disciplinary Authority but no lower in rank and status
than an Assistant General Manager shall be competent to act as the Appellate Authority
within the meaning of Regulation 17.”
Page 7 of 14
and Appeal Regulations who could exercise appellate powers

       to reduce pension under clause (2) of Pension Regulations.
14.        The bank would argue as pension was reduced under

       regulation 33(1) by Field General Manager as an authority

       superior     to    disciplinary      authority      competent     to   impose

       penalty, no prior consultation with Board was necessary,

       unlike cases where Competent Authority i.e., disciplinary

       authority      while    awarding        compulsory        retirement   directs

       pension less than full compensation pension.
15.        Such argument is fallacious for following reasons. Clause

       (2) permits the Competent Authority to award pension in

       exercise of not only original but also appellate or reviewing

       powers. If the expression ‘Competent Authority’ in clause (2) is

       restricted to disciplinary authority alone, reduction of pension

       in exercise of appellate or review power would become

       nugatory.       Any     interpretation       which      renders   words    or

       expressions in a statute otiose ought to be eschewed. 5
16.        Given this situation to accept the bank’s interpretation

       that the two clauses ought to be read independent of one

       another would give rise to a piquant situation where the self­

5
Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh
, (1953) 2 SCC 111.
Page 8 of 14
same authority, i.e., Field General Manager reducing pension

  under clause (1) would not require prior consultation with the

  Board which is mandatory while exercising similar power

  under clause (2). To avoid this anomaly whenever a superior

  authority reducing pension under regulation 33(1) is also

  appellate authority or reviewing authority who is empowered

  to exercise power under clause (2), the requirement of prior

  consultation with the Board must be held to be mandatory,

  failing which requirement of such prior consultation may be

  circumvented by the bank to the prejudice of the employee.
17.    There is no cavil that pension is not a discretion of the

  employer but a valuable right to property and can be denied

  only through authority of law. When an authority is vested

  with the discretion to grant pension less than full pension

  admissible under the Pension Regulations, all procedural

  safeguards   in   favour   of   the   employee   including   prior

  consultation must be strictly followed.
18.    High Court failed to read the regulation in its proper

perspective and went a step ahead to hold that a compulsorily

retired employee would not be entitled to any pension unless an

order is passed under regulation 33 (1). A combined reading of
Page 9 of 14
the clauses in regulation 33 clearly indicates that the pension

payable to an employee who has been compulsorily retired as a

penalty shall not be less than two­third of his full pension or Rs.

375 per mensem, whichever is higher. The word ‘may’ occurring

in clause (1) does not give discretion to superior authority to

award pension less than two­third of the full pension. High

Court misinterpreted the word ‘may’ in the clause to hold that

grant of pension is discretionary. The word ‘may’ must be read

in its proper context, that is to say, it was used in the regulation

not to vest discretion in the superior authority to grant pension

less than two­third of full pension payable but to clarify that the

aforesaid clause will not entitle a compulsorily retired employee

to pension if he is not otherwise entitled to such pension on

superannuation on that day. For example, if an employee is

compulsorily retired without completing ‘qualifying service’

making him eligible to pension under the regulations.
19.    In fine, we hold clause (1) and clause (2) of regulation 33

must be read conjointly and in all cases when the full pension

admissible to a compulsorily retired employee under the

regulations is reduced, a prior consultation with the Board is

necessary.
Page 10 of 14
20. It would be argued the Field General Manager’s order to

      reduce pension may be placed before the Board for ex­post

      facto approval. Whether ‘prior consultation’ is mandatory or a

      post facto approval would suffice would depend on various

      factors including nature of consultation, status of the

      authority consulted, and the rights affected by the decision.
21. A plain reading of regulation 33 would show award of

      pension less than full pension is to be done with prior

      consultation of the Board of Directors. Such prior consultation

      with the highest authority of the Bank i.e., Board of Directors

      must be understood as a valuable mandatory safeguard before

      an employee’s constitutional right to pension is curtailed. In

      these circumstances, a post facto approval cannot be a

      substitute of prior consultation with the Board before the

      decision      is   made.   Reference       may   be   made   to   Indian

      Administrative Service (S.C.S.)
Association, U.P. & Ors. vs.

      Union of India & Ors.6
wherein the parameters to decide

      whether prior consultation is mandatory or directory have

      been succinctly elucidated:­



6 (1993) Supp (1) SCC 730.
Page 11 of 14
“26. The result of the above discussion leads to the following
conclusions:
(1) Consultation is a process which requires meeting of minds
between the parties involved in the process of consultation on
the material facts and points involved to evolve a correct or at
least satisfactory solution. There should be meeting of minds
between the proposer and the persons to be consulted on the
subject of consultation. There must be definite facts which
constitute the foundation and source for final decision. The
object of the consultation is to render consultation meaningful to
serve the intended purpose. Prior consultation in that behalf is
mandatory.
(2) When the offending action affects fundamental rights or to
effectuate built­in insulation, as fair procedure, consultation is
mandatory and non­consultation renders the action ultra vires
or invalid or void.
(3) When the opinion or advice binds the proposer, consultation
is mandatory and its infraction renders the action or order
illegal.
(4) When the opinion or advice or view does not bind the person
or authority, any action or decision taken contrary to the advice
is not illegal, nor becomes void.
(5) When the object of the consultation is only to apprise of the
proposed action and when the opinion or advice is not binding
on the authorities or person and is not bound to be accepted,
the prior consultation is only directory. The authority proposing
to take action should make known the general scheme or
outlines of the actions proposed to be taken be put to notice of
the authority or the persons to be consulted; have the views or
objections, take them into consideration, and thereafter, the
authority or person would be entitled or has/have authority to
pass appropriate orders or take decision thereon. In such
circumstances it amounts to an action “after consultation”.
(6) No hard and fast rule could be laid, no useful purpose would
be served by formulating words or definitions nor would it be
appropriate to lay down the manner in which consultation must
take place. It is for the Court to determine in each case in the
light of its facts and circumstances whether the action is “after
consultation”; “was in fact consulted” or was it a “sufficient
consultation”.
(7) Where any action is legislative in character, the consultation
envisages like one under Section 3(1) of the Act, that the
Central Government is to intimate to the State Governments
concerned of the proposed action in general outlines and on
receiving the objections or suggestions, the Central Government
or Legislature is free to evolve its policy decision, make
Page 12 of 14
appropriate legislation with necessary additions or modification
        or omit the proposed one in draft bill or rules. The revised draft
        bill or rules, amendments or additions in the altered or modified
        form need not again be communicated to all the concerned
        State Governments nor have prior fresh consultation. Rules or
        Regulations being legislative in character, would tacitly receive
        the approval of the State Governments through the people's
        representatives when laid on the floor of each House of
        Parliament. The Act or the Rule made at the final shape is not
        rendered void or ultra vires or invalid for non­consultation.”
22. Mr. Mehta finally in a last bid endeavour requested us to invoke

powers under
Article 142
to do complete justice and endorse the

decision of the reduction of pension in the present case.
23. Though it is claimed that the delinquent acts of the appellant

had caused an approximate loss to the tune of Rs. 3.26 crores to

the bank, no evidence relating to the computation of such loss was

either considered by the disciplinary authority or by the appellate

authority. Further, no opportunity of hearing was given by the

authorities prior to reducing his pension. No exceptional case to

exercise our extraordinary powers under
Article 142
is made out.
24. Accordingly, we allow the appeal and set aside the order of the

High Court and order of the Field General Manager dated
07.08.2015 reducing pension without prior consultation of the

Board of Directors. It shall be open to the Bank to take appropriate

decision regarding reduction of pension after giving an opportunity
Page 13 of 14
of hearing to the appellant and with prior consultation of the Board

within two months from the date of this judgment failing which the

appellant shall be entitled to full pension from the date of

superannuation.
….……..…..……...……………………….J.
                             (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)



                             ….……..…..……...……………………….J
                              (JOYMALYA BAGCHI)

New Delhi;
July 15, 2025.
Page 14 of 14