[Cites
21
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Satender Kumar Antil vs Central Bureau Of Investigation on 16 July, 2025
2025 INSC 909




                                                                                    REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           IA NO. 63691 OF 2025
                                                    IN
                                           MA NO.2034 OF 2022
                                                    IN
                                           MA NO. 1849 OF 2021
                                                    IN
                               SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO. 5191 OF 2021



             SATENDER KUMAR ANTIL                                                … PETITIONER


                                                         VERSUS


             CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
             AND ANR.                                                          … RESPONDENTS

                                                            ORDER
1. IA No. 63691 of 2025 has been filed by the State of Haryana seeking

                         modification of the order dated 21.01.2025, passed by this Court in MA No.

                         2034/2022 in MA No. 1849/2021 in SLP (Crl.) No. 1591/2021.
2. Vide the aforesaid order, this Court had directed all the States and Union
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Territories to issue a Standing Order to their respective police machinery to
   SWETA BALODI
   Date: 2025.07.30
   17:37:21 IST

                         issue notices under
Section 41-A
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
   Reason:
1
(hereinafter referred to as “
CrPC
, 1973”)/
Section 35
of the Bharatiya Nagarik

   Suraksha Sanhita (hereinafter referred to as “BNSS, 2023”) only through the

   mode of service as prescribed under the
CrPC
, 1973/BNSS, 2023.
3. It was held that service of the aforesaid notices through WhatsApp or other

   modes of electronic communication, cannot be considered or recognised as an

   alternative or substitute to the mode of service recognised and prescribed

   under the
CrPC
, 1973/BNSS, 2023.
4. It was also held that the Standing Orders must be issued strictly in accordance

   with the guidelines issued by the Delhi High Court in
Rakesh Kumar v.

   Vijayanta Arya (DCP) & Ors.
, 2021 SCC Online Del 5629 and Amandeep

   Singh Johar v. State (NCT Delhi), 2018 SCC Online Del 13448, both of which

   were upheld by this Court in
Satender Kumar Antil v. CBI & Anr.
(2022) 10

   SCC 51.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPLICANT
5. At the outset, it is submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

   Applicant/State of Haryana that a notice under
Section 35
of the BNSS, 2023

   is only an information to the concerned person that he is required to join the

   investigation, and is not liable to be arrested at that time. Service of notice

   through the mode of electronic communication is required to ensure that the
2
concerned person does not evade service of notice, and that precious resources

   of the State are not wasted.
6.
Section 64
of the BNSS, 2023 has been brought to the attention of this Court.

   Placing reliance on the Proviso to
Section 64(2)
of the BNSS, 2023 he

   submitted that it permits the service of summons via the mode of electronic

   communication also, which would indicate that there is no bar in serving of

   summons through the mode of electronic communication. Therefore, when

   BNSS, 2023 statutorily recognizes electronic mode of service of summons

   issued by the Court, then the notice issued under
Section 35
of the BNSS, 2023

   should also be permitted to be served through the electronic mode.
7. Placing reliance upon
Section 71
of the BNSS, 2023, it is submitted that

   sub-section (1) provides for service of summons to witnesses through the

   mode of electronic communication. Even if one were to contend that proviso

   to
Section 64(2)
of the BNSS, 2023 permits service of summons via the mode

   of electronic communication only in those cases where the summons bear the

   image of a Court's seal,
Section 71
of the BNSS, 2023 is an overriding

   provision as there is no requirement of the Court's seal therein.
8. A careful reading of
Section 64(2)
and
Section 71
of the BNSS, 2023 would

   indicate that the former relates to system-generated summons, i.e., the e-
3
Summons App, hence the requirement of the Court's seal to make them look

   authentic, whereas, the latter relates to physical summons duly signed,

   scanned and transmitted electronically, because of which there is no separate

   requirement of any watermark seal. A notice under
Section 35
of the BNSS,

   2023 falls within the same category as a summons under
Section 71
of the

   BNSS, 2023, and therefore must be permitted to be transmitted electronically.
9. Placing reliance upon Section 530 of the BNSS, 2023, it is submitted that the

   intent of the legislature is clear, relating to the use of technology in

   streamlining criminal proceedings. The aforesaid section lays down that trials,

   inquiries and proceedings may be held through the mode of electronic

   communication. Therefore, excluding service of notice under
Section 35
of

   the BNSS, 2023 through the mode of electronic communication, would be an

   exception to the entire scheme of affairs.
10.Insofar as the guidelines issued by the Delhi High Court in
Rakesh Kumar v.

   Vijayanta Arya (DCP) & Ors.
, 2021 SCC Online Del 5629 and Amandeep

   Singh Johar v. State (NCT Delhi), 2018 SCC Online Del 13448, both of which

   were upheld by this Court in
Satender Kumar Antil v. CBI & Anr.
(2022) 10

   SCC 51, it is submitted that these judgments were delivered when the
CrPC
,

   1973 was in operation and the BNSS, 2023 had not come into effect. Unlike
4
the BNSS, 2023 the
CrPC
, 1973 had no provision that contemplated the

   service of summons or notice through the mode of electronic communication,

   and therefore such directions were issued. Hence, the guidelines issued in the

   aforesaid judgment have no bearing on or applicability to the provisions of

   BNSS, 2023.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE AMICUS CURIAE
11.The learned Senior Counsel/Amicus Curiae submitted that notice served

   through WhatsApp or other modes of electronic communication is not

   contemplated as a mode of service under
Section 35
of the BNSS, 2023 since

   the same is not in accordance with Chapter VI of the BNSS, 2023, and hence

   cannot be treated as a valid mode of serving notice under
Section 35
of the

   BNSS, 2023.
12.It is submitted that summons are to be served personally on the person, as per

   the regular mode of service. The newly added proviso to
Section 64(2)
of the

   BNSS, 2023 permits the mode of electronic communication as a means to

   serve summons, only in those cases where the summons bear the image of the

   Court’s seal. Since a notice issued under
Section 35
of the BNSS, 2023 is not

   from the Court, the Investigating Agency must necessarily adhere to the

   regular mode of service.
5
13.It is further submitted that Section 530 of the BNSS, 2023 states that all trials,

   inquiries and proceedings under the BNSS, 2023 may be held in electronic

   mode, by use of electronic communication or use of audio-video electronic

   means. The legislature, in its wisdom, has excluded investigations from the

   scope of the aforesaid section, thereby meaning that the same have been

   consciously omitted from the purview of the procedures which are permissible

   through electronic means. Hence, the aforesaid section clearly does not permit

   service of notice under
Section 35
of the BNSS, 2023 through WhatsApp or

   other modes of electronic communication.
14.Finally, it is submitted that since a notice under
Section 35
of the BNSS, 2023

   is issued by the Investigating Agency, and the breach thereof leads to arrest

   and deprivation of the liberty of an individual, it is appropriate that such a

   notice be served in person on the accused, and not through the mode of

   electronic communication.
DISCUSSION
15.The Legislature, envisaging the extensive reliance on modern means of

   communication in the present times, has recognised the mode of electronic

   communication within the ambit of the BNSS, 2023.
6
Section 2
of the BNSS, 2023
     “2. Definitions
                                              ***
(i) “electronic communication” means the communication of any written, verbal,
     pictorial information or video content transmitted or transferred (whether from one
     person to another or from one device to another or from a person to a device or
     from a device to a person) by means of an electronic device including a telephone,
     mobile phone, or other wireless telecommunication device, or a computer, or
     audio-video player or camera or any other electronic device or electronic form as
     may be specified by notification, by the Central Government.”
16.Notably, the Legislature has clearly demarcated the extent of permissible

   usage of modes of electronic communication, under the BNSS, 2023. The

   same is evident from the language employed in Section 530 of the

   BNSS, 2023.
Section 530 of the BNSS, 2023
     “530. Trial and proceedings to be held in electronic mode.—All trials, inquires
     and proceedings under this Sanhita, including—
(i) issuance, service and execution of summons and warrant;
(ii) examination of complainant and witnesses;
(iii) recording of evidence in inquiries and trials; and
(iv) all appellate proceedings or any other proceeding,
     may be held in electronic mode, by use of electronic communication or use of
     audio-video electronic means.”
17.Section 530 of the BNSS, 2023 states that all trials, inquiries, and proceedings

   may be held in electronic mode, by use of electronic communication or use of

   audio-video electronic means. Categories mentioned thereunder would clearly

   show that it is not only meant for the accused persons, but also for the
7
complainant and witnesses. Further, the mode of electronic communication is

   only one of the modes available, and its usage is discretionary.
18.The issue before us lies within a narrow compass – whether the usage of

   electronic communication can also be extended to the procedure governing

   the service of a notice, contemplated under
Section 35
of the BNSS, 2023. To

   answer the same, a purposive interpretation must be given to the BNSS, 2023,

   especially the aforementioned provision.
NOTICES BY THE INVESTIGATING AGENCY
19.The BNSS, 2023, keeping in tune with the erstwhile provisions of the
CrPC
,

   1973 provides for situations where a person may be arrested by the

   Investigating Agency, without a warrant.
Section 35
of the BNSS, 2023
    “35. When police may arrest without warrant.—(1) Any police officer may
    without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person—
(a) who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a cognizable offence; or
(b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information
        has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a
        cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may be less
        than seven years or which may extend to seven years whether with or without
        fine, if the following conditions are satisfied, namely:—
(i) the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of such complaint,
         information, or suspicion that such person has committed the said offence;
(ii) the police officer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary—
(a) to prevent such person from committing any further offence; or
(b) for proper investigation of the offence; or
(c) to prevent such person from causing the evidence of the offence to disappear or
         tampering with such evidence in any manner; or
8
(d) to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat or promise to any
    person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from
    disclosing such facts to the Court or to the police officer; or
(e) as unless such person is arrested, his presence in the Court whenever required
    cannot be ensured,
     and the police officer shall record while making such arrest, his reasons in
     writing:
Provided that a police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is
     not required under the provisions of this sub-section, record the reasons in
     writing for not making the arrest; or
(c) against whom credible information has been received that he has committed
     a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
     extend to more than seven years whether with or without fine or with death
     sentence and the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of that
     information that such person has committed the said offence; or
(d) who has been proclaimed as an offender either under this Sanhita or by order
     of the State Government; or
(e) in whose possession anything is found which may reasonably be suspected to
     be stolen property and who may reasonably be suspected of having committed
     an offence with reference to such thing; or
(f) who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his duty, or who has
     escaped, or attempts to escape, from lawful custody; or
(g) who is reasonably suspected of being a deserter from any of the Armed Forces
     of the Union; or
(h) who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable complaint has
     been made, or credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion
     exists, of his having been concerned in, any act committed at any place out of
     India which, if committed in India, would have been punishable as an offence,
     and for which he is, under any law relating to extradition, or otherwise, liable
     to be apprehended or detained in custody in India; or
(i) who, being a released convict, commits a breach of any rule made under sub-
section (5) of
Section 394
; or
(j) for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or oral, has been received from
     another police officer, provided that the requisition specifies the person to be
     arrested and the offence or other cause for which the arrest is to be made and it
     appears therefrom that the person might lawfully be arrested without a warrant
     by the officer who issued the requisition.
(2) Subject to the provisions of
Section 39
, no person concerned in a non-
cognizable offence or against whom a complaint has been made or credible
information has been received or reasonable suspicion exists of his having so
concerned, shall be arrested except under a warrant or order of a Magistrate.
(3) The police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not
required under sub-section (1) issue a notice directing the person against
9
whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information has
     been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a
     cognizable offence, to appear before him or at such other place as may be
     specified in the notice.
(4) Where such a notice is issued to any person, it shall be the duty of that
     person to comply with the terms of the notice.
(5) Where such person complies and continues to comply with the notice, he
     shall not be arrested in respect of the offence referred to in the notice unless,
     for reasons to be recorded, the police officer is of the opinion that he ought to
     be arrested.
(6) Where such person, at any time, fails to comply with the terms of the notice
     or is unwilling to identify himself, the police officer may, subject to such orders
     as may have been passed by a competent Court in this behalf, arrest him for
     the offence mentioned in the notice.
(7) No arrest shall be made without prior permission of an officer not below the
     rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police in case of an offence which is punishable
     for imprisonment of less than three years and such person is infirm or is above sixty
     years of age.”

                                                                     (emphasis supplied)
20.
Section 35
of the BNSS, 2023 provides for arrest of persons by the

   Investigating Agency, ensuring that the concerned person appears before the

   Investigating Agency and cooperates with the investigation. The provision

   delineates the prerequisites that must be fulfilled before a person can be

   arrested without a warrant, keeping in mind the laudable objective of

   safeguarding the liberty of an individual. The legislative intent behind the

   provision is that of restricting arbitrary arrests.
21.
Section 35(3)
of the BNSS, 2023 mandates the service of a notice whenever

   the Investigating Agency, on the basis of a reasonable complaint, credible

   information or suspicion, determines that a person may have committed a

   cognizable offence, but does not deem the arrest of such person necessary. In
10
such a scenario, the Investigating Agency is mandated to issue a written notice

   directing the person to appear before it, or at such other place as may be

   specified in the notice.
22.
Section 35(4)
of the BNSS, 2023 imposes a duty on the recipient of the notice

   to the effect that once the notice is served, the person must comply with every

   term of the notice.
Section 35(5)
of the BNSS, 2023 provides that as long as

   the person to whom the notice is issued, appears as is required and continues

   to comply with the notice, they cannot be arrested in relation to the alleged

   offence. Arrest may be made only if the Investigating Agency records specific

   reasons as to why the arrest is necessary.
23.
Section 35(6)
of the BNSS, 2023 lays down the procedure to be followed in

   case of non-compliance with the notice issued by the Investigating Agency

   under
Section 35(3)
of the BNSS, 2023. Non-compliance with a notice does

   not ipso facto mandate arrest, as there lies a discretion with the Investigating

   Agency, which must be of the opinion that the arrest of the concerned person

   is necessary for the purpose of investigation. In other words, failure to comply

   with the notice does not lead to automatic arrest. Rather, it is the last resort

   available to the Investigating Agency, after due exercise of discretion

   regarding the necessity of arrest.
11
24.Therefore, the abovementioned provision contains an element of substantivity,

   which becomes evident from the discretion provided to the Investigating

   Agency. The substantive element is in the nature of a safeguard, especially

   when the liberty of an individual is involved.
25.The protection of one’s liberty is a crucial aspect of the right to life guaranteed

   to each and every individual, under
Article 21
of the Constitution of India,

   1950 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Constitution’). The procedure

   encapsulated in
Section 35(6)
of the BNSS, 2023, seeks to secure this

   fundamental right, from encroachment by the relevant Authority, and

   therefore, any attempt to interpret the provision as a mere procedural one,

   would amount to rewriting the provision itself.
26.Thus, service of a notice under
Section 35
of the BNSS, 2023 needs to be

   carried out in a manner that protects this substantive right, as non-compliance

   with the notice can have a drastic effect on the liberty of an individual.
27.The Legislature, in its wisdom, has specifically excluded the service of a

   notice under
Section 35
of the BNSS, 2023 from the ambit of procedures

   permissible through electronic communication, that have been delineated

   under Section 530 of the BNSS, 2023.
12
28.While interpreting a statute, the legislative intent is to be gathered from a plain

   and simple reading of the language employed in the provisions, in a purposive

   manner, thereby upholding the objective behind the enactment. On a plain

   reading of the BNSS, 2023, the restrictions imposed by the Legislature on the

   use of electronic communication, to only certain procedures, precludes the use

   of electronic communication for any other procedure, for which it has not been

   specifically permitted by the BNSS, 2023.
29.This interpretation is countenanced by the objective sought to be achieved by

   the BNSS, 2023. As highlighted hereinbefore, the essence of
Article 21
of the

   Constitution imbues the BNSS, 2023, which reflects the laudable objective of

   safeguarding the liberty of an individual, while facilitating the investigation

   into and adjudication of offences. The abovementioned restrictions on the

   usage of the mode of electronic communication, have been imposed in order

   to safeguard the right to life and personal liberty, guaranteed to an individual

   by the Constitution, from being impinged during the course of criminal

   investigation and proceedings.
30.Hence, it is manifestly apparent that the Legislature has particularly specified

   the circumstances in which usage of modes of electronic communication is
13
permissible, being circumstances which do not have a bearing on the liberty

   of an individual.
SUMMONS BY THE COURT
31.Another line of reasoning presented before this Court, is regarding the

   permissibility of the usage of electronic communication for the issuance of

   summons by the Court, under the BNSS, 2023. To consider the same, this

   Court must delve into the nature of proceedings pertaining to a notice under
Section 35
of the BNSS, 2023 vis-a-vis a summons under
Sections 63
,
64
and
71
of the BNSS, 2023.
32.We first wish to highlight the difference between investigation, inquiry and

   judicial proceedings, as contemplated under the BNSS, 2023.
Section 2
of the BNSS, 2023
    “
Section 2
. Definitions-
***
(k) "inquiry" means every inquiry, other than a trial, conducted under this
    Sanhita by a Magistrate or Court;
(l) "investigation" includes all the proceedings under this Sanhita for the
    collection of evidence conducted by a police officer or by any person (other
    than a Magistrate) who is authorised by a Magistrate in this behalf.
(m) “judicial proceeding” includes any proceeding in the course of which
    evidence is or may be legally taken on oath;”
                                                             (emphasis supplied)
   It is to be noted that the purpose of an investigation by an Investigating

   Agency, is markedly distinct from that of an inquiry or judicial proceedings
14
by the Court. While the former is to investigate an offence, the latter is a search

  towards the truthful determination of an occurrence. Therefore, the procedure

  of one cannot be read into the other.
Section 63
of the BNSS, 2023
    “63. Form of summons.—Every summons issued by a Court under this Sanhita
    shall be,—
(i) in writing, in duplicate, signed by the presiding officer of such Court or by such
      other officer as the High Court may, from time to time, by rule direct, and shall
      bear the seal of the Court; or
(ii) in an encrypted or any other form of electronic communication and shall bear
      the image of the seal of the Court or digital signature.”
                                                                  (emphasis supplied)
33.A summons under
Section 63(i)
of the BNSS, 2023 is issued by a Court in

  writing, in duplicate, which shall be signed by the presiding officer of such

  Court, or by such other officer as directed by the High Court from time to time,

  and shall bear the seal of the Court.
34.A new form of summons has been contemplated by the legislature in the

  BNSS, 2023. Under
Section 63(ii)
of the BNSS, 2023, a summons issued by

  a Court can be in an encrypted or any other form of electronic communication,

  and shall bear the image of the seal of the Court or digital signature.
Section 64
of the BNSS, 2023
    “64. Summons how served.—(1) Every summons shall be served by a police
    officer, or subject to such rules as the State Government may make in this behalf,
    by an officer of the Court issuing it or other public servant:
15
Provided that the police station or the registrar in the Court shall maintain a
    register to enter the address, email address, phone number and such other details as
    the State Government may, by rules, provide.
(2) The summons shall, if practicable, be served personally on the person
    summoned, by delivering or tendering to him one of the duplicates of the
    summons:
Provided that summons bearing the image of Court's seal may also be
    served by electronic communication in such form and in such manner, as the
    State Government may, by rules, provide.”
                                                                   (emphasis supplied)
35.
Section 64
of the BNSS, 2023 pertains to how summons shall be served. We

  are concerned with
Section 64(2)
of the BNSS, 2023 which mandates that a

  summons shall be served personally on the person summoned, if practicable,

  by delivering or tendering one of the duplicates of the summons. The proviso

  to
Section 64(2)
of the BNSS, 2023 provides a discretion of also serving

  summons by electronic communication, only when they bear the image of the

  Court's seal in a manner and form that the State Government may provide by

  rules.
36.From a cumulative reading of
Sections 63
and
64
of the BNSS, 2023, the

  argument on behalf of the applicant that
Section 64(2)
of the BNSS, 2023

  relates to system-generated summons i.e., the e-Summons App, hence the

  requirement of the Court's seal to make them look authentic, falls to the ground

  because, irrespective of the summons being issued under
Section 63(i)
or
Section 63(ii)
of the BNSS, 2023, it shall necessarily bear the seal of the Court,

  or the image of the seal of the Court, when the summons is being served.
16
Section 71
of the BNSS, 2023
    “71. Service of summons on witness.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained
    in the preceding sections of this Chapter, a Court issuing a summons to a witness
    may, in addition to and simultaneously with the issue of such summons, direct
    a copy of the summons to be served by electronic communication or by
    registered post addressed to the witness at the place where he ordinarily
    resides or carries on business or personally works for gain.
        (2) When an acknowledgement purporting to be signed by the witness or an
    endorsement purporting to be made by a postal employee that the witness refused
    to take delivery of the summons has been received or on the proof of delivery of
    summons under sub-section (3) of
Section 70
by electronic communication to the
    satisfaction of the Court, the Court issuing summons may deem that the summons
    has been duly served.”
                                                                   (emphasis supplied)
37.
Section 71
of the BNSS, 2023 provides for the service of summons on

  witnesses. We are concerned with sub-section (1) which states that a Court

  issuing a summons to a witness may direct a copy of such summons to be

  served by electronic communication.
38.The contention of the applicant that a notice under
Section 35
of the

  BNSS, 2023 falls within the same category as a summons under
Section 71
of

  the BNSS, 2023, and therefore, since the latter allows electronic mode of

  service,   the    former     must     also    be   permitted     to   be    transmitted

  electronically, cannot be accepted, for the simple reason that a summons

  under
Section 71
of the BNSS, 2023, has no immediate bearing on the liberty

  of an individual in case of its non-compliance. However, a notice under
Section 35
of the BNSS, 2023 could have an immediate bearing on the liberty
17
of the individual in case of its non-compliance, as laid down under
Section

   35(6)
of the BNSS, 2023.
39.Furthermore, a summons issued by a Court under
Sections 63
or 71 of the

   BNSS, 2023, and a notice issued by the Investigating Agency under
Section

   35
of the BNSS, 2023 travel on different footings and cannot be equated with

   each other. A summons issued by a Court is a judicial act, whereas a notice

   issued by the Investigating Agency is an executive act. Hence, the procedure

   prescribed for a judicial act cannot be read into the procedure prescribed for

   an executive act.
EXPLICIT MENTION OF THE USAGE OF ELECTRONIC MODE IN THE
CONTEXT OF THE INVESTIGATING AGENCY
40.We further wish to take note of the fact that the BNSS, 2023 does not entirely

   preclude the use of electronic communication by the Investigating Agency.

   The Legislature has envisioned the use of electronic communication, during

   the course of investigation, and upon completion of investigation by the

   Investigating Agency, specifically provided for under
Sections 94(1)
and
193(3)
of the BNSS, 2023 respectively.
18
Section 94(1)
of the BNSS, 2023

    “94. Summons to produce document or other thing-
(1) Whenever any Court or any officer in charge of a police station considers that
     the production of any document, electronic communication, including
     communication devices, which is likely to contain digital evidence or other thing
     is necessary or desirable for the purposes of any investigation, inquiry, trial or
     other proceeding under this Sanhita by or before such Court or officer, such Court
     may issue a summons or such officer may, by a written order, either in physical
     form or in electronic form, require the person in whose possession or power such
     document or thing is believed to be, to attend and produce it, or to produce it, at
     the time and place stated in the summons or order.”
Section 193(3)
of the BNSS, 2023

    “193. Report of a Police Officer on the completion of investigation-
***
     (3)(i) As soon as the investigation is completed, the officer in charge of the police
     station shall forward, including through electronic communication to a Magistrate
     empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police report, a report in the
     form as the State Government may, by rules provide, stating—
(a) the names of the parties;
(b) the nature of the information;
(c) the names of the persons who appear to be acquainted with the circumstances
     of the case;
(d) whether any offence appears to have been committed and, if so, by whom;
(e) whether the accused has been arrested;
(f) whether the accused has been released on his bond or bail bond;
(g) whether the accused has been forwarded in custody under
Section 190
;
(h) whether the report of medical examination of the woman has been attached
     where investigation relates to an offence under
Sections 64
,
65
,
66
,
67
,
68
,
70
or
Section 71
of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
(i) the sequence of custody in case of electronic device;
(ii) the police officer shall, within a period of ninety days, inform the progress of
     the investigation by any means including through electronic communication to
     the informant or the victim;
(iii) the officer shall also communicate, in such manner as the State Government
     may, by rules, provide, the action taken by him, to the person, if any, by whom
     the information relating to the commission of the offence was first given.”
19
41.The usage of electronic communication by the Investigating Agency, has only

   been provided for effecting the procedure under
Sections 94
and
193
of the

   BNSS, 2023.
42.
Section 94
deals with issuance of summons, in an electronic form, to produce

   a document.
Section 193
deals with the usage of electronic communication for

   forwarding the report to a Magistrate, upon completion of the investigation,

   or to inform the progress of the investigation to the informant or victim. None

   of these procedures have any bearing on the liberty of an individual.
43.Hence, when viewed from any lens, we are unable to convince ourselves that

   electronic communication is a valid mode of service of notice under
Section

   35
of the BNSS, 2023, since its conscious omission is a clear manifestation of

   the legislative intent. Introducing a procedure into
Section 35
of the

   BNSS, 2023, that has not been specifically provided for by the Legislature,

   would be violative of its intent.
20
44.For the aforesaid reasons, IA No. 63691 of 2025 seeking modification of the

   order dated 21.01.2025, stands dismissed. As a consequence, order dated

   21.01.2025, passed by this Court in MA No. 2034/2022 in MA No. 1849/2021

   in SLP (Crl.) No. 1591/2021 stands confirmed.
...………………………. J.
(M. M. SUNDRESH)




                                 ………………….…………………………. J.
(NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH)
NEW DELHI;
JULY 16, 2025
21