[Cites
14
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Baljinder Kumar @ Kala vs State Of Punjab on 16 July, 2025
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Vikram Nath
2025 INSC 856




                                                                     REPORTABLE
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 2688-2689 OF 2024


                            BALJINDER KUMAR @ KALA …APPELLANT(S)
                                                         VERSUS
                            STATE OF PUNJAB                       …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                   JUDGMENT
VIKRAM NATH, J.
1.    One can fairly imagine the amplitude of havoc that
                                  would wreak loose in a quiet village which on one
                                  fine morning wakes up to the news of four members
                                  of a family dead, including two lives yet to even
                                  reach the incipient age of five years, and with two
                                  other family members grievously injured. To add to
                                  the horror, the primary suspect in the entire
                                  incident is the father of the deceased children. At
Signature Not Verified         least, that is what the alleged eyewitnesses’
Digitally signed by
account points towards. It is but natural that the
   SONIA BHASIN
   Date: 2025.07.16
   16:10:16 IST
   Reason:
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024             Page 1 of 56
case garners enough sensation in no time to
      become a headline in the local papers and the
      pressure on the investigating agencies is enormous
      to find the culprit. The breakdown of the legal
      system becomes apparent when such haste to lay
      a finger of blame on somebody leads to a shoddy
      investigation and a poorly conducted trial. The
      result is a loosely tied prosecution case with glaring
      loopholes all across and yet the Courts’ enthusiasm
      to deliver justice in such a heinous crime ensures
      that the accused person ends up on the death row,
      albeit without sufficient evidence. This is precisely
      the misery which the instant case entails.
2.    The present appeals have been preferred by the
      accused-appellant assailing the judgment and
      order dated 04.03.2024 passed by the High Court
      of Punjab and Haryana in MRC No. 1 of 2020 and
      CRA-D No. 323 of 2020. The High Court, vide the
      impugned order, has upheld the conviction and
      confirmed the sentence of death imposed on the
      appellant by the Additional Sessions Judge,
      Kapurthala,        on     29.02.2020   in   Case    No.
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                Page 2 of 56
SC/64/2014, under
Sections 302
,
308
and
325
of
           the Indian Penal Code, 18601.
Factual Background –
3.         The case of the prosecution is that in the early
           morning of 29.11.2013, PW1–Vijay Kumar (“the
           complainant”) saw the appellant outside his
           mother’s (PW2–Manjit Kaur) house armed with a
           datar, wherein the appellant told the complainant
           that “he has finished what he had started”, and fled
           away with 3-4 unidentified persons who were
           armed with a gandasi and rods. On entering PW2’s
           house,       the   complainant   found   his   following
           relatives in injured condition – (i) Seema Rani aged
           26 years (sister of PW1; wife of the appellant), (ii)
           Reena Rani aged 28 years (sister of PW1; sister-in-
           law of the appellant), (iii) Harry aged 5 years (son of
           Seema Rani from her first marriage; adopted son of
           Reena Rani; step-son of the appellant), (iv) Sumani
           Kumari aged 3-4 years (daughter born out of the
           wedlock between Seema Rani and the appellant),
(v) Harsh aged 1.5-2 years (son born out of the
           wedlock between Seema Rani and the appellant),
1
IPC
, hereinafter.
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                       Page 3 of 56
and (vi) Om Prakash @ Tari aged 18 years (brother
      of PW1). PW1 called an ambulance, and all the six
      injured persons were taken to the hospital where
      Seema Rani, Reena Rani, Sumani Kumari and
      Harsh were declared brought dead while Harry and
      Om Prakash @ Tari were admitted at the hospital.
4.    The     FIR    was        registered    at   11.15   a.m.    on
      29.11.2013 itself under
Sections 302
,
323
and
34
of    the     IPC    at     Police     Station   Satnampura,
      Kapurthala by S.I. Karnail Singh (‘Investigating
      Officer/IO’) on receiving a telephonic message from
      the Civil Hospital, Phagwara. On 15.02.2014, on
      receipt of opinion from the doctor regarding nature
      of injuries on the person of injured Om Prakash
      and Harry, the offence was enhanced under
Sections 308
and
325
IPC, while offence under
Section 34
of IPC was reduced. The appellant was
      arrested subsequently on 30.01.2014 post his
      discharge from the hospital since he was also
      undergoing treatment of his arm since the date of
      incident.
5.    After completion of the investigation, challan was
      presented against the appellant above to face trial
      under
Sections 302
,
308
,
325
and
323
of the IPC.
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                        Page 4 of 56
The case was committed to the Sessions Court,
      vide order dated 21.05.2014, wherein the accused
      pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. During the
      course of prosecution evidence, the case was
      transferred to the Court of Additional Sessions
      Judge, Kapurthala, wherein it was heard and
      decided as Case No. SC/64/2014.
6.    The motive attributed by the prosecution to the
      appellant is that the appellant’s sister, one Rekha
      Rani was married to one Haria – however, due to
      matrimonial dispute between the parties, the
      marriage was dissolved by divorce in presence of
      the panchayat wherein Haria returned all the
      dowry articles and also undertook to pay Rs.
      35,000/- as maintenance to Rekha Rani. PW2–
      Manjit Kaur (mother-in-law of the appellant) stood
      as guarantor for Haria for returning the amount,
      and when such amount was not paid, it led to
      constant fights between the appellant and his wife
      Seema Rani. The fight had escalated to such an
      extent where the appellant had threatened to kill
      his wife and children if the money was not paid,
      and it also led to Seema Rani along with her
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024             Page 5 of 56
children     coming      to    her        maternal         home     on
       17.11.2013 after she was beaten by the accused.
7.     While this was the motive ascribed, the primary
       evidence considered against the appellant by the
       Courts       below      was          the         testimonies         of
       PW1/complainant, PW2 who claims to be an
       eyewitness and PW17 who is an injured child
       witness. Besides the testimonies, there were also
       alleged discoveries of blood-stained clothes, a
       gandasi and a bicycle at the behest of the appellant
       based      on    his    disclosure              statement       dated
       01.02.2014,       which        led        to     the      prosecution
       establishing      its   case         against        the     accused-
       appellant.
Trial Court’s findings –
8.     The prosecution, in order to substantiate its case
       before the Trial Court, examined 22 prosecution
       witnesses while the accused examined no witness
       in   defence      in    spite        of        availing     sufficient
       opportunities. The lead witnesses presented by the
       prosecution other than the medical officers and
       members of the investigation team included – (i)
       PW1–Vijay Kumar (complainant); (ii) PW2–Manjit
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                                Page 6 of 56
Kaur (claims to be eyewitness); and, (iii) PW17–
      Harry (injured child witness). Other than this,
      PW23–Om Prakash, who was an injured witness,
      was presented before the Court but was not
      examined as a witness on oath on account of being
      found mentally unfit and thereby, not a competent
      witness.
9.    In order to draw a verdict about the conviction of
      the accused, the Trial Court, after hearing the rival
      contentions raised by the respective counsels,
      considered the following arguments and formed its
      reasoning on the varied grounds which are
      summarized as below –
      A. Delay in lodging FIR: The incident is alleged to
          have taken place at about 6 a.m. on 29.11.2013
          and the FIR was lodged on the same day at
          around 11 a.m. The Trial Court held that
          naturally, the first effort of the complainant was
          to save the life of his six injured family members.
          As such, arranging the ambulance and taking
          them to the hospital consumed a lot of time and
          FIR cannot be said to be delayed in such
          circumstances.
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                Page 7 of 56
B. No independent witness: The defence counsel
          had argued that PW1–Vijay Kumar, PW2–Manjit
          Kaur and PW17–Harry are close relatives of the
          deceased persons and interested witnesses, and
          since no independent witness of the locality has
          been examined, thus their testimony cannot be
          relied upon. The Trial Court held that since the
          incident had taken place in the house of PW2–
          Manjit Kaur and that too in the early hours of
          the morning, therefore, she is the most natural
          and best witness. Further, PW17–Harry is a
          witness who sustained injuries during the
          occurrence and his presence at the place cannot
          be denied, therefore, his evidence cannot be
          discarded solely on the ground of being a close
          relative.
C. Presence of PW2–Manjit Kaur at the spot:
Manjit Kaur, who claims to be an eyewitness to
          the incident, stated that after witnessing the
          occurrence, she managed to slip away outside
          the house and concealed herself behind the
          bushes out of fear and came back half an hour
          later. The defence counsel had contended that
          such a conduct was highly improbable and
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024              Page 8 of 56
unnatural for a mother to leave her children at
              the mercy of the killer while slipping away from
              the place of occurrence and makes her presence
              at the spot extremely doubtful. The Trial Court
              observed that the reflex of every human being in
              a dangerous situation varies and it is quite
              natural that, in order to save herself from the
              attack, Manjit Kaur managed to escape from the
              house. Further, it was held that her account that
              she was about to leave for Gurudwara, in
              accordance    with      her   daily   ritual,   was
              corroborated by PW17–Harry who had the same
              impression that his grandmother had left for
              Gurudwara by that hour.
D. Disclosure statement recorded and recovery
              effected without any independent witness:
The defence counsel had submitted that there
              was no independent witness present at the time
              of recording of disclosure statement of the
              accused, nor at the time of effecting recovery of
              weapon. The Trial Court held that Section 27 of
              the Indian Evidence Act, 18722 does not lay
              down that the statement made to police official
2
Evidence Act
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                     Page 9 of 56
should always be in presence of independent
          witnesses. Thus, in such matters, Court seeks
          corroboration from independent witnesses as a
          matter of caution and not as a matter of rule. It
          was held that the recovery of blood-stained
          clothes of the accused finds corroboration from
          the testimony of PW2–Manjit Kaur, who had
          categorically stated that the accused, at the time
          of occurrence, was wearing black shirt and blue
          pajama and the same were recovered.
      E. Discrepancies in the statement of other PWs
          about presence of PW2 at the spot and
          presence of private persons other than the
          accused:      The     Trial   Court   held   that    the
          contradictions pointed out by the defence
          counsel are minor in nature, and the two
          eyewitnesses and one injured child witness have
          stood the test of scrutiny despite the lengthy
          cross-examination. It was observed that such
          minor contradictions do not go to the root of the
          prosecution case.
F. Defence of accused’s arm being amputated:
          The defence counsel had argued that the left arm
          of the accused has been amputated and, in such
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                    Page 10 of 56
a condition, it would have been impossible for
          the accused to carry out murder of four persons
          and cause injuries to two others with one hand
          using gandasi. However, PW1, during his cross-
          examination, had stated that the accused’s arm
          had     been      amputated    after   the      alleged
          occurrence. This was also supplemented by the
          statement of PW15–Dr. Ramesh Chander who
          had attended to the accused at Civil Hospital,
          Phagwara. Further, no suggestion whatsoever,
          nor any evidence has been adduced by the
          accused to submit that his arm was amputated
          prior    to    the    occurrence.   Therefore,      this
          argument of the defence also fell flat.
      G. Motive: The Trial Court held that the motive has
          been established amply in shape of testimony of
          PW18–Satnam Singh (Sarpanch) who had stated
          about the panchayati divorce between the sister
          of the accused and Haria and also the fact that
          PW2–Manjit Kaur stood as a guarantor towards
          the promise of payment of Rs. 35,000/-. Thus, it
          was clear that the appellant was nourishing a
          grudge against Manjit Kaur and her family
          members.
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                    Page 11 of 56
H. Plea of alibi: It was observed by the Trial Court
          that the accused was admitted to Civil Hospital,
          Phagwara at about 7 p.m. on 29.11.2013, i.e. the
          day of the incident due to some accidental
          injuries, whereas the occurrence had taken
          place at about 6 a.m. on the same day, i.e. more
          than twelve hours prior to him being admitted in
          the hospital. Therefore, the plea of alibi merely
          on this ground is nothing but a bald assertion
          and shall not succeed as the accused has failed
          to adduce any oral or documentary evidence to
          support his plea.
I. Injuries/medical             evidence   reflect     the
          intention to kill: The Trial Court analysed the
          post-mortem reports and the medical opinion of
          the members of Board of doctors who conducted
          post-mortem which led it to conclude that the
          injuries were caused by the accused on the vital
          body parts of the deceased and such injuries
          were sufficient to cause death in the ordinary
          course of nature. Therefore, it was established
          that the accused caused the injuries only with
          the intention to brutally kill them, leaving no
          chance of their survival.
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                  Page 12 of 56
J. Conviction under
Sections 308
and
325
of
          the IPC: The Trial Court considered the medical
          reports and the statement of Medical Officer
          opining     that    “injury   no.   3,   possibility   of
          dangerous to life, could not be ruled out”, and
          held that from the intention of accused, while
          causing injuries to minor Harry, ingredients of
          offence under
Section 308
of IPC stand proven.
          Additionally, with regard to the injuries meted
          out to Om Prakash, the Medical Officer opined
          that the “possibility of injury nos. 1 and 3 to be
          grievous in nature cannot be ruled out”. Even
          though the final opinion regarding the injury
          was not placed on record by the prosecution, the
          Trial Court went ahead and held that the guilt of
          accused for the offence punishable under
Section 325
of IPC stands proved.
K. Recovery        of    weapon     and      blood-stained
          clothes: A gandasi, i.e. the weapon used for the
          commission of the crime along with blood-
          stained clothes of the accused and a cycle were
          allegedly recovered on the basis of the accused’s
          disclosure statement. The clothes and gandasi
          were sent for chemical analysis, and the said
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                    Page 13 of 56
report stated that “The exhibits contained in the
                parcel A and B are stained with human blood”.
                The said report was not exhibited before the Trial
                Court, but the Court, nevertheless, took judicial
                notice of the same and held that the report of
                chemical examiner is admissible in evidence as
                per
Section 293
of the Code of Criminal
                Procedure, 19733. The Court went ahead to the
                extent of holding that the blood-stained clothes
                and weapon of offence leave no room for doubt
                to connect the accused with the commission of
                crime.
10. Thereby, it was held by the Trial Court that the
              prosecution has been able to prove guilt of the
              accused beyond reasonable doubt. As such, the
              accused, vide judgment dated 29.02.2020, was
              convicted under
Section 302
of IPC on four counts
              (i.e. Seema Rani, Reena Rani, Harsh and Sumani
              Kumari) along with
Sections 308
and
325
of the
              IPC.
11. The order of sentence against the accused was
              passed by the Trial Court on the same day after
              lunch, wherein the Court held it to be one of the
3
Cr.P.C
.
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                    Page 14 of 56
rarest of rare cases and sentenced the accused to
      death under
Section 302
IPC for committing four
      murders. The accused was also sentenced to pay a
      fine of Rs. 2,00,000/- (Rupees Two lakhs only), in
      default of which to undergo rigorous imprisonment
      for one year under
Section 302
IPC, in case his
      death sentence is not confirmed by the High Court.
      Further, the accused was sentenced to undergo
      seven years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of
      Rs. 50,000/- (Rupees Fifty thousand only) under
Section 308
of IPC, in default of payment of fine to
      further        undergo          ten     months’        rigorous
      imprisonment. Similarly, under
Section 325
of IPC,
      the accused was sentenced to undergo seven years’
      rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 50,000/-
      (Rupees Fifty thousand only), and in default of
      payment of fine, to further undergo rigorous
      imprisonment for ten months. All the sentences
      were to run consecutively in case death sentence is
      not confirmed. Out of the amount of fine imposed,
      2/3rd     of   the    amount          was   to   be    paid    as
      compensation to the victim PW2–Manjit Kaur as
      well as injured persons namely Harry and Om
      Prakash, in equal proportions.
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                         Page 15 of 56
12. The elemental factors considered by the Trial Court
      while categorizing the instant case in the “rarest of
      rare” category and awarding death sentence to the
      accused       included      that   the   crime   was     not
      committed in the heat of passion but was pre-
      meditated as the convict was nourishing grudge
      against his own family members and led to
      committing murder of his own wife, two children
      and sister-in-law. The Court also observed that if
      the accused could go on to take such an extreme
      step, he could very well be a danger to the life of
      complainant and PW2. It was held that the balance
      tilted towards the aggravating circumstances as
      the crime shook the society’s conscience and the
      convict deserves to meet the gallows.
High Court’s findings –
13. The High Court, vide the impugned judgment,
      notes the findings of the Trial Court, details the
      arguments of the opposing counsels and proceeds
      to record its reasons for upholding the conviction.
      However, the High Court notes certain fallacies
      committed by the Trial Court, especially with
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                    Page 16 of 56
regard to its analysis of the deposition of PW1–Vijay
      Kumar.
14. The High Court firstly noted that the site plan (Ex
      PW22/J)          does       not   show   that     the
      PW1/complainant’s house is adjacent to that of his
      mother/PW2. Further, it was noted that the cycle
      repair shop of the complainant, which is where the
      complainant lived as per PW2’s statement, is
      situated 10 kilometers away from the house where
      the occurrence took place. Thus, it was held to be
      apparent that PW1–Vijay Kumar was not residing
      near the house in question and, therefore, it was
      highly improbable for him to be at the spot when
      the accused was coming out by holding gandasi
      after committing the offence. Therefore, PW1’s
      statement as to him having witnessed the accused
      while exiting the house after the incident was
      completely discarded by the High Court.
15. Subsequently, the High Court also observed that
      the manner in which the recovery of gandasi along
      with blood-stained clothes and the cycle had been
      effected after a considerable period of two months
      from the house of the accused does not inspire any
      confidence in the investigation and rather brings
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024             Page 17 of 56
out glaring lapse on the part of the investigating
      agency.
16. However, the High Court granted unblemished
      acceptance to PW2–Manjit Kaur’s statement as to
      her being present in the house at the relevant hour
      and that she was an eyewitness to the entire
      incident who fled away the scene out of fear of her
      own safety.
17. Further, with regard to the injuries sustained by
      the accused on the day of the incident and how the
      accused offered no explanation as to the cause of
      injuries, the High Court employed
Section 106
of
      the Evidence Act to place reverse onus on the
      appellant. Failure to provide any explanation by the
      accused pertaining to his injuries led the Court to
      treat it as another reason to confirm the conviction
      by presuming that the said injuries were received
      by the accused during the assault on account of
      defence put up by the deceased and injured victims
      other than the minor children.
18. Another factor that weighed with the High Court
      was that the manner in which the assault was
      committed clearly showed that it was by a person
      who was keenly nursing a grudge and was not a
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024             Page 18 of 56
case of robbery by unknown persons who could
      have easily over-powered the minor children and
      deceased women without inflicting injuries of such
      severe nature.
19. As such, the High Court held that, on co-relating
      the statement of PW2 and the child witness, the
      motive aspect and the fact that the appellant
      himself was admitted in the hospital later on the
      day of incident itself as he had suffered serious
      injuries, to which he has not given any plausible
      explanation, would go on to show that the
      prosecution is able to prove its case beyond any
      shadow of doubt regarding the involvement of the
      appellant.
20. The High Court also observed that the brutality of
      the incident is that of a diabolic act, whereby
      conscience of the society as a whole has been
      shocked. The deceased, including two children and
      wife of the accused-appellant himself, were done to
      death in the safety of their own house and,
      therefore, the Court held the case to fall in the
      rarest of rare category while confirming the death
      penalty.
Submissions –
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024            Page 19 of 56
21. It is in the above background that the impugned
      judgment is being assailed before us by the
      accused-appellant.
22. We have heard Mr. Dama Seshadri Naidu, learned
      senior counsel appearing for the appellant and Mr.
      Siddhant Sharma, learned counsel appearing for
      the respondent–State of Punjab.
23. The counsel for the appellant, Mr. Naidu, has
      argued in length before us while adequately dealing
      with the evidence presented by the prosecution
      before the Courts below, and their submissions can
      be classified into five main contentions which are
      as follows –
a) Failure of the prosecution to establish a clear
          motive:      It    has   been    contended   that    the
          purported         financial    dispute   between     the
          appellant and PW2’s family which has been
          attributed as the root cause of animosity and
          gave birth to the crime remains uncorroborated
          since the prosecution failed to examine Haria or
          the appellant’s sister, who were the principal
          parties to the alleged transaction.
b) Contradictions            and    embellishments         in
          Prosecution Witness testimonies: It has been
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                    Page 20 of 56
exhaustively argued that the testimonies of the
          key witnesses, i.e. PW1 and PW2 are riddled with
          contradictions ranging from the presence of the
          said witnesses to the weapon used and the
          existence      of    any     accompanying     accused
          persons. Even though, the appellant’s counsel
          has made pinpointed attacks and brought forth
          specific discrepancies, we are deliberately not
          elaborating the said submission at the instant
          juncture, as it shall be dealt with appropriately
          in the latter part of the judgment, while
          analysing the testimonies of the prosecution
          witnesses.
c) Deficiencies         in      the   investigation    and
          questionable evidentiary value of the alleged
          recoveries: It was submitted that the arrest as
          well as the recovery of weapon and clothes was
          not supported by any independent witness.
          Further, the disclosure statement being made
          two months after the incident and the lack of
          DNA or forensic evidence with regard to the
          recovered articles point towards investigative
          loopholes and inconclusive evidence on record.
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                   Page 21 of 56
d) Failure to meet the standard of proof beyond
          reasonable        doubt:         The    above-mentioned
          deficiencies      highlight       the      failure     of    the
          prosecution case in being able to meet the
          required standard of proof and legal threshold
          for conviction in cases of such nature.
e) Non-applicability of the “rarest of rare”
          doctrine:      Without prejudice to the above
          grounds, it was submitted that even as such, the
          instant case does not qualify as “rarest of rare”
          and, therefore, even if in arguendo, the accused
          is convicted, the sentence of death penalty shall
          be too grave and wholly unwarranted.
24. On the other hand, the counsel for the respondent–
      State has unequivocally supported the findings of
      the Courts below and submitted that the impugned
      judgment should not be interfered with. It was
      submitted that there was an eyewitness account of
      the complainant PW1, PW2–Manjit Kaur and the
      child witness Harry, and minor discrepancies in
      the statements of the witnesses can be overlooked,
      especially in view of the fact that there was a motive
      and     the    presence         of   injured     eyewitness        is
      irrefutable. It was submitted that the consequential
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                            Page 22 of 56
recoveries of the weapon and the blood-stained
      clothes further strengthen the prosecution’s case,
      and there is no plausible reason to disbelieve the
      same.
Analysis –
25. Having heard the in-detail submissions and
      perused the material on record, we find it of utmost
      importance to primarily delve into the depositions
      of key witnesses. It is apparent that the Courts
      below have strongly relied upon the testimonies of
      three witnesses to bring home the conclusion of
      guilt against the accused. These three witnesses
      are – (i) PW1–Vijay Kumar (the complainant), (ii)
      PW2–Manjit Kaur (alleged eyewitness), and (iii)
      PW17–Harry (injured child witness). Before we
      proceed       ahead      with   verifying   the     inter-se
      corroboration amongst these testimonies, it would
      be relevant to reproduce the contents of FIR (which
      was registered at the instance of PW1) as well as
      the above-mentioned depositions.
Ex. PW22/B
          FIR No. 54/2013 at P.S. Satnampura,
          Phagwara registered on 29.11.2013
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                     Page 23 of 56
Statement of Vijay Kumar son of Late Daulat
          Ram, caste Adharmi, R/o Kot Rani, PS
          Satnampura, Phagwara, aged 28 years.
              Stated that I am resident of above stated
          address. I am running a cycle repair shop at
          my residence. We are two brothers. My
          younger brother is Om Parkash @ Tari. We
          have two houses and have a joint family.
          Yesterday dated 28.11.2013 in our house
          situated in Dashmesh Puri my mother Manjit
          Kaur, my brother Om Parkash @ Tari, my
          sister Seema Rani and her children Harry
          aged 6 years, Sumani Kumari aged 3 years,
          Harsh 2 years and sister Reena Rani aged 28
          years were sleeping in the house at night. My
          mother used to visit Shri Gurudwara Sahib
          at Dashmesh Puri daily in the morning.
          Sunehri Lai husband of my sister Reena Rani
          is living abroad since two years due to this
          reason she is living with us. My sister Seema
          Rani wife of Baljinder Kumar @ Kala R/o
          village Gurray, PS Guraya whose marriage
          was solemnized since six years ago, also
          living with us from 15 to 20 days alongwith
          her children due to disputes with her
          husband. On dated 14.11.2013 Baljinder
          Kumar @ Kala came our house and
          threatened all of us that if we did not paid
          Rs.35,000/- to him he would kill his children
          and his wife. Today at about 6.00 a.m. I
          alongwith my wife went to our another
          house to drink tea from my mother and
          when we reached at our house near the gate
          in a gali we saw that Baljinder Singh @ Kala
          armed with Datar came out from our house
          and asked us upon seeing that he would told
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024             Page 24 of 56
us to face consequences for not giving
          Rs.35,000/- to him and he did the same what
          he had said and he fleed away from the spot.
          We had seen three/four unidentified
          persons armed with Gandasis and Rods
          ran away alongwith him towards cremation
          ground and when we entered our house and
          saw that both of my sisters Seema Rani and
          Reena Rani, my brother Om Parkash @ Tari
          and three children Harry, Sumani Kumari
          and Harsh smeared with blood. The blood
          was scattered in the room here and there.
          Then I called Ambulance No. 108 for help and
          we went all of them to Civil Hospital
          Phagwara, there doctor Sahib declared my
          sister Seema Rani, Reena Rani, Children
          Sumani Kumari and Harsh dead. My brother
          Om Parkash @ Tari and Harry being injured
          was admitted to the hospital for treatment.
          All the offence occurred by Baljinder Kumar
          @ Kala son of Kaila Ram residence of village
          Gurray PS Guraya alongwith unidentified
          persons armed with weapons with my
          family. Action be taken against them.
          Statement was recorded, heard being correct.
          Sd/- Vijay Kumar, Attested by Sd/- Karnail
          Singh     SHO     PS   Satnampura      dated
          29.11.2013.
[Emphasis is mine]


                Examination-in-chief and cross-
               examination of PW1 – Vijay Kumar
          PW-1 on SA: Vijay Kumar son of Late
          Daulat Ram son of Ram Kishan, aged 28
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024              Page 25 of 56
years, Cycle repair shop, resident of
          village Kot Rani, P.S. Satnampura,
          Phagwara District Kapurthala.
I am running a cycle repair shop at Kot
          Rani. We are two brothers. The name of my
          younger brother is Om Parkash @ Tari. We
          are having two houses with joint family. One
          of our house is in village Kot Rani and the
          second house is situated in Mohalla
          Deshmesh Puri adjoining to Kot Rani. We
          have two sisters namely Reena Rani and
          Seema Rani. My sister Reena Rani has been
          residing with us for the last two years and
          her husband is residing abroad. My sister
          Seema Rani was married with accused
          present in the Court since the last about six
          years. She was having three children namely
          Sumani Kumari, Harsh and Harry. The
          marriage of sister of the accused was got
          performed by my mother with Hariya. There
          was held divorce between the said sister of
          the accused and her husband and my
          mother was to pay Rs. 35,000/- to the
          accused. Due to this reason, there are used
          remain altercation between Seema Rani and
          her husband i.e. the accused who is present
          in the Court. For this reason my said sister
          Seema Rani alongwith her children came to
          reside with us about 15 days prior to the
          occurrence.
On 14.11.2013, accused came to our
          house in village Kot Rani, and threatened us
          to kill Seema Rani, Reena Rani and children
          of Seema Rani. On 29.11.2013 my mother
          Manjit Kaur had gone to Gurudwara at
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024             Page 26 of 56
about 06.00 AM. At that time on the said
          date my both the said sisters, my mother and
          children of Seema Rani were present in the
          house situated in the area of Dashmesh Puri
          above-said. On 29.11.2013, I alongwith my
          wife Sunita Devi were going to our house
          situated in Dashmesh Puri to take tea
          alongwith my mother. When we reached at
          the gate of the above-said house, we saw
          accused Baljnder Kumar coming running
          out from the said house alongwith
          Gandasi. On seeing us, he told us that he
          has done what he has to do and to face the
          consequences for not making the payment of
          Rs.35,000/-. After uttering this, he ran away
          from the spot towards the cremation ground.
          When we entered in the house, he saw that
          both of my sisters Seema Rani and Reena
          Rani, my brother Om Parkash @ Tari and
          three children of Seema Rani smeared with
          blood. The blood was scattered in the room.
          Then ambulance 108 was called at the spot
          and brought the injured to Civil Hospital,
          Phagwara in said ambulance. On reaching
          Civil Hospital, Phagwara the doctor told us
          Seema Rani, Reena Rani and children
          Sumani Kumari and Harsh are dead. My
          injured brother and child Harry were
          admitted in the said hospital for treatment.
          The accused had murdered my sisters Seema
          Rani, Reena Rani and children Sumani
          Kumari and Harsh and had got injury to Om
          Parkash @ Tari and Harry and made by
          statement to the police which bears my
          signature and I identify the same. The said
          statement is EX.PA.
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024             Page 27 of 56
On 29.11.2013, police reached at the spot
          and lifted blood from the spot which was put
          into dubbi plastic which was sealed with the
          seal of mark "KS" and the same was taken
          into police possession vide memo EX PB
          which was attested by me and other police
          officials. Police also took into possession
          blood stained shawl and bed sheet of dubble
          bed from the spot vide EX.PC which was also
          attested by me and other police officials. My
          statement was also recorded in this regard.
              On 01.02 2014, the accused got recovered
          one gandasi made of iron, blood stained
          clothes i.e. Pajama and one vest (both blood
          stained) which were worn by accused at the
          time of alleged occurrence from the residence
          house behind the petti in village Burra. He
          also got recovered one cycle from another
          room of his house. Sketch EX.PD of
          recovered gandasi was prepared. Thereafter,
          this gandasi alongwith the bicycle and above-
          said clothes were taken into police
          possession vide memo EX.PE, The said
          sketch and memo bearing my signatures as
          attesting witness. My statement with regard
          to this recovery was also recorded. I identify
          the accused present in the Court.
(Remaining examination in chief is deferred
          at the request of Ld PP that case property of
          this case not produced)
                                      Dated 30.07.2014
          PW-1 on SA: Vijay Kumar son of Late
          Daulat   Ram     recalled for further
          examination in chief.
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024              Page 28 of 56
I have seen the sealed parcels of gandasi
          EX.P1 and clothes EX.P2 in the Court today.
          At the request of Ld. PP these parcels are
          ordered to be opened. On opening parcel
          EX.P1, a gandasi is taken out which is
          EX.P3. It is the same gandasi which was got
          recovered by the accused. On opening parcel
          EX.P2, one pajama and one T-shirt blood
          stained are taken out which are EX.P4 and
          EX.P5 respectively. These are the same
          clothes which were got recovered by the
          accused. I have also seen the cycle EX.P6. It
          is the same which was got recovered by the
          accused.
XXXXXmn:- on behalf of the accused.
              Gandasi and clothes of the accused were
          seen by me in the house of the accused.
          These articles were recovered from the room
          of the accused. The brothers and other family
          members of the accused are residing with
          him. The accused took the police alongwith
          me to his house. Many residents of the village
          had assembled in the house of the accused
          when we went there. The police had not
          obtained their signatures on any paper. The
          police did the writing work regarding the
          recovery. We had gone there at 09/10:00
          A.M. The police did the writing work in the
          room of the house of the accused. The other
          family members of the accused came to the
          house when we reached there and by that
          time we had not entered in the room of the
          alleged recovery. It is correct that if we had
          gone to the house of the accused the alleged
          recovery could have been effected on search
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024              Page 29 of 56
without the assistance of accused. It is
          incorrect to suggest that nothing was
          recovered from the house of the accused in
          my presence and I have deposed falsely on
          this aspect. It is also wrong to suggest that
          police did not do any writing work at the
          house of accused.
Seema alongwith her children had come
          to our house on the 14th of month but I do
          not remember the month. It is wrong to
          suggest that I alongwith my family residing
          separately from my mother. My cycle repair
          shop is situated at 10 kilometers from my
          house where the alleged occurrence took
          place. I stated in my statement EX PA that
          accused was armed with a gandasi.
Confronted with his said statement where
          gandasi is not mentioned. My mother was
          present at the time of alleged occurrence.
          The occurrence took place at about 06:00
          A.M. My mother was present in the house
          when the alleged occurrence took place.
          My mother used to go to Gurudwara to pay
          obeisance. She used to go to Gurudwara at
          about 06:00 A.M and return at about 07.00
          A.M. from Gurudwara. I had stated in my
          statement EX.PA that my mother had to
          Gurudwara at about 06.00 A.M. on
          29.11.2013. Attention of the witness drawn
          towards EX.PA where this fact is not
          specifically recorded. It is incorrect to
          suggest that my mother had not witnessed
          the occurrence. The police recorded my
          statement EX.PA at about 11:00 A.M at Civil
          Hospital, Phagwara. I do not know at which
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024             Page 30 of 56
place and on which date statement of my
          mother was recorded. I and my wife had not
          chased the accused. He was accompanied
          with 3-4 persons. But we had not noticed
          any weapon in the hands of those persons
          as they had run away. All those persons ran
          towards the creation ground side. When we
          entered the house and saw the injured
          lying in pool of blood, we raised raula. It is
          correct that a news regarding the alleged
          occurrence was also published in the
          newspaper EX.Dl (objected to). It was a
          correct news which was published in EX.D1
          (objected to). The accused was arrested after
          about three days of the occurrence. It is
          correct that his left arm has been amputated.
          Voluntarily It was amputated after the
          alleged occurrence. Prior to 14th of that
          month, my sister had also visited us about
          15-20 days back. We did not inform the
          police regarding the threats given by the
          accused. Seema was married earlier also
          prior to her marriage with the present
          accused. It is wrong to suggest that neither
          myself nor my mother had witnessed any
          occurrence. It is also wrong to suggest that
          we have falsely named the present accused
          in this case. It is also wrong to suggest that I
          have deposed falsely.
Dated 15.10.2014
                                      [Emphasis is mine]


                Examination-in-chief and cross-
               examination of PW2 – Manjit Kaur
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024               Page 31 of 56
PW-2 on SA: Manjit Kaur wife of Daulat
          Ram, wife of Ram Kishan, aged 55 years,
          Housewife, resident of village Kot Rani,
          P.S. Satnampura, Phagwara District,
          Kapurthala.
Stated that I am housewife. I have two
          sons namely Vijay Kumar and Om Parkash @
          Tari. Said Om Parkash @ Tari is mentally
          retarded person. I have two daughters
          namely Seema Rani and Reena Rani. My
          daughter Reena Rani was married with
          Sunhari Lal. Her husband is residing abroad.
          Since husband of Reena Rani has been
          residing abroad so she was residing with us
          for the last about two years. She was
          issueless. From the first marriage of Seema
          Rani she was having one child namely Harry
          who was taking into adoption by Reena Rani.
          Second marriage of my daughter Seema Rani
          was performed with Baljinder Kumar @ Kala
          resident of village Burra the accused present
          in the Court about 5-6 years back. My
          daughter Seema Rani was having two
          children from her second marriage namely
          Sumani Kumari and Harsh. Rekha Rani
          sister of accused was married with Hariya
          resident of Atta near Goraya. There were not
          cordial relations between said Rekha Rani
          and Hariya and as such they could not pull
          on together. A divorce was taken place
          between them on 19.10.2013 in the presence
          of panchayats of both the parties. I was also
          present in said panchayat at that time.
          Hariya returned the entire dowry articles to
          accused Baljinder Kumar. Said Hariya had
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024             Page 32 of 56
also undertaken to pay a sum of Rs. 35,000/-
to accused of this case. I stood as guarantor
          on behalf of Hariya to make payment of said
          amount of Rs.35,000/- to the accused as I
          was mediator in the above-said marriage of
          Rekha Rani with Hariya. Hariya did not make
          the payment above-said of Rs.35,000/- as
          agreed within stipulated date and as result
          thereof there used to remain altercation
          between Seema Rani and her husband
          Baljinder Kumar accused. On 14.11.2013,
          my daughter Seema Rani and her husband
          Baljinder Kumar came together to my house.
          He threatened us in case we did not make the
          payment of the above-said amount of
          Rs.35,000/- he will kill all of us. Thereafter,
          Seema Rani alongwith children again came
          to my house on 17 11.2013 after she was
          beaten by the accused.
On 29.11.2013 I was present in my
          house and I was likely to go to Gurudwara
          at about 05:30 A.M. I did not go to
          Gurudwara and after sometimes, I went to
          the bathroom side. On hearing of voice I
          came out from the bathroom then I saw
          accused Baljinder Kumar armed with
          gandasi wearing black shirt and pajama of
          blue colour. Accused caused injury with
          the gandasi to my daughter namely Seema
          Rani and Reena Ram, said Om Parkash @
          Tari, Harsh, Harry and Sumani Kumari by
          causing injuries to them with the gandasi.
          Accused was uttering where is their mother I
          will kill her also for not making payment of
          above-said Rs.35,000/-. Due to fear I ran
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024              Page 33 of 56
out of the house and raised a raula. When
          I entered into the house after some times
          then I saw that my both daughters, my son
          and three children above-said were lying in
          an injured condition. My son Vijay Kumar
          and his wife came there who called an
          ambulance 108 by making a telephone call
          and took the injured to the Civil Hospital,
          Phagwara in the said ambulance. In the
          hospital doctor told that Seema Rani, Reena
          Rani, Harsh and Sumani Kumari are dead
          Harry and Tari were referred to DMC,
          Ludhiana after giving them first aid. Accused
          had caused the murder of Seema Rani,
          Reena Ram, Harsh and Sumani Kumari and
          also injured Tari and Harry due to non
          payment of the abovesaid amount. Accused
          Baljinder Kumar present in the Court to
          whom I identify. My statement was recorded
          by the police.
XXXXXmn:- on behalf of the accused.
          (Deferred at the request of Ld.Counsel for the
          accused as he has been engaged from the
          Free Legal Aid side and copy of challan is not
          with him)
                                      Dated: 30.07.2014
          PW-2 on SA: Manjit Kaur wife of Late
          Daulat   Ram   recalled  for   cross-
examination by Ld Counsel for the
          accused
             I am daily visitor to the Gurudwara. I
          usually go to the Gurudwara at about
          06:00 AM. without fail. It takes about 10-
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024              Page 34 of 56
15 minutes to reach the gurudwara if one
          goes on foot. My daughter Seema came to my
          house alongwith her children on 17.11.2013.
          This was the second marriage of Seema with
          accused. The accused came to my house on
          14.11 2013 and threatened us. We did not
          inform the police regarding the factum of
          threats given by the accused. The cycle
          shop of my son Vijay was situated near by
          my house and that shop comes after
          crossing two shops from my house and he
          resides in that shop. 1 have never seen my
          said son Vijay Kumar taking intoxicants.
          There is one varandah outside the shop. My
          son Vijay Kumar and his wife reside in the
          house where Vijay Kumar runs cycle
          repair shop. My son Vijay Kumar and his
          wife came earlier to me to the place of
          occurrence. Police recorded my statement in
          my house when we had came back after
          depositing the dead bodies in the mortuary
          after 11:00 A.M. 1 do not remember the exact
          time when my statement was recorded by the
          police. I do not know if my statement was
          recorded earlier or if the statement of my son
          Vijay Kumar was recorded earlier then my
          statement. The male folk was separate then
          the women folk when the police recorded the
          statements of mine and my son. It is wrong
          to suggest that our bathroom is situated
          with varandah adjoining to the roadside
          but it is situated near our kitchen. We
          have got only one bathroom in our house
          near our kitchen. Police did not prepare site
          plan in my presence. It is wrong to suggest
          that from inside the bathroom, place of
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024              Page 35 of 56
occurrence is not visible. Our bathroom and
          toilet are separate. I heard the noise while
          sitting in the bathroom at about 06:00
          A.M. I did not go immediately to the room
          i.e. place of occurrence, but I ran outside
          of the house being afraid of the accused.
          At that time our main gate was open through
          which I came outside. I ran towards colony
          raising raula. My son and his wife came to
          me hearing my raula, when I came back to
          my home. My said son and his wife also
          came there. I concealed myself near the
          factory situated near colony. I hid myself
          behind the bushes, for about half an hour.
          After half an hour, I gained the
          consciousness. I lost my consciousness
          behind the bushes. I do not remember if I had
          got recorded to the police in my statement
          that I had run out of my house raising raula.
          Accused had threatened us on 14.11.2013
          and thereafter, I saw him at the time of
          occurrence. I do not know if a news item was
          published in some newspaper qua the said
          occurrence. My son Vijay Kumar and his
          wife Sunita had come to us to have cup of
          tea on their own. It is incorrect to suggest
          that neither myself nor my son had seen the
          occurrence. It is further wrong to suggest
          that the accused never visited my house on
          14.11.2013, nor he gave any threat to us on
          the said day. It is also wrong to suggest that
          the accused has been falsely implicated in
          this case.
Dated: 30.07.2014
                                      [Emphasis is mine]
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024              Page 36 of 56
26. The precise purpose behind reproducing the above
      testimonies of PW1 and PW2 is to bring forth the
      striking contradictions and incongruities which
      become       as   clear    as      a    day    on   a    singular
      comprehensive reading. The prosecution relied
      laboriously on the testimonies of PW1 and PW2 to
      establish the appellant’s presence and conduct at
      the    scene.      The     Trial       Court    has      lent    its
      unquestionable acceptance to the two testimonies.
      Even though the High Court displayed a degree of
      caution, was quick to recognize the inconsistencies
      in PW1’s deposition and discarded the same, yet
      again, found no reason to doubt PW2’s account of
      events, extended her the credibility of being an
      eyewitness to the entire incident and considered it
      to be unimpeachable. We are, however, unable to
      accord the same degree of sanctity to the
      testimonies of these two purported star witnesses.
      The reasons are multiple and based on ample
      discrepancies which are discussed as follows –
      A. Presence of PW1 at the spot:
Although PW1’s presence at the spot has
          already been discarded by the High Court, we
          find it relevant to discuss the same as it also
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                           Page 37 of 56
points towards blazing contradictions in PW2’s
          account of events and raises several questions
          about the veracity of her own statement.
             Firstly, PW1 states that his cycle shop where
          he resided is ten kilometres away from the place
          of occurrence, whereas PW2 stated that the said
          cycle shop is merely two buildings away from
          her house. PW2’s claim goes unverified by the
          record since no site map has been placed on
          record to reflect that the two places are in the
          same neighbouring area. Rather, it has come on
          record at various places in the case file that
          PW2’s house and PW1’s house/cycle shop were
          located in two different villages. Therefore,
          PW2’s statement in this regard is clearly false.
             Further, PW1, in FIR as well as during his
          deposition, states that on the morning of
          29.11.2013, his wife and him were going to
          PW2’s house to have tea along with her.
Whereas       PW2,      in   her    chief   and    cross-
          examination,         makes     several      inconsistent
          statements about the arrival of PW1 to the spot.
          She initially states that her son (PW1) and
          daughter-in-law        came    to    the    spot   as    a
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                     Page 38 of 56
consequence of the ‘raula’ (hue and cry) that she
          raised. She reiterates the same sentiment in her
          cross-examination but, a few sentences later,
          she goes ahead and says that the son and his
          wife had come to have a cup of tea on their own.
          At one point of time, she also mentions in her
          cross-examination that PW1 and his wife had
          come to the spot of occurrence earlier than
          herself. It also must be noted that PW1 nowhere
          mentions about any raula/alarm raised by PW2,
          as claimed by her good self. These jarring
          inconsistencies suggest chiefly two things –
          firstly, that the statement of PW2 is highly
          shaky, varies at every other turn and is not
          reliable at all; and secondly, that the presence
          of PW1 and his wife at the spot of occurrence
          cannot      be   deduced    from   the   contrasting
          statements and admitted facts like the distance
          of cycle shop from the place of accident.
             Therefore, it can be safely concluded that it
          was highly unlikely for PW1 to be present at the
          spot when the accused was leaving after
          allegedly committing the murder and any
          reliance on PW1’s statement to convict the
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                 Page 39 of 56
accused shall be grossly misplaced. It is
          apparent,      as    the         High   Court    had     also
          acknowledged, that PW1 had been introduced
          as a sham witness by the prosecution despite
          him being absent from the site of crime.
      B. Presence of PW2 at the place of occurrence:
PW2–Manjit Kaur’s account of events has
          been lent maximum trustworthiness by the
          Courts below and she has been hailed as one
          true eyewitness to the entire incident. We have
          already expressed our reservations pertaining to
          PW2’s      statement         emanating          from    huge
          contradictions as stated above, but there are
          even bigger irregularities to shake her credibility
          further.
Firstly, PW2’s presence in the house during the
          occurrence becomes doubtful from the initial
          stage itself as PW1 nowhere mentions her
          presence in the FIR which was registered on the
          day of the incident itself. It is unfathomable that
          the complainant would narrate the sequence of
          events and would miss out on such a major and
          traumatic       detail      as    to    his   own      mother
          witnessing the murder of her children and
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                         Page 40 of 56
grandchildren.           Further,     even        in      his
          examination-in-chief, PW1 reiterates that his
          mother (PW2) had gone to the Gurudwara at 6
          a.m. on the said morning. It is only during his
          cross-examination that PW1, for the first time,
          states that his mother was in the house at the
          time of the alleged incident. Such dissonance in
          statement clearly indicates towards the untrue
          and misguiding nature of these statements.
             Further, even PW2’s own account of being
          present      at    the      crime    scene   is        highly
          questionable. In her examination-in-chief, she
          mentions that she heard the noise while in
          bathroom, came out of the bathroom, saw the
          accused committing the act, then ran out of the
          house out of fear and raised ‘raula’. However, in
          her cross-examination, she states that as soon
          as she heard the noise while in the bathroom,
          she directly ran outside the house due to fear,
          thereby      not     directly       and   first-handedly
          witnessing the accused committing the act of
          murder and inflicting injuries. She further
          states that her son and his wife came to the spot
          as a result of ‘raula’ (alarm) that she raised and
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                     Page 41 of 56
that they came back to the house with her.
However, in the same breath, she also talks
          about her hiding behind the bushes and losing
          consciousness for about half an hour, and her
          son    and     his wife     reaching   the   place     of
          occurrence before herself. This entire narration
          creates a major dent in the timeline of the
          prosecution case and leads to inconsistencies
          which cannot be aligned in a rational manner.
          PW2’s testimony in itself is highly ambivalent,
          fluctuating and shows no sign of coherence of
          events forming an unbreakable chain. The
          incompatibility of a sequence of events only
          becomes more apparent when the statements of
          the two star witnesses are attempted to be read
          together. A natural conclusion of the above
          depositions is that PW2’s presence at the crime
          scene as an eyewitness is highly improbable as
          she is thoroughly self-contradictory about the
          unfolding of events on that fateful morning.
          Therefore, her existence as an eyewitness also
          has to be ruled out.
C. Weapon wielded by the accused:
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                    Page 42 of 56
Given the inconsistent nature of statements
          throughout, it comes as no shock yet certainly
          points     towards          another   irregularity     that
          PW1/complainant,             while    getting   the     FIR
          registered, had stated the accused to be carrying
          a ‘datar’ while exiting the crime scene. However,
          in the later statements made by PW1 before the
          Court, which were naturally recorded after the
          alleged recovery of weapon on 01.02.2014, PW1
          has readily changed his stance and stated to
          have seen the accused carrying a ‘gandasi’. It
          must be noted that the two weapons are
          considerably and visibly different, and a rural
          individual, especially such as PW1 himself, is
          understood to be adept in such difference and
          would not ordinarily mistake one for the other.
          It goes without saying that the murder weapon
          becomes a relevant piece of evidence in such
          cases. A subsequent and convenient switching
          of statements by a key witness with regard to
          seeing the accused with the said weapon only
          points towards the fabricated nature of such a
          statement.
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                       Page 43 of 56
D. Accompanying accused persons with the
          appellant:
Another unmistakable contradiction is in
          PW1’s account of events in the FIR where he
          states the appellant to be accompanied by
          three/four      unidentified    persons     who   were
          armed with gandasis and rods. Whereas, in his
          chief examination, he entirely omits mentioning
          any accompanying accused persons. However,
          when he is confronted with such a contradiction
          during the cross-examination, he admits that
          the accused was accompanied by three/four
          persons while fleeing the scene of crime, but
          states that he did not notice any weapons in the
          hands of such accused persons. These amount
          to    three    different    versions   by   the   same
          individual regarding one peculiarity i.e. if the
          accused-appellant, whom he claims to have
          witnessed fleeing away from the scene, was
          accompanied by someone else or not. Such
          inconsistency gives         greater weight to       our
          decision to render PW1’s statement wholly
          unreliable.
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                   Page 44 of 56
27. Apart from the above-mentioned discrepancies in
      the    depositions, there       is   a   whole   array     of
      perceptible questions that neither the prosecution
      has attempted to address, nor the Courts below
      have exhibited any inquisitiveness towards. Even
      though PW1 consistently mentions that he was
      accompanied by his wife Sunita Devi while going to
      PW2’s residence, there is no explanation as to why
      Sunita Devi has not been examined at any point.
      Further, irrespective of who raised the ‘raula’
      (alarm), be it PW1 or PW2, if such an outcry was
      actually raised at some point by either of them, it
      is quite surprising to note that no neighbour has
      been made a witness anywhere. It becomes
      especially more shocking in a rural set up where
      the community is close knit and the houses are
      situated nearby. In fact, as per the site plan, the
      house of one Sada Ram is located right next to that
      of PW2. Therefore, it would have been unmissable
      for such neighbours to not step out and witness the
      alleged escape of the accused.
28. Further, it has not missed our attention that how
      PW2 managed to escape the house without being
      noticed by the accused, has also not been
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                    Page 45 of 56
explained and remains an enigma. She has stated
          in the cross-examination that the bathroom is not
          near the exit but is next to the kitchen. The site
          plan prepared by the investigating agencies also
          does not shed clearer light on the same and the
          mystery regarding unnoticed escape only thickens,
          given the difference in age and motor abilities of the
          accused (28 years at the time of incident) and PW2
          (aged around 55 years). The Courts below have
          opted to not burden themselves with this query and
          have rather believed PW2’s statement in this regard
          as it is.
29. It must be noted that the Trial Court as well as the
          High Court have very conveniently brushed aside
          such contradictions in the testimonies of PW1 and
          PW2 by holding that minor contradictions do not
          go to the root of prosecution case. We are unable to
          succumb to the view of categorizing above-
          discussed contradictions as “minor”.
30. The general principle is that only such omissions
          which         amount         to     contradiction            in    material
          particulars can be used to discredit the testimony
          of the witness.4 Whereas contradiction in the
4
Narayan Chetanram Chaudhary & Anr. v. State of Maharashtra
, (2000) 8 SCC 457
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                                         Page 46 of 56
statement of the witness is fatal for the case, minor
        discrepancy or variance in evidence will not make
        the       prosecution’s             case        doubtful.5       Material
        discrepancies are those which are not normal and
        not expected of a normal person.6 Moreover, when
        witness             testimonies                exhibit         significant
        contradictions between their initial statements and
        trial depositions, they cannot be relied upon unless
        independently corroborated.7
31. In the instant case, there are different versions of
        the same set of events which are being told by these
        witnesses at differing points of time, statements
        retracted and remoulded as per their convenience,
        wherein such difference in statements are leading
        to material alterations in the chain of events. As a
        result,        the       prosecution                timeline   and     the
        fundamental details about the occurrence are not
        at all corroborated between its two key witnesses.
        Therefore, we observe that the contradictions in
        prosecution witnesses’ testimonies, as pointed
        above, are major ones and carve a gaping hole in
        the prosecution story altogether.
5
State of Himachal Pradesh v. Lekh Raj
, (
2000) 1 SCC 247
6
State of Rajasthan v. Kalki & Anr.
, (
1981) 2 SCC 752
7
Vadivelu Thevar v State of Madras
, AIR 1957 SC 614
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                                    Page 47 of 56
32. The        internal     inconsistencies   and    lack     of
      corroboration cast serious doubts and snatch away
      the degree of accuracy that is to be attained while
      determining the culpability of an accused in cases
      of murder. We cannot turn a blind eye to the
      obvious inconsistencies in the depositions of its
      main       witnesses       which   indicate   deliberate
      embellishment and coaching, rendering these
      testimonies unreliable. Therefore, we have no
      hesitation to hold that no credence can be lent to
      the testimonies of PW1 and PW2 and their account
      of being “eyewitness” to the incident or having seen
      the accused has to be discarded.
33. Once it has been deduced that the statements of
      PW1 and PW2 inspire no confidence of this Court
      and their presence at the scene of occurrence has
      to be disbelieved, we proceed forward to analyse the
      testimony of third key witness, i.e. PW17–Harry,
      who was a child witness and sustained injuries
      during the event, thereby, his presence at the spot
      cannot be doubted. His testimony is reproduced as
      below –
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                 Page 48 of 56
Examination-in-chief and cross-
examination of PW17 – Harry

          PW-17 on SA: Statement of Harry son of
          Sunahari Lal son of unknown, aged about
          12 years, Student, R/o Daslimesh Nagar,
          Kotrani, Phagwara, District Kapurthala.
Stated that I am resident of abovesaid
          address and now studying in 5th standard.
          On 28.11.2013 I was present in my maternal
          grand mother Manjit Kaur’s house. On that
          night I alongwith my mother Reena alongwith
          my masi Seema Rani, my uncle Tari and my
          cousin sister Sumani and my cousin brother
          Harsh were sleeping together. In early
          morning of 29.11.2013 at about 5.00 a.m.
          my masar Baljinder Singh @ Kala accused
          present in the court armed with Gandasi
          came there in the room where we all were
          sleeping and opened attacked on all of us
          with gandasi and killed my mother Reena
          alongwith my masi Seema Rani and my
          cousin sister Sumani and my cousin brother
          Harsh. The accused caused three injuries to
          me on my neck and stomach. After causing
          the occurrence, the accused ran away from
          the spot. Due to injuries I was got
          admitted in the Civil Hospital, Phagwara.
          PW17 (XXXXXXXXX by Sh. Lakhbir Singh,
          Advocate, counsel for the accused)
             When I woke up I have not seen the
          accused in the room volunteered I was
          half sleep. Press reporter after visited the
          seen. I do not remember the time when the
          press reporter came at the spot. I have not
          seen masar inflicting injuries on that
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024            Page 49 of 56
deceased and injured volunteered as I was
          half sleep. My maternal grand mother used
          to go to Gurudwara at 5.00 a.m. She used to
          come from the Gurudwara after two hours
          come back. I was sleeping straight way.
          When I received injury I was sleeping at
          that time. I am studying in 5th class. First I
          received injury on my left arm. It is wrong to
          suggest that there is no visible injury mark
          on my left arm. I became unconscious when
          I received first injury on my left arm. On that
          day my nani came back from Gurudwara
          at 6.00 a.m. By that time, accused has fled
          away from the spot. My nani came there
          after half an hour of the occurrence. It is
          wrong to suggest that I have deposed falsely.
Dated: 25.10.2018
                                     [Emphasis is mine]
34. While we have no qualms about the competency of
      PW17 on the account of being a child witness, the
      key inference that has to be drawn by the above
      testimony is that the injured witness did not
      actually ‘witness’ the incident. In his cross-
      examination, he admits that he was sleeping
      throughout the incident. He states that he did not
      see the appellant as he was half-asleep and
      specifically states that he did not see the appellant
      inflicting    injuries     on   the   deceased    persons.
      Therefore, even if PW17’s testimony is treated as
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                    Page 50 of 56
completely reliable, it is clear that his statement
      cannot be considered as incriminating against the
      appellant for the lack of having witnessed the
      actual incident.
35. Having        examined       the   above    testimonies    in
      thorough detail, it becomes evident that once PW1
      and PW2’s statements are discarded for absence of
      reliability, the prosecution case effectively loses its
      vertebrae and comes crumbling down to its feet.
36. Further, to make matters even worse for the
      prosecution, there are key deficiencies in the
      investigation and the evidentiary value of the
      alleged recoveries remains questionable. Neither
      the arrest of the accused nor the alleged recovery
      of the blood-stained clothes and the weapon
      (purportedly based on the disclosure statement of
      the accused) is supported by any independent
      witness. While the recovery may not be wholly
      discarded due to the lack of a supporting witness,
      however,        it    undoubtedly        becomes   highly
      questionable, especially with the factum of long
      delay of two months in the discovery being effected.
37. Additionally, it is quite conspicuous that the
      investigating agency took minimum pains to link
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                  Page 51 of 56
the discovered articles to the incident or the
      deceased persons through forensic evidence or
      otherwise. The only forensic evidence in this case
      is the report of the chemical analysis which merely
      states that the blood found on the exhibits is
      opined to be of human origin. The same is evidently
      not sufficient to link the articles to the deceased or
      the specific offence. In any case, the report has
      admittedly not been formally exhibited before the
      Court. With regard to the alleged weapon of offence,
      it has been deposed by PW22–Karnail Singh
      (SHO/IO) that the weapon was misplaced at a later
      stage and no forensic analysis placed before the
      Court. It clearly and amply reflects the regard that
      has been held due towards investigative protocols
      in the instant case and is utterly deplorable.
38. Consequently, a lot of focus has been laid by
      prosecution as well as by the Courts below on the
      alleged motive that led to the commission of the
      crime. However, as a result of the above analysis,
      when there remains practically nothing to link the
      accused-appellant to the scene of the crime, an
      alleged monetary dispute between the parties shall
      not by itself aid the prosecution case enough to
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024              Page 52 of 56
frame the accused for a charge of murder on
      multiple counts. The Trial Court has held that
      dacoity or commission of offence by a stranger
      party has to be ruled out due to the gruesome
      nature of the crime. However, merely lack of an
      alternative plausible explanation to the incident
      cannot serve as enough evidence in itself to send a
      man to the gallows, whose guilt otherwise remains
      unestablished.
39. Similarly, the High Court has employed
Section
      106
of the Evidence Act to draw an adverse
      inference against the accused with regard to his
      silence surrounding the injuries sustained by him
      on the day of the incident which led him to getting
      admitted in the hospital later on the same day and
      caused consequent amputation of his left arm. The
      High Court has concluded that in the absence of
      any alternative explanation by the accused, it has
      to be presumed that the said injuries were a result
      of the resistance that the accused must have faced
      during the commission of the crime earlier in the
      day. However, we believe that given the fact that
      the prosecution has not been able to establish the
      presence of accused at the site of crime through
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024            Page 53 of 56
direct, circumstantial, oral or forensic evidence,
      taking recourse to
Section 106
of the Evidence Act
      and employ it against the accused in a detrimental
      manner in the absence of any foundational facts,
      shall lead to a severe and unwarranted application
      of the provision.
40. Further,        neither    PW1       nor    PW2,   in   his/her
      statement, has stated anything about the accused
      of having suffered an arm injury while he was
      allegedly spotted at the crime scene. In such
      circumstances, no opportunity arises to shift the
      burden of proof on the appellant so as to
      reasonably explain his injury. No adverse inference
      can be drawn thereby.
41. As such, we are constrained to conclude that the
      above discussed deficiencies which include, (a)
      contradictions        and       embellishments        in   key
      eyewitness testimonies, (b) failure to conclusively
      link material objects to the crime, and (c)
      investigative      lapses       leading   to   gaps   in   the
      evidentiary chain – all these factors highlight the
      failure of the prosecution in meeting the legal
      threshold for a conviction.
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                     Page 54 of 56
42. In matters such as the instant one, the burden on
      prosecution is to prove beyond reasonable doubt
      that it is the appellant and appellant alone who has
      committed the crime. It is settled law that in order
      to record conviction based on ocular evidence, their
      testimonies have to be completely credible and
      trustworthy.
43. However, in the present matter, where there are
      major contradictions in the testimonies of key
      prosecution witnesses accompanied by glaring
      investigative defects, it cannot be said that the
      prosecution has established the charge beyond
      reasonable doubt. At the cost of repetition, we must
      state that the standard of proof is an absolutely
      strict one and cannot be faltered with. When at
      stake are human lives and the cost is blood, the
      matter needs to be dealt with utmost sincerity.
      Therefore, given the facts and circumstances of the
      case and in light of the above discussion, we cannot
      bring ourselves to hold the accused-appellant
      guilty of the charged offence as his guilt has not
      been proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
44. Accordingly,         the    appeals     are     allowed.    The
      impugned        judgment        and   final    order     dated
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                     Page 55 of 56
04.03.2024 passed by the High Court of Punjab
      and Haryana, as well as the judgment dated
      29.02.2020 passed by the Additional Sessions
      Judge, Kapurthala, are hereby quashed and set
      aside. The appellant is acquitted of all the offences
      charged      with.    The       appellant   has   undergone
      incarceration for more than eleven years, and it is
      accordingly ordered to release him forthwith unless
      he is required in connection with any other case.
45. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed
      of.
…………..........................J.
                                              [VIKRAM NATH]

                               ………….........................J.
                                     [SANJAY KAROL]

                               ………….........................J.
                                   [SANDEEP MEHTA]



NEW DELHI
JULY 16, 2025
Criminal Appeal Nos. 2688-2689/2024                     Page 56 of 56