[Cites
33
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shubha @ Shubhashankar vs State Of Karnataka on 14 July, 2025
Author:
Aravind Kumar
Bench:
Aravind Kumar
2025 INSC 830




                                                                                    REPORTABLE
                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1029 OF 2011


                         KUM. SHUBHA @ SHUBHASHANKAR                               …APPELLANT(S)

                                                                 VERSUS

                         STATE OF KARNATAKA & ANR.                                …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                                   WITH

                                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1030/2011

                                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1225/2011

                                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2943/2025


                                                            JUDGMENT
M. M. Sundresh, J.
1. The voice of a young ambitious girl, muffled by a forced family decision,

                             created the fiercest of turmoil in her mind. This, backed by an unholy
Signature Not Verified
alliance of a mental rebellion and wild romanticism, led to the tragic
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
Date: 2025.07.14
17:06:47 IST
Reason:
Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters           1 of 132
    murder of an innocent young man, while simultaneously destroying the

    lives of three others.
2. A studied scrutiny of the charges, along with the evidence placed on record

    led to the confirmation of the conviction rendered against the appellants,

    by the High Court, for the major offence punishable under
Section 302
of

    the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the “
IPC
”) while

    upholding the decision delivered by the Court of Sessions. The appellants

    who are before us seek to assail the life sentence imposed upon them by

    the Division Bench of the High Court of Karnataka.
3. We have heard learned Senior Counsel Mr. Ranjit Kumar, Mr. S.

    Nagamuthu, Mr. Siddhartha Dave, and Mr. R. Nedumaran appearing for

    the appellants, and learned Additional Advocate General (AAG) Mr.

    Muhammed Ali Khan and learned Senior Counsel Mr. Tomy Sebastian

    appearing for the respondents, at considerable length. In the process, all

    the documents placed on record along with the written arguments, are also

    taken due note of.
Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             2 of 132
CRIME AND ITS CAUSES
4. A crime constitutes a mental rebellion of norms and rules that have been

    created for the establishment of social order. It can be described as a

    deviant behavior, triggered by causes which are both distant and

    immediate. An idea of rebellion against the regulatory norms imposed by

    the society, thus, leads to a deviant conduct, which often happens through

    social conditioning and a series of habits. It is the strained mind, irked by

    alienation and material deprivation, that ignores the moral stage, all while

    focusing on the avoidance of punishment which might be the consequence

    of being in pursuit of a self-justified solution to the predicament which

    afflicts them.
5. There are multiple causes for a deviant behavior. To commit a crime, there

    is always a cause which, very often, has no nexus with the accused, who

    is shackled by social constraints thus, making him a victim of his

    circumstances. Even the genealogy of individuals can very well be

    influenced due to external environmental factors, such as, family,

    economy, education and social mores. Deficiencies in these factors are the



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters               3 of 132
    primary causes for an offence that is ultimately committed. But for these

    causes, an offence would not have been committed, as it is nothing but a

    manifestation of the mind, body and action. One can even say that multiple

    causes are responsible for the crime, both external and internal, while an

    offender merely plays a role in committing it.
6. Alienation in different forms is one of the major causes for a crime being

    committed, upon feeling a disconnect from the community, society, or

    social institutions. Alienated individuals often feel powerless and

    neglected, which can lead them to feel rejected by the society and its social

    norms. The breakdown of social norms contributes to a deviant behaviour,

    especially when individuals lack clear moral guidance from their

    communities. Since law keeps changing from time to time, what is legal,

    may not necessarily be moral. Rapid social change, orchestrated by law,

    often creates conducive conditions for criminal behaviour.

CRIME AND WOMEN
7. We shall now concentrate specifically on the offences committed by

    women. If the factors highlighted above are applied in the context of a


Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters               4 of 132
    woman, it would result in heightened prejudices against her, leading to a

    gendered response of victimization. A woman is pushed into a dark corner

    by external elements, that contribute substantially to the inequalities in her

    life. Thoughts of a woman would differ based on the place, person and

    group that she interacts with. It is the social norms and values which

    determine an action on her part, that is nothing but a form of her

    expression.
8. We shall test this proposition through a simple example of a young lady,

    who is desirous of spreading her ambitious wings, longing for her own

    independence. A forced marriage, divorcing her from her professional

    ambitions and curtailing her further education, would certainly warrant a

    reaction. Such reactions would vary from one woman to another,

    depending upon the circumstances. For instance, a girl from a middle-

    class family might react differently compared to one who hails from a

    poor, or even a rich family. Even amongst these classifications, a decision

    made by a woman might vary depending upon the impact brought about

    by the peculiar circumstances in her life. Therefore, she might be put in a



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                5 of 132
    position where she would have to choose either of the following options

    available to her. After making an abortive attempt in getting the family to

    accept her views, she may leave her parental home without notice, she

    may turn violent, or even commit suicide. If societal pressure stops her

    from undertaking any of these measures, and a marriage is forced upon

    her, her agony would compound and escalate. An unwarranted marriage

    thrust upon her is the worst form of alienation that she can experience both

    mentally and physically.
9. In such an instance, a possible solution from her point of view would be

    different. Social constraint might play a decisive role. Factors such as

    social stigma, lack of education, inadequate financial support, and

    perceived notions about the value system, might trigger a variety of

    responses. These factors do not merely limit her choices—they distort her

    very perception of freedom, making resistance seem impossible or even

    immoral. In some cases, she may internalize these pressures, believing

    that compliance is her only option. In others, she may resist in subtle, often




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                6 of 132
    invisible ways—through quiet despair, emotional withdrawal, or even

    clandestine acts of defiance.
EFFECT OF A CRIME AND ITS REMEDY
10. As a crime is perceived to be an act of resistance against social order, its

    impact is also felt by society, accordingly. There are primarily two ways

    to deal with a crime. It can be done either by merely punishing the

    offender, or by reforming him. Punishment is to be seen from the

    perspective of the society, as well as the offender. When the punishment

    is supported by law, it acts as a deterrent to crimes being committed in the

    society.
11. A mere punishment per se would not constitute a remedy for an act of

    crime. It might change the offender’s legal or social status, but would not

    be sufficient to address the root cause of his actions or remove the

    psychological and emotional factors that made him commit the crime. The

    idea therefore, is to reform and rehabilitate the deviant person to bring him

    back into the fold of society. This reformative part, thus, assumes a greater




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters               7 of 132
    significance. It is more so, when the offender is not entirely responsible

    for the causes which led to the crime.
12. Society, through its own systemic failures, inequalities, or neglect often

    plays a role in shaping criminal behavior, and is also responsible for the

    creation of such behaviour, whether through poverty, lack of education,

    discrimination, or broken institutions. In that scenario, the offender

    becomes a victim, requiring adequate measures for treatment by

    compassionate correction, structural support, and opportunities for

    genuine transformation. In an attempt to bring the individual back into the

    social fold, responsibility has to be shared by every other individual,

    ultimately rebuilding the bonds of community rather than perpetuating

    cycles of alienation and punishment.
ARTICLE 161
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA, 1950
13. The Constitution of India, 1950 (hereinafter referred to as the

    “Constitution”) which is the supreme law of the land, encourages the

    reformation of individuals, by granting them a new lease of life. This is

    personified by
Articles 72
and
161
of the Constitution which empowers


Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             8 of 132
    the constitutional authorities to grant pardon to convicts. In light of this,

    we would like to specifically elaborate on the underlying principles

    pertaining to the powers vested with the Governor under
Article 161
of

    the Constitution.
Article 161
of the Constitution
      “161. Power of Governor to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or
      commute sentences in certain cases.—

      The Governor of a State shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves,
      respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the
      sentence of any person convicted of any offence against any law relating to a
      matter to which the executive power of the State extends.”
14.
Article 161
of the Constitution has an in-built laudable objective. This

    Article emphasizes the role of the State to facilitate an offender to be

    reintegrated into society, after realizing his mistake. This power is

    sovereign, and is to be exercised on the advice of the Council of Ministers.

    Thus, it grants the Constitutional Court only a limited power of judicial

    review.
15. Though the power conferred under
Article 161
of the Constitution might

    sound similar to the statutory powers available under
Sections 473
and
474
of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (hereinafter referred



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                      9 of 132
    to as the “BNSS”), corresponding to
Sections 432
and
433
of the Code of

    Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the “
Cr.P.C
’), its

    powers are much wider. While statutory provisions govern classes of

    convicts collectively, the prerogative of pardon is generally exercised

    discretely in specific instances. Therefore, the scope of this power is much

    broader and is to be applied on a case-to-case basis. A constitutional power

    is fundamentally different and distinct from a statutory one. While

    statutory powers are derived from laws enacted by legislatures and remain

    subject to amendment or repeal, constitutional powers originate from the

    Constitution itself. Therefore, the power to pardon, reprieve, respite, remit

    etc. forms part of the constitutional ethos, goal and culture. Unlike

    statutory provisions, which are tailored to address specific scenarios or

    population demographics, constitutional powers embody the State’s

    commitment to a broader ethical vision – one that prioritizes humanity and

    equity, even in the administration of punishment.




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters               10 of 132
Maru Ram v. Union of India and Ors., (1981) 1 SCC 107

      “72. We conclude by formulating our findings:
(1) We repulse all the thrusts on the vires of Section 433-A. Maybe,
      penologically the prolonged term prescribed by the section is supererogative.
If we had our druthers we would have negatived the need for a fourteen-year
      gestation for reformation. But ours is to construe, not construct, to decode, not
      to make a code.
(2) We affirm the current supremacy of Section 433-A over the Remission
      Rules and short-sentencing statutes made by the various States.
      (3) We uphold all remissions and short-sentencing passed under
Articles 72
and
161
of the Constitution but release will follow, in life sentence cases, only
      on government making in order en masse or individually, in that behalf.
      (4) We hold that
Section 432
and
Section 433
are not a manifestation of
Articles 72
and
161
of the Constitution but a separate, though similar
      power, and Section 433-A, by nullifying wholly or partially these prior
      provisions does not violate or detract from the full operation of the
      constitutional power to pardon, commute and the like.”

                                                                  (emphasis supplied)

Shatrughan Chauhan and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors., (2014) 3 SCC
1
“16. Articles 72/161 of the Constitution entail remedy to all the convicts
      and are not limited to only death sentence cases and must be understood
      accordingly. It contains the power of reprieve, remission, commutation
      and pardon for all offences, though death sentence cases invoke the
      strongest sentiment since it is the only sentence that cannot be undone once
      it is executed.
17. Shri Andhyarujina, learned Senior Counsel, who assisted the Court as
      amicus commenced his submissions by pointing out that the power reposed in
      the President under
Article 72
and the Governor under
Article 161
of the
      Constitution is not a matter of grace or mercy, but is a constitutional duty of
      great significance and the same has to be exercised with great care and
      circumspection keeping in view the larger public interest. He referred to the
      judgment of the US Supreme Court in Biddle v. Perovich [71 L Ed 1161 : 274
      US 480 (1927)] as also the judgments of this Court in Kehar Singh v. Union




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                         11 of 132
      of India, (1989) 1 SCC 204 : 1989 SCC (Cri) 86 and Epuru Sudhakar v. State
      of A.P., (2006) 8 SCC 161 : (2006) 3 SCC (Cri) 438.
***
19. In concise, the power vested in the President under
Article 72
and the
      Governor under
Article 161
of the Constitution is a constitutional duty. As
      a result, it is neither a matter of grace nor a matter of privilege but is an
      important constitutional responsibility reposed by the People in the
      highest authority. The power of pardon is essentially an executive action,
      which needs to be exercised in the aid of justice and not in defiance of it.
      Further, it is well settled that the power under Articles 72/161 of the
      Constitution of India is to be exercised on the aid and advice of the Council
      of Ministers.
***
47. It is clear that after the completion of the judicial process, if the convict
      files a mercy petition to the Governor/President, it is incumbent on the
      authorities to dispose of the same expeditiously. Though no time-limit can
      be fixed for the Governor and the President, it is the duty of the executive
      to expedite the matter at every stage viz. calling for the records, orders
      and documents filed in the court, preparation of the note for approval of
      the Minister concerned, and the ultimate decision of the constitutional
      authorities. This Court, in
Triveniben v. State of Gujarat
, (1989) 1 SCC 678 :
1989 SCC (Cri) 248, further held that in doing so, if it is established that there
      was prolonged delay in the execution of death sentence, it is an important and
      relevant consideration for determining whether the sentence should be allowed
      to be executed or not.”
                                                                   (emphasis supplied)
16. From the above, we would only clarify that, notwithstanding the existence

    of a Circular or a Rule introduced by way of a statutory power under
Section 473
of the BNSS, the constitutional powers granted under
Article

    161
of the Constitution, can also be exercised in a given case. Thus, even

    in cases where statutory mechanisms exist, the constitutional mandate

    under
Article 161
of the Constitution remains inviolable and exercisable,


Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                          12 of 132
    in order to ensure that justice in individual cases is not constrained by

    procedural norms.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
17. During the month of December 2003, Shubha Shankar (hereinafter

    referred to as “A-4”), a young girl aged 20 years, was studying in the 5th

    semester of integrated course, B.A., LL.B. at BMS Law College,

    Bangalore. PW-10, B.S. Shankarnarayan, is the father of A-4, and an

    Advocate. PW-12, Vijayalakshmi, is her mother. Arun Verma (hereinafter

    referred to as “A-1”) was also a student of the same college as A-4,

    studying in the 1st semester. PW-22, N. Dhanashekaran, is his father who

    was working as a Labour Officer during the said period. At the relevant

    point of time, Dinesh @ Dinakaran (hereinafter referred to as “A-3”), was

    a young man aged 28 years, who had been recently married, and had a

    child. PW-14, Uttam Prakash, is his father and PW-13, Bhavani, is his

    wife. A-3 and A-1 are cousins, as the sister of PW-14 is the mother of A-
1. Venkatesh (hereinafter referred to as “A-2”) was a teenager aged 19

    years. PW-17, Anandan, is his father. B.V. Girish (hereinafter referred to


Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             13 of 132
    as the “deceased”) was a young man aged 26 years, working as a software

    engineer at Intel. PW-6, B. Venkatesha, is his father and PW-5, B.V.

    Ramesh is his elder brother.
18. A-4 and her family, along with the deceased and his family were residents

    of the same locality in Bangalore, Karnataka. Considering the long-

    standing cordial relations between the two families, the parents of A-4

    extended a proposal to the parents of the deceased during the month of

    October 2003 for the marriage of A-4 with the deceased. Both the families

    consented to the said proposal on 20.11.2003, and fixed the date of the

    engagement ceremony as 30.11.2003. As decided, the engagement

    ceremony of A-4 and the deceased took place on 30.11.2003 at “Udupi

    Hall” in the presence of their close friends and relatives. Several

    photographs, as well as video footage, were captured during the

    ceremony. The marriage of A-4 and the deceased was decided to be

    solemnized on 11.04.2004.
19. Two days after the engagement ceremony, on the evening of 03.12.2003,

    A-4 asked the deceased to take her for dinner to T.G.I. Friday’s Hotel



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters            14 of 132
    (hereinafter referred to as “T.G.I.F. Hotel”) which was situated near Intel,

    the company where he was working. The deceased agreed to take her and

    informed his parents and PW-5 about their plan. He picked her up from

    her house on his scooter at around 06:30 PM, and subsequently, they went

    to have dinner at T.G.I.F. Hotel.
20. Post dinner, between 09:30 PM - 09:40 PM, the deceased and A-4

    informed their parents that they had eaten dinner and were returning home.

    On their way back, they stopped at the “Air View Point” located at the

    Airport Ring Road to watch the landing of aeroplanes. At that time, the

    deceased received fatal injuries on his head at the hands of an unknown

    assailant, who fled after inflicting the injuries, using a steel rod. A-4, with

    the help of passers-by, stopped a Maruti car, shifted the deceased to the

    backseat of the car and admitted him in the Manipal Hospital located at

    the Airport Road. A-4 informed her father PW-10 about the occurrence,

    who in turn, passed on the information to PW-12. She also informed PW-

    5 about the same. On receiving the information, PW-5 took his parents

    and the mother of A-4 to the hospital. By then, PW-10 had also reached



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                 15 of 132
    the hospital from his office. Around 02:00 AM in the intervening night

    between 03.12.2003 and 04.12.2003, all of them returned home except for

    PW-10 and PW-5 who stayed back at the hospital. In the early morning of

    04.12.2003, PW-6, PW-12 and A-4 returned to the hospital. At about

    08:05 AM, the deceased was declared dead. PW-5 lodged a written

    complaint at the police station, based on the information received from A-

    4, on the basis of which the First Information Report (hereinafter referred

    to as the “FIR”) was registered against unknown persons for the offence

    punishable under
Section 302
of the IPC. The said FIR was registered by

    the police Inspector PW-31, K.A. Nanaiah, who was the 1st Investigating

    Officer (hereinafter referred to as the “I.O.”). Upon investigating, A-1 to

    A-4 were arrested on 25.01.2004. PW-31 continued the investigation till

    17.02.2004, after which the case file was handed over to Dawood Khan,

    PW-32, who was the subsequent I.O. in the case. A chargesheet was filed

    on 17.04.2004, followed by a supplementary one on 10.01.2005.
21. Charges were framed by the Trial Court against all the accused persons

    under
Section 120-B
, and
Section 302
read with
Section 120-B
of the IPC,



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             16 of 132
    while A-4 was additionally charged for the offence punishable under
Section 201
of the IPC. 33 witnesses out of 64 listed witnesses were

    examined before the Trial Court on behalf of the prosecution, while 3

    witnesses were examined on behalf of the defence. In total, 111 Exhibits

    were marked by the prosecution and 17 Material Objects (hereinafter

    referred to as “M.O.”) were placed before the Trial Court. 64 Exhibits

    were marked by the defence. All the accused were duly informed of the

    incriminating materials placed against them during the course of recording

    their statement under
Section 313
of the Cr.P.C.
22. The case of the prosecution for proving the guilt of the accused before the

    Trial Court was based on the premise that A-4 was not willing to get

    married to the deceased and thus, expressed her grievance to her close

    friend, A-1. A-1, upon seeing her plight, sought help from his cousin,

    A-3. A-3 roped in his friend, A-2 in order to eliminate the deceased, so as

    to stop his marriage with A-4 and thus, the accused persons, in conspiracy

    with each other, committed the murder of the deceased.




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             17 of 132
23. On 03.12.2003, A-4, while returning with the deceased on his scooter after

    dinner, took him to the “Air View Point” located at the Airport Ring Road

    to watch the landing of aeroplanes. A-1 and A-2 were following them on

    a scooter (M.O.12), as A-4 was constantly updating A-1 regarding their

    whereabouts by way of continuous SMSes. A-3 was continuously tracking

    and giving instructions to A-1 and A-2 throughout the evening by way of

    voice calls and so, all the accused persons were in constant touch with

    each other right before the occurrence, which took place sometime

    between 09:40 PM and 10:00 PM. While the deceased and A-4 were

    watching the landing of aeroplanes, A-2 struck the deceased multiple

    times with a steel rod (M.O.11), while A-1 was waiting for him on the

    scooter. Then, A-2 sat on the scooter behind A-1 as the pillion rider and

    they subsequently fled the scene. The occurrence was seen by two

    eyewitnesses, PW-15 and PW-16. After the occurrence, the deceased was

    admitted to the hospital by A-4, and he succumbed to his injuries on the

    morning of the following day.
Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters            18 of 132
24. For proving the said theory, the prosecution mainly relied upon the

    evidence of PW-8, PW-11 and PW-23 to establish motive, the Call Detail

    Records (hereinafter referred to as the “CDR”) showing the extensive

    communications between the accused persons from 25.11.2003 to

    04.12.2003, the eye-witness testimonies of PW-15 and PW-16, and the

    recovery of the steel rod and the scooter at the instance of the accused.
25. PW-8, Hema is the beautician who applied mehendi for A-4 on 29.11.2003

    and also dressed up A-4 for the engagement ceremony on 30.11.2003. She

    deposed that at the time of applying mehendi on 29.11.2003, A-4 hugged

    her and told her that she was not willing to get married to the deceased,

    and requested her to do anything to stop the marriage. A-4 also told PW-8

    that even if the engagement were to take place, she would run away and

    get married to her friend, A-1. PW-8 informed about the same to PW-9,

    Umasashi who is the maternal aunt of A-4. However, PW-9 asked PW-8

    to keep quiet as the engagement had already been fixed, and this would

    affect the status of the family. PW-8 deposed that on 30.11.2003, when she

    had gone to the house of A-4 for applying makeup, A-4 told her that if



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              19 of 132
    Girish died, the engagement would stop and she would be able to flee with

    A-1, and his associates would help them do so. PW-8 added that after the

    death of Girish, when she had gone to the house of A-4 on 05.12.2003,

    A-4 told her that she had escaped from the marriage as Girish had died as

    per her wishes, and she could live happily for the next two years.
26. PW-11, Sheetal Rajagopal is a friend of A-4 from the days of her music

    classes. She deposed that A-4 had not invited her to the engagement

    ceremony. Thus, she was not aware of the same. However, she stated that

    one Kamala, a servant who was working at the house of A-4, informed her

    about the engagement and thus, PW-11 called up A-4 over the telephone

    and congratulated her. However, A-4 told her that she was unhappy with

    the idea of the said marriage, and PW-11 made no further enquiry about

    it.
27. PW-23, Pramod Dixit is a friend of A-4 from Pre-University College. He

    deposed that they were bosom friends, and in constant touch with each

    other. He had also attended the engagement ceremony on 30.11.2003. He

    stated that prior to the engagement, when he had spoken to A-4 on the



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             20 of 132
    phone, she confided in him stating that she did not like the lifestyle of the

    deceased as he disliked visiting expensive hotels and restaurants, whereas

    she was someone who wanted a fun-loving lifestyle. She also expressed

    to him that she did not want to get married at such a young age.
28. The CDR brought on record by the prosecution showed that voluminous

    calls/SMSes were exchanged between all the accused persons during the

    period ranging from 25.11.2003 to 04.12.2003. It showed continuous

    calls/SMSes, especially between A-1 and A-4.
29. PW-15 and PW-16 testified to the effect that at about 09:45 PM on the

    night of 03.12.2003, when they were returning home on their two-wheeler,

    they saw A-2 hit the deceased with a steel rod on the back of his head,

    while A-4 was standing at a slight distance away from them. The deceased

    then fell unconscious. On raising an alarm, A-2 ran away and sat behind

    A-1 on the scooter, and they fled the scene. PW-15 also added that he

    helped A-4 by stopping a car which was passing by, and placed the

    deceased in the backseat of the car with the help of an auto-rickshaw

    driver. He then drove the scooter of the deceased to his house and with the



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters               21 of 132
    help of his tenant, informed the Intel security officers who came to his

    house and collected the belongings of the deceased. PW-16 deposed that

    he left with the two-wheeler of PW-15.
30. After the accused persons were arrested on 25.01.2004, M.O.11 and

    M.O.12 which were used for the commission of the offence, were

    recovered by PW-31 pursuant to the disclosure statements made by A-1

    and A-2 under
Section 27
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (hereinafter

    referred to as the “IEA”).
31. On 13.07.2010, the Trial Court convicted the appellants for the offence

    punishable under
Section 120-B
of the IPC and sentenced them to undergo

    life imprisonment. A-2 alone was convicted and sentenced to life for the

    offence punishable under
Section 302
of the IPC. Additionally, A-4 was

    convicted for the offence punishable under
Section 201
of the IPC and

    sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for a period of 3 years, with

    the sentences imposed to run concurrently. The Trial Court rendered the

    conviction by accepting all the materials put forth by the prosecution as

    discussed above, with substantial reliance placed upon the CDR and eye-



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters            22 of 132
    witness testimonies. The Trial Court also found the plea of alibi raised by

    A-1 to be false, and the evidence of PW-9, PW-10 and PW-12 to not be

    reliable as they were interested witnesses.
32. Appeals were filed before the High Court, both by the State as well as the

    appellants. While dismissing the appeals filed by the appellants, the High

    Court was pleased to allow the appeal filed by the State in part, while

    modifying the conviction of the appellants to one under Section 302 read

    with
Section 120-B
of the IPC. The sentence of life imprisonment imposed

    upon the appellants was confirmed. Assailing the aforesaid decision of the

    High Court which broadly concurred with that of the Trial Court, the

    present appeals have been filed.
ARGUMENTS OF THE APPELLANTS
33. For the sake of brevity, we propose to cumulatively deal with the

    arguments made by the respective Senior Counsel appearing for the

    appellants.
34. The testimonies of PW-15 and PW-16 have to be disbelieved as they are

    planted witnesses. There is a delay in recording their statements under


Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             23 of 132
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C, especially with respect to PW-16, as his

    statement was recorded two months after the occurrence, despite his

    availability throughout the said period. The conduct of PW-15 also makes

    it difficult to believe his presence at the place of occurrence as, instead of

    informing the police regarding the incident, PW-15 took the scooter of the

    deceased to his house, leaving behind his own two-wheeler with PW-16.

    Despite being an ex-serviceman, he did not take any step whatsoever to

    report the incident to the police. In fact, it is the I.O. who called him up on

    the morning of the next day, even before the registration of the FIR by

    PW-5, and asked him to give his statement as he was an eye-witness to

    the incident. The source from which the police came to know about the

    same remains unknown. The evidence of PW-15 also shows that he was

    known to PW-31 earlier, which casts a doubt on his credibility. There is

    no clarity in the evidence of PW-15 regarding the presence of PW-16.

    Additionally, all the witnesses who could have testified to the presence of

    PW-15 and PW-16 at the place of occurrence, like the occupants of the

    car in which the deceased was taken to the hospital, the tenant of PW-15



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                 24 of 132
    and the Intel security officers have conveniently not been examined by the

    prosecution, for the reasons best known to them.
35. The evidence adduced by PW-8 is wholly unreliable being contrary to the

    evidence of PW-9, PW-10, PW-12, PW-6 and PW-31. Her presence at the

    engagement ceremony has not been proved by the prosecution either by

    the production of her diary, or the photographs taken on the day of the

    engagement, making her very presence doubtful. There was an inordinate

    delay in recording her statement as it was recorded only on 14.01.2004,

    even though she received the information from A-4 on 05.12.2003 itself,

    with no explanation for such delay. She has contradicted herself on quite

    a few occasions, especially with respect to the information given by her to

    PW-6 and PW-31.
36. The evidence of PW-11 is tainted, as she is an interested witness known

    to the family of the deceased, evident from the fact that she was

    accompanied by the sister of the deceased to the Trial Court. Kamala, from

    whom she got the information regarding the engagement of A-4, has

    neither been cited as a witness, nor has she been examined by the



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             25 of 132
    prosecution. Though she deposed that she had not attended the

    engagement ceremony, the evidence of PW-10 and PW-12 say otherwise.

    Her statement was recorded by the police much belatedly in February,

    2004.
37. The evidence of PW-23 cannot be relied upon, as he has made a statement

    out of threat and coercion by the police. His statement recorded by the

    police is silent about his communication with A-4 after the occurrence.

    Additionally, his mobile phone was not even secured or seized by the I.O.,

    despite the numerous SMSes exchanged between him and A-4.
38. The reliance placed by the Courts below on the CDR, has no legal basis.

    The witnesses who deposed in support of the CDR, being PW-24 and PW-

    25, were not competent to do so. Merely because they were working with

    the Telecom Service Provider (hereinafter referred to as the “TSP”) at the

    relevant point of time, their evidence ought not to be accepted, especially

    when the competent officers were available. The certificates issued by the

    TSPs are not in compliance with Section 65-B of the IEA. With respect to

    the certificate issued by M/s. Reliance Infocomm Ltd. (hereinafter



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             26 of 132
    referred to as “Reliance”), it is submitted that the certificate dated

    29.09.2004 was issued by PW-24 instead of Mr. Ramani, the nodal officer

    who had actually extracted the data and sent the same to the police. This

    is a serious error on the part of the investigating agency, as the said

    Mr. Ramani was working at Reliance till October 2004 and therefore,

    should have issued the certificate being the only competent officer to do

    so. It is admitted by PW-24 that the CDR were actually stored in the main

    server in Bombay, and the output taken therefrom was sent via e-mail to

    him, after which the printout was taken from the said e-mail. However,

    the certificate issued by Reliance fails to mention the same and thus, does

    not satisfy the requirements under Section 65-B(4) of the IEA. Similarly,

    the certificate issued by M/s. Airtel Bharti Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as

    “Airtel”) also does not satisfy these requirements, as there is no mention

    of the device from which the output was taken, and the manner in which

    it was taken. It has not been issued in the prescribed format. With respect

    to the CDR furnished by Airtel, the same suffers from material

    irregularities and errors, which show that it has been tampered with by



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters               27 of 132
    way of a manual intervention. This is supported by the admission made

    by PW-25 that he had made handwritten entries for the data pertaining to

    the tower location at the behest of the police. The said data provided by

    the CDR is also fundamentally unreliable and cannot be used against the

    appellants as, PW-25 admitted during his cross-examination that the tower

    has a coverage radius of approximately 6-7 kilometres, which represents

    an extraordinarily vast area, meaning that any individual within a span of

    12-14 kilometres in diameter could potentially be serviced by the said

    tower. The CDR, even if admissible, do not per se implicate the appellants

    and thus, no inference can be drawn on that basis.
39. With respect to the recovery of M.O.11, an argument was made to the

    effect that the said recovery cannot be sustained, as the disclosure

    statements under
Section 27
of the IEA were made jointly by both A-1

    and A-2. M.O.11 was subsequently recovered from an open space

    pursuant to their statements. The link required under
Section 27
of the IEA

    is missing as the panch witnesses to the recovery of M.O.11 cannot prove

    whether the recovery was made pursuant to the disclosure statement of the



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             28 of 132
    accused as the same was not recorded in their presence. It was also openly

    shown to PW-15 at the police station, without properly securing it by way

    of sealing. There are material contradictions in the evidence as the FSL

    Report of M.O.11 records the presence of bloodstains on the steel rod,

    while PW-18, the doctor who conducted the post-mortem, deposed that he

    could not find any bloodstain on the same. Similarly, there is no clarity in

    the evidence as to whether M.O.11 is a steel rod or a steel pipe. The

    recovery of M.O.12 from the house of A-1 also cannot be believed as the

    said scooter was being used by his sister, DW-3 in Tamil Nadu. The

    identification of the scooter by PW-15 and PW-16 is also highly doubtful

    as they could not state the registration number of the vehicle.
40. If the evidence of PW-15 and PW-16 is disbelieved, then it will be a case

    of circumstantial evidence. There is no sufficient link to connect all the

    accused. Even as per the case of the prosecution, A-2 was in touch with

    A-3 alone, except for a few occasions where A-1 also communicated with

    A-2, and only one communication was made by A-4 to A-2 during the

    entire alleged period of conspiracy. Furthermore, A-4 was also talking to



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              29 of 132
    the deceased. The prosecution has not been able to prove the motive as

    well, if one was to disbelieve the evidence of PW-8, PW-11 and PW-23.

    As against A-3, except for the CDR, there is no other material to implicate

    him. Certainly, this is a case where this Court has to extend the benefit of

    doubt, as both the Courts below have not taken into consideration the

    relevant materials.
In support of their contentions, the learned Senior

    Counsel appearing for the appellants relied upon the decisions of this

    Court in
Arjun Panditrao Khotkar v. Kailash Kushanrao Gorantyal

    and Ors.
, (2020) 7 SCC 1, Sudershan Kumar v. State of H.P., (2014)

    15 SCC 666, Gireesan Nair and Ors. v. State of Kerala, (
2023) 1 SCC

    180, Ramkishan Mithanlal Sharma v. State of Bombay
, AIR 1955 SC

    104 and Manzoor v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (1982) 2 SCC 72.

ARGUMENTS OF THE RESPONDENTS
41. Learned AAG and learned Senior Counsel, appearing for the respondents

    submitted that though there are material discrepancies available, the Court

    will have to see the evidence available as a whole. The presence of A-4 at

    the place of occurrence is not in dispute. It is a fact which has also been


Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              30 of 132
    proved by the evidence of PW-5, PW-6, PW-10 and PW-12, supported by

    the Accident Register. Therefore, the homicide of the deceased, and the

    presence of A-4 along with the deceased at the place of occurrence stands

    proved.
42. The testimonies of eye-witnesses PW-15 and PW-16 are consistent with

    the medical evidence available on record. There are concurrent findings

    of the Courts below with regards to the quality of their evidence.

    Moreover, being neutral witnesses with no prior relation to the deceased,

    they have no reason to falsely implicate the accused.
43. The motive of A-4 to commit the murder of the deceased along with the

    other accused is proved by the testimonies of PW-8, PW-11 and PW-23.

    The evidence of PW-8 showed that not only was A-4 unwilling to marry

    the deceased, but also wanted to elope with A-1. PW-11 also testified

    regarding the resentment of A-4 towards her marriage with the deceased.

    The testimony of PW-23, who is in fact a confidant of A-4, is also

    consistent with the testimonies of PW-8 and PW-11. Thus, there is no

    reason to discredit his testimony.
Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters            31 of 132
44. The testimonies of PW-24 and PW-25, being the competent officers,

    established the authenticity of the CDR, which were duly proved by way

    of the requisite certificates under Section 65-B of the IEA. The Courts

    below upheld the evidentiary value of these records, concluding that

    the volume, the timing of calls, and SMSes exchanged, strongly indicated

    a premeditated conspiracy amongst the accused.
45. The recovery of M.O.11 and M.O.12 at the instance of the accused has

    been consistently believed by both the Courts below. The medical

    evidence on record also corroborates the usage of M.O.11 to inflict the

    injuries on the deceased. Further, the plea of alibi and the defence raised

    by A-1 pertaining to the recovery of M.O.12 has been disbelieved by both

    the Trial Court and the High Court.
46. Considering the recovery coupled with the eye-witnesses’ account, duly

    supported by the CDR and the evidence on motive, which have been

    accepted by both the Courts below, there is no need for any interference.

    In support of their contentions, the learned counsel appearing for the

    respondents placed reliance upon the decisions of this Court in Harendra



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             32 of 132
    Rai v. State of Bihar and Ors., (2023) 13 SCC 563, Sahabuddin and

    Another v. State of Assam, (2012) 13 SCC 213, Anees v. State (NCT of

    Delhi), 2024 SCC OnLine SC 757, Kishore Bhadke v. State of

    Maharashtra, (2017) 3 SCC 760 and Sajeev v. State of Kerala, 2023

    SCC OnLine SC 1470.
EVIDENCE AND ITS RELIABILITY
47. Before analyzing the evidence on record, we deem it fit to discuss the

    relevant principles applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present

    appeals. It is the foundational duty of the Court to make an endeavor and

    find out the truth. Evidence is the material for unearthing the truth. In order

    to do so, a fact has to be proved by taking due note of the matters made

    available before the Court. To prove a fact, the adequate parameter is the

    degree of probability.
Rajesh Yadav and Anr. V. State of U.P.
, (2022) 12 SCC 200.
“Principles of law
11.
Section 3
of the Evidence Act, 1872:
“3. Interpretation clause.—In this Act the following words and expressions
      are used in the following senses, unless a contrary intention appears from the
      context—



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                      33 of 132
      “Evidence”.—“Evidence” means and includes—
      (1) all statements which the Court permits or requires to be made before it by
      witnesses, in relation to matters of fact under inquiry; such statements are
      called oral evidence;
(2) all documents including electronic records produced for the inspection of
      the Court; such documents are called documentary evidence.
“Proved”.—A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the matters
      before it, the Court either believes it to exist, or considers its existence so
      probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular
      case, to act upon the supposition that it exists.
      “Disproved”.—A fact is said to be disproved when, after considering the
      matters before it, the Court either believes that it does not exist, or considers
      its non-existence so probable that a prudent man ought, under the
      circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the supposition that it does not
      exist.”
12.
Section 3
of the Evidence Act defines “evidence”, broadly divided into oral
      and documentary. “Evidence” under the Act is the means, factor or material,
      lending a degree of probability through a logical inference to the existence of
      a fact. It is an “adjective law” highlighting and aiding substantive law. Thus, it
      is neither wholly procedural nor substantive, though trappings of both could be
      felt.
13. The definition of the word “proved” though gives an impression of a
      mere interpretation, in effect, is the heart and soul of the entire Act. This
      clause, consciously speaks of proving a fact by considering the “matters
      before it”. The importance is to the degree of probability in proving a fact
      through the consideration of the matters before the court. What is
      required for a court to decipher is the existence of a fact and its proof by
      a degree of probability, through a logical influence.
14. Matters are necessary, concomitant material factors to prove a fact. All
      evidence would be “matters” but not vice versa. In other words, matters could
      be termed as a genus of which evidence would be a species. Matters also add
      strength to the evidence giving adequate ammunition in the Court’s sojourn in
      deciphering the truth. Thus, the definition of “matters” is exhaustive, and
      therefore, much wider than that of “evidence”. However, there is a caveat, as
      the court is not supposed to consider a matter which acquires the form of an
      evidence when it is barred in law. Matters are required for a court to believe in
      the existence of a fact.
15. Matters do give more discretion and flexibility to the court in deciding the
      existence of a fact. They also include all the classification of evidence such as


Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                          34 of 132
      circumstantial evidence, corroborative evidence, derivative evidence, direct
      evidence, documentary evidence, hearsay evidence, indirect evidence, oral
      evidence, original evidence, presumptive evidence, primary evidence, real
      evidence, secondary evidence, substantive evidence, testimonial evidence, etc.
16. In addition, they supplement the evidence in proving the existence of a fact
      by enhancing the degree of probability. As an exhaustive interpretation has to
      be given to the word “matter”, and for that purpose, the definition of the
      expression of the words “means and includes”, meant to be applied for
      evidence, has to be imported to that of a “matter” as well. Thus, a matter might
      include such of those which do not fall within the definition of
Section 3
, in the
      absence of any express bar.
17. What is important for the court is the conclusion on the basis of
      existence of a fact by analysing the matters before it on the degree of
      probability. The entire enactment is meant to facilitate the court to come
      to an appropriate conclusion in proving a fact. There are two methods by
      which the court is expected to come to such a decision. The court can come
      to a conclusion on the existence of a fact by merely considering the matters
      before it, in forming an opinion that it does exist. This belief of the court
      is based upon the assessment of the matters before it. Alternatively, the
      court can consider the said existence as probable from the perspective of
      a prudent man who might act on the supposition that it exists. The
      question as to the choice of the options is best left to the court to decide.
      The said decision might impinge upon the quality of the matters before it.
18. The word “prudent” has not been defined under the Act. When the
      court wants to consider the second part of the definition clause instead of
      believing the existence of a fact by itself, it is expected to take the role of a
      prudent man. Such a prudent man has to be understood from the point of
      view of a common man. Therefore, a Judge has to transform into a
      prudent man and assess the existence of a fact after considering the
      matters through that lens instead of a Judge. It is only after undertaking
      the said exercise can he resume his role as a Judge to proceed further in
      the case.
19. The aforesaid provision also indicates that the court is concerned with
      the existence of a fact both in issue and relevant, as against a whole
      testimony. Thus, the concentration is on the proof of a fact for which a
      witness is required. Therefore, a court can appreciate and accept the
      testimony of a witness on a particular issue while rejecting it on others
      since it focuses on an issue of fact to be proved. However, we may hasten
      to add, the evidence of a witness as whole is a matter for the court to decide



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                          35 of 132
      on the probability of proving a fact which is inclusive of the credibility of
      the witness. Whether an issue is concluded or not is also a court’s domain.

      Appreciation of evidence
20. We have already indicated different classification of evidence. While
      appreciating the evidence as aforesaid along with the matters attached to
      it, evidence can be divided into three categories broadly, namely, (i) wholly
      reliable, (ii) wholly unreliable, and (iii) neither wholly reliable nor wholly
      unreliable. If evidence, along with matters surrounding it, makes the court
      believe it is wholly reliable qua an issue, it can decide its existence on a
      degree of probability. Similar is the case where evidence is not believable.
      When evidence produced is neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable,
      it might require corroboration, and in such a case, court can also take note
      of the contradictions available in other matters.
21. The aforesaid principle of law has been enunciated in the celebrated
      decision of this Court in
Vadivelu Thevar v. State of Madras
, 1957 SCR 981 :
AIR 1957 SC 614: (AIR p. 619, paras 11-12)
      “11. In view of these considerations, we have no hesitation in holding that the
      contention that in a murder case, the court should insist upon plurality of
      witnesses, is much too broadly stated.
Section 134
of the Indian Evidence Act
      has categorically laid it down that ‘no particular number of witnesses shall in
      any case, be required for the proof of any fact’. The legislature determined, as
      long ago as 1872, presumably after due consideration of the pros and cons, that
      it shall not be necessary for proof or disproof of a fact to call any particular
      number of witnesses. In England, both before and after the passing of the
Evidence Act, 1872
, there have been a number of statutes as set out in Sarkar’s
      Law of Evidence — 9th Edn., at pp. 1100 and 1101, forbidding convictions on
      the testimony of a single witness. The Indian Legislature has not insisted on
      laying down any such exceptions to the general rule recognized in
Section 134
quoted above. The section enshrines the well-recognised maxim that “Evidence
      has to be weighed and not counted”. Our Legislature has given statutory
      recognition to the fact that administration of justice may be hampered if a
      particular number of witnesses were to be insisted upon. It is not seldom that a
      crime has been committed in the presence of only one witness, leaving aside
      those cases which are not of uncommon occurrence, where determination of
      guilt depends entirely on circumstantial evidence. If the Legislature were to
      insist upon plurality of witnesses, cases where the testimony of a single witness
      only could be available in proof of the crime, would go unpunished. It is here
      that the discretion of the presiding Judge comes into play. The matter thus
      must depend upon the circumstances of each case and the quality of the


Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                         36 of 132
      evidence of the single witness whose testimony has to be either accepted or
      rejected. If such a testimony is found by the court to be entirely reliable,
      there is no legal impediment to the conviction of the accused person on
      such proof. Even as the guilt of an accused person may be proved by the
      testimony of a single witness, the innocence of an accused person may be
      established on the testimony of a single witness, even though a
      considerable number of witnesses may be forthcoming to testify to the
      truth of the case for the prosecution. Hence, in our opinion, it is a sound
      and well-established rule of law that the court is concerned with the
      quality and not with the quantity of the evidence necessary for proving or
      disproving a fact. Generally speaking, oral testimony in this context may
      be classified into three categories, namely:
(1) Wholly reliable.
(2) Wholly unreliable.
(3) Neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable.
12. In the first category of proof, the court should have no difficulty in coming
      to its conclusion either way — it may convict or may acquit on the testimony
      of a single witness, if it is found to be above reproach or suspicion of
      interestedness, incompetence or subornation. In the second category, the court
      equally has no difficulty in coming to its conclusion. It is in the third category
      of cases, that the court has to be circumspect and has to look for
      corroboration in material particulars by reliable testimony, direct or
      circumstantial. There is another danger in insisting on plurality of
      witnesses. Irrespective of the quality of the oral evidence of a single
      witness, if courts were to insist on plurality of witnesses in proof of any
      fact, they will be indirectly encouraging subornation of witnesses.
      Situations may arise and do arise where only a single person is available
      to give evidence in support of a disputed fact. The court naturally has to
      weigh carefully such a testimony and if it is satisfied that the evidence is
      reliable and free from all taints which tend to render oral testimony open
      to suspicion, it becomes its duty to act upon such testimony. The law
      reports contain many precedents where the court had to depend and act
      upon the testimony of a single witness in support of the prosecution. There
      are exceptions to this rule, for example, in cases of sexual offences or of the
      testimony of an approver; both these are cases in which the oral testimony
      is, by its very nature, suspect, being that of a participator in crime. But,
      where there are no such exceptional reasons operating, it becomes the duty
      of the court to convict, if it is satisfied that the testimony of a single witness
      is entirely reliable. We have, therefore, no reasons to refuse to act upon the



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                          37 of 132
       testimony of the first witness, which is the only reliable evidence in support of
       the prosecution.”
                                                                    (emphasis supplied)
48. Thus, the evidence adduced before the Court, can be accepted either in

      toto or in part. Furthermore, it can also be rejected. A Court shall apply its

      mind to the evidence available to arrive at a just conclusion.

DISCUSSION
49. We shall first consider the ocular evidence available before us comprising

      of the testimonies of the eyewitnesses, PW-15 and PW-16.

 i.     Eye-Witness Testimonies of PW-15 and PW-16
50. PW-15 and PW-16 are the two witnesses who are stated to have been

      present at the place of occurrence. We have carefully considered the

      evidence adduced by them. The more closely we scrutinize the testimonies

      of these witnesses, the less we find ourselves relying on them. This is due

      to their unnatural conduct and the material discrepancies found between

      their testimonies. PW-15, despite being an ex-service man and an

      eyewitness to the incident, did not taken any step whatsoever to report the

      same to the police. Rather strangely, he took pains to take the scooter




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                          38 of 132
    driven by the deceased back home and handed it over to his tenant,

    Mr. Naveen who has also not been examined by the prosecution, despite

    being a cited witness. On going through the laptop and visiting cards

    recovered from the scooter of the deceased, PW-15 called the Intel

    security officer, Radhakrishnan, who came and collected the laptop and

    scooter. He has also not been examined by the prosecution, even though

    he was a cited witness. All the while, neither did PW-15 call the police nor

    did he ask his tenant to call the police. Instead, he was contacted by PW-

    31 at about 8:30 AM-9:00 AM on 04.12.2003 shortly after the death of the

    deceased, who told him to give his statement whenever called for.

    However, PW-15 could not offer any explanation as to how PW-31 got to

    know his residential number or the fact that he had witnessed the incident.

    What is strange is that the FIR itself was lodged only at 10:30 AM on the

    basis of the complaint given by PW-5, the brother of the deceased, which

    makes one question as to how PW-31 came to know about the presence of

    PW-15 at the place of occurrence, even before the registration of the FIR.

    His statement was recorded only on 05.12.2003, even though he was



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              39 of 132
    contacted by the police on 04.12.2003 itself. Suffice it is to state that it is

    impossible for us to accept the evidence of PW-15 on the basis of the

    discussion made above.
51. PW-16 is another eyewitness whose statement was not recorded by the

    police for more than two months, until 21.02.2004. This was unusual as

    PW-15 had intimated him about the call he received from the police on

    04.12.2003 itself and the recording of his statement on 05.12.2003. It is

    also pertinent to note that not only was he meeting PW-15 regularly for a

    few days after the incident, but had also attended office throughout the

    said period, indicating that he was very much available, and yet failed to

    give his statement to the police earlier. The so-called reasons assigned by

    him for the delay in giving his statement are also contradictory. First, he

    states that it was due to the fact that he was under stress owing to some

    personal problems. Immediately thereafter, he states that it was because

    he did not have the time to do so. The said reasons are not acceptable, as

    the police knew about his presence much earlier. Apart from his unnatural

    conduct, there are also material contradictions in the evidence of PW-15



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                 40 of 132
    and PW-16 on the identification of A-1 and A-2. We also find that there is

    no clarity in the evidence of PW-15 on the presence of PW-16.
52. In light of what has been discussed above, we can observe that many of

    the cited witnesses, including the occupants of the car in which the

    deceased was taken to the hospital, the tenant of PW-15 and the Intel

    security officer, who could have testified to the presence of PW-15 and

    PW-16 on that fateful night, have not been examined by the prosecution,

    for the reasons best known to them.
53. Though we find numerous other serious contradictions in the evidence of

    PW-15 and PW-16, we do not wish to go into it any further, as we have

    absolute clarity that their presence at the place of occurrence is highly

    doubtful and therefore, cannot be relied upon.
54. As we have discarded the eyewitnesses’ account of the incident, we must

    note now that the case rests purely on circumstantial evidence. Thus, we

    must scrutinize the remaining evidence available by keeping in mind the

    five golden principles
laid down by
this Court in
Sharad Birdhichand

    Sarda v. State of Maharashtra
, (1984) 4 SCC 116.



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             41 of 132
  (1) “the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn must
      or should be and not merely ‘may be’ fully established,

  (2) the facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of
      the guilt of the accused, that is to say, they should not be explainable on
      any other hypothesis except that the accused is guilty,

  (3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency,

  (4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be proved,
      and

  (5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any
      reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the innocence of the
      accused and must show that in all human probability the act must have
      been done by the accused.”

                                                                (emphasis supplied)
 ii.     Motive
55. When a case is founded on circumstantial evidence, it is imperative to

       establish the motive of the accused to commit the offence. This is because

       it serves as the foundation of the evidentiary chain that ultimately leads to

       the implication of the accused.
Munish Mubar v. State of Haryana
, (2012) 10 SCC 464

        “30. In a case of circumstantial evidence motive assumes great significance
        and importance for the reason that the absence of motive would put the
        court on its guard and cause it to scrutinise each piece of evidence very
        closely in order to ensure that suspicion, emotion or conjecture do not take
        the place of proof. However, the evidence regarding existence of motive
        which operates in the mind of an assassin is very often not within the reach



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                       42 of 132
      of others. The said motive may not even be known to the victim of the
      crime. The motive may be known to the assassin and no one else may know
      what gave birth to such evil thought in the mind of the assassin. In a case
      of circumstantial evidence, the evidence indicating the guilt of the accused
      becomes untrustworthy and unreliable, because most often it is only the
      perpetrator of the crime alone, who has knowledge of the circumstances
      that prompted him to adopt a certain course of action, leading to the
      commission of the crime. Therefore, if the evidence on record suggests
      sufficient/necessary motive to commit a crime, it may be conceived that
      the accused has committed the same.”

                                                              (emphasis supplied)
56. On the evidence available on motive, PW-8, PW-11 and PW-23 are the

    witnesses who have been relied on by the prosecution to prove it.
57. We shall first examine the evidence of PW-8. Firstly, we find her evidence

    to be tainted, as she was already known to the father of the deceased,

    PW-6 who stated that he knew her from 4-5 years ago as they used to see

    each other in the park while walking. Secondly, not only does she state

    that she had attended the engagement ceremony of A-4 on 30.11.2003, but

    also goes to the extent of stating that she had sat in the first row and that

    photos and videos were taken of the same. However, the prosecution has

    not made any attempt to prove her presence at the ceremony by producing

    the said photographs or videos. None of the other witnesses have testified

    about her presence at the ceremony. Thus, her very presence at the


Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                     43 of 132
    engagement ceremony itself is highly doubtful. Thirdly, there is a huge

    delay in the recording of her statement by the police, as the same was done

    only on 14.01.2004. Fourthly, apart from the contradictions in her own

    testimony, there are material contradictions with the testimonies of PW-6

    and PW-31 regarding the place and manner in which her statement was

    recorded by the police. PW-8 states that her statement was recorded by the

    police at her house in January 2004. However, this is contradicted by

    PW-6 who deposed that her statement was recorded by PW-31 and ACP

    Pemmaiah when she had visited his house in December 2003. She then

    states that she had conveyed the information about the murder of the

    deceased to PW-6 on the same day that she had gone to his house in

    December 2003. But then, she contradicts herself by stating that she had

    not conveyed the said information to anyone other than the inmates of her

    house, until the police recorded her statement on 14.01.2004. She further

    states that the police was already present at the house of PW-6 when she

    had arrived; however, despite her attempt to speak to them, they did not

    record her statement at that juncture and did so only a month thereafter,



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             44 of 132
    which appears to be rather unusual. This is contradicted by PW-6 who

    states that he had informed PW-31 over the telephone when PW-8 had

    come to give some information on the murder of the deceased and the

    police reached his house only after the arrival of PW-8. PW-31 also

    contradicts her version by stating that it was PW-8 who had denied

    recording her statement on that day and not vice versa. Though there can

    be some justification for her contradictions with the testimonies of PW-9,

    PW-10 and PW-12 who are interested witnesses, the fact remains that it is

    also contradictory to the evidence of PW-31 and PW-6. We find further

    contradictions between her statement recorded under
Section 161
of the

    Cr.P.C and her testimony before the Court. We find the conduct of PW-8

    to be unnatural as well, similar to the observations made by us on the

    conduct of PW-15 and PW-16.
58. Regarding PW-11, we find her evidence to be unreliable too, due to the

    existence of material discrepancies with that of the other witnesses.

    Firstly, she states for the first time before the Court that it was Kamala, a

    servant from the house of A-4, who had informed her regarding the



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters               45 of 132
    engagement of A-4 with the deceased. However, the said Kamala has

    neither been cited as a witness nor examined by the prosecution to

    establish the said theory. While she deposes that she did not attend the

    engagement ceremony, the evidence of PW-10 and PW-12 would suggest

    otherwise, as they had deposed that she had attended the engagement

    ceremony as a guest of PW-6. She was also accompanied by the sister of

    the deceased, Sunitha to the Trial Court which lends credence to the case

    of the defence that she did attend the ceremony on behalf of the family of

    the deceased. She also testifies that it was Sunitha and PW-6 who had

    visited her house soon after she had seen the incident on television, and

    asked her to recount what she knew. She adds that they were the ones who

    had informed the police about the same, and to her surprise, the police

    visited her home four or five days later, which makes the manner in which

    her statement was recorded by the police a little odd as well. There is also

    a huge delay in recording her statement under
Section 161
of the Cr.P.C,

    as it was only recorded in February 2004. Therefore, the observations




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              46 of 132
    made by us on the conduct of the abovementioned witnesses extends to

    PW-11 as well.
59. This leaves us with the evidence of PW-23, Pramod Dixit, who went to

    Pre-University College with A-4. He deposed in clear terms that A-4

    confessed to him that she did not want to get married to the deceased, as

    she felt that they were not compatible. While the deceased had a

    conservative lifestyle, she wanted a luxurious one, visiting expensive

    hotels and restaurants. She also disclosed to him that she did not want to

    get married at such a young age. We are inclined to rely much on this

    evidence, as we find it to be natural. This is owing to the fact that unlike

    the aforementioned witnesses, there is nothing on record to show that

    PW-23 had any prior relationship with the family of the deceased and

    unlike PW-8 and PW-11, who were not so well-known to A-4, it is not in

    dispute that PW-23 was close to A-4 and had not only been in touch with

    A-4 but also her father, PW-10. A-4 has admitted the same in her statement

    recorded under
Section 313
of the Cr.P.C. Thus, there was no reason for

    PW-23 to have testified against his friend, A-4. Secondly, the evidence of



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              47 of 132
    PW-23, which is inclusive of his testimony and the e-mail sent by him to

    PW-10 on 18.04.2004, marked as Exhibit D-51 categorically establish that

    A-1 and A-4 were close to each other. Though the extent of the

    relationship is not known, one could easily infer the bond between A-1

    and A-4, and that they were constantly in touch with each other. It is one

    thing to say that the evidence is not sufficient enough to show that they

    were in a relationship, but it is sufficient to show that A-4 was disinclined

    towards her marriage with the deceased and A-1 was a close confidant of

    hers. PW-23 also goes to the extent of mentioning in his e-mail sent to the

    father of A-4 that he did not have a good opinion about A-1, but was

    hesitant to tell A-4 about the character of A-1, fearing that she might

    mistake him to be making false allegations out of jealousy. Therefore, we

    are inclined to rely on the evidence of PW-23 to not only demonstrate that

    A-4 was unwilling to marry the deceased, but also to show the close

    relationship between A-1 and A-4. At this juncture, we would also like to

    refer to the admission made by PW-10 in his testimony that A-1 used to




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters               48 of 132
       come to his house for doing moot court rehearsals with A-4, which

       establishes that A-1 and A-4 were close to each other.
iii.     Call Detail Records
60. Having found the motive to commit the offence proved, we shall now

       concentrate on the CDR available on record, which shows the extensive

       communications exchanged between the accused persons before the

       incident, on the day of the incident and after the incident. We would like

       to go in-depth on this aspect, as the case now rests on circumstantial

       evidence, having disbelieved the testimonies of the eye-witnesses.
61. Apart from the meticulous arguments made by learned Senior Counsel,

       Mr. Tomy Sebastian appearing on behalf of the complainant, much effort

       has also been undertaken by our Office with respect to the correlation of

       the CDR, already filed and taken on record. Records from the months of

       October, November and December 2003 have been taken and an endeavor

       has been made to ascertain the conspiracy hatched amongst the accused

       persons.
Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                49 of 132
62. On a perusal of the relevant oral and documentary evidence on record, we

    have no doubt in holding that the prosecution has duly proved that A-1

    was in possession of and the user of mobile phone bearing

    No. 9845017289, A-2 was the possessor and user of mobile phone bearing

    No. 08036940211, A-3 was the possessor and user of mobile phone

    bearing No. 08036860795, and A-4 was the possessor and user of mobile

    phone bearing No. 9845570337. The TSP of the mobile phones used by

    A-1 and A-4 was Airtel and the TSP of the mobile phones used by A-2

    and A-3 was Reliance.
63. Before we analyze the evidence available by way of CDR, it is imperative

    to prove that the admissibility of the said evidence was strictly in

    accordance with Section 65-B of the IEA, as the information pertaining to

    these CDR is stored in huge servers, which cannot be produced before the

    Court, and are thus, produced by way of printouts which qualify as

    secondary evidence.
Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters            50 of 132
Arjun Panditrao Khotkar v. Kailash Kushanrao Gorantyal and Ors.,
   (2020) 7 SCC 1

      “32. Coming back to
Section 65-B
of the Evidence Act, sub-section (1) needs
      to be analysed. The sub-section begins with a non obstante clause, and then
      goes on to mention information contained in an electronic record produced by
      a computer, which is, by a deeming fiction, then made a “document”. This
      deeming fiction only takes effect if the further conditions mentioned in the
      section are satisfied in relation to both the information and the computer in
      question; and if such conditions are met, the “document” shall then be
      admissible in any proceedings. The words “… without further proof or
      production of the original …” make it clear that once the deeming fiction is
      given effect by the fulfilment of the conditions mentioned in the section, the
      “deemed document” now becomes admissible in evidence without further
      proof or production of the original as evidence of any contents of the original,
      or of any fact stated therein of which direct evidence would be admissible.
33. The non obstante clause in sub-section (1) makes it clear that when it
      comes to information contained in an electronic record, admissibility and
      proof thereof must follow the drill of Section 65-B, which is a special
      provision in this behalf —
Sections 62
to
65
being irrelevant for this
      purpose. However, Section 65-B(1) clearly differentiates between the
      “original” document — which would be the original “electronic record”
      contained in the “computer” in which the original information is first stored —
      and the computer output containing such information, which then may be
      treated as evidence of the contents of the “original” document. All this
      necessarily shows that Section 65-B differentiates between the original
      information contained in the “computer” itself and copies made therefrom —
      the former being primary evidence, and the latter being secondary evidence.
34. Quite obviously, the requisite certificate in sub-section (4) is unnecessary
      if the original document itself is produced. This can be done by the owner of a
      laptop computer, a computer tablet or even a mobile phone, by stepping into
      the witness box and proving that the device concerned, on which the original
      information is first stored, is owned and/or operated by him. In cases where
      “the computer”, as defined, happens to be a part of a “computer system” or
      “computer network” (as defined in the
Information Technology Act, 2000
) and
      it becomes impossible to physically bring such network or system to the court,
      then the only means of proving information contained in such electronic record
      can be in accordance with Section 65-B(1), together with the requisite
      certificate under Section 65-B(4). This being the case, it is necessary to clarify


Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                          51 of 132
      what is contained in the last sentence in para 24 of
Anvar P.V. v. P.K. Basheer
,
      (2014) 10 SCC 473 : (2015) 1 SCC (Civ) 27 : (2015) 1 SCC (Cri) 24 : (2015)
      1 SCC (L&S) 108 which reads as “… if an electronic record as such is used as
      primary evidence under
Section 62
of the Evidence Act …”. This may more
      appropriately be read without the words “under
Section 62
of the Evidence
      Act,…”.
With this minor clarification, the law stated in para 24 of
Anvar
      P.V. v. P.K. Basheer
, (2014) 10 SCC 473 : (2015) 1 SCC (Civ) 27 : (2015) 1
      SCC (Cri) 24 : (2015) 1 SCC (L&S) 108 does not need to be revisited.
***
60. It may also be seen that the person who gives this certificate can be
      anyone out of several persons who occupy a “responsible official position”
      in relation to the operation of the relevant device, as also the person who
      may otherwise be in the “management of relevant activities” spoken of in
      sub-section (4) of Section 65-B. Considering that such certificate may also
      be given long after the electronic record has actually been produced by the
      computer, Section 65-B(4) makes it clear that it is sufficient that such
      person gives the requisite certificate to the “best of his knowledge and
      belief”. [Obviously, the word “and” between knowledge and belief in Section
      65-B(4) must be read as “or”, as a person cannot testify to the best of his
      knowledge and belief at the same time.]
61. We may reiterate, therefore, that the certificate required under
      Section 65-B(4) is a condition precedent to the admissibility of evidence by
      way of electronic record, as correctly held in
Anvar P.V. v. P.K. Basheer
,
      (2014) 10 SCC 473 : (2015) 1 SCC (Civ) 27 : (2015) 1 SCC (Cri) 24 : (2015)
      1 SCC (L&S) 108 , and incorrectly “clarified” in
Shafhi Mohammad v. State of
      H.P.
, (2018) 2 SCC 801 : (2018) 2 SCC 807 : (2018) 2 SCC (Civ) 346 : (2018)
      2 SCC (Civ) 351 : (2018) 1 SCC (Cri) 860 : (2018) 1 SCC (Cri) 865. Oral
      evidence in the place of such certificate cannot possibly suffice as
Section 65-
B(4) is a mandatory requirement of the law.
Indeed, the hallowed principle
      in Taylor v. Taylor, (1875) LR 1 Ch D 426, which has been followed in a
      number of the judgments of this Court, can also be applied.
Section 65-B(4)
of
      the Evidence Act clearly states that secondary evidence is admissible only if
      led in the manner stated and not otherwise. To hold otherwise would render
      Section 65-B(4) otiose.
***
82. But Section 65-B makes the admissibility of the information contained in
      the electronic record subject to certain conditions, including certification. The
      certification is for the purpose of proving that the information which
      constitutes the computer output was produced by a computer which was


Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                         52 of 132
      used regularly to store or process information and that the information so
      derived was regularly fed into the computer in the ordinary course of the
      said activities.”
                                                             (emphasis supplied)
64. There is no doubt that the compliance of this provision is mandatory.

    However, there is no straitjacket formula to arrive at the conclusion of

    such due compliance, with specific reference to the CDR. It is the duty of

    the concerned Court to satisfy itself on such compliance, by taking due

    note of the requisite certificate produced under Section 65-B(4) of the

    IEA, coupled with the oral evidence adduced by the competent officer on

    behalf of the TSP. One must understand that in contrast to the other

    prosecution witnesses, the one who speaks in support of such certificates,

    has no other interest in the case and therefore, has to be considered as a

    Court witness, having no axe to grind with anyone. He deposes on behalf

    of the TSP, concentrating only with respect to the certificate issued. Thus,

    in the absence of any fundamental flaw in his testimony, with competency

    to depose on behalf of the TSP, the Court is expected to take due note of

    it, accordingly.
Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                   53 of 132
65. In the case at hand, while scrutinizing the evidence pertaining to the

    admissibility of CDR, it is crucial to keep in mind that we are dealing with

    an offence which was committed in the year 2003, when technology and

    the laws governing it were still at a nascent stage. On a perusal of the

    documentary evidence, we find that both the TSPs have furnished the

    requisite certificates under Section 65-B(4) of the IEA, marked as Exhibit

    P-50 and Exhibit P-83, and we are duly satisfied with the compliance

    made thereunder. A certificate not given in the prescribed format per se

    will not make it invalid, especially when the authenticity of these marked

    documents is not in dispute. The competent officers on behalf of Reliance

    and Airtel have also deposed affirmatively with respect to the said

    certificates, as PW-24 and PW-25 respectively. PW-24 was holding the

    position of Head of Marketing & Sales and Co-ordinator for Statutory

    Legal Enforcement Agencies at Reliance, Bangalore. PW-25 was holding

    the position of Assistant Manager as the Nodal Officer of Airtel,

    Bangalore. Thus, both the witnesses were holding a ‘responsible official

    position’ at the respective companies, as required under Section 65-B(4)



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              54 of 132
    of the IEA. It is not necessary for the said officers to be holding positions

    of technical expertise, and is enough if they depose to the ‘best of their

    knowledge or belief’. The contention raised by the appellants that

    Mr. Ramani was the only competent officer to depose on behalf of

    Reliance is without substance, as the evidence of PW-24 clearly states that

    Mr. Ramani had left the organisation and thus, PW-24 being the successor-

    in-office became the competent officer. It is not in dispute that PW-24 and

    PW-25 are the representatives of the respective TSPs. Their testimonies

    with respect to the certificates and the CDR remain unmistakably clear,

    despite being subjected to exhaustive cross-examination and, mere

    discrepancies per se would not lead us to hold that there was no due

    compliance. With respect to the certificate furnished by Reliance, the

    appellants raised an argument that it was not in conformity with Section

    65-B(4) of the IEA, as it did not mention that the main server was located

    in Bombay, from which the data had been extracted and sent via email to

    the concerned office in Bangalore. This argument does not hold much

    water, as this process of extraction and transfer of data was done by



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters               55 of 132
    authorized employees of the TSP through an electronically defined

    process, as per established procedures. The alleged discrepancies in

    certain portions of the CDR, as pointed out by the appellants, cannot

    eschew the evidence in its entirety. Moreover, it is nobody’s case that the

    entries in the CDR are factually incorrect, nor is there any dispute over the

    author of these entries. It is also to be kept in mind that there was no

    specific denial or explanation offered by even the accused persons, when

    presented with the overwhelming evidence on the numerous calls/SMSes

    exchanged between them, while recording their statement under
Section

    313
of the Cr.P.C. Thus, we are inclined to hold that on the facts of the

    instant case, the CDR furnished by both Reliance and Airtel are admissible

    in accordance with Section 65-B(4) of the IEA.
66. As we have established the admissibility of the CDR, we may proceed

    with the evaluation of the voluminous data on CDR, placed on record by

    the prosecution, showing the unusually high number of communications

    exchanged between the accused persons during the relevant period of

    time. On a meticulous analysis of the same, we find that the results are



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters               56 of 132
    astounding. For the sake of convenience, we would like to categorize the

    communications appended in Annexure ‘A’ on the basis of the time

    period during which they were exchanged, as following: October 2003

    (Table 1), 01.11.2003 to 15.11.2003 (Table 2) and 16.11.2003 to

    24.11.2003 (Table 3). However, for the period between 25.11.2003 to

    06.12.2003 (Table 4 – Table 14), we would like to analyze it on a day-to-

    day basis, as the prosecution seeks to prove the conspiracy between the

    accused persons, especially placing reliance on the CDR pertaining to the

    said period. To avoid prolixity, we do not wish to repeat the phone

    numbers of the persons while discussing the CDR and instead, refer to

    them by the person itself.
67. The CDR pertaining to the month of October 2003 in Table 1 show the

    number of calls made by A-4 to A-1, and also by A-3 to A-1. We also take

    note of the communications made by A-4 to the deceased. The emerging

    pattern is that it is A-4 who had called A-1 most of the time. Similarly,

    A-4 has also made calls to the deceased. However, what is to be taken note

    of specifically, is the difference in the timing of the calls made to A-1 and



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters               57 of 132
    the deceased. On doing so, we find that A-4 has made majority of the calls

    to the deceased only during the daytime, while the calls made to A-1 are

    both during the daytime and the odd hours of the night.
68. Between 01.11.2003 and 15.11.2003, as seen in Table 2, the frequency of

    communications exchanged between A-1 and A-4 increased multifold,

    while the ones between A-4 and the deceased decreased significantly. For

    the said period, there are a whopping 92 communications between A-1 and

    A-4, as against only 44 with the deceased. Here again, it can be inferred

    that several communications have been exchanged between A-1 and A-4

    during the odd hours of the night.
69. The frequency of communications between A-1 and A-4 increased even

    more between 16.11.2003 to 24.11.2003, as seen in Table 3. A total of 98

    communications have been logged between them, as against only 22 with

    the deceased. We would like to draw attention to the glaring disparity in

    the frequency of their communications as, according to the evidence of

    PW-5 and PW-10, A-4’s parents had made a proposal to the parents of the

    deceased regarding the marriage during the month of October 2003 itself.



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             58 of 132
    The same was finalized on 20.11.2003, when both the families gave their

    consent to the marriage proposal, and the engagement ceremony was fixed

    on 30.11.2003. While one would expect a rise in communication between

    the deceased and A-4 after their pre-engagement rituals, the call records

    exhibit a completely different story. For instance, on 23.11.2003, 9

    communications have been exchanged between A-4 and A-1, while A-4

    contacted the deceased only twice. Similarly, on 24.11.2003, 16

    communications have been exchanged between A-4 and A-1, as against

    only 3 with the deceased, which leads us to arrive at the conclusion that

    A-4 was not interested in her marriage with the deceased, and instead

    shared a close relationship with A-1. It is to be noted that in a majority of

    these communications, it is A-4 who has contacted A-1 and not vice versa.
70. Now, we shall come to the data available for 25.11.2003 in Table 4. Here

    again, A-3 has communicated with not only A-1, but also A-4 by way of

    voice calls. A-1, being in contact with A-3 from 23.11.2003, roped him

    into the plan and on 25.11.2003, A-3 has made direct contact with A-4 for

    the first time. On the very same day itself, A-3 has made 9 voice calls to



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters               59 of 132
    A-4, one after the other, and in short intervals. Thus, it can be inferred that

    A-3 has actively entered into the conspiracy on the said date. We wish to

    emphasize on the same, as A-3 is a complete stranger to A-4, and there

    was no occasion or reason for them to have been in touch.
71. On 26.11.2003, as mentioned in Table 5, there have been further

    communications between A-4 and A-1 by way of 7 SMSes and 1 voice

    call. Strangely, there was only one communication made by A-4 to the

    deceased.
72. On 27.11.2003, as mentioned in Table 6, A-4 contacted the deceased only

    once, while continuing her communication with A-1 via SMS. The

    communication between A-3 and A-4 also continued as A-3 has made 8

    calls to A-4. We can observe that one call is made immediately after the

    other, inter se the accused persons.
73. On 28.11.2003, as observed in Table 7, a total of 33 calls/SMSes were

    exchanged between the accused persons, excluding A-2. A total of 19

    communications were exchanged between A-1 and A-4, including both

    SMSes and voice calls, while there were only 5 communications between



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                 60 of 132
    A-4 and the deceased. It is to be noted that A-1 and A-4 have also engaged

    in conversations during the odd hours of the night. A total of 10 voice calls

    were made between A-3 and A-1, out of which majority of the calls were

    initiated by A-3. It is crucial to note that out of the 4 voice calls between

    A-3 and A-4, 3 calls were initiated by A-4.
74. Analysis of the CDR for 29.11.2003, a day before the engagement

    ceremony, as mentioned in Table 8, would show that a total of 11

    communications were exchanged between A-4 and A-1, including 10

    SMSes and 1 voice call. All the communications were initiated by A-4.

    Between A-3 and A-4, there were a total of 6 voice calls. We also take note

    of the calls between A-3 and A-1. It is interesting to note the emerging

    pattern in some of the calls between the accused, as they have been made

    one after the other.
75. We would like to emphasize a little more on the CDR for 30.11.2003 in

    Table 9, as it was the date of the engagement ceremony of A-4 with the

    deceased. Till 29.11.2003, we could find that the communication was

    exclusively between A-1, A-3 and A-4. On analyzing the CDR for



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters               61 of 132
    30.11.2003, we find that A-2 has come into the picture for the first time.

    At this juncture, we would like to refer to the evidence of PW-14, the

    father of A-3, who admitted that there was a prior friendship between A-3

    and A-2. Thus, we would like to infer that it was A-3 who roped A-2 into

    the plan. On the said date, there were a total of 8 communications between

    A-4 and A-1, inclusive of both SMSes and voice calls. This shows the

    unnatural conduct of A-4, as even on the day of her engagement ceremony

    with the deceased, she was fervently communicating with A-1, lending

    corroboration to the evidence of PW-23 that she was not willing to marry

    the deceased.
76. We would also like to draw specific attention to A-4’s conduct during the

    engagement ceremony. Firstly, the photographs taken during the

    ceremony marked as Exhibit P-15, clearly show that A-4 was holding her

    phone in her hands throughout the ceremony. Secondly, as per the

    evidence of PW-10, the engagement ceremony commenced around

    7:00 PM. The CDR show that even during the engagement ceremony, A-

    4 has attended 3 calls made by A-3 between 7:00 PM to 9:00 PM. Qua the



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             62 of 132
    other communications, A-3 has made 2 calls to A-2 and it is to be noted

    that right after making these calls to A-2, A-3 has contacted A-4 twice,

    which shows that they were acting in furtherance of their conspiracy.
77. The CDR for 01.12.2003 and 02.12.2003 in Tables 10 and 11 respectively,

    show the communications between all the accused persons. On

    01.12.2003, there were a total of 5 communications between A-4 and

    A-1, including 3 voice calls and 2 SMSes, as against only one

    communication between A-4 and the deceased. There were also 3 calls

    between A-1 and A-3, and 2 calls between A-3 and A-2, all initiated by

    A-3.
78. For the CDR of 02.12.2003, we would first like to draw attention to the

    sharp contrast between the frequency of the calls/SMSes on the other days

    and the frequency of the same on 02.12.2003 showing a dramatic rise,

    whereby a total of 56 communications were exchanged, several of them

    taking place one after the other. It is to be noted that this was just a day

    before the murder of the deceased, and thus, it can be inferred that the

    accused persons were communicating in preparation for the murder. We



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              63 of 132
    note that out of the same, 34 communications were exchanged between

    A-1 and A-4. It can be seen that as we get closer to the date of the incident,

    there has been active communication on the part of A-2 as well, since a

    total of 11 communications were exchanged between A-1 and A-2, out of

    which 7 were voice calls and 4 were SMSes, and 5 voice calls were also

    made by A-3 to A-2.
79. Strangely, there were no communications at all between A-1 and A-2 prior

    to 02.12.2003, but just a day before the incident, 11 communications have

    been exchanged between them, when they are admittedly strangers. We

    also take note of the SMS sent by A-4 to A-2. Several of these calls/SMSes

    have been made consecutively by different accused persons, hinting at a

    synchronized coordination between them.
80. 03.12.2003 is the date of the unfortunate incident, which is not in dispute.

    The CDR for the same finds place in Table 12. We find that there were

    countless communications exchanged between the accused persons on the

    said day.
Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                64 of 132
81. Between A-1 and A-4 alone, there were 54 communications, of which 45

    were SMSes and 9 were voice calls. We would like to do a detailed

    breakdown of the CDR available for this date, as this was the day the

    terrible incident took place. For the same, we would like to first establish

    some foundational facts which are not in dispute. As per the testimonies

    of PW-5, PW-6 and PW-10, the deceased left with A-4 for the dinner at

    around 06:30 PM. Admittedly, A-4 and the deceased were together

    throughout the period ranging from 06:30 PM up until the incident took

    place. Then, PW-10 has also stated in his testimony that A-4 called him

    and informed about the incident sometime between 09:45 PM-10:00 PM.

    The CDR show that there was a call between A-4 and PW-10 at about

    09:56 PM, and the last communication between A-1 and A-4 before the

    said call took place at 09:39 PM, which leads us to the conclusion that the

    incident took place sometime between 09:39 PM to 09:56 PM. Thus, we

    would like to draw specific attention to the communications exchanged

    between the accused after 06:30 PM. A-1 and A-4 have exchanged 38




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              65 of 132
    SMSes from 06:37 PM to 09:39 PM continuously, one after the other, with

    an average gap of only 2-7 minutes in between each message.
82. It is rather strange that A-4 was continuously exchanging messages with

    A-1, during the entire period that she was with the deceased, who was her

    fiancé at the time. This lends credence to the case of the prosecution that

    she was giving information to A-1 regarding their whereabouts.

    Obviously, there were no voice calls made during the said period, as she

    could not talk to A-1 on the phone with the deceased beside her. With

    respect to A-1 and A-2, 4 communications have been exchanged between

    them, with the last call at 05:42 PM. No calls/SMSes were exchanged after

    that, which brings us to the inference that they were together during the

    entire period after that. A-3 has made 3 calls to A-2 after 06:30 PM, at

    07:39 PM, 08:39 PM and the last one at 09:25 PM, right before the

    occurrence.
83. After the last communication between A-1 and A-4 at 09:39 PM, there is

    complete silence with no communication between any of the accused until

    09:56 PM, when A-4 informed her father about the incident. The sudden



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             66 of 132
    silence between the accused during this crucial period lends credence to

    the theory put forth by the prosecution that the murder of the deceased was

    committed by the accused persons in conspiracy. The CDR would also

    reveal that, after the occurrence, A-4 chose not to inform A-1 about the

    incident, notwithstanding the numerous communications between them

    prior to the occurrence, but informed only her father, PW-10. This, we

    find, is a conduct which is rather very strange. At this juncture, we would

    also make a reference to the tower location of the calls made by the

    accused persons. As per the CDR and the evidence of PW-25, the calls

    made by A-1 and A-4 were recorded from the Carlton Tower located at the

    Airport Road. Similarly, the calls made/received by A-2 were recorded

    from the tower in the Domlur area which covers the Airport Road in its

    radius. Though this does not prove the presence of the accused at the exact

    place of occurrence, it does prove that A-1 and A-2 were in close

    proximity of the place of occurrence. Therefore, though the same is not a

    substantive piece of evidence, it definitely adds muscle to the

    prosecution’s version.
Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             67 of 132
84. Now, we shall consider the CDR available for the period after the

    occurrence. It has been observed that the communications between the

    accused have suddenly dried up after the occurrence. After the deceased

    was assaulted on the head, A-4 admitted the deceased in the hospital at

    10:10 PM, as stated in the Accident Register marked as Exhibit P-86. As

    per the evidence of PW-6, A-4 along with her mother and other family

    members of the deceased left the hospital around 02:00 AM, and returned

    to the hospital at around 07:00 AM in the morning. The CDR for

    04.12.2003 in Table 13 shows that even during this time, A-4 has sent

    messages to A-1, in the late night and early morning, which lends credence

    to the prosecution’s theory that A-4 wanted to update A-1 on the critical

    condition of the deceased. Subsequently, A-3 has made back-to-back calls

    to both A-1 and A-2 throughout the morning.
85. On 05.12.2003, as observed in Table 14, the communication between A-1

    and A-4 became almost nil, with only one communication made by A-1 to

    A-4, and a few more between A-1 and A-2. On 06.12.2003, as mentioned




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             68 of 132
    in Table 14, there was only a solitary communication between A-1 and

    A-4.
86. From the aforesaid materials, it is impossible for us to come to any other

    conclusion, than the one put forth by the prosecution, as the

    communications between the accused persons are too many, having a

    distinct pattern, following one after the other and even during odd hours

    of the night. The sudden rise in communications on the date of the incident

    and even a day prior to it, followed by a sudden drop in the

    communications on the very night of the unfortunate incident and days

    thereafter, consistently point only towards the guilt of the accused and

    serve as proof of the conspiracy that was hatched to murder the deceased.

    At this juncture, we would like to point out that while CDR data may not

    be construed as a substantive piece of evidence, it is certainly to be used

    for appropriate corroboration. One has to see the attending circumstances

    to decide the evidentiary value of CDR. For example, where the evidence

    is so overwhelming and the conduct of an accused is such that he is bound

    to give a sufficient explanation for it, but fails to do so, as in the instant



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                69 of 132
      case, the CDR might even take the position of substantive evidence.
Therefore, in a given factual scenario, the Court can place heavy reliance

      upon the same for the purpose of rendering a conviction. Suffice it is to

      state that proving the guilt depends upon the degree of probability.
iv.     Recovery of M.O.11 and M.O.12
87. Though substantial arguments have been made on M.O.11 and M.O.12,

      we are inclined to uphold the recovery. It is the case of the prosecution

      that A-2 was the pillion rider who got down from the scooter (M.O.12)

      and attacked the deceased using the steel rod/pipe (M.O.11). It is not in

      dispute that the recovery of M.O.11 was made at the instance of A-2. The

      same was witnessed by PW-30, who has duly affixed his signature on the

      seizure mahazar marked as Exhibit P-87. Both the Courts have rightly

      accepted the evidence of PW-30, who is an independent witness. The

      evidence of PW-30 cannot be eschewed solely on the ground that the other

      panch witness was not examined by the prosecution, despite being cited

      as a witness. The recovery of M.O.11 has been effected from a secluded

      place in a military compound. It was picked up from the bush, on being



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters               70 of 132
    identified by A-2. Merely because A-1 was also present during the

    recovery, one cannot say that the recovery was effectuated on the basis of

    joint disclosure made by A-1 and A-2, and thus, is inadmissible. Herein,

    it is pertinent to point out that the ‘voluntary’ statements of A-1 and A-2

    were also recorded separately and marked as Exhibit P-94 and Exhibit

    P-95 respectively.
Kishore Bhadke v. State of Maharashtra
, (2017) 3 SCC 760

      “35.
In
State (NCT of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu
(SCC pp. 711-12, para 145),
      this Court has held that a joint disclosure or simultaneous disclosures, per
      se, are not inadmissible under
Section 27
of the Evidence Act. A person
      accused need not necessarily be a single person, but it could be a plurality of
      the accused. The Court held that a joint or simultaneous disclosure is a myth,
      because two or more accused persons would not have uttered informatory
      words in chorus. When two persons in custody are interrogated separately
      and simultaneously and both of them may furnish similar information
      leading to the discovery of fact which was reduced into writing, such
      disclosure by two or more persons in police custody do not go out of the
      purview of
Section 27
altogether. What is relevant is that information
      given by one after the other without any break, almost simultaneously, as
      in the present case and such information is followed up by pointing out the
      material things by both of them then there is no good reason to eschew
      such evidence from the regime of
Section 27
. Whether that information is
      credible is a matter of evaluation of evidence. The courts below have
      accepted the prosecution version in this behalf, being credible. Suffice it to say
      that the disclosure made by Accused 3 about the relevant fact, per se, is not
      inadmissible.”

                                                                  (emphasis supplied)




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                          71 of 132
88. The argument raised by the appellants that the link required under
Section

    27
of the IEA is missing due to the absence of the panch witnesses while

    recording the disclosure statements of the accused is also not acceptable,

    on the facts of the case, as the presence of the witness to the disclosure

    statement is not a mandate and only one of prudence. The mere absence

    of the witness to the disclosure statement is hardly sufficient to hold that

    the recovery itself is doubtful.
89. We also find that the argument made to the effect that PW-18 did not find

    any bloodstain on the weapon during his examination will not hold water

    as the role of the doctor in this scenario is rather different. The police sent

    the weapon to him only to seek his opinion as to whether the injuries on

    the deceased were caused by M.O.11, to which he has rightly deposed in

    support of his report that the said weapon could have inflicted the injuries

    on the deceased. With respect to the presence of the bloodstain, we are

    inclined to rely on the FSL Report, as the report is prepared by technical

    experts after analysing the weapon using the appropriate equipment, and

    not merely on the basis of seeing it with the naked eye.



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                 72 of 132
90. With respect to the sealing of M.O.11, we find from the records that it was

    sufficiently sealed with the letter ‘N’ and also corresponds to the sample

    sent while tallying with the description. This is evident from all the

    requisitions made by the police and the FSL Report, where it has been

    clearly mentioned that M.O.11 was sealed and the seal was intact. Since

    we have already disbelieved the evidence of PW-15, his account about

    M.O.11 being kept unsecured in the Police Station is also not tenable. The

    argument that there is no clarity as to whether M.O.11 is a steel rod or a

    steel pipe is immaterial as the external appearance of a steel rod and a steel

    pipe is one and the same. If it is hollow inside, then it is a steel pipe,

    otherwise it is a steel rod. Here, on the basis of the description of the

    weapon, we can say that M.O.11 is a steel pipe as it is hollow. PW-30 and

    PW-31 have clearly testified to the same effect before the Court. The

    contention raised regarding the delay in sending the weapon to the FSL is

    also irrelevant as mere delay in sending the weapon to FSL cannot be a

    ground to discard the evidence pertaining to recovery, which is otherwise




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                73 of 132
    cogent as stated by this Court in
State of Madhya Pradesh v. Chhaakki

    Lal and Anr.
, (2019) 12 SCC 326.
“34. For reversing the verdict of conviction, the High Court has pointed out
      that there was delay in sending the seized gun and pistol (recovered on
      1.3.2006) which was sent to the FSL only on 19.4.2006. The High Court has
      doubted the case of prosecution by observing that apart from delay in sending
      the seized guns/pistol, there is no material showing as to where the seized
      weapons were kept during the period from 1.3.2006 to 19.4.2006. Such delay
      in sending the recovered weapons to FSL could only be an omission or
      lapse on the part of the Investigating Officer. Such omissions or lapses in
      the investigation cannot be a ground to discard the prosecution case which
      is otherwise credible and cogent….”

                                                                  (emphasis supplied)
91. The recovery of M.O.12, was made from the house of A-1 in the presence

    of PW-30, pursuant to the disclosure statement of A-1. The said factum

    has been confirmed by PW-30 and PW-31 in their testimony before the

    Court. The defence raised by A-1 that M.O.12 belonged to his sister

    DW-3, as it was gifted by their parents in her marriage, and was being

    used by her in Tamil Nadu cannot be believed as the National Insurance

    Company based in Bangalore continued to be the insurer of the vehicle at

    the relevant point in time. Further, no evidence was brought on record by

    the defence to show that DW-3 had given any intimation to the RTO



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                      74 of 132
      in Tamil Nadu to prove that she had shifted the vehicle from the State of

      Karnataka to the State of Tamil Nadu. Thus, having found no merit, we

      reject the defence raised by A-1, accordingly. Based on the discussion

      made above, we are inclined to uphold the recovery of M.O.11 and

      M.O.12. Now, what is left to be considered by us is the conduct of the

      accused and the plea of alibi raised by A-1 which are relevant facts.
v.     Conduct of A-4
92. Firstly, the conduct of A-4 is rather strange for a person who was

      continuously in touch with A-1 by way of numerous calls/SMSes on a

      daily basis not only during the period when her marriage proposal with

      the deceased was under consideration, but also after getting engaged to

      him. Secondly, we also find her conduct to be unnatural on the day of the

      incident, as she was constantly communicating with A-1 when she had

      gone out for dinner with her then fiancé, the deceased. However, she

      consciously stopped communicating with A-1 immediately after the

      incident took place. Even when her fiancé was on his deathbed, A-4 was

      communicating with A-1 and such conduct of hers is inconsistent with her



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters               75 of 132
    innocence and speaks volumes about their questionable relationship.

    Thirdly, we also find that A-4, has caused destruction of evidence in order

    to screen herself and the others from punishment as all the messages in the

    phone recovered from A-4, especially the ones exchanged on the day of

    the incident, were found to be deleted. The same was the situation with

    the phone used by A-1, M.O.13. PW-10 further admits in his cross-

    examination that there were no messages in the inbox or outbox of M.O.10

    when he surrendered the phone to the Investigating Officer on 26.01.2004.

    PW-33, being the technical expert, has also affirmed that the messages on

    the phone can only be deleted by manual operation. If the said messages

    were exchanged between the accused for any other bona fide purpose, then

    it was incumbent upon the accused to explain the same before the Court,

    which they have failed to do. Thus, the absence of the messages on the

    phones, coupled with the failure of the accused to offer sufficient

    explanation for their extensive communications right before the incident,

    would lead us to draw an adverse inference against A-1 and A-4.
Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             76 of 132
vi.     Plea of Alibi
93. Similarly, the Courts rightly drew an adverse inference against A-1 upon

      finding that the plea of alibi raised by him was not proved through the

      evidence of PW-22 and DW-1. PW-22, the father of A-1, had deposed that

      A-1 was at the HAL hospital on the night of 03.12.2003 as his father-in-

      law had been admitted there. Thus, in order to prove the said plea of alibi,

      the discharge summary was marked as Exhibit D-60 and DW-1, who was

      the Medical Superintendent at the said hospital, was examined by the

      defence. However, Exhibit D-60 did not contain anything to show that

      A-1 was present at the hospital during the period in question and DW-1

      also admitted in his cross-examination that the hospital did not maintain

      any records to show as to who had visited the patient at the hospital. Thus,

      we conclude that A-1 had raised a false plea of alibi.
94. From the discussion made above, it is clear that the foundational facts are

      not in dispute. The case of the prosecution with respect to the homicidal

      death of the deceased stands duly proved by way of the post-mortem

      report marked as Exhibit P-35 and the deposition of PW-18 in support of



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                77 of 132
    the same which would reveal that the deceased suffered as many as six

    injuries in total, ‘Injury No.2’ being the vital injury on the head, and the

    cause of death was coma as a result of the said head injury. No challenge

    has been raised by the appellants on the said medical evidence. Similarly,

    it is the case of A-4 herself that she was with the deceased during the time

    of occurrence. This is not only her own case, but also the case of her

    parents who deposed as PW-10 and PW-12. The said fact is also supported

    by the Accident Register, marked as Exhibit P-86, which proves that it was

    A-4 who had admitted the deceased to the hospital on the night of

    03.12.2003. PW-29 further supports the said fact by deposing with respect

    to the Accident Register. Thus, the occurrence itself and the presence of

    A-4 with the deceased during the time of occurrence is not in dispute. To

    that extent, we can also say that A-4 was a witness to the incident as she

    had stated in the spot seizure mahazar marked as Exhibit P-14, that she

    had seen someone running after assaulting the deceased. Despite being in

    close proximity of the deceased at the time of occurrence, it is rather

    strange to note that A-4 was left completely unscathed, despite her stand



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              78 of 132
    that both of them were attacked, while the deceased received as many as

    six injuries. The said fact shows the complicity of A-4 in the crime,

    especially when the defence has failed to establish any other motive for

    the homicide of the deceased.
95. Therefore, on the facts assessed above, we find that a case has been made

    out for confirming the conviction of the appellants. We are inclined to hold

    so, notwithstanding our disapproval of the evidence adduced by the

    prosecution, including the testimonies of PW-8, PW-11, PW-15 and

    PW-16.
96. Thus, we hold that the link for circumstantial evidence stands connected

    and proved, as the motive has been duly established through the evidence

    of PW-23, the voluminous CDR stands proved through the evidence of

    PW-24 and PW-25 who withstood a lengthy and exhaustive cross-

    examination, and the recovery of the weapon also stands proved. Even in

    the statements of the accused recorded under
Section 313
of the Cr.P.C,

    there was no acceptable explanation given by them for the numerous

    communications exchanged between them during the period ranging from



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              79 of 132
    25.11.2003 to 04.12.2003. Insofar as A-3 is concerned, we are inclined to

    hold that not only did he orchestrate the entire operation for the murder of

    the deceased by pulling the strings discreetly, but was also actively

    monitoring, directing and supervising the other accused. He was not only

    communicating with A-2, but also A-1 and A-4. The CDR show that a total

    of 34 voice calls have been made between A-3 and A-4 during the entire

    period ranging from 25.11.2003 to 03.12.2003, with no communications

    either before or after the said period. The said evidence is particularly

    overwhelming and cannot be brushed aside, as admittedly, there was no

    prior relationship between them, and there was no occasion for them to

    have communicated extensively when they were strangers to each other,

    with nothing in common, belonging to different strata of the society. It is

    A-3, who communicated extensively with A-1, A-2 and A-4. Though

    arguments have been made by the appellants to the effect that the

    prosecution has not been able to prove his profession, what is sufficient

    for us is the crucial role played by A-3.
Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              80 of 132
97. With respect to A-2, he came into the picture at a much later point of time.

    It is the case of the prosecution that this teenager was roped in at the

    instance of A-3 to hit the final nail in the coffin. We wish to observe that

    A-2 was a teenager hailing from an impoverished community, and was

    engaged in the loading and unloading of goods, as per the evidence of his

    father PW-17. The connection between A-2 and A-3 also stands proved as

    admitted by PW-14 in his testimony and thus, we are unable to acquit

    A-2, due to the recovery and the CDR which stand against him.
98. As stated above, A-4 was in constant communication with not only A-1,

    but also A-3. She was very much in the knowhow of things and the said

    communication continued till the final act. Once A-4 expressed her

    grievance to A-1, he got in touch with A-3, who facilitated the plan

    accordingly, by utilizing the service of A-2. In the said course, A-4 has

    also engaged in the destruction of evidence, as discussed above, in order

    to screen herself and the others from legal punishment. As we are satisfied

    with the adequacy of the evidence on record, though for different reasons,

    we are inclined to uphold the conviction and sentence rendered by the



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              81 of 132
    High Court in the impugned judgment. Accordingly, the appeals stand

    dismissed by confirming the conviction of the appellants rendered by the

    High Court under Section 302 read with
Section 120-B
of the IPC and

    additionally,
Section 201
of the IPC for A-4 alone. The sentence of life

    imprisonment imposed upon them also stands confirmed.

MOVING FORWARD
99. We do not wish to end our judgment by merely rendering a conviction. We

    do believe that this Court has a little more role to play. Considering that

    we started our discussion keeping in mind that this unfortunate event

    would not have occurred, had the family been more sympathetic in

    understanding the mental predilection and disposition of A-4, it is

    important for us to make certain observations. Ultimately, A-4 was unable

    to make a decision for herself, despite being an individual who had

    attained majority. Having said so, we cannot condone her action as it

    resulted in the loss of an innocent life of a young man. We would only

    state at this juncture, that A-4 was made to commit this offence by




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             82 of 132
    adopting the wrong course of action in order to address her problem. Years

    have rolled on since the occurrence of the crime, which was in 2003.
100. The appellants, who committed the offence with adrenaline pumping in

    their veins, have now reached the middle age. Two out of the four accused

    persons were teenagers at the time of occurrence, while A-4 had barely

    crossed that phase. A-3 was a man aged 28 years, and was recently married

    with one child. As a Court, we seek to view the matter from a different

    perspective, only for the purpose of giving a new lease of life to the

    appellants who have committed a heinous crime, notwithstanding the

    availability of other alternative avenues to resolve the problems faced by

    A-4. We have also been informed that they have not been put to adverse

    notice thereafter. Their conduct in the prison is also not adverse. They

    were not born as criminals, but it was an error of judgment through a

    dangerous adventure which led to the commission of a heinous crime. It

    is difficult for us to decide at this stage who influenced the other, although

    there is a clear meeting of minds.
Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                83 of 132
101. In light of the same, we would like to facilitate the appellants’ right to

    seek pardon by permitting them to file appropriate petitions before His

    Excellency the Hon’ble Governor of Karnataka. We would only request

    the constitutional authority to consider the same, which we hope and trust

    would be done by taking note of the relevant circumstances governing the

    case.
102. Accordingly, we grant eight weeks’ time from the date of this judgment,

    for the appellants to file appropriate petitions seeking to invoke the power

    of pardon under
Article 161
of the Constitution. Till these petitions are

    duly considered and decided, the appellants shall not be arrested and their

    sentence shall remain suspended.
103. The appeals stand dismissed, with the aforesaid liberty.




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              84 of 132
104. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
...………………………. J.
(M. M. SUNDRESH)




                                                       …………………………. J.
(ARAVIND KUMAR)
NEW DELHI;
JULY 14, 2025




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters            85 of 132
                                                              ANNEXURE ‘A’
                                        Table 1
                                      October 2003

   SI No            DATE                  TIME         FROM         TO
1.             03.10.2003             06:01 PM        A3          A1
2.             12.10.2003            08:44 AM         A3          A1
3.             15.10.2003             02:24 PM        A3          A1
4.             22.10.2003             03:48 PM        A3          A1
5.            22.10.2003             10:55 PM        A3          A1
6.            25.10.2003             05:59 PM        A4       Deceased
7.            25.10.2003             08:23 PM        A4       Deceased
8.            25.10.2003             08:29 PM        A4       Deceased
9.            25.10.2003             08:34 PM        A4       Deceased
10.            25.10.2003             09:29 PM        A4       Deceased
11.           25.10.2003            11:56 PM         A4          A1




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters             86 of 132
12.           26.10.2003            07:58 AM        A4   Deceased
13.           26.10.2003            08:42 AM        A4   Deceased
14.           26.10.2003            10:05 AM        A4   Deceased
15.           26.10.2003            10:11 AM        A4   Deceased
16.           26.10.2003             05:16 PM       A3      A1
17.           26.10.2003            01:38 AM        A4      A1
18.           26.10.2003            01:38 AM        A4      A1
19.           27.10.2003            11:38 AM        A4      A1
20.           27.10.2003             05:30 PM       A3      A1
21.           27.10.2003             07:09 PM       A3      A1
22.           27.10.2003             09:38 PM       A3      A1
23.           27.10.2003             10:01 PM       A4   Deceased
24.           27.10.2003             10:11 PM       A4   Deceased




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        87 of 132
25.           27.10.2003             10:15 PM       A4   Deceased
26.           27.10.2003             10:37 PM       A4   Deceased
27.           27.10.2003             11:22 PM       A4   Deceased
28.           28.10.2003             01:45 PM       A4   Deceased
29.           28.10.2003             02:38 PM       A4      A1
30.           28.10.2003             05:24 PM       A4   Deceased
31.           28.10.2003            10:30 PM        A4      A1
32.           28.10.2003            11:01 PM        A4      A1
33.           28.10.2003             11:07 PM       A4   Deceased
34.           29.10.2003            10:24 AM        A4      A1
35.           29.10.2003             02:29 PM       A4      A1
36.           29.10.2003             02:56 PM       A4      A1
37.           29.10.2003             08:22 PM       A4      A1




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        88 of 132
38.           29.10.2003             09:27 PM       A4      A1
39.           29.10.2003             10:40 PM       A4   Deceased
40.           29.10.2003            10:44 PM        A4      A1
41.           30.10.2003             05:51 PM       A4      A1
42.           30.10.2003             07:02 PM       A4   Deceased
43.           30.10.2003            11:19 PM        A4      A1
44.            31.10.2003            09:10 AM        A4      A1
45.            31.10.2003            09:36 AM        A4      A1
46.            31.10.2003             12:05 PM       A4   Deceased
47.            31.10.2003             01:40 PM       A4   Deceased
48.            31.10.2003             08:44 PM       A4      A1
49.            31.10.2003            10:37 PM        A4      A1
50.            31.10.2003             10:55 PM       A4   Deceased




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        89 of 132
                                       Table - 2
                                01.11.2003-15.11.2003

   SI No.           DATE                  TIME         FROM      TO
1.              01.11.2003            12:35 AM         A1       A4
2.              01.11.2003             01:52 PM        A4    Deceased
3.              01.11.2003             03:41 PM        A4       A1
4.              01.11.2003             04:09 PM        A4    Deceased
5.              01.11.2003             07:02 PM        A4       A1
6.              01.11.2003             07:03 PM        A4       A1
7.              01.11.2003             08:20 PM        A4    Deceased
8.              01.11.2003             09:17 PM        A4       A1
9.              01.11.2003             11:30 PM        A4       A1
10.             01.11.2003             11:36 PM        A4    Deceased
11.             01.11.2003             11:41 PM        A4       A1
12.             02.11.2003            01:40 AM         A1       A4
13.             02.11.2003             10:45 AM        A4    Deceased



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters          90 of 132
14.             02.11.2003             05:07 PM       A4   Deceased
15.             02.11.2003             06:16 PM       A4      A1
16.             02.11.2003             08:13 PM       A4   Deceased
17.             02.11.2003             10:47 PM       A4   Deceased
18.             03.11.2003             07:44 AM       A4   Deceased
19.             03.11.2003             11:03 AM       A4      A1
20.             03.11.2003             05:58 PM       A4      A1
21.             03.11.2003             07:24 PM       A4   Deceased
22.             03.11.2003             10:45 PM       A4   Deceased
23.             03.11.2003             11:44 PM       A4      A1
24.             04.11.2003             08:59 AM       A4   Deceased
25.             04.11.2003             09:49 AM       A4      A1
26.             04.11.2003             09:53 AM       A4      A1
27.             04.11.2003             05:34 PM       A4      A1
28.             05.11.2003             11:54 AM       A4   Deceased




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        91 of 132
29.             05.11.2003             03:10 PM       A4   Deceased
30.             05.11.2003             03:44 PM       A4   Deceased
31.             05.11.2003           04:00:15 PM      A4      A1
32.             05.11.2003            4:00:17 PM      A4      A1
33.             05.11.2003             06:56 PM       A4   Deceased
34.             05.11.2003             06:58 PM       A4   Deceased
35.             05.11.2003           08:21:26 PM      A4      A1
36.             05.11.2003           08:21:28 PM      A4      A1
37.             05.11.2003             08:35 PM       A4   Deceased
38.             05.11.2003             08:36 PM       A4   Deceased
39.             05.11.2003           08:52:47 PM      A4      A1
40.             05.11.2003           08:52:49 PM      A4      A1
41.             05.11.2003             09:19 PM       A4      A1
42.             05.11.2003             09:34 PM       A4      A1
43.             05.11.2003             10:34 PM       A4   Deceased




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        92 of 132
44.             06.11.2003             9:17 AM        A4   Deceased
45.             06.11.2003             09:32 AM       A4      A1
46.             06.11.2003           10:57:49 AM      A4      A1
47.             06.11.2003           10:57:53 AM      A4      A1
48.             06.11.2003           10:57:55 AM      A4      A1
49.             06.11.2003             11:24 AM       A4      A1
50.             06.11.2003             11:12 PM       A4   Deceased
51.             07.11.2003             08:50 AM       A4   Deceased
52.             07.11.2003           07:22:45 PM      A4   Deceased
53.             07.11.2003           07:22:47 PM      A4   Deceased
54.             07.11.2003             08:46 PM       A4   Deceased
55.             07.11.2003             09:49 PM       A4   Deceased
56.             07.11.2003           11:33:13 PM      A4      A1
57.             07.11.2003           11:33:16 PM      A4      A1
58.             07.11.2003             11:43 PM       A4      A1




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        93 of 132
59.             08.11.2003            01:06 AM        A4      A1
60.             08.11.2003             09:33 AM       A1      A4
61.             08.11.2003             01:11 PM       A4   Deceased
62.             08.11.2003             03:18 PM       A4   Deceased
63.             08.11.2003             04:43 PM       A4      A1
64.             08.11.2003           05:08:48 PM      A4      A1
65.             08.11.2003           05:08:50 PM      A4      A1
66.             08.11.2003             05:10 PM       A4   Deceased
67.             08.11.2003             05:11 PM       A4   Deceased
68.             08.11.2003             07:11 PM       A4   Deceased
69.             08.11.2003             07:19 PM       A4   Deceased
70.             08.11.2003             08:49 PM       A4   Deceased
71.             08.11.2003             09:27 PM       A4      A1
72.             08.11.2003           10:04:01 PM      A4      A1
73.             08.11.2003           10:04:03 PM      A4      A1




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        94 of 132
74.             09.11.2003            12:43 AM        A1      A4
75.             09.11.2003            03:51 AM        A1      A4
76.             09.11.2003             10:26 AM       A4      A1
77.             09.11.2003             03:38 PM       A4      A1
78.             09.11.2003             08:17 PM       A4      A1
79.             09.11.2003           10:11:46 PM      A4      A1
80.             09.11.2003           10:11:47 PM      A4      A1
81.             09.11.2003             11:35 PM       A1      A4
82.             10.11.2003             03:25 PM       A4      A1
83.             10.11.2003             04:18 PM       A4      A1
84.             10.11.2003             05:50 PM       A4      A1
85.             10.11.2003             06:05 PM       A4      A1
86.             10.11.2003             09:57 PM       A4      A1
87.             10.11.2003           09:59:41 PM      A4      A1
88.             10.11.2003           09:59:44 PM      A4      A1




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        95 of 132
89.             10.11.2003             10:42 PM       A4      A1
90.             10.11.2003           11:10:30 PM      A4      A1
91.             10.11.2003           11:10:33 PM      A4      A1
92.             11.11.2003             12:12 PM       A4      A1
93.             11.11.2003             02:13 PM       A4      A1
94.             11.11.2003             05:24 PM       A4      A1
95.             11.11.2003             07:48 PM       A4      A1
96.             11.11.2003             08:11 PM       A4   Deceased
97.             11.11.2003           11:18:34 PM      A4      A1
98.             11.11.2003           11:18:37 PM      A4      A1
99.             11.11.2003             11:32 PM       A1      A4
100.            12.11.2003             02:09 PM       A4      A1
101.            12.11.2003             02.11 PM       A4      A1
102.            12.11.2003             02:20 PM       A4      A1
103.            12.11.2003             02:36 PM       A4      A1




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        96 of 132
104.            12.11.2003             04:00 PM       A4      A1
105.            12.11.2003             05:09 PM       A4      A1
106.            12.11.2003             05:53 PM       A4      A1
107.            12.11.2003             10:21 PM       A4      A1
108.            12.11.2003             11:11 PM       A4      A1
109.            12.11.2003             11:35 PM       A4   Deceased
110.            13.11.2003             08:08 AM       A1      A4
111.            13.11.2003             07:11 PM       A4      A1
112.            13.11.2003           07:12:00 PM      A4      A1
113.            13.11.2003           07:12:04 PM      A4      A1
114.            13.11.2003             08:04 PM       A4   Deceased
115.            13.11.2003           10:20:03 PM      A4      A1
116.            13.11.2003           10:20:05 PM      A4      A1
117.            13.11.2003             10:59 PM       A4      A1
118.            13.11.2003             11:13 PM       A1      A4




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        97 of 132
119.            14.11.2003             03:15 PM       A4   Deceased
120.            14.11.2003             07:53 PM       A4      A1
121.            14.11.2003           08:37:39 PM      A4      A1
122.            14.11.2003           08:37:43 PM      A4      A1
123.            14.11.2003           08:37:45 PM      A4      A1
124.            14.11.2003           11:06:58 PM      A4      A1
125.            14.11.2003           11:07:01 PM      A4      A1
126.            15.11.2003            12:40 AM        A4      A1
127.            15.11.2003             08:30 AM       A4      A1
128.            15.11.2003           09:04:06 AM      A4      A1
129.            15.11.2003             10:14 AM       A4   Deceased
130.            15.11.2003             12:47 PM       A1      A4
131.            15.11.2003             03:25 PM       A4   Deceased
132.            15.11.2003             04:29 PM       A4   Deceased
133.            15.11.2003             09:46 PM       A4   Deceased




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        98 of 132
134.            15.11.2003             10:44 PM        A4    Deceased
135.            15.11.2003             10:49 PM        A4    Deceased
136.            15.11.2003             11:38 PM        A4       A1


                                       Table - 3
                                16.11.2003-24.11.2003

  SI No.           DATE                  TIME          FROM      TO
1.        16.11.2003             12:03 PM         A4    Deceased
2.        16.11.2003             03:40 PM         A4        A1
3.        16.11.2003           06:09:25 PM        A4        A1
4.        16.11.2003           06:18:06 PM        A4        A1
5.        16.11.2003           06:25:41 PM        A4        A1
6.        16.11.2003           07:26:23 PM        A4        A1
7.        16.11.2003             07:40 PM         A4    Deceased
8.        16.11.2003             09:16 PM         A4    Deceased




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters          99 of 132
9.        16.11.2003             09:24 PM        A4   Deceased
10.       16.11.2003             09:35 PM        A4   Deceased
11.       16.11.2003             09:49 PM        A4   Deceased
12.       16.11.2003          10:08:41 PM        A4       A1
13.       17.11.2003            09:53 AM         A4       A1
14.       17.11.2003            10:25 AM         A4       A1
15.       17.11.2003             03:34 PM        A4   Deceased
16.       17.11.2003             03:38 PM        A4       A1
17.       17.11.2003             04:25 PM        A1       A4
18.       17.11.2003          10:55:54 PM        A4       A1
19.       17.11.2003          10:55:56 PM        A4       A1
20.       17.11.2003            11:21 PM         A4       A1
21.       17.11.2003            11:39 PM         A4       A1




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        100 of 132
22.       17.11.2003            11:42 PM         A4       A1
23.       18.11.2003            09:26 AM         A4       A1
24.       18.11.2003          09:46:39 AM        A4       A1
25.       18.11.2003          09:46:41 AM        A4       A1
26.       18.11.2003            10:34 AM         A4       A1
27.       18.11.2003           06:47:42 PM       A4       A1
28.       18.11.2003           06:47:45 PM       A4       A1
29.       18.11.2003             07:30 PM        A4   Deceased
30.       18.11.2003             07:45 PM        A4   Deceased
31.       19.11.2003          08:21:37 AM        A4       A1
32.       19.11.2003          08:21:39 AM        A4       A1
33.       19.11.2003            09:35 AM         A4       A1
34.       19.11.2003          09:40:00 AM        A4       A1




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        101 of 132
35.       19.11.2003          09:40:09 AM        A4       A1
36.       19.11.2003          09:40:13 AM        A4       A1
37.       19.11.2003          09:42:07 AM        A4       A1
38.       19.11.2003          09:42:20 AM        A4       A1
39.       19.11.2003          09:42:34 AM        A4       A1
40.       19.11.2003            11:06 AM         A4       A1
41.       19.11.2003          11:17:46 AM        A4       A1
42.       19.11.2003          11:17:49 AM        A4       A1
43.       19.11.2003            11:33 AM         A4       A1
44.       19.11.2003             02:23 PM        A4       A1
45.       19.11.2003             04:52 PM        A4       A1
46.       19.11.2003             09:37 PM        A4   Deceased
47.       19.11.2003          11:03:37 PM        A4       A1




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        102 of 132
48.       19.11.2003          11:03:40 PM        A4       A1
49.       19.11.2003            11:07 PM         A4       A1
50.       20.11.2003            10:24 AM         A4   Deceased
51.       20.11.2003          10:37:13 AM        A4       A1
52.       20.11.2003          10:37:16 AM        A4       A1
53.       20.11.2003             12:32 PM        A4       A1
54.       20.11.2003             12:59 PM        A4       A1
55.       20.11.2003             01:14 PM        A4       A1
56.       20.11.2003             01:29 PM        A4       A1
57.       20.11.2003             01:46 PM        A4       A1
58.       20.11.2003             01:47 PM        A4       A1
59.       20.11.2003             03:51 PM        A4   Deceased
60.       20.11.2003             03:56 PM        A4       A1




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        103 of 132
61.       20.11.2003             07:20 PM        A4   Deceased
62.       20.11.2003            11:48 PM         A4       A1
63.       20.11.2003            11:49 PM         A4       A1
64.       21.11.2003            09:53 AM         A4       A1
65.       21.11.2003           04:18:54 PM       A4   Deceased
66.       21.11.2003           04:18:56 PM       A4   Deceased
67.       21.11.2003             07:58 PM        A4       A1
68.       21.11.2003             08:07 PM        A4       A1
69.       21.11.2003           08:38:18 PM       A4       A1
70.       21.11.2003           08:38:20 PM       A4       A1
71.       21.11.2003             08:43 PM        A4       A1
72.       21.11.2003             08:50 PM        A4       A1
73.       21.11.2003          11:02:19 PM        A4       A1




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        104 of 132
74.       21.11.2003          11:02:22 PM        A4       A1
75.       21.11.2003            11:58 PM         A4       A1
76.       22.11.2003          09:30:34 AM        A4       A1
77.       22.11.2003          09:30:36 AM        A4       A1
78.       22.11.2003            10:35 AM         A4       A1
79.       22.11.2003            10:46 AM         A4       A1
80.       22.11.2003            11:43 AM         A4       A1
81.       22.11.2003             03:16 PM        A4   Deceased
82.       22.11.2003             04:00 PM        A4   Deceased
83.       22.11.2003           07:41:08 PM       A4       A1
84.       22.11.2003           07:41:11 PM       A4       A1
85.       22.11.2003           09:57:50 PM       A4       A1
86.       22.11.2003           09:57:52 PM       A4       A1




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        105 of 132
87.       22.11.2003            10:21 PM         A4       A1
88.       22.11.2003            11:35 PM         A1       A4
89.       22.11.2003          11:44:07 PM        A4       A1
90.       22.11.2003          11:44:09 PM        A4       A1
91.       23.11.2003             12:43 PM        A4       A1
92.       23.11.2003             12:55 PM        A4       A1
93.       23.11.2003             02:07 PM        A4       A1
94.       23.11.2003             03:56 PM        A4       A1
95.       23.11.2003             04:36 PM        A4       A1
96.       23.11.2003             04:42 PM        A4       A1
97.       23.11.2003             08:17 PM        A3       A1
98.       23.11.2003           09:22:35 PM       A4       A1
99.       23.11.2003           09:22:38 PM       A4       A1




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        106 of 132
100.       23.11.2003             09:36 PM        A4   Deceased
101.       23.11.2003             09:47 PM        A4   Deceased
102.       23.11.2003             10:31 PM        A3       A1
103.       23.11.2003            11:18 PM         A4       A1
104.       24.11.2003            01:20 AM         A4       A1
105.       24.11.2003            01:23 AM         A4       A1
106.       24.11.2003             01:35 PM        A4       A1
107.       24.11.2003             01:44 PM        A4   Deceased
108.       24.11.2003             01:45 PM        A4       A1
109.       24.11.2003             01:48 PM        A4   Deceased
110.       24.11.2003             03:12 PM        A4       A1
111.       24.11.2003             04:12 PM        A3       A1
112.       24.11.2003             05:45 PM        A3       A1




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        107 of 132
113.       24.11.2003             05:46 PM        A3       A1
114.       24.11.2003             06:55 PM        A4       A1
115.       24.11.2003             06:59 PM        A4   Deceased
116.       24.11.2003             07:10 PM        A4       A1
117.       24.11.2003             07:17 PM        A4       A1
118.       24.11.2003             07:26 PM        A4       A1
119.       24.11.2003             07:34 PM        A4       A1
120.       24.11.2003             08:57 PM        A4       A1
121.       24.11.2003             09:08 PM        A4       A1
122.       24.11.2003             09:26 PM        A4       A1
123.       24.11.2003             09:55 PM        A4       A1
124.       24.11.2003            10:09 PM         A1       A4
125.       24.11.2003            11:20 PM         A4       A1




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        108 of 132
                                        Table - 4
                                       25.11.2003

  S No.          TIME               FROM                 TO       SMS/V
1.            10:21 AM                A3                A1          V
2.           11:01 AM                A3                A1          V
3.           03:03 PM                A4              Deceased   SMS/V
4.           04:24 PM                A3                A1          V
5.           04:25 PM                A3                A1          V
6.           06:18 PM                A4              Deceased   SMS/V
7.           09:04 PM                A3                A4          V
8.           09:16 PM                A3                A4          V
9.           09:17 PM                A3                A4          V
10.          09:19 PM                A3                A4          V
11.          09:23 PM                A3                A4          V




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              109 of 132
12.          09:26 PM                A3              A4      V
13.          09:28 PM                A3              A4      V
14.          09:29 PM                A3              A4      V
15.          09:32 PM                A4              A1    SMS
16.          09: 40 PM                A3              A4      V
17.           11:20 PM                A1              A4      V


                                        Table - 5
                                       26.11.2003

   S No.          TIME               FROM              TO   SMS/V
1.      09:06 AM                 A3             A1      V
2.      09:10 AM                 A4             A1    SMS
3.      09:26 AM                 A4             A1    SMS
4.      11:02 AM                 A4             A1    SMS
5.      11:07 AM                 A4             A1    SMS
6.      11:33 AM                 A3             A1      V



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        110 of 132
7.         12:13 PM                A4                A1           SMS
8.         03:40 PM                A4             Deceased       SMS/V
9.         03:52 PM                A4                A1           SMS
10.         04:27 PM                A4                A1           SMS
11.         06:30 PM                A3                A1             V
12.       09:13:29 PM               A3                A1             V
13.       09:13:57 PM               A3                A1             V
14.         09:38 PM                A1                A4             V


                                        Table - 6
                                       27.11.2003

   S No.          TIME                 FROM                TO          SMS/V
1.         10:17 AM                 A3            A1 Residence       V
2.         03:23 PM                 A3                A1             V
3.         05:43 PM                 A3                A4             V
4.         06:04 PM                 A4                A1           SMS




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                  111 of 132
5.         06:33 PM                 A3              A4           V
6.         06:52 PM                 A3              A4           V
7.         07:00 PM                 A3              A4           V
8.         07:06 PM                 A4            Deceased    SMS/V
9.         07:13 PM                 A3              A4           V
10.         07:17 PM                 A3              A4           V
11.         07:19 PM                 A3              A4           V
12.         07:49 PM                 A3              A4           V
13.         08:36 PM                 A4              A1         SMS
14.         08:42 PM                 A4              A1         SMS
15.         09:22 PM                 A4              A1         SMS
16.         11:11 PM                 A3              A1           V




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              112 of 132
                                        Table - 7
                                       28.11.2003

   S No.          TIME                 FROM              TO        SMS/V
1.         12:09 AM                 A1              A4           V
2.         12:12 AM                 A4              A1           V
3.         09:09 AM                 A4              A1         SMS
4.         09:18 AM                 A4              A1         SMS
5.         09:31 AM                 A4              A1         SMS
6.         09:44 AM                 A4              A1         SMS
7.         10:05 AM                 A4              A1         SMS
8.         10:22 AM                 A3              A1           V
9.         12:44 PM                 A3              A4           V
10.         12:53 PM                 A4              A3           V
11.         01:40 PM                 A4              A3           V
12.         02:31 PM                 A4            Deceased    SMS/V
13.         02:56 PM                 A3              A1           V



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              113 of 132
14.         03:45 PM                 A3              A1           V
15.         04:00 PM                 A4              A3           V
16.         04:34 PM                 A4            Deceased    SMS/V
17.       04:37:02 PM                A4            Deceased    SMS/V
18.       04:37:29 PM                A4            Deceased    SMS/V
19.         04:38 PM                 A1              A3           V
20.         05:08 PM                 A3              A1           V
21.         05:45 PM                 A1              A3           V
22.         06:06 PM                 A4              A1         SMS
23.         06:16 PM                 A1              A3           V
24.         06:22 PM                 A4            Deceased    SMS/V
25.         06:40 PM                 A1              A3           V
26.         07:03 PM                 A4              A1         SMS
27.         07:09 PM                 A4              A1         SMS
28.         07:17 PM                 A4              A1         SMS




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              114 of 132
29.         07:40 PM                 A4            A1     SMS
30.         07:44 PM                 A4            A1     SMS
31.         07:53 PM                 A1            A3       V
32.         08:24 PM                 A4            A1     SMS
33.         09:23 PM                 A4            A1       V
34.         09:35 PM                 A3            A1       V
35.         11:41 PM                 A4            A1     SMS
36.         11:57 PM                 A4            A1     SMS
37.         11:57 PM                 A4            A1     SMS
38.         11:59 PM                 A1            A4       V



                                         Table - 8
                                        29.11.2003

    S No.           TIME                FROM           TO    SMS/V
1.          08:53 AM                 A3          A4       V
2.          09:05 AM                 A4          A3       V



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        115 of 132
3.          09:06 AM                 A3            A1           V
4.          09:12 AM                 A4          Deceased    SMS/V
5.          01:16 PM                 A4            A1           V
6.          01:59 PM                 A4            A1         SMS
7.          02:02 PM                 A4            A1         SMS
8.          02:25 PM                 A4          Deceased    SMS/V
9.          03:00 PM                 A4            A1         SMS
10.          03:33 PM                 A4          Deceased    SMS/V
11.          06:53 PM                 A4          Deceased    SMS/V
12.          06:55 PM                 A4            A1         SMS
13.          06:58 PM                 A4            A1         SMS
14.          07:07 PM                 A1            A3           V
15.          07:15 PM                 A4            A1         SMS
16.          07:27 PM                 A4            A1         SMS
17.          08:07 PM                 A4            A1         SMS




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              116 of 132
18.          08:07 PM                 A3            A4           V
19.          08:30 PM                 A3            A4           V
20.          08:41 PM                 A3            A4           V
21.          08:45 PM                 A3            A4           V
22.          09:16 PM                 A3            A1           V
23.          09:17 PM                 A1            A3           V
24.          09:20 PM                 A4            A1         SMS
25.          09:51 PM                 A4            A1         SMS


                                   Table - 9
               30.11.2003 (Date of the Engagement Ceremony)

    S No.           TIME                FROM             TO        SMS/V
1.          08:51 AM                 A4            A1         SMS
2.          09:11 AM                 A4            A1           V
3.          10:22 AM                 A1            A4           V
4.          10:39 AM                 A4          Deceased    SMS/V




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              117 of 132
5.          10:48 AM                 A4          A1     SMS
6.          12:49 PM                 A4          A1     SMS
7.          01:00 PM                 A3          A1       V
8.          02:38 PM                 A4          A1     SMS
9.          04:04 PM                 A4          A1     SMS
10.          07:42 PM                 A3          A4       V
11.          08:22 PM                 A3          A2       V
12.          08:29 PM                 A3          A2       V
13.          08:46 PM                 A3          A4       V
14.          08:49 PM                 A3          A4       V
15.          10:53 PM                 A4          A1     SMS



                                       Table - 10
                                       01.12.2003

   SI No.            TIME                 FROM         TO    SMS/V
1.           12:11 PM                 A3         A1       V



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        118 of 132
2.         12:13 PM                 A3           A2           V
3.         01:40 PM                 A3           A2           V
4.       05:06:50 PM                A1           A4        SMS/V
5.         07:45 PM                 A4         Deceased       V
6.       08:39:53 PM                A1           A4        SMS/V
7.         09:03 PM                 A3           A1           V
8.         10:47 PM                 A3           A1           V
9.        10:53 PM                  A4           A1         SMS
10.       10:56 PM                  A1           A4         SMS
11.       11:51 PM           A-4 Residence       A1           V


                                       Table – 11
                                       02.12.2003

   SI No.            TIME                FROM            TO        SMS/V
1.             08:37 AM                  A4           A1         SMS
2.             10:18 AM                  A1           A4         SMS




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              119 of 132
3.             10:35 AM                  A1           A4         SMS
4.             10:39 AM                  A4           A1           V
5.             11:20 AM                  A3           A2           V
6.             11:21 AM                  A3           A1           V
7.              01:11 PM                 A1           A4         SMS
8.              01:12 PM                 A4         Deceased       V
9.              01:22 PM                 A4           A3           V
10.             03:11 PM                 A1           A3           V
11.             03:41 PM                 A4           A1         SMS
12.             03:45 PM                 A3           A2           V
13.             03:49 PM                 A3           A4           V
14.             03:50 PM                 A3           A4           V
15.             03:54 PM                 A3           A2           V




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              120 of 132
16.             04:29 PM                 A3           A2           V
17.             04:53 PM                 A3           A2           V
18.             05:05 PM                 A1           A4         SMS
19.             05:12 PM                 A4           A1         SMS
20.             05:37 PM                 A4           A1         SMS
21.             05:44 PM          A4 Residence        A1           V
22.             06:32 PM                 A1           A2           V
23.             06:37 PM                 A4           A1         SMS
24.             06:37 PM                 A1           A4         SMS
25.             06:46 PM                 A1           A4           V
26.             06:49 PM                 A4         Deceased     SMS
27.             06:50 PM          A4 Residence        A1           V
28.             06:52 PM                 A1           A2           V




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              121 of 132
29.             06:59 PM                 A1         A4     SMS
30.             07:03 PM                 A1         A2       V
31.             07:42 PM                 A1         A2       V
32.             07:44 PM                 A1         A2       V
33.             07:44 PM                 A1         A4       V
34.             07:55 PM                 A4         A2     SMS
35.             07:58 PM                 A1         A4       V
36.             07:59 PM          A4 Residence      A1       V
37.             08:06 PM          A4 Residence      A1       V
38.             08:14 PM          A4 Residence      A1       V
39.             08:15 PM          A4 Residence      A1       V
40.             08:20 PM          A4 Residence      A1       V
41.             08:28 PM                 A1         A2     SMS




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        122 of 132
42.             08:28 PM                 A1         A2     SMS
43.             08:29 PM                 A1         A2     SMS
44.             08:31 PM                 A1         A2     SMS
45.             08:40 PM                 A1         A2       V
46.             08:59 PM                 A4         A1     SMS
47.             09:05 PM                 A4         A1     SMS
48.             09:13 PM          A4 Residence      A1       V
49.             09:23 PM                 A1         A4     SMS
50.             09:24 PM                 A4         A1     SMS
51.             09:52 PM                 A1         A4     SMS
52.             09:52 PM                 A1         A4     SMS
53.             10:08 PM          A2 Residence      A1       V
54.            10:42 PM           A4 Residence      A1       V




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        123 of 132
55.            11:21 PM                  A4         A1     SMS
56.            11:21 PM                  A4         A1     SMS
57.            11:24 PM                  A1         A4     SMS
58.            11:30 PM                  A4         A1     SMS



                                       Table - 12
                                       03.12.2003

   SI No.            TIME                 FROM         TO    SMS/V
1.            8:50 AM                  A4        A1      SMS
2.           10:33 AM            A4 Residence    A1        V
3.           10:36 AM            A4 Residence    A1        V
4.           12:17 PM            A4 Residence    A1        V
5.           12:22 PM            A4 Residence    A1        V
6.           12:31 PM            A4 Residence    A1        V
7.           01:06 PM                  A4        A1      SMS




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        124 of 132
8.           01:09 PM                  A1        A4      SMS
9.           01:11 PM                  A4        A1      SMS
10.           01:32 PM            A4 Residence    A1        V
11.           01:38 PM                  A4        A1      SMS
12.           01:53 PM            A4 Residence    A1        V
13.           02:10 PM                  A1        A4      SMS
14.           02:11 PM            A4 Residence    A1        V
15.           03:07 PM                  A4        A1      SMS
16.           03:16 PM                  A1        A4        V
17.           03:23 PM                  A1        A2      SMS
18.           03:30 PM                  A1        A2      SMS
19.           03:39 PM                  A1        A2      SMS
20.           03:44 PM                  A3        A2        V
21.           04:52 PM                  A3        A1        V
22.           05:16 PM                  A3        A1        V




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        125 of 132
23.           05:22 PM                  A3          A1            V
24.           05:32 PM                  A4        Deceased        V
25.           05:33 PM                  A4        Deceased        V
26.           05:42 PM            A1 Residence      A2            V
27.           05:46 PM                  A3          A1            V
28.           05:54 PM                  A3          A2            V
29.           06:01 PM                  A3          A4            V
30.           06:16 PM                  A4        Deceased        V
31.           06:25 PM                  A4        Deceased        V
32.           06:37 PM                  A1          A4          SMS
33.           06:41 PM                  A4          A1          SMS
34.           06:46 PM                  A1          A4          SMS
35.           06:51 PM                  A4          A1          SMS
36.           06:54 PM                  A1          A4          SMS
37.           06:56 PM                  A4          A1          SMS




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters              126 of 132
38.           07:03 PM                  A1        A4      SMS
39.           07:05 PM                  A4        A1      SMS
40.           07:12 PM                  A1        A4      SMS
41.           07:21 PM                  A1        A4      SMS
42.           07:28 PM                  A1        A4      SMS
43.           07:37 PM                  A4        A1      SMS
44.           07:39 PM                  A3        A2        V
45.           07:39 PM                  A1        A4      SMS
46.           07:42 PM                  A4        A1      SMS
47.           07:44 PM                  A1        A4      SMS
48.           07:45 PM                  A1        A4      SMS
49.           08:05 PM                  A1        A4      SMS
50.           08:12 PM                  A1        A4      SMS
51.           08:13 PM                  A4        A1      SMS
52.           08:16 PM                  A1        A4      SMS




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        127 of 132
53.           08:17 PM                  A4        PW-10        V
54.           08:20 PM                  A1         A4        SMS
55.           08:22 PM                  A4         A1        SMS
56.           08:23 PM                  A1         A4        SMS
57.           08:26 PM                  A4         A1        SMS
58.           08:32 PM                  A1         A4        SMS
59.           08:33 PM                  A4         A1        SMS
60.           08:38 PM                  A1         A4        SMS
61.           08:39 PM                  A3         A2          V
62.           08:40 PM                  A4         A1        SMS
63.           08:44 PM                  A1         A4        SMS
64.           08:47 PM                  A4         A1        SMS
65.           08:49 PM                  A1         A4        SMS
66.           08:55 PM                  A4         A1        SMS
67.           08:58 PM                  A1         A4        SMS




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters           128 of 132
68.           09:07 PM                  A4                     A1         SMS
69.           09:08 PM                  A1                     A4         SMS
70.           09:10 PM                  A1                     A4         SMS
71.           09:14 PM                  A1                     A4         SMS
72.           09:25 PM                  A3                     A2           V
73.           09:39 PM                  A1                     A4           V
74.           09:56 PM                 PW-10                   A4           V


              No. of communications on the date of the incident

        Accused persons           No. of SMS           No. of calls      Total

            A1 and A4               45 SMS                9 calls         54
A1 and A3                   0                 4 calls          4
A1 and A2                3 SMS                1 call           4
A3 and A2                   0                 5 calls          5
A4 and A3                   0                 1 call           1
A4 and A2                   0                   0              0
Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                       129 of 132
           A4 and deceased              0              4 calls        4


            No. of communications between 06:37 PM to 09:39 PM

    Accused persons                No. of SMS          No. of calls   Total
A1 and A4               38 SMS                 0             38
A1 and A3                    0                 0             0
A1 and A2                    0                 0             0
A3 and A2                    0              3 calls          3
A4 and A3                    0                 0             0
A4 and A2                    0                 0             0
A4 and deceased                   0                 0             0
Table - 13
                                       04.12.2003

   SI No.           TIME                 FROM                   TO     SMS/V
1.         02:10 A.M                    A4                 A1       SMS
2.         02:10 AM                     A4                 A1       SMS



Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters                  130 of 132
3.          06:41 AM                 A4            A1     SMS
4.          06:51 AM                 A4            A1     SMS
5.          08:36 AM                 A3            A2       V
6.          08:42 AM                 A3            A1       V
7.          09:14 AM                 A3            A2       V
8.          10:04 AM                 A3            A1       V
9.          10:12 AM                 A3            A2       V
10.          03:28 PM           A1 Residence        A2       V
11.          04:18 PM                 A4            A1     SMS
12.          04:48 PM                 A1            A3       V

                                      Table - 14
                               05.12.2003 & 06.12.2003

   SI No.           DATE                 TIME          FROM       TO
1.          05.12.2003           10:05 AM          A1       A4
2.          05.12.2003           02:47 PM          A1       A2




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters          131 of 132
3.          05.12.2003           02:48 PM        A1       A2
4.          05.12.2003           02:49 PM        A1       A2
5.          05.12.2003           04:36 PM        A1       A2
6.          05.12.2003           04:37 PM        A1       A2
7.          05.12.2003           04:38 PM        A1       A2
8.          05.12.2003           04:39 PM        A1       A2
9.          06.12.2003         08:15:32 PM       A1       A4




                                            ***




Criminal Appeal No. 1029 of 2011 & Connected Matters        132 of 132