[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Vikram Bhalchandra Ghongade vs The Headmistress Girls High School And ... on 14 July, 2025
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
2025 INSC 824                                                                       Reportable

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.19436 OF 2024


             VIKRAM BHALCHANDRA GHONGADE
                                                                                ..PETITIONER
                                                       VERSUS
             THE HEADMISTRESS GIRLS
             HIGH SCHOOL AND JUNIOR
             COLLEGE, ANJI (MOTHI),
             TAH. AND DISTT. WARDHA & ORS.

                                                                             …RESPONDENTS
                                                  JUDGEMENT
K. VINOD CHANDRAN, J.
1.     The petitioner is the son of a teacher in an aided school, who

                            died while in service. The petitioner as the legal heir claims

                            gratuity under the
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
1 . The

                            petitioner’s claim was rejected by the original authority and the

                            appellate authority under the Act and also the High Court against

                            which the petitioner is before this Court.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2025.07.14
15:48:05 IST
Reason:
1
For brevity ‘the Act of 1972’
Page 1 of 10
SLP (C) No.19436 OF 2024
2.      The petitioner appeared in person and argued that the

           school has settled the General Provident Fund dues in his name

           clearly mentioning him as nominee and the question of legal

           heirship certificate never arose.
Birla Institute of Technology v.

           State of Jharkhand
2 clearly held that teachers are eligible for

           gratuity under the Act overruling the judgment placed on record

           by the learned Government Advocate reported in
Ahmedabad

           (P) Primary Teachers’ Assn. v. Administrative Officer
3 ,

           negativing the case of the Government that rules framed under
Article 309
of the Constitution of India would apply. It is

           contended that without an exemption with respect to the schools

           in Maharashtra, the Gratuity Act cannot be made inapplicable.

           Further the exemption under sub-rule (5) of Rule 4 does not apply

           since the gratuity payable under the Act is far more beneficial

           than the scheme under the Rules of 1982.
3.      The learned Government Advocate on the other hand

           submits that being an aided school, the employees are paid pay

           & allowances, while in service, by the Government so is the

           pensionary benefits including Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity
2
(2019) 4 SCC 513
3
(2004) 1 SCC 755
Page 2 of 10
SLP (C) No.19436 OF 2024
           (DCRG) paid under the Maharashtra Civil Services (Pension

           Rules), 19824 brought out under
Article 309
of the Constitution of

           India. There is no question of the petitioner being paid amounts

           under the Act of 1972. The petitioner admits that his father is

           surviving, who would also be a legal heir of the deceased. The

           petitioner hence has to produce a legal heir certificate and the

           claim of the father will also have to be dealt with. The High Court

           has in fact directed such consideration by the Government, on the

           Government’s own undertaking that it would be done

           expeditiously on an application being filed with required papers.
4.       The petitioner approached the original authority under the
Payment of Gratuity Act
who found that there was a difference in

           DA, as asserted by the petitioner in his application and the last

           pay certificate of the deceased teacher which was produced

           before the authority, which makes the claim for DCRG

           anomalous. We cannot accept this contention since the DA will

           have to be ascertained from the last pay certificate issued by the

           employer. It was also held that the Act of 1972 though would be

           applicable to teachers, the definition of employee excludes a

           person holding a post under the Central Government and State
4
For brevity ‘the Rules of 1982’
Page 3 of 10
SLP (C) No.19436 OF 2024
        Government; which the teacher was holding while she was in

        service. Finding that the petitioner’s mother’s service does not

        fall under the Act of 1972, the application was rejected.
5.      The appellate authority found the order of the controlling

        authority to be perfectly in order. It was also noticed that the

        respondent had specifically contended that the petitioner had

        never approached the respondents with a proper documentation

        as to the death and legitimacy of the claim. Before the High Court,

        the respondent submitted that it requires certain documents from

        the petitioner for processing the claim, namely, photograph and

        the undertaking to indemnify the legitimate claim, if raised by

        any other person, on submission of which, the claim would be

        processed. A direction was issued to process the claim as

        undertaken by the respondent for which the petitioner was

        directed to be present before the respondent.
6.      On the question of the teacher’s entitlement to the

        provisions of the
Gratuity Act
, it has to be held that the decision

        in Birla Institute of Technology2 puts to rest any such

        controversy. The question here would be not so much the

        entitlement to gratuity but as to whether the legal heirs of a

        deceased teacher in an aided school would be entitled to gratuity
Page 4 of 10
SLP (C) No.19436 OF 2024
        under the Act of 1972 or under the Rules of 1982. The argument of

        the State is that an aided school employee, including a teacher

        would be exempted from the definition of an employee under the

        Act. Per contra it is argued that the exemption is only to a person

        who holds a post under the Central Government or State

        Government. An aided school teacher does not hold a post under

        the State Government contends the appellant.
7.      It must be observed that a teacher in an aided school for all

        practical purposes is akin to a post under the State Government.

        Pertinent is the fact that the posts in aided schools are either

        sanctioned by the Government or approved in accordance with

        the Rules and pay and allowances are also paid by the

        Government. The aided school teachers are also entitled to some

        of the conditions of service as are applicable to Government

        teachers, with entitlement of pension, provident fund and gratuity

        as applicable, in accordance with the Rules brought out under
Article 309
of the Constitution of India. Though strictly speaking

        the teachers may not be holding a post under the State

        Government, it is akin to a post under the State Government, at

        least for the monetary benefits of pay and allowances, while in

        service, as also pension and other benefits on retirement.
Page 5 of 10
SLP (C) No.19436 OF 2024
8.      We have to also notice that sub-section (5) makes
Section 4
inapplicable, if the employees have a right to receive better

        terms of gratuity under any award or agreement or contract with

        an employer. When comparing the benefits, the question is not to

        be considered in isolation with respect to an employee and

        whether he or she would be entitled to higher amounts under the

        Act or under the Rules. The scheme has to be considered in toto

        for the purpose of determining as to which is more beneficial.
The

        Act
of 1972 prescribes under
Section 4(2)
, gratuity at the rate of

        15 days wages based on the last wages drawn for every

        completed year of service or part thereof in excess of six months.

        Insofar as the Rules of 1982 is concerned, gratuity is payable

        equal to ¼th of last pay drawn of each completed six monthly

        period of qualifying service, subject to a maximum of 16 and a

        half years. It has to be noticed that the payment of gratuity as per

        the Act of 1972 is payable to an employee on the termination of

        his employment after rendering continuous service for not less

        than five years; the minimum limit of five years being not

        applicable only when the termination is due to death or

        disablement. While DCRG under the Rules of 1982 is payable to

        the Government employee, at any time his services cease without
Page 6 of 10
SLP (C) No.19436 OF 2024
        the minimum limit of five years-service. Further, on death prior

        to the minimum period, the gratuity payable under the Rules of

        1982 is far more than that applicable under the Act of 1972, which

        is as hereunder:
Completed year of                        death gratuity
        qualifying service

                1                    …           2 ½ months’ pay
                2                    …           5 months’ pay
                3                    …           7 ½ months’ pay
                4                    …           10 months’ pay
9.      A person entering service though has a normal expectation

        of retiring on attaining the age of superannuation but there are

        vagaries of fate which would make it otherwise. We have already

        seen that on death prior to five years of service the benefits under

        the Rules of 1982 would be more beneficial to the dependents of

        the employees. Further it must be noticed that the Government

        servants including the teachers in the Government schools would

        be entitled to gratuity under the Rules of 1982 and there cannot

        be a situation where the teachers of aided schools are entitled to

        a different computation of gratuity under the Act of 1972. It is also

        to be emphasised that the Rules of 1982 enables not only DCRG

        but also pension to the employees covered under the Rules of
Page 7 of 10
SLP (C) No.19436 OF 2024
        1982, which a person entitled to the gratuity under the Act of 1972

        may not be entitled in all circumstances.
10.     We are of the opinion that the aided school teachers who

        are governed by the service conditions brought out by the State

        Government are also covered under the Rules of 1982. The extent

        of application as per the Rule 2(a) of the Rules of 1982 specifically

        makes it applicable to: “Any person for whose appointment and

        conditions of employment special provision is made by or under

        any law for the time being in force” (sic). There can hence be no

        dispute raised on the applicability of the Rules of 1982, insofar as

        aided school teachers are concerned whose pay and allowances

        and service conditions are regulated by the Government.
11.      Now we come to the actual claim raised by the petitioner,

        who is the son of the deceased teacher. The Government

        Advocate had raised a contention that the required documents

        have not been produced, especially the legal heirship certificate,

        especially in the context of the husband of the deceased teacher

        being still alive. Petitioner, however, contends that the husband

        was estranged and they have been separated for long. Be that as

        it may, a mere estrangement would not disentitle the husband

        from the benefits due to the family of a deceased employee. The
Page 8 of 10
SLP (C) No.19436 OF 2024
        petitioner, undisputedly has been paid the provident fund dues,

        for which he was notified as a nominee, as seen from the records,

        by the mother when she was alive; presumably as indicated from

        her service records. We find absolutely no reason to direct the

        petitioner to produce a legal heirship certificate since in any case

        the payment made to a nominee or one of the legal heirs, when

        there are also other legal heirs left behind, is in trust and the

        person who receives the payment as a nominee holds the money

        in trust for all the others. The nomination made by the deceased

        employee while she was alive only absolves the employer from

        finding out the different legal heirs for the purpose of making

        payments apportioning their separate shares.
12.      The death is undisputed and there is no requirement now to

        produce the death certificate also. In such circumstances, the

        petitioner shall approach the first respondent with an application

        for payment of DCRG in accordance with the Rules of 1982 along

        with an undertaking to indemnify the Government and the

        Society which runs the aided school from any claims made by any

        other legal heir, by a notarised affidavit. The same shall be

        forwarded to the Education Officer, who shall make the payment

        expeditiously. We make it clear that the petitioner shall also be
Page 9 of 10
SLP (C) No.19436 OF 2024
        paid simple interest @ 7% per year, starting from one month of

        the date of death of the employee, till the date of payment.
13.      The Special Leave Petition is allowed with the above

        modification.
14.      Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
………….……………………. J.
(SUDHANSHU DHULIA)




                                              ………….……………………. J.
(K. VINOD CHANDRAN)
       NEW DELHI;
JULY 14, 2025.
Page 10 of 10
SLP (C) No.19436 OF 2024