[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Manohar vs The State Of Maharashtra on 28 July, 2025
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
2025 INSC 900                                                            REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.___________ OF 2025
                                    (Arising out of SLP(C) No.       of 2025)
                                                              Diary No. 26900 of 2023

                            MANOHAR AND OTHERS                         …APPELLANTS

                                                     VERSUS

                            THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND
                            OTHERS                                   …RESPONDENTS

                                                       WITH

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.___________ OF 2025
                                    (Arising out of SLP(C) No.       of 2025)
                                                              Diary No. 25104 of 2025

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.___________ OF 2025
                                    (Arising out of SLP(C) No.        of 2025)
                                                              Diary No.25109 OF 2025


                                                    JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, CJI
1.     Delay condoned.
2.     Leave granted.
3.     The present batch of appeals challenge the common
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2025.07.28
15:53:29 IST
judgment and final order dated 21st April, 2022, passed by a
Reason:
learned Single Judge of the High Court of Judicature at
1
Bombay, Bench at Aurangabad (hereinafter, “High Court”),

whereby the First Appeals filed by the claimants/Appellants

came to be dismissed.
FACTS
4.      The facts, in brief, giving rise to the present appeals are

as given below:
4.1.    The Appellants, in the lead matter, are farmers and

were owners of land bearing Survey No. 103 and 104,

admeasuring 16 Hectare 79 Are situated at Village Pungala,

Taluq and District Parbhani, Maharashtra.
4.2.    It appears that the land of the Appellants and other

adjoining lands were sought to be acquired in the 1990s under

the provisions of the
Maharashtra Industrial Development Act,

1961
(hereinafter, “Act of 1961”) for setting up an Industrial

Area near Jintur town in Parbhani District.
4.3.    On 16th January, 1992, the Land Acquisition Officer &

Deputy Collector, Hingoli (hereinafter, “Land Acquisition

Officer”) issued a notice under sub-section (2) of
Section 32
of

the Act of 1961.
2
4.4.   On 6th December, 1994, the Respondent-State took

possession of the Appellants’ land and an Award came to be

passed by the Land Acquisition Officer. In terms of the said

Award, the total area subject matter of the acquisition was 89

Hectares and 44 Are and the total compensation awarded was

Rs. 45,70, 508/-.
4.5.   Being aggrieved by the quantum of compensation

awarded, the Appellants accepted the compensation under

protest and simultaneously filed a Reference under
Section 18
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter, “
LA Act
”) in the

year 1997.
4.6.   Vide judgment and award dated 7th June 2007, in

L.A.R. No. 61 of 1997, the Court of Principal District Judge,

Parbhani (hereinafter, “Reference Court”), partly allowed the

reference    with   proportionate   costs   and   directed   the

Respondent-State to pay the Appellants an amount of Rs.
46,26,013/- along with future interest @ 15% per annum from

the date of award until the payment is made on the additional

market value of Rs. 16,43,224/-.
4.7.   Aggrieved still, the Appellants filed a First Appeal

bearing No. 1179 of 2008 before the High Court.
3
4.8.    Vide impugned judgment and final order, the learned

Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the First Appeal.

4.9.    Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeals came to

be filed by way of special leave.
4.10. Vide order dated 22nd September, 2023, this Court

issued notice on the application for condonation of delay in

filing Special Leave Petition as well as on the Special Leave

Petition.
SUBMISSIONS
5.      We have heard Mr. Bharat Thakorlal Manubarwala,

learned counsel for the Appellants, Ms. Rukhmini Bobde,

learned counsel for Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and Ms.

Shyamali Gadre, learned counsel for Respondent No. 3.
6.      Mr. Manubarwala submitted that the Appellants are

farmers, who lost their only source of sustenance and ever

since are prosecuting their claim for fair, just and reasonable

compensation based on the highest exemplar dated 31st March

1990. He further submitted that the Reference Court having

found the highest exemplar sale to be a bona-fide transaction

erred in ignoring the same without any reasoning. He,

therefore, submitted that the finding of the High Court, that
4
the Reference Court considered the highest exemplar sale

deed, is contrary to the record.
7.       Mr. Manubarwala submitted that Reference Court and

High Court ought to have given benefit of the highest exemplar

sale deed to the Appellants. He further submitted that the

Courts having found that, the lands acquired in the

acquisition are situated near T-point of Nashik-Nirmal State

Highway adjacent to Jintur town which is a prime location

with percolation tank just opposite to the lands with sufficient

water, ought to have enhanced the compensation based on the

highest exemplar sale deed dated 31st March, 1990.
8.       To buttress his submissions, Mr. Manubarwala placed

reliance on the judgments of this Court in the cases of
State

of Punjab and Another v. Hans Raj (Dead) by LRs
.
Sohan

Singh and Others,1 Mehrawal Khewaji Trust (Registered),

Faridkot and Others v. State of Punjab and Others,2

Mohammad Yusuf and Others v. State of Haryana and




1 (1994) 5 SCC 734
2 (2012) 5 SCC 432
5
Others,3 and Anjani Molu Dessai v. State of Goa and

Another.4
9.       Per contra, Ms. Bobde appearing on behalf of the

Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 submitted that the Land Acquisition

Officer had considered the sale instances of similar lands in

the vicinity of the acquired lands and arrived at a proper

valuation. She, accordingly, submitted that the compensation

of acquired lands is fair and reasonable.
10.      Ms. Gadre appearing on behalf of the Respondent No.

3 submitted that the Appellants owned dry crop land which

was subject matter of acquisition by Maharashtra Industrial

Development           Corporation   (hereinafter,   “MIDC”).   She

submitted that before the Reference Court, the Appellants

relied on ten sale exemplars and the sale exemplars at Serial

Nos. 1 to 4 are pre-notification sale exemplars from Jintur

town. She further submitted that considering the total area

under acquisition by MIDC, the sale exemplars relied upon,

being of an area less than 1 Hectare, are of small plots in

Jintur town.
3 (2018) 16 SCC 105
4 (2010) 13 SCC 710
6
11.      Ms. Gadre submitted that the Reference Court has not

entered any finding that the highest exemplar sale deed dated

31st March, 1990, is a bona-fide transaction. She further

submitted that the Reference Court was justified in not

considering the highest exemplar sale deed dated 31st March,

1990, showing market value of Rs. 72,900/- per Acre, as it

reflected an unusually high rate. She further submitted that

the sale exemplars at Serial Nos. 8 to 10 show that even after

the acquisition, the market value of land had not increased in

the same proportion.
12.
In support of her submissions, Ms. Gadre placed

reliance on the judgments of this Court in the cases of Major

General Kapil Mehra and Others v. Union of India and

Another,5       Shawal   Singh     (Dead)   Through     Legal

Representatives v. Land Acquisition Collector, Himachal

Pradesh and Another,6 Anjani Molu Dessai (supra), and
Nirmal Singh and Others v. State of Haryana Through

Collector.7
5 (2015) 2 SCC 262
6 (2016) 12 SCC 619
7 (2015) 2 SCC 160
7
ISSUE FOR CONSIDERATION
13.    On a perusal of the material placed on record, in light

of the submissions advanced by the learned counsel appearing

on behalf of the parties, the only issue that falls for our

consideration is whether the impugned judgment and final

order dated 21st April, 2022, passed by the High Court is

sustainable or not?
ANALYSIS
14.    The land of the Appellants and other adjoining lands

were acquired in the 1990s under the provisions of the Act of

1961 for setting up an Industrial Area near Jintur town in

Parbhani District of Maharashtra. The Land Acquisition

Officer, on 6th December, 1994, awarded compensation to the

tune of Rs. 10,800/- per Acre (or Rs. 27,000/- per Hectare).

However, not being satisfied with the compensation awarded,

the Appellants preferred a petition under
Section 18
of the LA

Act before the Reference Court, claiming enhancement of

compensation determined by the Land Acquisition Officer.
15.    On a perusal of the judgment and award passed by the

Reference Court dated 7th June, 2007, it appears that the case

of the Appellants was that the Land Acquisition Officer has not
8
considered that the land in question is touching the outskirts

of municipal limits of Jintur city and having non-agricultural

potential. It was further their case that Village Pungala is only

one kilometre away from Jintur city so the Appellants, being

farmers, had a good market for selling their agricultural

produce.
16.       It is pertinent to note that to substantiate their claim,

the Appellants led evidence by way of affidavit. They placed on

record the following sale instances:
S. No.    Date of Sale    Name of    Area Sold   Price per Acre
              Deed          Village
1.       28/04/1989      Jintoor      20 R      Rs. 40,000/-
2.       22/05/1989      Jintoor      39 R      Rs. 41,000/-
3.       22/05/1989      Jintoor      80 R      Rs. 40,000/-
4.      31/03/1990      Jintoor      96 R       Rs. 72,900/-
5.       28/05/1990      Wazur        20 R      Rs. 40,000/-
6.       05/10/1990     Bhogaon       40 R      Rs. 25,000/-
7.       11/02/1992 Panghari          11 R      Rs. 54,500/-
8.       16/04/1992 Panghari          47 R      Rs. 18,000/-
9.       31/12/1992      Jintoor      26 R      Rs. 61,500/-
10.      06/03/1993      Jintoor      12 R      Rs. 60,000/-
17.       It is further to be noted that though the Respondent-

State denied the correctness of the above documents (sale
9
instances), but no rebuttal evidence was placed on record by

them.
18.     After deciding the issue of limitation in the favour of

the Appellants, the Reference Court found that the lands

under acquisition are located at a short distance from Jintur

town, which is a district headquarter; the purpose for which

the lands were acquired was for development of Industrial

Area and that the lands which were acquired were having non-

agricultural potential. Further, the Reference Court found that

the location of the lands is suitable for industrial units and

that a water facility is available just adjacent to the lands.
19.     From paragraph 28 onwards, the Reference Court has

dealt with the most material piece of evidence placed on record

by the Appellants viz., the sale instances as specified above in

tabular form. The Reference Court observed that the material

date on which the market value of land is to be determined will

be 19th July, 1990, when firstly the notification under sub-

section (2) of
Section 32
of the Act of 1961 was issued. The

Court, accordingly, came to the finding that the sale instances

prior to the aforesaid date of notification will be of relevance to

the matter. Thereafter, the Reference Court observed that the
10
sale instances at Sr. Nos. 1 to 3 and 4 to 6 are prior to or

nearby to the notification under the Act of 1961 and that the

lands which are covered under the sale deeds are from Jintur

town. The Court, therefore, came to the finding that the sale

instances relied on by the claimants can be relied on and acted

upon and that the sale deeds of lesser area of land can also be

considered for determining the market value.
20.    Pertinently, the Reference Court found that the

claimants have placed on record certified copies of the sale

deeds and that the same has got presumptive value under
Section 51A
of the LA Act. The Court further found that no

rebuttal evidence has been led by the Respondent-State.

Accordingly, the Reference Court came to the conclusion that

the sale instances covered under the sale deeds came to be

effected in due course of business in routine manner between

willing purchaser and seller and, therefore, the transaction

covered therein can be relied upon and acted upon to

determine the market value of the land.
21.    Surprisingly,   after   reaching   till   this   point,   the

Reference Court in paragraph 31, while determining the price

of the claimants’ land, came to the finding that since the price
11
of land sold under the sale deeds at Sr. Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 5,

was around Rs. 40,000/- per Acre i.e., Rs. 1,00,000/- per

Hectare so by applying the deduction of 20% in the price, the

market value of dry crop land, at the time of acquisition, was

ascertained as Rs. 32,000/- per Acre (or Rs. 80,000/- per

Hectare) and the price of irrigated land, at the time of

acquisition, was ascertained as Rs. 40,000/- per Acre (or Rs.

1,00,000/- per Hectare). In the result, compensation to be

awarded for the land of the Appellants was enhanced to Rs.

32,000/- per Acre.
22.    It can, therefore, be seen that the highest exemplar sale

deed dated 31st March, 1990, showing market value of Rs.

72,900/- per Acre, available at Sr. No. 4 and relied upon by

the claimants as a bona-fide sale instance was completely

overlooked by the Reference Court. It would, however, have

been a different matter if the Reference Court, for reasons to

be recorded by it, came to a finding that the sale instance at

Sr. No. 4 was not a bona-fide one or a sham/bogus one which

could not be relied upon.
23.    Being aggrieved by the judgment and award of the

Reference Court, the claimants/Appellants filed a First Appeal
12
before the High Court. The learned Single Judge of the High

Court, however, finding no error in the approach and/or

outcome of the judgment and award passed by the Reference

Court dismissed the batch of appeals filed by the claimants.

Aggrieved thereby, the Appellants filed the present appeals by

way of special leave.
24.     To ascertain whether the impugned judgment and final

order passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court is

sustainable or not, it would be apposite to refer to paragraphs

45-46 and 49-50 thereof, which read thus:
“45. Now coming to the determination of the market
      value of the acquired lands and sale instances
      produced by the claimants. It is not in dispute that
      the acquired lands are situated at village Pungala.
      The compulsory land acquisition is made according
      to the Act of 1961 for the public purpose for
      establishment of Jintur industrial area. According to
      the evidence of claimants, village Pungala is at a
      distance of 2 k.m. away from Jintur, which is a
      taluka place, where the market committee, Wakhar
      Mahamandal, dairy business and other basic
      facilities are available. The oral evidence of claimants
      regarding distance in between the acquired land and
      Jintur town is not at all challenged by way of cross-
      examination initiated by the learned A.G.P. As such,
      there is no difficulty to accept the oral evidence
      produced by the claimants that the acquired
      lands are at a distance of 2 k.m. away from the
      Jintur town. Jintur is a town. There is a
      municipality and all the facilities are available. It
      is a taluka headquarter.
13
46. It is material to note that the acquired lands are
selected for acquisition. It is evident from the
testimony of the claimants that the acquired
lands are more convenient for the establishment
of M.I.D.C. Jintur. Water facility is also available
at a short distance from the acquired lands. The
stock of evidence produced by the claimants
regarding the proximity of the acquired lands
with Jintur town coupled with facilities available
and advantages is not any way challenged by way
of cross-examination. Certainly, the argument
advanced by the learned counsel for the M.I.D.C. that
the acquired lands are at a distance of 5 k.m. away
from the Jintur town cannot be accepted. The
claimants have also placed on record the
documentary evidence in the nature of village map of
Pungala and map of Jintur town in order to show the
proximity. The learned reference Court has rightly
considered the village map of Pungala and map of
Jintur town and the location of acquired lands in
para 11 of the impugned judgment. It is rightly held
by the reference Curt (sic) that the acquired lands
are adjacent to Jintur town. There are hills in
between the lands and village Pungala and the
acquired lands and they are near to Jintur town
rather than from Pungala. The acquired lands are
situated near T-point of Nashik-Nirmal State
Highway. It is also observed by the reference
Court that the acquired land has N.A.
potentiality. The percolation tank is just opposite
to the acquired lands, it has sufficient water. As
such, selection of the acquired lands for
acquisition for establishment of M.I.D.C.
indicates their prime location as observed by the
reference Court.
…
49. Now, the source which is available is exemplars,
which are on record to determine the market value of
the acquired lands. On going through the
impugned judgments, it is noticed that the
reference Court has considered in all ten
exemplars as shown in para 10 of the impugned
14
judgment. However, not considered the sale
instance at Sr. No. 4 dated 31.03.1990, which is
from Jintur pertaining to 96 R land sold for the
consideration of Rs. 72,900/-, which is found to
be the highest sale instance in the chart. As
pointed earlier, the market value of the acquired land
is to be determined on the date of notification under
Section 32
of the Act of 1961, which is published in
the Government gazette on 19.07.1990.
50. Even though the sale instance at Sr. No. 8 of the
chart is from the village Pungala, it is of post
notification and must be kept out for consideration.
The reference Court has considered the sale
instances at Sr. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 since they
are found nearby to the notification under
Section 32(2)
of the Act of 1961. In para No. 31 of
the impugned judgment, the reference Court has
also considered the sale instance at Sr. No. 4
referred above
. On going through para nos. 29 to
32 of the impugned judgment, it would be clear
that the reference Court has rightly considered
the sale instances at Sr. No. 1 to 3 and 4 to 6 for
determination of market value. The reference
Court has also rightly deducted 20% by considering
the proximity of the land with Jintur town coupled
with advantages and determined the market value of
the acquired lands at Rs. 1,00,000/- per Hectare for
irrigated lands and Rs. 80,000/- per Hectare for dry
lands, which appear to be adequate and reasonable
having regard to the location, geographical situation
coupled with advantages and proximity to Jintur
town and nearby rates. The exercise of determining
the market value of the acquired lands made by
the reference Court cannot be said to be
erroneous. The reference Curt (sic) has attempted to
award adequate compensation to the claimants,
whose lands came to be acquired by way of
compulsory acquisition for the industrial area of
Jintur town. The reference Court has also awarded
the statutory benefits available under the
Land
Acquisition Act, 1894
including solatium.”
                                (emphasis supplied)
15
25.    It can thus be seen that though the High Court

recorded, in paragraph 49, that the Reference Court

considered in all ten exemplars and that it did not consider

the sale instance at Sr. No. 4 dated 31st March 1990, which is

from Jintur, in the immediate next paragraph i.e., paragraph

50, the High Court takes a diametrically opposite view that the

Reference Court has considered the sale instance at Sr. No.

4 since they are found nearby to the notification under the Act

of 1961. Not only that but the High Court, placing reliance on

paragraph 31 of the judgment and award passed by the

Reference Court, reiterated that it has considered the sale

instance at Sr. No. 4.
26.    Having already referred to paragraph 31 of the

judgment and award passed by the Reference Court

hereinbefore, we have no difficulty in holding that the finding

recorded by the learned Single Judge of the High Court in

paragraph 50 of the impugned judgment and final order is

erroneous.
27.    The Reference Court having taken note of the ten sale

exemplars ought to have dealt with the sale instance at Serial

No. 4, however, it did not. That being the case, the High Court
16
should have taken note of the same and taken into

consideration the sale instance at Sr. No. 4, however, the High

Court having clearly observed that the Reference Court did not

take into consideration the sale instance at Sr. No.4, in

paragraph 49, recorded an incorrect finding in paragraph 50

by holding that the Reference Court took into consideration

the sale instance at Sr. No. 4.
28.    Taking note of the same, we have no hesitation in

holding that the impugned judgment and order dated 21st

April, 2022, is not at all sustainable.
29.    Having come to the above conclusion, we could have

very well remitted the matter back to the High Court for

consideration afresh, however, taking into consideration the

fact that the Appellants are farmers and that their land was

acquired by the Respondent-State in the early 1990s, we are

of the view that it would be appropriate that we ourselves

consider the case of the Appellants as to whether they ought

to be granted compensation on the basis of the highest

exemplar sale deed dated 31st March, 1990, showing market

value of Rs. 72,900/- per Acre.
17
30.       In this respect, it will be appropriate to refer to the

judgments of this Court relied upon by the learned counsel for

the parties.
31.       In the case of Anjani Molu Dessai (supra) this Court,

while referring to two previous decisions of this Court, held

thus:
“20. The legal position is that even where there
        are several exemplars with reference to similar
        lands, usually the highest of the exemplars, which
        is a bona fide transaction, will be considered.
        Where however there are several sales of similar
        lands whose prices range in a narrow bandwidth,
        the average thereof can be taken, as representing
        the market price. But where the values disclosed
        in respect of two sales are markedly different, it
        can only lead to an inference that they are with
        reference to dissimilar lands or that the lower
        value sale is on account of undervaluation or
        other price depressing reasons. Consequently,
        averaging cannot be resorted to. We may refer to
        two decisions of this Court in this behalf.
21. In M.           Vijayalakshmamma              Rao
        Bahadur v. Collector [(1969) 1 MLJ 45 (SC)] , a three-
Judge Bench of this Court observed that the proper
        method for evaluation of market value is by taking
        the highest of the exemplars and not by averaging of
        different types of sale transactions. This Court held:
(MLJ pp. 46-47)
             “It seems to us that there is substance
             in the first contention of Mr Ram
             Reddy. After all when the land is being
             compulsorily taken away from a person,
             he is entitled to say that he should be
             given the highest value which similar
             land in the locality is shown to have
18
fetched in a bona fide transaction
     entered      into   between     a   willing
     purchaser and a willing seller near
     about the time of the acquisition. It is
     not disputed that the transaction
     represented by Ext. R-19 was a few
     months prior to the notification under
Section 4
that it was a bona fide
     transaction and that it was entered into
     between a willing purchaser and a willing
     seller. The land comprised in the sale deed
     is 11 grounds and was sold at Rs. 1961
     per ground. The land covered by Ext. R-27
     was also sold before the notification but
     after the land comprised in Ext. R-19 was
     sold. It is true that this land was sold at
     Rs. 1096 per ground. This, however, is
     apparently because of two circumstances.
     One is that betterment levy at Rs. 500 per
     ground had to be paid by the vendee and
     the other that the land comprised in it is
     very much more extensive, that is about
     93 grounds or so. Whatever that may be,
     it seems to us to be only fair that where
     sale deeds pertaining to different
     transactions are relied on behalf of the
     Government, that representing the highest
     value should be preferred to the rest
     unless there are strong circumstances
     justifying a different course. In any case
     we see no reason why an average of two
     sale deeds should have been taken in this
     case.”
22.
In
State of Punjab v. Hans Raj
[(1994) 5 SCC 734]
this Court held: (SCC p. 736, para 4)
     “4.    Having    given     our    anxious
     consideration     to     the    respective
     contentions, we are of the considered view
     that the learned Single Judge of the High
     Court committed a grave error in working
     out average price paid under the sale
19
transactions to determine the market
           value of the acquired land on that basis.
As the method of averaging the prices
           fetched by sales of different lands of
           different kinds at different times, for fixing
           the market value of the acquired land, if
           followed, could bring about a figure of
           price which may not at all be regarded as
           the price to be fetched by sale of acquired
           land. One should not have, ordinarily
           recourse to such method. It is well
           settled that genuine and bona fide sale
           transactions in respect of the land
           under acquisition or in its absence the
           bona fide sale transactions proximate
           to the point of acquisition of the lands
           situated in the neighbourhood of the
           acquired lands possessing similar value
           or utility taken place between a willing
           vendee and the willing vendor which
           could be expected to reflect the true
           value, as agreed between reasonable
           prudent persons acting in the normal
           market conditions are the real basis to
           determine the market value.””
                                        (emphasis supplied)
32.     Next, in the case of Mehrawal Khewaji Trust (supra),

this Court held thus:
“17. It is clear that when there are several exemplars
      with reference to similar lands, it is the general rule
      that the highest of the exemplars, if it is satisfied that
      it is a bona fide transaction, has to be considered and
      accepted. When the land is being compulsorily taken
      away from a person, he is entitled to the highest
      value which similar land in the locality is shown to
      have fetched in a bona fide transaction entered into
      between a willing purchaser and a willing seller near
      about the time of the acquisition. In our view, it
20
seems to be only fair that where sale deeds pertaining
        to different transactions are relied on behalf of the
        Government, the transaction representing the
        highest value should be preferred to the rest unless
        there are strong circumstances justifying a different
        course. It is not desirable to take an average of
        various sale deeds placed before the authority/court
        for fixing fair compensation.”
33.       It can thus be seen that it is a settled position of law

that when there are several exemplars with reference to

similar land, usually the highest of the exemplars, which is a

bona-fide transaction, will be considered. The same was

reiterated in the judgment of this Court in the case of

Mohammad Yusuf (supra).
34.       The learned counsel for the Respondent No. 3 (MIDC),

arguing in support of the impugned judgment and final order

dated 21st April, 2022, in addition to relying on the judgment

of this Court in Anjani Molu Dessai (supra) referred to three

other judgments of this Court.
35.       Firstly, she relied on paragraph 20 of the judgment of

this Court in the case of Kapil Mehra (supra), which reads

thus:
“20. Where the lands acquired are of different type
        and different locations, averaging is not permissible.
        But where there are several sales of similar lands,
21
more or less, at the same time, whose prices have
      marginal variation, averaging thereof is permissible.
      For the purpose of fixation of fair and reasonable
      market value of any type of land, abnormally high
      value or abnormally low value sales should be
      carefully discarded. If the number of sale deeds of
      the same locality and the same period with short
      intervals are available, the average price of the
      available number of sale deeds shall be considered as
      a fair and reasonable market price.”
                                      (emphasis supplied)
36.     It was sought to be contended that sale exemplar at Sr.

No. 4 gave an abnormally high figure of Rs. 72,900/- per Acre

and that this sale exemplar has rightly been excluded from

consideration by the Courts below. Further, it was also

contended    that   even   the   maximum    increase   in   sale

consideration in the later years i.e., till 1993 does not match

up to the amount of sale exemplar at Sr. No. 4.
37.     Secondly, relying on the judgment of this Court in the

case of Shawal Singh (supra), specifically paragraph 7

thereof, it was sought to be contended by the learned counsel

for Respondent No. 3 (MIDC) that the claimants/Appellants

did not lead any evidence to show that the sale exemplar at

Sr. No. 4 is a bona-fide transaction. Paragraph 7 of Shawal

Singh (supra) reads thus:
22
“7. The decision of this Court in
Mehrawal Khewaji
      Trust [Mehrawal Khewaji Trust v. State of Punjab
,
      (2012) 5 SCC 432 : (2012) 3 SCC (Civ) 177] with
      regard to highest rate of comparable sales is subject
      to certain well-defined and well-understood
      exceptions apart from the necessity of proving
      such sales to be bona fide as indicated in the
      decisions of this Court. The extent of the area
      transferred would certainly be a relevant factor which
      issue stands concluded by findings of fact recorded
      by the learned Reference Court.”
                                       (emphasis supplied)
38.     Thirdly, relying on paragraph 20 of Anjani Molu

Dessai (supra) which has been reproduced hereinbefore so

also paragraph 18 of
Nirmal Singh
(supra), the learned

counsel for Respondent No. 3 (MIDC) contended that the

Reference Court has rightly used the principle of averaging of

sale price of sale exemplars at Sr. Nos. 1 to 3 and 5 for

determination of market value of the acquired land as the same

is a well-established principle of law
laid down by
this Court in

several cases.
For ease of reference, paragraph 18 of
Nirmal

Singh
(supra) is reproduced and it reads thus:
“18. Keeping in mind the guidelines
laid down by
this Court in the catena of cases referred to supra,
      we are of the opinion to determine just and
      reasonable compensation for the acquired land on
      the basis of the sale instances as submitted by the
      appellants by taking the average of the sale
      considerations mentioned therein that are relevant
      to the date of issue of notification under
Section 4
of
23
the Act. However, the same is to be determined
      keeping in mind that developmental costs are higher
      for larger areas of land as compared to small portions
      of land. The rate of compensation must be subject to
      deductions towards developmental purpose that will
      have to be incurred by the respondent State.”
                                      (emphasis supplied)
39.     Insofar as the contention of the learned counsel for

Respondent No. 3 (MIDC) that the Courts below rightly

excluded the sale exemplar at Serial No. 4 on account of it

being of an abnormally high value is concerned, we outrightly

reject the said contention.
40.     It is well-settled that the compensation payable to the

owner of the land is determined by reference to the price which

a seller might reasonably expect to obtain from a willing

purchaser. It is further settled law that the land acquired has

to be valued not only with reference to its condition at the time

of notification under
Section 4
of the LA Act but its potential

value must be taken into account. In this respect, the sale

deeds of lands situated in the vicinity and the comparable

benefits and advantages which they have, provide a ready

method of computing the market value.
41.     In the instant case, it is not in dispute that the land

was acquired for public purpose for the establishment of Jintur
24
Industrial Area. Further, the lands in question are situated at

village Pungala, which is at a distance of 2 kilometres from

Jintur, a taluka place and where the market committee,

Wakhar Mahamandal, dairy business and other basic facilities

are available. Not only that but the Courts below found that

the lands acquired are situated near T-point of Nashik-Nirmal

State Highway; that the acquired land has non-agricultural

potential and that a percolation tank just opposite to the

acquired lands, having sufficient water, could be found. It

would also be relevant to note that the sale instances at Sr.

Nos.1, 2 and 3 are of April/May of 1989 and the notice under
Section 32(2)
of the Act of 1961 was issued on 19th July 1990,

as such, the sale exemplar at Sr. No.4 i.e., the sale instance

dated 31st March 1990, is the most proximate to the date of

transaction. Further, the sale instances at Sr. Nos.9 and 10,

from Jintur, show that after the notice under the Act of 1961,

there has been a very high rise in the prices of the land in the

nearby areas. We are, therefore, of the considered opinion that

the land of the Appellants was situated in a prime location and

they deserve the benefit of the highest sale exemplar.
25
42.    On the same lines, the contention of the learned

counsel for the Respondent No. 3 (MIDC) that the maximum

increase in the sale consideration in the later years (i.e., till

1993) does not match up to the amount of sale exemplar at Sr.

No. 4 dated 31st March 1990 is also liable to be rejected. It can

clearly be seen from the aforementioned table that the sale

instances at Sr. Nos. 9 and 10 are from Jintur and they reflect

sale consideration of Rs. 61,500/- and 60,000/- respectively,

which are closer to the highest sale exemplar at Sr. No. 4

having value of Rs. 72,900/-, than they are to the sale

instances at Sr. Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 5 which are having value of

around Rs. 40,000/-.
43.    Insofar as the contention of the learned counsel for

Respondent No. 3 (MIDC) qua sale instance at Sr. No. 4 not

being a bona-fide transaction is concerned, the same is also

rejected on the basis of the provision contained in
Section 51A
of the LA Act as per which the certified copy of a document can

be accepted as evidence of transaction recorded in the said

document.
44.    Further, it is clear from the judgment and award

passed by the Reference Court that though the Respondent-
26
State denied the correctness of above documents, it did not

lead any rebuttal evidence. In light of the same, the contention

of the learned counsel for Respondent No. 3 (MIDC) on this

count is also rejected.
45.    Finally, insofar as the contention of the learned counsel

for the Respondent No. 3 (MIDC) qua the method of

computation of the compensation is concerned, we are of the

view that the same does not merit acceptance.
46.    It was sought to be contended by the learned counsel

for the Respondent No. 3 (MIDC) that the Reference Court has

rightly used the principle of averaging of sale price of sale

exemplars at Sr. No. 1, 2, 3 and 5 for determination of market

value of acquired land. However, it is clear from a reading of

paragraph 20 of the judgment of this Court in the case of

Anjani Molu Dessai (supra) that the legal position is that even

where there are several exemplars with reference to similar

lands, usually the highest of the exemplars, which is a bona-

fide transaction will be considered. Further, only where there

are several sales of similar lands whose prices range in a

narrow bandwidth, the average thereof can be taken, as

representing the market price. The said position of law was
27
reiterated in the judgment of this Court in the cases of

Mehrawal Khewaji Trust (supra) and Mohammad Yusuf

(supra).
47.    Even in the case of Kapil Mehra (supra), relied upon

by the learned counsel for Respondent No. 3 (MIDC), it has

been held that where there are several sales of similar lands,

more or less, at the same time, whose prices have marginal

variation, averaging thereof is permissible.
48.    The position of law being thus and further on account

of the fact that the lands acquired in the present case are in a

prime location, we are of the considered opinion that no

occasion arose for the Reference Court to deviate from the well-

settled position of law and that the claimants/Appellants

deserve the benefit of the highest sale exemplar dated 31 st

March 1990. Not only that but in the event, the values of the

sale instances taken into consideration by the Reference Court

had a “marginal variation”, averaging thereof would have been

permissible. But the sale exemplars taken into consideration

by the Reference Court, in the present case, were the ones from

Sr. Nos. 1 to 6 and they ranged from Rs. 25,000/- per Acre to
28
Rs. 72,900/- per Acre. In such a case, the averaging thereof

was clearly not permissible.
49.    It is further to be noted that only because the Reference

Court, without recording any reason, decided to completely

overlook/omit the sale instance at Sr. No. 4 and only took into

consideration the sale instances at Sr. Nos.1, 2, 3 and 5, which

are having value of Rs.40,000/- per Acre, Rs.41,000/- per

Acre, Rs.40,000/- per Acre and Rs.40,000/- per Acre

respectively; the averaging of these sale instances, having a

marginal variation, could have been envisaged by the

Reference Court. We are, however, of the considered opinion

that such an approach taken by the Reference Court was

completely impermissible. Even in the case of
Nirmal Singh
(supra), relied upon by the learned counsel for Respondent No.

3 (MIDC), where this Court took the average of the sale

considerations mentioned therein, the range of prices was in a

narrow bandwidth. The contention of the learned counsel for

Respondent No.3 (MIDC) qua the method of computation of the

compensation is, therefore, also rejected.
50.    Having held thus, we, however, cannot lose sight of the

aspect that the ten sale exemplars placed before the Reference
29
Court by the claimants/Appellants are of small plots of land in

Jintur town, each of them being less than 1 Hectare. The

Reference Court, therefore, correctly came to the conclusion

that while accepting the sale instances a reasonable reduction

requires to be made. As such, the land which is acquired being

much larger in area, the Reference Court applied a deduction

of 20% in the price determined. Being in agreement with the

same, while accepting the sale exemplar at Sr. No. 4 dated 31st

March 1990, and having market value of Rs. 72,900/- per

Acre, we deem it appropriate to apply a deduction of 20% i.e.,

Rs. 14,580/- per Acre.
51.      In the result, we pass the following order:
i.    The present batch of appeals are allowed;
ii.    The judgment and final order dated 21st April, 2022,

             passed by the learned Single Judge of the High

             Court is quashed and set aside;
iii.   The judgment and award dated 7th June, 2007

             passed by the Reference Court is quashed and set

             aside;
30
iv.   We direct that the compensation granted to the

            Appellants be enhanced from Rs. 32,000/- per Acre

            to Rs. 58,320/- per Acre; and

      v.    We further direct that all other consequential

            benefits of solatium and interest on the enhanced

            compensation in terms of
Section 23
(1-A), 23(2) and

            28 of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
, be granted to

            the Appellants.
52.     Pending applications, if any, are disposed of.
..............................CJI
                                                         (B.R. GAVAI)




                              .............................................J
                               (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)
NEW DELHI;
JULY 28, 2025.
31