[Cites
7
, Cited by
45
]
Supreme Court of India
Registrar, Cooperative Socieites vs F.X. Fernando on 15 February, 1994
Equivalent citations: 1994 SCC (2) 746, JT 1994 (1) 666, AIRONLINE 1994 SC 94, 1994 (2) SCC 746, 1994 SCC (L&S) 756, (1994) 1 SERV LR 820, (1994) 68 FAC LR 769, (1994) 1 LAB LN 847, (1994) 1 CUR LR 540, (1994) 1 SCR 959, (1994) 2 SCT 775, (1994) 1 LAB LJ 819, (1994) 1 JT 666, (1994) 27 ATC 188, 1994 UJ(SC) 1 460, 1994 UJ(SC) 460, (1994) 1 SCR 959 (SC), (1994) 1 JT 666 (SC)
Author:
S.  Mohan
Bench:
S.  Mohan
PETITIONER:
REGISTRAR, COOPERATIVE SOCIEITES

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
F.X. FERNANDO

DATE OF JUDGMENT15/02/1994

BENCH:
MOHAN, S. (J)
BENCH:
MOHAN, S. (J)
VENKATACHALLIAH, M.N.(CJ)
FAIZAN UDDIN (J)

CITATION:
 1994 SCC  (2) 746	  JT 1994 (1)	666
 1994 SCALE  (1)601


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
MOHAN, J.- Leave granted.
2.   The facts leading to present appeal are as under:
3.   The  respondent  joined the Cooperative  Department  as
Deputy Registrar in the year 1969.  He was promoted as Joint
Registrar  in 1981.  He became the  Joint  Registrar/Special
Officer	 of the Park Town Cooperative Wholesale Stores	Ltd.
in 1984.
4.During  his  tenure  as  the	Joint	Registrar/Special
Officer	 of  Park  Town Cooperative  Wholesale	Stores	Ltd.
complaints  were  received by the  Director,  Vigilance	 and
Anti-Corruption Department.  The said Department  approached
the Registrar, Cooperative Societies to furnish the  details
to investigate into the alleged irregularities.	  Thereupon,
the   Registrar	 furnished  the	 relevant   material.	 The
Vigilance  and Anti-Corruption Department was  requested  to
complete  the  inquiry	on  or	before	December  31,  1987.
However, no progress was made in that direction.
5.The  Government  of  Tamil Nadu by  its  GOMs	 No.  185
Personnel and Administrative Reforms Department dated  March
17,  1988  amended Rule 12 of the Tamil Nadu  Civil  Service
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules.  Under the	said
GO,  the powers imposing minor penalty came to be  conferred
on the Heads of the Departments.
6.Finally,  the Vigilance and Anti-Corruption  Department
submitted  its	detailed report.  On an examination  of	 the
same, the Government issued
748
GOMs No. 371 dated December 20, 1988 directing the Registrar
to   take  disciplinary	 action	 against   the	 respondent.
Thereupon  the Registrar issued the charge memo dated  March
20,   1989.    The  Registrar	(Marketing,   Planning	 and
Development) was appointed as Enquiry Officer to conduct the
inquiry.  The respondent appeared before the Enquiry Officer
from  January  24, 1990 to March 20, 1990.  He	also  cross-
examined one witness.
7.On  March  20, 1990, he made a  representation  to  the
appellant  alleging bias against the Enquiry  Officer.	 The
complaint  was rejected.  Again, another  representation  to
the same effect was made.  That was also rejected on May  8,
1990 and the Registrar called upon the respondent to  appear
before	the Enquiry Officer.  At this stage, the  respondent
moved  an application OA No. 1294 of 1990 before  the  Tamil
Nadu Administrative Tribunal to quash the order dated May 8,
1990  calling  him  by the Registrar to	 appear	 before	 the
Enquiry Officer.
8.By  the  impugned  order  dated  March  19,  1991,  the
Tribunal  held	that the proceedings under Rule	 17(b)	were
liable	to be set aside on the ground that the Registrar  of
Cooperative Societies was not empowered to impose even minor
penalty.   However,  it	 was  open  to	the  Government	  as
Disciplinary Authority to initiate fresh action by issuing a
charge memo and conclude the proceedings within a period  of
six  months.   Aggrieved by this order,	 the  present  civil
appeal has come to be preferred.
9.The  learned counsel for the appellant would urge  that
the Tribunal has completely ignored GOMs No. 185 dated March
17, 1988 by which the Government had delegated the power  to
the Heads of the Departments to impose minor penalties.
10.Besides,  by GOMs No. 371 dated December 20, 1988,  the
Government  directed the Registrar to frame charges  against
the  respondent and to initiate inquiry.  Without regard  to
this  GO, the Tribunal has held as though Registrar  on	 his
own  under  Rule 17(b) had issued a charge  memo  for  which
there was no power.
11.The	learned	 counsel for the respondent  would  submit
that  if the Disciplinary Authority is the  Government,	 the
Registrar  is  not  competent to frame	charges	 and  direct
inquiry proceedings.
12.We  will now proceed to consider whether  the  impugned
order of the Tribunalis	 correct.   The finding	 of  the
Tribunal is as follows:
"The Joint Registrar of Cooperative  Societies
	      is   a   State   service	 officer   and	 the
	      Disciplinary    Authority	  is	the    State
	      Government.  Therefore, proceedings under Rule
	      17(b)  of	 the  T.N.C.S.	(CA)  Rules  can  be
	      initiated	 only  by the  person  empowered  to
	      impose  the penalties specified in that  rule.
	      The  rules  also contain a provision  that  an
	      authority	 competent to impose  the  penalties
	      mentioned	 in  Rule  17(a)  may  institute   a
	      disciplinary   action  in	 respect  of   major
	      penalties	 also.	However, in this  case,	 the
	      Registrar	 of  Cooperative  Societies  is	 not
	      empowered	 even to impose the minor  penalties
	      and   therefore  initiation  of	disciplinary
	      proceeding  by him by issue of a	charge	memo
	      and proceeding further by
749
appointment  of Enquiry Officer is beyond	 his
	      powers and therefore on this ground alone	 the
	      proceedings have to be set aside.	 It is	open
	      to  the  Disciplinary  Authority,	 viz.,	 the
	      Government   to  initiate	 action	 afresh	  by
	      issuing  the charge memo and  after  obtaining
	      the   written   statement	  of   defence	 and
	      examination thereof order inquiry if necessary
	      by    designating	  the	Enquiry	   Officer."
(emphasis supplied)
13.  This  finding is clearly wrong since it has  not  taken
note  of  the  amendment made to Tamil	Nadu  Civil  Service
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules amending Rule  12
whereunder  the	 Heads	of the Departments  are	 enabled  to
impose	minor penalties.  We will now extract both  original
Rule  12  and  the  notification issued	 in  GOMs  No.	185,
Personnel    and   Administrative    Reform    (Personnel-N)
Department, dated March 17, 1988 amending the said rule:
"12.   The State Government may impose any  of
	      the  penalty specified in items (i) and  (iii)
	      to  (viii) in Rule 8 on members of  the  State
	      Service:
Provided	that  if the Governor of  Madras  is
	      himself  the  appointing	authority  for	 any
	      service or a class or category thereof, he may
	      himself  impose any of the said  penalties  on
	      members of that service, class or category, as
	      the case may be:
Provided	further	 that  in the  case  of	 the
	      members  of the Services specified  in  column
	      (I)  of  Appendix	 IV  to	 these	rules,	 the
	      authority	  which	 may  impose  any   of	 the
	      penalties mentioned in items (i), (iii) so far
	      as it relates to withholding of increments and
(v)  in  Rule  8	shall  be  the	 authorities
	      specified	 in  the  corresponding	 entries  in
	      columns (2), (3) and (4) thereof."
"NOTIFICATION
	      In  exercise  of the powers conferred  by	 the
	      proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution  of
	      India, the Governor of Tamil Nadu hereby makes
	      the  following  amendment to  the	 Tamil	Nadu
	      Civil  Services (Classification,	Control	 and
	      Appeal)  Rules, in Volume I of the Tamil	Nadu
	      Service Manual, 1977:
Amendment
	      In  the said rules, Rule 12 shall be  numbered
	      as  sub-rule (1) of that rule and	 after	sub-
	      rule (1) as so renumbered, the following	sub-
	      rule shall be added; namely:
`(2)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in
	      these  rules and in Appendix IV, the Heads  of
	      Departments  concerned may impose any  of	 the
	      penalties	  mentioned  in	 items	(i),   (iii)
	      insofar  as  it  relates	to  withholding	  of
	      increments and (v) in Rule 8 on all members of
	      the State Service other than such members	 who
	      are   immediately	  below	  such	 Heads	  of
	      Departments.
14.  The punishments that are referred to above are  found
in Rule 8 of Madras Civil Services (Classification,  Control
and Appeal) Rules as under:
750
"8. (i) Censure.
(iii) Withholding of increments or  promotion,
	      including stoppage at an efficiency bar.
(v)(a) Recovery from pay of the whole or	part
	      of  any  pecuniary loss caused  to  the  State
	      Government  or the Central Government or to  a
	      local body by negligence or breach of  orders,
	      or
(b)Recovery   from   pay	to   the   extent
	      necessary of the monetary value equivalent  to
	      the   amount  of	increments  ordered  to	  be
	      withheld, where such an order cannot be  given
	      effect to, or
(c)Recovery   from   pay	to   the   extent
	      necessary of the monetary value equivalent  to
	      the amount of reduction to a lower stage in  a
	      time-scale ordered where such an order  cannot
	      be given effect to.
Explanation.-   In   cases  of   stoppage	  of
	      increment with cumulative effect, the monetary
	      value equivalent to three times the amount  of
	      increments  ordered  to  be  withheld  may  be
	      recovered."
15.  This  is  not a case in which  a  Registrar  has  taken
disciplinary  action  on his own.  The Government  of  Tamil
Nadu  by GOMs No. 371 dated December 20, 1988  directed	 the
appellant to take disciplinary action against the respondent
for the following irregularities:
"He  appointed  candidates  for  the  post  of
	      Salesmen to the newly opened fair price  shops
	      of  Park	Town Cooperative  Wholesale  Stores,
	      Madras  during 1984-85 directly without  being
	      sponsored	 by  the  Employment  Exchange	 and
	      thereby  violated	 GOMs No. 1138,	 Labour	 and
	      Employment Department, dated May 25, 1978, and
	      the  instructions	 given by the  Registrar  of
	      Cooperative  Societies in Lr.   No.  149614/84
	      PDS2, dated September 26, 1984.
	      He had violated departmental instructions	 and
	      purchased	  consumer  goods  such	  as   rice,
	      tamarind and chillies directly from traders at
	      higher  rates without placing  orders  through
	      joint purchase committee meetings as
	      prescribed  by  the Registrar  of	 Cooperative
	      Societies circulars etc. and thereby conferred
	      undue  pecuniary	advantages  to	the  private
	      traders."
16.  It was on the basis of this GO, on March 20,  1989	 the
Registrar issued the charge memo.
In this connection, it is
worthwhile  to	refer  to a recent decision  of	 this  Court
reported in
P.V. Srinivasa Sastry v. Comptroller and Auditor
General
'.  The relevant observations at pages 132324 are  as
under: (SCC pp. 422-23, paras 4-5 and 6)
	      "But
Article 311(1)
does not say that even the
	      departmental proceeding must be initiated only
	      by  the appointing authority.  However, it  is
	      open  to Union of India or a State  Government
	      to  make	any rule prescribing that  even	 the
	      proceeding  against  any	delinquent   officer
	      shall   be   initiated  by  an   officer	 not
	      subordinate to the appointing authority.	 Any
	      such  rule  shall	 not  be  inconsistent	with
Article  311
of the Constitution	 because  it
	      will   amount  to	 providing   an	  additional
	      safeguard
1   (I 993) 1 SCC 419: 1993 SCC (L&S) 206: (1993) 23 ATC 645
: AIR 1993 SC 1321
751
or protection to the holder of a civil post.  But in absence
of any such rule, this right or guarantee does not flow from
Article 311
of the Constitution.  It need not be pointed out
that initiation of a departmental proceeding per se does not
visit the officer concerned with any evil consequences,	 and
the  framers  of  the  Constitution  did  not  consider	  it
necessary  to guarantee even that to holders of civil  posts
under the Union of India or under the State Government.	  At
the same time this will not give right to authorities having
the same rank as that of the officer against whom proceeding
is  to	be  initiated to take a decision  whether  any	such
proceeding  should be initiated.  In absence of a rule,	 any
superior  authority  who can be held to be  the	 controlling
authority, can initiate such proceeding.
In the case of
State of M.P. v. Shardul Singh2
the  departmental enquiry had  been  initiated
	      against  the  Sub-Inspector of Police  by	 the
	      Superintendent of Police, who sent his inquiry
	      report  to the Inspector General, who was	 the
	      appointing  authority.  The  Inspector-General
	      of Police dismissed the officer concerned from
	      the  service  of the State  Government.	That
	      order  was challenged on the ground  that	 the
	      initiation of the departmental enquiry by	 the
	      Superintendent  of  Police  was  against	 the
	      mandate	of
Article  31  1   (1)
of	 the
	      Constitution.  This contention was accepted by
	      the High Court.  But this Court said: (SCC  p.
	      112, para 10)
	      `[We  are unable to agree with the High  Court
	      that  the guarantee given under
Article  31  1
	      (1)
includes within itself a further guarantee
	      that the disciplinary proceedings resulting in
	      dismissal or removal of a civil servant should
	      also   be	 initiated  and	 conducted  by	 the
	      authorities mentioned in that Article.'
	      *		*		     *
	      Although
Article 311
of the Constitution	does
	      not  speak  as  to  who  shall  initiate	 the
	      disciplinary   proceedings  but,	as   already
	      stated   above,  that  can  be  provided	 and
	      prescribed by the rules.	But if no rules have
	      been  framed, saying as to who shall  initiate
	      the  departmental	 proceedings,  then  on	 the
	      basis  of
Article 311
of the  Constitution  it
	      cannot be urged that it is only the appointing
	      authority	 and no officer subordinate to	such
	      authority	  can  initiate	  the	departmental
	      proceeding.   In the present case, it was	 not
	      brought to our notice that any rule prescribes
	      that  the	 Accountant  General,  who  is	 the
	      appointing   authority,	alone	could	have
	      initiated a departmental proceeding."
17.Then	 again	the finding that there is  long	 delay	in
initiating  of departmental proceedings cannot be  supported
because in this case the Directorate of Vigilance and  Anti-
Corruption  had not been prompt.  Therefore,  the  appellant
cannot	be faulted.  Accordingly, we set aside the order  of
the  Tribunal and direct that the matter be  proceeded	with
from  the  stage  at which it was left.	  It  is  a  settled
principle of law that justice must not only be done but must
be seen to be done.  Therefore, we would direct that
2 (1970) 1 SCC 108
752
another Enquiry Officer be appointed in order to remove	 any
apprehension  of bias on the part of respondent.  The  civil
appeal will stand allowed with no cost.
ORDER
1.   Special leave granted.
2.   The  father  of the respondent having passed  away	 the
respondent  sought  appointment	 in  the  Rajasthan   Police
Service	 as  Sub-Inspector  on	compassionate  ground.	 The
authorities  could  not	 accede to his	request	 as  he	 had
crossed the prescribed age limit (including relaxation)	 for
the  post  of  Sub-Inspector of	 Police.   The	authorities,
therefore, offered him the post of Lower Division Clerk	 for
which  upper  age limit is 31.	The  respondent	 instead  of
accepting  the	same moved the High Court by way of  a	writ
petition.   The	 High Court allowed the	 writ  petition	 and
directed  that he be given appointment as  Sub-Inspector  of
Police ignoring the age limit prescribed under the Rajasthan
Police Subordinate Service Rules, 1989.	 The special  appeal
to the Division Bench was dismissed and hence this appeal.
3.We  have heard counsel on both sides.	 It is one  thing
to  say that a family member of the deceased is entitled  to
appointment on compassionate ground, but it is altogether  a
different  thing to say that his appointment should be	made
regardless  of the rules.  Since he had crossed the  maximum
age prescribed for the post of Sub-Inspector of Police,	 the
authorities were fully justified in offering him the post of
Lower Division Clerk, which he
+ Arising out of SLP (C) No. 1848 of 1993
753
SHANKER MOTIRAM NALE v. SHIOLALSING GANNUSING RAJPUT
should	have  accepted.	 We fail to see how the	 High  Court
could  in  the face of the rules direct the  authorities  to
make  his  appointment	as  Sub-Inspector  of  Police.	 We,
therefore,  cannot allow the order to stand.  We  set  aside
the  order  of	the  learned Single Judge  as  well  as	 the
Division  Bench and direct that the respondent may  join  as
Lower  Division Clerk, if he so desires, within	 four  weeks
from  today.   Any  appointment made  on  pain	of  contempt
proceedings  pursuant  to  the	impugned  judgment  may	  be
cancelled.   The appeal is disposed of accordingly  with  no
order as to costs.
ORDER
1.This appeal is obviously incompetent.	 It is against an
order  of a Division Bench of the High Court  rejecting	 the
application for review of a judgment and decree passed by  a
learned	 Single	 Judge,	 who seems to have  retired  in	 the
meantime.   It is not against the basic judgment.  Order  47
Rule 7 ,
of CPC
bars an appeal against the order of the court
rejecting the review.  On this basis, we reject the  appeal.
No costs.
I.A. No. 1/93 (Application for substitution)
2.   No orders are necessary in view of the rejection of the
appeal.
65