[Cites
19
, Cited by
23
]
Supreme Court of India
K.T. Huchegowda vs Deputy Commissioner on 18 March, 1994
Equivalent citations: 1994 SCC (3) 536, JT 1994 (2) 694, 1995 AIR SCW 100, (1994) 3 SCR 151 (SC), 1994 (3) SCC 536, 1994 UJ(SC) 2 325, (1994) 1 RENTLR 372, (1994) 2 JT 694 (SC)
Author:
N.P Singh
Bench:
N.P Singh
,
A.M.  Ahmadi
,
Yogeshwar Dayal
PETITIONER:
K.T. HUCHEGOWDA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER

DATE OF JUDGMENT18/03/1994

BENCH:
SINGH N.P. (J)
BENCH:
SINGH N.P. (J)
AHMADI, A.M. (J)
YOGESHWAR DAYAL (J)

CITATION:
 1994 SCC  (3) 536	  JT 1994 (2)	694
 1994 SCALE  (2)349


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
The judgment of the Court was delivered by
N.P. SINGH, J.- Leave granted.
2.This appeal has been filed on behalf of the  appellant,
for  setting  aside  an order passed by the  High  Court  of
Karnataka, rejecting the claim of the appellant, that, being
in  possession	over the lands in dispute for more  than  12
years,	he had perfected his title by prescription, as	such
there was no scope for restoring the lands to the respondent
concerned,   in	 accordance  with  the	provisions  of	 the
Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition
of  Transfer  of  Certain  Lands)  Act,	 1978
(hereinafter
referred to as the "Act".
3.According to the appellant, the father of Respondent	3
(hereinafter referred to as the "respondent") was granted  4
acres of land in Village Karakachi on 29-3-1957 by the State
of Karnataka, with the condition that he shall not  alienate
the said land for a period of 15 years from the date of	 the
grant.	  However,  the	 father	 of  the   said	  respondent
transferred  2 acres 20 guntas out of the 4 acres in  favour
of  one Ismail Saheb by a registered sale deed	dated  24-4-
1965 i.e. before the expiry of the period of 15 years.	 The
said  Ismail Saheb in his turn transferred the said land  in
favour	of  the appellant by a registered  sale	 deed  dated
20-7-1979.    The  appellant  claims  to  be   in   peaceful
possession  of	the  said  land.  He  also  claims  to	have
invested  huge	sum in the development and  cultivation	 and
construction  of  a  residential  house	 over  the  land  in
question.
4.
The  Act
aforesaid came into force from  1-1-1979,  the
primary	 object of which is to declare the transfer  of	 any
granted	 land, made either before or after the	commencement
of the said Act, in contravention of the terms of the  grant
null and void.	It vests power in Assistant Commissioner, if
he  is satisfied, that the transfer of any granted land	 was
null  and  void,  to  take possession  of  such	 land  after
evicting  all persons in possession thereof, in such  manner
as  may	 be  prescribed	 and to restore	 such  land  to	 the
original  grantee or to his legal heir.	 As in	the  instant
case, admittedly, the father of the respondent had alienated
the  land, granted to him, in contravention of the terms  of
the grant, inasmuch as before the expiry of the period of 15
years,	on  an	application, being filed on  behalf  of	 the
respondent, the Assistant Commissioner, declared by an order
dated  13-5-1988,  the alienation of the land  aforesaid  as
null  and  void	 and directed restoration  of  land  to	 the
respondent being the heir of the original grantee.
5.The Deputy Commissioner dismissed the appeal, filed  on
behalf	of  the appellant.  The writ application,  filed  on
behalf	of the appellant, was dismissed by the	High  Court.
The  High Court was of the view that in order to defeat	 the
claim of the respondent, the appellant had to prove  adverse
possession  over the land in question not only for a  period
of  12	years but for a period of 30 years i.e.	 the  period
prescribed  in respect of the lands belonging to  the  State
Government.  This was based on an order passed by this Court
in the case of Sunkara Rajayalakshmi v. State of Kamataka1.
1 (1985) 1 Scale 445
539
6.It   may  be	mentioned  that	 earlier   several   writ
applications  had  been	 filed	before	the  High  Court  of
Karnataka,   questioning  the  constitutional  validity	  of
Sections 4
and
5
of the Act aforesaid, which were  dismissed
by the High Court.  This Court in the case of Manchegowda v.
State Of Kamataka2 examined the different provisions of	 the
Act,  as to whether they were violative of
Article  19(1)(f)
and
Article 31 (which were then in force)
or
Articles 14
and
3   1
A.    It  was  held   that   the   provisions	were
constitutionally  valid and there was no  infirmity  because
the  object  of the Act was speedy  restoration	 of  granted
lands to the members of the weaker communities i.e.  members
of  the	 Scheduled  Castes  and	 Scheduled  Tribes.   Having
rejected the challenge to the validity of the provisions  of
the Act, it was said:
"Though  we have come to the  conclusion	that
	      the Act is valid, yet, in our opinion, we have
	      to make certain aspects clear.  Granted  lands
	      which had been transferred after the expiry of
	      the  period of prohibition do not come  within
	      the   purview  of	 the  Act,  and	 cannot	  be
	      proceeded against under the provisions of this
	      Act.   The  provisions of the  Act  make	this
	      position	clear,	as
Sections 4
and
5
become
	      applicable   only	 when  granted	 lands	 are
	      transferred   in	breach	of   the   condition
	      relating	to prohibition on transfer  of	such
	      granted  lands.	Granted	 lands	 transferred
	      before the commencement of the Act and not  in
	      contravention  of prohibition on transfer	 are
	      clearly  beyond the scope and purview  of	 the
	      present Act.  Also in case where granted lands
	      had  been transferred before the	commencement
	      of  the  Act  in violation  of  the  condition
	      regarding prohibition on such transfer and the
	      transferee  who had initially acquired only  a
	      voidable	title  in  such	 granted  lands	 had
	      perfected	 his title in the granted  lands  by
	      prescription by long and continuous  enjoyment
	      thereof  in  accordance with  law	 before	 the
	      commencement  of the Act, such  granted  lands
	      would also not come within the purview of	 the
	      present Act, as the title of such	 transferees
	      to the granted lands has been perfected before
	      the  commencement	 of the Act.  Since  at	 the
	      date of the commencement of the Act the  title
	      of such transferees had ceased to be  voidable
	      by  reason  of  acquisition  of	prescriptive
	      rights  on account of long and continued	user
	      for  the requisite period, the title  of	such
	      transferees  could  not be  rendered  void  by
	      virtue  of the provisions of the	Act  without
	      violating	 the constitutional  guarantee.	  We
	      must,  therefore, read down the provisions  of
	      the Act by holding that the Act will apply  to
	      transfers	 of granted lands made in breach  of
	      the condition imposing prohibition on transfer
	      of granted lands only in those cases where the
	      title  acquired  by the transferee  was  still
	      voidable	at the date of the  commencement  of
	      the  Act	and  had  not  lost  its  defeasible
	      character	 at the date when the Act came	into
	      force.  Transferees of granted lands having  a
	      perfected	 and  not a voidable  title  at	 the
	      commencement  of	the Act must be held  to  be
	      outside the pale of the provisions of the Act.
Section  4
of the Act must be so construed  as
	      not to
	      2 (1984) 3 SCC 301 : AIR 1984 SC 1151
540
have the effect of rendering void the title of
	      any  transferee which was not voidable at	 the
	      date of the commencement of the Act."
Although, it was said by this Court, that the provisions  of
the  Act shall not be applicable where the  transferee,	 who
had initially acquired only a voidable title in such granted
lands,	had perfected his title in the granted lands  by  "a
prescription  by long and continuous enjoyment thereof',  it
was not clarified in that judgment as to whether this period
of  continuous	enjoyment by the transferee shall be  for  a
period of 12 years or for a period of 30 years, in order  to
defeat	the  application for restoration by the	 grantee  of
such lands.  It appears that later a review application	 was
filed,	which was disposed of by an order referred to  above
in the case of Sunkara Rajayalakshmi v. State of  Kamataka1.
While  clarifying  the	question  regarding  the  period  of
prescription, it was said by this Court:
"We may also make it clear that so far as	 the
	      second  exception	 laid  down  by	 us  in	 our
	      judgment dated 17-4-1984 is concerned,  namely
	      that   the
Karnataka  Scheduled	Castes	 and
	      Scheduled	 Tribes (Prohibition of Transfer  of
	      Certain Lands) Act, 1978
will not apply  where
	      the transferees have perfected their title  in
	      the  granted land by prescription of long	 and
	      continuous  enjoyment before the	commencement
	      of the Act, the period of limitation which has
	      to  be taken into account for the	 purpose  of
	      determining   whether  the  title	  has	been
	      perfected	 by prescription is that which	runs
	      against the State Government and therefore  it
	      would be 30 years and not 12 years."
As  the appellant and other similarly situated persons	were
not  parties  to the aforesaid case which had come  to	this
Court or to the review application, they have questioned the
direction of this Court, that for the purpose of determining
whether	 the title has been perfected by  prescription,	 the
period would be 30 years and not 12 years.  According to the
appellant, once the State Government granted the land to any
person,	 being	a  member of Scheduled	Caste  or  Scheduled
Tribe,	the  title to such land passed to  such	 person	 and
there is no question of applying the period of 30 years, for
determining  whether the transferee has perfected his  title
by  prescription  against such person.	It will be  only  12
years, as is applicable to any other class of citizens.
7.
Section 3(b)
of the Act defines "granted land" to  mean
"any land granted by the Government to a person belonging to
any  of	 the Scheduled Castes or the  Scheduled	 Tribes	 and
includes land allotted or granted to such persons under	 the
relevant  law  for  the	 time being  in	 force	relating  to
agrarian  reforms  or land ceilings or abolition  of  inams,
other than that relating to hereditary offices or rights and
the   word  'granted'  shall  be   construed   accordingly".
Relevant part of
Section 4
is as follows:
"4.    Prohibition  of  transfer	of   granted
	      lands.-  (1) Notwithstanding anything  in	 any
	      law,  agreement, contract or  instrument,	 any
	      transfer of granted land made either before or
	      after   the  commencement	 of  this  Act,	  in
	      contravention  of	 the terms of the  grant  of
	      such land or the law
541
providing	 for such grant, or  subsection	 (2)
	      shall be null and void and no right, title  or
	      interest in such land shall be conveyed nor be
	      deemed ever to have conveyed by such transfer.
	      (2)No person shall, after the  commencement
	      of this Act, transfer or acquireby
	      transfer any granted land without the previous
	      permission of the Government."
Sub-section  (1) of
Section 5
of the Act	with
	      which, we are concerned says:
"5.   Resumption	and restitution	 of  granted
	      lands.-  (1)  Where,  on	application  by	 any
	      interested  person or on information given  in
	      writing  by any person or suo motu, and  after
	      such  enquiry  as	 he  deems  necessary,	 the
	      Assistant	 Commissioner is satisfied that	 the
	      transfer of any granted land is null and	void
	      under sub-section (1) of
Section 4
, he
	      may,-
(a)by  order take possession of  such  land
	      after  evicting  all  persons  in	  possession
	      thereof in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided	that  no such order  shall  be	made
	      except  after  giving the	 person	 affected  a
	      reasonable opportunity of being heard;
(b)restore   such	 land  to  the	 original
	      grantee  or his legal heir.  Where it  is	 not
	      reasonably practicable to restore the land  to
	      such grantee or legal heir, such land shall be
	      deemed  to have vested in the Government	free
	      from  all	 encumbrances.	The  Government	 may
	      grant  such land to a person belonging to	 any
	      of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes in
	      accordance with the rules relating to grant of
	      land."
8.On  a plain reading, granted land will mean,	any  land
granted	 by the Government to a person, who is a  member  of
the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes which includes land
allotted to such persons.  Grant may be of different  types;
it may be by absolute transfer of the interest of the  State
Government  to	the  person concerned; it  may	be  only  by
transfer of the possession of the land, by way of allotment,
without	 conveying  the title over such land  of  the  State
Government.   If  by  grant,  the  transferee  has  acquired
absolute  title	 to  the land in  question  from  the  State
Government,  then  subject  to protection  provided  by	 the
different  provisions of the Act, he will be subject to	 the
same  period  of  limitation  as  is  prescribed  for  other
citizens by the provisions of the
Limitation Act
, in respect
of extinguishment of title over land by adverse	 possession.
On  the other hand, if the land has been allotted by way  of
grant and the title remains with the State Government,	then
to  extinguish	the  title that has remained  of  the  State
Government  by	adverse possession, by a transferee  on	 the
basis  of an alienation made in his favour by  an  allottee,
the  period of limitation shall be 30 years.   Incidentally,
it  may	 be mentioned that some of the States  in  order  to
protect	 the  members  of the Scheduled	 Tribes	 from  being
dispossessed  from  the lands which belong to  them  and  of
which	they   are   absolute	owners,	  for	purpose	  of
extinguishment	of their title by adverse  possession,	have
prescribed  special  period of limitation,  saying  that  it
shall be 30 years.  In Bihar, vide Regulation No. 1 of 1969,
in
Article 65
of the
Limitation Act
, it has been
542
prescribed that it would be 30 years in respect of immovable
property  belonging to a member of the Scheduled  Tribes  as
specified  in Part III to the Schedule to  the	Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
9.There	 is no dispute that so far as the Act with  which
we  are concerned, no special period of limitation has	been
prescribed,  in respect of lands which have been granted  to
the  members  of the Scheduled Castes and  Scheduled  Tribes
with  absolute ownership by the State Government.   In	this
background,   when  this  Court	 in  the  case	of   Sunkara
Rajayalakshmi v. State of Karnataka' said that the period of
limitation,  which  has	 to be taken into  account  for	 the
purpose of determining, whether the title has been perfected
by prescription, shall be that which runs against the  State
Government  and	 therefore it would be 30 years and  not  12
years,	has  to	 be  read in context  with  the	 lands,	 the
ownership  whereof, has not been transferred absolutely,  to
the  members of the Scheduled Castes and  Scheduled  Tribes;
the  lands  having  been only allotted to  them,  the  title
remaining  with the State Government.  The cases  where	 the
transfer  by the State Government by way of grant  has	been
absolute,  then	 unless	 there is an amendment	so  far	 the
period	of  limitation is concerned, it is not	possible  to
apply  the  special  limitation of 30  years,  so  far	such
grantees are concerned, when the question to be	 determined,
is as to whether a transferee in contravention of the  terms
of  the	 grant,	 has perfected his  title  by  remaining  in
continuous and adverse possession.  The transferee, who	 has
acquired the land from the grantee, in contravention of	 the
terms  of  the	grant shall perfect  his  title	 by  adverse
possession by completing the period of 12 years.
When	this
Court said in its main judgment, in the case of
Manchegowda
v. State of Karnataka2
that in cases where granted lands had
been  transferred  before  the commencement of	the  Act  in
violation  of the condition, regarding prohibition  on	such
transfer and the transferee who had initially acquired	only
a  voidable title, in such granted lands had  perfected	 his
title  in  the	granted lands by prescription  by  long	 and
continuous  enjoyment thereof in accordance with law  before
the commencement of the Act, has to be read, for purpose, of
determining  the  period of limitation in respect  of  lands
granted with absolute ownership, to mean 12 years and  grant
by  way	 of allotment without transfer of the  ownership  in
favour of the grantee, to mean 30 years.
10.It  is  obvious  that for the  purpose  of  determining
whether the period of 12 years or 30 years limitation is  to
be  applied, each case has to be examined on its own  merit.
The High Court has dismissed the writ application as well as
the  appeal merely on the basis of the order passed by	this
Court  in  the	case of Sunkara Rajayalakshmi  v.  State  of
Karnataka'  on	the  review application	 filed	before	this
Court.	 According to us, the High Court has to examine	 the
claim  made  by the appellant on the materials	produced  in
support	 of the said claim, especially the deed of grant  in
favour of the original grantee, for the purpose of recording
a  finding  as	to whether the grant was in  the  nature  of
absolute  transfer of the title of the State  Government  in
favour	of  the	 grantee  or it was  a	mere  allotment	 for
enjoyment  of  the  lands  in  question,  the  title  having
remained with the State Government.
543
11.Accordingly,	 the order of the appellate court  is  set
aside  and  the	 High  Court is	 requested  to	examine	 the
aforesaid  question on the materials produced on  behalf  of
the appellant and the respondents concerned.  It need not be
pointed out that any claim made on behalf of the  appellant,
that  the  grant by the State Government in  favour  of	 the
original  grantee  was	in the	nature	of  absolute  grant,
reserving  no right, title and interest and that  transferee
has perfected his title by continuous and adverse possession
over  such transferred land, shall be examined	taking	into
consideration,	as to whether the appellant had raised	this
question  at  the  earliest  opportunity  i.e.	before	 the
Assistant  Commissioner and what material had been  produced
by  the	 appellant  before  the	 Assistant  Commissioner  in
support	 of such claim.	 It need not be impressed  that	 the
object and the scheme of the Act is to protect the  interest
of the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes,
who shall be deemed to be a weaker section of our  community
and the transfer in favour of the appellant admittedly being
in contravention of the terms of the grant in favour of	 the
original grantee, heavy onus rests on the appellant, to show
to the court that by his continuous and adverse	 possession,
the  right,  title  and interest of  the  grantee  has	been
extinguished before the commencement of the Act.
12.Accordingly,	 the  appeal  is  allowed.   But  in   the
circumstances  of  the case, there shall be no order  as  to
costs.
544
545
SWARAN SINGH v. STATE OF PUNJAB (Jayachandra Reddy, J.)
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
K.JAYACHANDRA  REDDY,  J.-  In	all  these  appeals   the
question  that	arises	for  consideration  is	whether	 the
tenants	 also  are  entitled to be heard  by  the  authority
concerned  while  deciding a dispute of	 title	between	 the
persons claiming to be the owners and the Gram Panchayat  in
respect of shamilat deh under
Section 42
of the East  Punjab
Holdings  (Consolidation  and Prevention  of  Fragmentation)
Act,  1948 ('Act' for short)?  According to  the  averments,
the  appellants claim to have been cultivating the  land  as
lessees which land has been described in the revenue records
as  shamilat  deh owned by the Gram  Panchayat.	  Thus	they
claim to be tenants of the Gram Panchayat in
546
respect of the land in	dispute.  Before the High Court they
challenged  the	 order	of  Director  of  Consolidation	  of
Holdings  ('Director' for short) passed under
Section 42
of
the  Act.   The said order was passed by the Director  in  a
petition  filed	 by persons claiming to have shares  in	 the
shamilat  deh which shares were entered in  the	 cultivation
column	as  maqbuza  malkan.  Their  contention	 before	 the
Director  was  that the consolidation authorities  were	 not
competent.  to change the title of the "right  holders"	 and
that whatever was entered in the Wajab-ul-Arz had to be made
a part of the scheme of the village and had to be adhered to
by   the  consolidation	  authorities	during	 repartition
proceedings.   Secondly they also challenged  the  mutation.
The  Director  accepted	 the contention and  held  that	 the
Panchayat  cannot lay any claim to the area since  the	same
was  mentioned in the Jamabandi to be in possession  of	 the
Khewatdars  namely  the	 right	holders	 and  therefore	 the
Panchayat  had no right to the land.  The Director  remanded
the  matter to the consolidation authority with a  direction
that  20  acres of the area should be allowed  to  the	Gram
Panchayat and the rest should be partitioned among the right
holders	 namely	 the Khewatdars.  It may be  mentioned	here
that	the   Panchayat	  pursued   the	   matter    further
unsuccessfully.	 Ultimately the special leave petition filed
by it was also dismissed by this Court.
2.The  appellants, however, filed writ	petitions  before
the  High  Court  and  contended that  since  they  were  in
possession  of	the  suit land as  lessees  under  the	Gram
Panchayat,  they were entitled to be heard before any  order
could  be passed adversely affecting them and since no	such
opportunity was given to them nor they were made parties  to
the  petition under
Section 42
of the Act, the order of	 the
Director was liable to be quashed.  They also contended that
they  had the locus standi to file the writ petitions.	 The
High  Court, however, dismissed the writ petitions filed  by
the appellants holding that in view of two earlier decisions
of the same High Court namely
Joginder Singh v. Director  of
Consolidation of Holdings
, and
Nek Singh v. State of  Punjab
through Additional Director, Consolidation of HoldingS2, CWP
No.  2820  of 1986 dated 12-8-1986  the	 petitioners  cannot
claim  to have any locus standi to file the  writ  petitions
and accordingly dismissed them.	 LPAs filed in some of these
matters	 against  the  order in	 writ  petitions  were	also
dismissed.  Hence the present appeals.
3.At this juncture, it may be mentioned that Civil Appeal
No.  3429 of 1990 is filed against the judgment in
Joginder
Singh
case'  in the following circumstances.
In
Joginder
Singh
case' the Division Bench after considering the  legal
provisions  held that the land in question did not  vest  in
the Panchayat.	Then with reference to the contention of the
petitioners that they being the tenants of the Panchayat  in
respect of this land in question are interested parties	 and
the  Director  should  have also made them  parties  to	 the
petition under
Section 42
of the Act, the Division Bench  at
one   stage  made  an  observation  that  they	could	have
approached the Director for passing a
1  AIR 1989 P & H 234: 1988 Punj LJ 535: (1988) 2 Rev LR 318
2 CWP No. 2820 of 1986, decided on 12-8-1986
547
fresh  order  after affording them an opportunity  of  being
heard.	 But  the  later observations would  show  that	 the
Director  could	 not  review  the  order.   The	 petitioners
Joginder  Singh and others, however, moved the Director	 for
giving them an opportunity of being heard and for passing  a
fresh  order, as observed by the High Court.   The  Director
asked  the petitioners to get a clarification from the	High
Court  regarding  the  observation  made.   The	 petitioners
applied	 to  the High Court for clarification and  the	High
Court dismissed the petition saying that no clarification is
necessary.
As against the said order, Civil Appeal No. 3429
of 1990 is filed and consequently the ratio
laid down by
the
Division  Bench	 in
Joginder  Singh
case'  is	 also  being
questioned.   The other Civil Appeal Nos.
3427-3428 of	1990
and  4357  of 1990 are filed  by  the  petitioner-appellants
claiming  to  be the tenants against the order of  the	High
Court dismissing the writ petitions filed by them  following
the  decision in
Joginder Singh
case' and the LPAs filed  by
them were also dismissed by the High Court.  Since a  common
question  arises,  all these appeals are being	disposed  of
together.
4.
The  Act
provides for the compulsory	consolidation  of
agricultural  holdings and preventing the  fragmentation  of
agricultural  holdings	in the State of Punjab and  for	 the
assignment or reservation of land for common purposes of the
village.  Under
Section 14
of the Act, the Government may of
its own accord agree or on application declare its intention
to make a scheme for consolidation of holdings.	 Section  16
lays  down  that the scheme prepared  by  the  Consolidation
Officer may provide for the distribution of land held  under
the  occupancy	tenure between the tenant holding  right  of
occupancy  and	his landlord in such proportion	 as  may  be
agreed	upon  between the parties.   Section  16(2)  confers
ownership  right  in  the  manner  stated  therein  on	such
tenants.   Section 22 provides for preparation of record  of
rights	by the Consolidation Officer in accordance with	 the
provisions of the
Land Revenue Act
giving effect to the	 re-
partition  etc.	  Some of the later provisions	provide	 for
consolidation and adjustment of the re-partitioned lands and
remedies  to appeal by any aggrieved person by order of	 the
Consolidation  Officer.	  Section  42  empowers	 the   State
Government  to call for the proceedings at any time for	 the
purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or propriety
of any order passed or scheme prepared or re-partition	made
by any officer and examine the records and pass	 appropriate
orders.	 In all the cases before us the respondents claiming
to be the right holders preferred petitions under
Section 42
of  the Act before the Director and contended that the	land
in  dispute was Banjar Qadim and according to the  entry  in
the  Wazab-ul-Arz of the village, it had to  be	 apportioned
among  the  proprietors	 and Khewatdars pro  rata  of  their
holdings in the revenue estate and that the Director had  no
jurisdiction to hold that the land in dispute vests in	Gram
Panchayat.   They also contended that the disputed land	 was
described in the record of rights prior to the consolidation
as Banjar Qadim in the individual cultivating possession  of
the Khewatdars and therefore the same could not vest in	 the
Gram Panchayat.	 The Director accepted their plea and passed
orders ordering distribution of the land among	shareholders
as
548
per  the provisions contained in the Jamabandi	of  1951-52,
which  according to him, is the only authenticated  document
inherited  by  the Consolidation Department.  In  all  these
cases	similar	  orders  were	passed	by   the   Director.
Questioning  the same the petitioner-appellants claiming  to
be  the	 tenants  in  the disputed  land  filed	 above	writ
petitions before the High Court and the main submission	 was
that  they  should have been given an opportunity  of  being
heard by the Director.
5.The  Division	 Bench which heard the	first  matter  in
Joginder Singh
case' referred to Section 2(g) of the Village
Common	Lands Act which defines shamilat deh and  held	that
the  land  in  dispute does not come  within  the  ambit  of
shamilat  deh.	 The Division Bench also observed  that	 the
petitioners  have not placed any material on record to	draw
an  inference that the land was recorded as shamilat deh  in
the record of rights.  The Division Bench also observed that
even  otherwise	 in the scheme of  consolidation  there	 are
existing  adequate  shamilat deh lands for  common  purposes
including  the purposes of the Gram Panchayat and  that	 the
excess	land secured from the proprietors pro rata  deserves
to be redistributed among the proprietors in accordance with
their  rights.	 The  Division Bench  in  detail  considered
several	 other aspects concerned with the interpretation  of
the provisions of the Act.  The Division Bench also  noticed
that the petitioners got priority for cultivation in auction
for a year and they had a right to remain in possession	 for
the  auction  period namely one year.  The  Division  Bench,
however,  concluded that since the dispute was	between	 the
proprietors  and the Panchayat, the tenants had no right  to
be impleaded as respondents before the Director.
6.Learned counsel for the appellants before us	contended
that since they are tenants in the disputed land as per	 the
leases granted by way of auction by the Gram Panchayat, they
are  interested parties and they should have been  heard  by
the Director while passing an order under
Section 42
of	 the
Act  in	 favour of the respondents.  From the  facts  stated
above,	it can be seen that it was a question of dispute  of
title  to  the	land  between the  Gram	 Panchayat  and	 the
rightholders.
7.A perusal of some of the above mentioned provisions  of
the  Act  in the background of the object  underlying  would
show  that the legislation is meant to improve the  standard
of  living  and working in the villages and  the  provisions
indicate that the persons who were in possession of  certain
lands  either  as  tenants  or	otherwise  are	entitled  to
allotment  of  the  said  lands	 after	consolidation.	 The
provisions  also  provide for preparation  of  schemes,	 re-
partition,   rights  to	 possession  of	 new  holdings	 and
reservation of land for common purposes etc.  Under
Section
42
of	the  Act all such  proceedings	of  the	 authorities
concerned  can	be  examined by the  Government	 to  satisfy
itself about the legality or propriety of the orders  passed
in such proceedings.
Section 42
of the Act reads thus :
"42.   Power of State Government to  call	 for
	      proceedings.-  The (State) Government  may  at
	      any time for the purpose of satisfying itself
549
as to the legality or propriety of (any  order
	      passed,	scheme	prepared  or  confirmed	  or
	      repartition  made	 by any officer	 under	this
	      Act),  call for and examine the record of	 any
	      case  pending  before or disposed of  by	such
	      officer  and may pass such order in  reference
	      thereto as it thinks fit :
Provided that (no order, scheme or repartition
	      shall  be varied) or reversed  without  giving
	      the  parties interested notice to	 appear	 and
	      opportunity to be heard (except in cases where
	      the  State  Government is satisfied  that	 the
	      proceedings  have	 been vitiated	by  unlawful
	      consideration)."
8.It  can be seen that the proviso to
Section 42
of  the
Act lays down that notice to "interested parties" to  appear
and  opportunity  to  be  heard	 to  them  being  given	 are
conditions  precedent  to  the passing	of  an	order  under
Section 42.
9.The  test for determining whether or not  a  particular
person	is a "party interested" within the contemplation  of
the  proviso is, whether he is likely to be affected by	 the
decision or the result of the proceedings.
10.In  Northem	Caterers P. Ltd. v. State  of  Punjab  and
Haryana3 the Constitution Bench of this Court indicated that
an unauthorised occupant should have an opportunity of being
heard.	 In  Mohan  Lal v. State of  Punjab4  Justice  Hegde
speaking for the Bench of this Court refer-red to the  ratio
laid down in Northem India Caterers P. Ltd. case3 and having
considered the scope of provisions of
Punjab Public Premises
and Land (Eviction and Rent Recovery) Act
observed thus :
"Under  our jurisprudence even  an  authorised
	      occupant	can  be evicted only in	 the  manner
	      authorised by law.  This is the essence of the
	      rule of law."
11.The appellants in each of these appeals before us claim
to be the tenants of the Panchayat.  In Joginder Singh case'
the  Division  Bench  also  noted the  fact  that  the	writ
petitioners got the property for cultivation in the  auction
held by the Panchayat.	The Division Bench further  observed
that  lease  was only for one year and they had a  right  to
remain in possession only for the auctioned period and after
the  expiry  of that period they had to surrender  the	suit
land to the Gram Panchayat.  But the plea of the  appellants
in  each  of the case is that they are continuing to  be  in
possession  and	 they are still holding the land  on  annual
patta  basis  and  the pattanama in their  favour  has	been
executed  by  the  Gram Panchayat and  therefore,  they	 are
tenants and lessees of this land.  In the  counter-affidavit
filed  by  the	respondents  also  it  is  stated  that	 the
appellants were merely lessees from year to year basis under
the Gram Panchayat and that when once it is found that	Gram
Panchayat  is not the owner of the suit land and  that	they
were  merely lessees from year to year basis under the	said
Panchayat,  they will have no right to stay on that land  as
they had no right independent to that of the Gram  Panchayat
and their possession becomes illegal and unauthorised and
3 (1967) 3 SCR 399: AIR 1967 SC 1581
4    1971 PLJ 338 (SC)
550
they  can  be ejected in due course by law by  the  rightful
owners,	 namely,  the respondent-proprietors who  have	been
held to be the owners of the suit land.	 It can thus be seen
that the appellants have an interest in the dispute land  in
each  of  these	 cases.	  Though the  dispute  as  such	 was
regarding   the	 title	between	 the  proprietors  and	 the
Panchayat,  the appellants at least come in the category  of
tenants having interest in the suit land in which case	they
do  come within the meaning of "interested parties" and	 the
proviso to Section 42 comes into operation and	consequently
an  order  passed without notice to them to  appear  becomes
invalid.
12.In  Paras Ram v. State of Punjab5 Justice Sarkaria,	as
he then was, considered the scope of the proviso to  Section
42 and held thus :
"The proviso to
Section 42
of the Act embodies
	      a fundamental canon of natural justice.  It is
	      founded  on  the maxim that no one  should  be
	      condemned	 unheard.  The word 'interested'  in
	      the  proviso, therefore, is to be	 interpreted
	      in  a  very  generous  spirit  and  its	wide
	      amplitude should not be allowed to be whittled
	      down  by	legal quibbles.	 In  its  dictionary
	      sense, the word 'interested' means  'concern',
	      'affected',  'having  an	interest,  right  or
	      title   to,  a  claim  upon  or  a  share	  in
	      something'.  The word 'interested'  therefore,
	      embraces within its scope not only landowners,
	      rightholders,  tenants and settlers, but	also
	      all persons who have a claim upon the land  or
	      the  property which is the  subject-matter  of
	      the  case before the Government under
Section
	      42
of  the  Act.	 The  test  for	 determining
	      whether or not a particular person is a 'party
	      interested'  within the contemplation  of	 the
	      proviso,	is,  whether  he  is  likely  to  be
	      affected by the decision or the result of	 the
	      proceedings.    In  the  present	 case,	 the
	      petitioners  satisfy that test.  It cannot  be
	      denied that the impugned order might adversely
	      affect the petitioners by causing shrinkage or
	      disappearance  of	 the surplus area  on  which
	      they  have  settled.   Surely,  they  are	 not
	      trespassers.   They have been inducted by	 the
	      Collector	 in  accordance	 with  a   statutory
	      scheme  for utilisation of surplus area  drawn
	      up under the
Tenancy Act
.	 It is true that  as
	      a result of the order, dated 20-6-1967, of the
	      Commissioner,  the matter has  been  reopened,
	      but  that does not mean that  the	 petitioners
	      have ceased to be ` parties interested' within
	      the  meaning of the proviso to
Section  42
of
	      the  Act.	  Admittedly,  they  are  still	  in
	      cultivating possession of the land.  They have
	      not  been evicted from the area on which	they
	      were settled."
13.  Likewise in Gram Panchayat of Village Serohi Behali  v.
Har  Lal6 a Division Bench of the High Court considered	 the
meaning of the words "parties interested" in the proviso  to
Section 42 and observed thus :
"The  learned counsel for the appellants	has,
	      however,	submitted  that the  words  'parties
	      interested'  in the proviso to
Section  42
of
	      the  Act only relate to the  rightholders	 and
	      not the tenants or other persons in possession
	      of  the land otherwise then  as  rightholders.
We regret our
	      5	  1969 PLJ 97 (P&H HC)
	      6	    1971 Punj LR 1009
551
inability	 to agree to that  submission.	 The
	      words   'parties	interested' in	the  proviso
	      means persons whose rights of the ownership or
	      possession  or  any other rights in  the	land
	      will  be	affected by the	 adjudication  under
Section 42
of the Act.  The reason is that  no
	      order  adverse to the interest of	 any  person
	      whatever can be made without issuing notice to
	      him and affording him an opportunity of  being
	      heard   and  that	 is  the  purpose  and	 the
	      intention	 of  the  proviso.   It	 cannot	  be
	      confined	 only  to  the	rightholders.	 The
	      tenants have also a right to be heard in order
	      to  safeguard  their  tenancy  rights  and  to
	      secure  that, in case of any other land  being
	      allotted to the landowner under whom they	 are
	      tenants,	 their	rights	in  that  land	 are
	      protected	 and that the land allotted in	lieu
	      of  the land going to be taken away from	them
	      is such a land which is cultivable and   their
	      interest	as  tenants  will  not	in  any	 way
	      suffer."
(emphasis supplied)
14.
In
Mukhtiar Singh v. State of  Punjab7
a Division  Bench
of  the	 High  Court examined the  scope  of  provisions  of
Section 42
of the Act and held as under :
"As  already held above, the Act	specifically
	      prohibits the State Government from exercising
	      its jurisdiction under Section 42 with a	view
	      to  vary	or  reverse the	 order	of  a  lower
	      authority under the Act without complying with
	      the  statutory requirements of the proviso  to
	      that section."
15.In  Chet Singh v. State of Punjab
' the facts	 are  that
one  Gurdev Singh petitioner under Section 42 who  had	some
complaint against a consolidation scheme was not present and
his  petition  was ordered to be closed	 by  the  Additional
Director (Consolidation) on 4-5-1965.  Gurdev Singh on 15-5-
1965  filed an application for restoration supported  by  an
affidavit, attributing his absence on 4-5-1965 on ground  of
illness.  An order dated 8-6-1965 of the Additional Director
shows  that the applicant Gurdev Singh's assertion  that  he
could  not  attend  due	 to  illness  was  accepted  by	 the
Additional  Director, who proceeded to exercise	 his  powers
under
Section 42
of the Act and to set right the  grievance
of Gurdev Singh, he perused all the relevant records.	This
order  of  the	Additional Director was	 questioned  by	 the
appellant  unsuccessfully before the High Court as  well  as
before	this Court.  The contention was that the  Additional
Director  had no power to review.  A Bench of this Court  in
the said case having examined Section 42 held thus (S CC pp.
500, 501, para 4)
	      "The  proviso  to Section 42  lays  down	that
	      notice  to  interested parties to	 appear	 and
	      opportunity   to	be  heard   are	  conditions
	      precedent to passing of an order under Section
42.  The fact that the Additional Director was
	      satisfied	 that the respondent, Gurdev  Singh,
	      did not have an opportunity of being heard due
	      to  his  illness, seems to us to amount  to  a
	      finding that the proviso could not be complied
	      with so that the previous order could
	      7	 AIR 1971 P & H 1: 72 Punj LR 697: 1970	 Rev
	      LR 289
	      8 (1977) 2 SCC 499: AIR 1977 SC 1494
552
not  be held to be an order duly passed  under
Section 42
of the Act.  It could be ignored as
	      'non est'."
16.The	learned	 counsel  for  the  respondents,  however,
submitted that assumingthat the appellants are the tenants
in the disputed land they can at the mostclaim	    such
protection  as would be available to them as tenants and  if
they  acquire  any rights for being in possession  they	 can
assert the same whenever any proceedings are taken before  a
competent  authority  to dispossess them.  We do  not  agree
that  they  cannot participate in the  dispute	between	 the
proprietors and the Panchayat in respect of the title of the
land in view of the mandate under the proviso to Section 42.
The general issues in law regarding locus standi of a tenant
to  participate	 in a dispute regarding	 title	between	 two
rival claimants would not arise in a case covered by
Section
42
of	the Act having regard to the nature  of	 the  rights
created	 under	the Act in favour of the  tenants  also,  as
discussed above.  As observed in Paras Ram case5 and in	 the
case of Gram Panchayat of Village Serohi Behali6 the tenants
definitely  come within the meaning of "parties	 interested"
and, therefore, they have a right to be heard.	As a  matter
of  fact in
Joginder Singh
case' they again  approached	 the
Director  of  Consolidation and he directed them  to  get  a
clarification from the High Court which was refused and they
have  come  up	to this Court.	We do  not  think  that	 the
appellants  in each of these appeals who are the  interested
parties	 should be driven to have a recourse to	 some  other
proceedings.  Hearing of an interested party is a  condition
precedent  for passing of an order under
Section 42
of	 the
Act.  When once it is not in dispute that the appellants who
are  the tenants in the disputed land by virtue of  a  lease
granted	 by the Panchayat by way of auction, then they	have
acquired some rights which also should be protected.
17.In  the  result  the	 impugned  orders  passed  by  the
Director  and also the impugned judgments of the High  Court
are  set aside and the matters are remanded to the  Director
for being disposed of afresh after hearing the appellants as
well  as  the  other  necessary	 parties.   Before   passing
appropriate  orders the Director shall consider whether	 any
or all of the appellants are still in possession of the land
as tenants and if so how their rights can be protected	even
if  the title to the land is to be decided in favour of	 the
respondent-shareholders.   Accordingly	all the	 above	said
appeals	 are allowed as indicated above.  There will  be  no
order as to costs.
557