[Cites
14
, Cited by
44
]
Supreme Court of India
Ch. Ramalinga Reddy vs Superintending Engineer And Anr on 2 December, 1994
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 1994 SC 450
Bench:
J.S. Verma
,
S. P. Bharucha
,
S.C. Sen
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  5528-29 of 1994

PETITIONER:
CH. RAMALINGA REDDY

RESPONDENT:
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 02/12/1994

BENCH:
J.S. VERMA & S. P. BHARUCHA & S.C. SEN

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

1994 SUPPL. (6) SCR 266

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by

BHARUCHA, J. These are appeals by special leave against the judgment and
order of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh whereby the High Court set aside
the arbitration award in respect of claims 2, 3, 7, 8 and 12 and modified
the award in respect of claims 5, 6, 13 and 14. The claims were made by the
appellant, a contractor, against the respondents, officers of the State
Government, in respect of an excavation contract for KM 11.711 to KM 13.287
of the Darsi Branch Canal for an amount of Rs. 50, 89,342.
Two issues were raised before the High Court, and they are raised before
this Court, namely, (i) whether the petition filed by the respondents to
set aside the award under
sections 30
and
33
of the Arbitration Act was
barred by time, and (ii) whether the award was vitiated in regard to
certain claims.
The award was made on 29th July, 1985. It was sent by the arbitrator to the
court on 31st July, 1985 and was received by the court at 12 noon on 5th
August, 1985. It is the case of the appellant that their advocate informed
the Additional Government Pleader in writing of the receipt of the award on
5th August, 1985. On 7th August, 1985, the court issued notice of the award
and it was received by the respondents on 10th August, 1985. The petition
to challenge the award was filed by the respondents on 6th September, 1985.
The relevant provision of the
Limitation Act, 1963
is
Article 119 (b)
and
it reads thus:
Description of suits            Period of Limitation         Time from
which period begins to run.

119,
Under the Arbitration Act, 1940
.

(a) ____                      	   ____                            ____
(b) for setting aside an award or getting an award remitted for
reconsideration.	     Thirty days 		The date of service
of notice of the filing of the award.
Section 14
of the Arbitration Act, so far as it is relevant, reads thus:
"
Section 14
Award to be signed and filed -
(1)   When the arbitrators or umpire have made their award, they shall sign
it and shall give notice in writing to the parties of the making and
signing thereof arid of the amount of fees and charges payable in respect
of the arbitration and award.
(2) The arbitrators or umpire shall, at the request of any party to the
arbitration agreement or any person claiming under such party or if so
directed by the Court and upon payment of the fees and charges due in
respect of the arbitration and award and of the costs and charges of filing
of the award, cause the award or a signed copy of it, together with any
depositions and documents which may have been taken and proved before them,
to be filed in Court, and the Court shall thereupon give notice to the
parties of the filing of the award."
Section 14(1)
of the Arbitration Act, 1940, requires arbitrators or umpires
to give notice in writing to the parties of the making and signing of the
award.
Section 14(2)
requires the court, after the filing of the award, to
give notice to the parties of the filing of the award. The difference in
the provisions of the two sub-sections with respect to the giving of notice
is significant and indicates clearly that the notice which the court is to
give to the parties of the filing of the award need not be a notice in
writing. The notice can be given orally. (See
Nilkantha Shidramappa
Ningashetti v. Kashinath Somanna Ningashetti and others
, [1962] 2 SCR 551).
In
Indian Rayon Corporation Ltd v. Raunaq and Company Pvt. Ltd.
[1989] 4
SCC 31, it was held that the fact that parties have notice of the filing of
the award is not enough. The notice must be served by the court. There must
be (a) filing of the award in the proper court; (b) service of the notice
by the court or its office to the parties concerned; and (c) such notice
need not necessarily be in writing. It is upon the date of service of such
notice that the period of limitation begins for an application for setting
aside the award.
It was found by the High Court that "learned counsel for the respondent-
contractor had not drawn our attention to any material to indicate that
Exhibit B-l notice was given by the learned counsel for contractor to the
learned Government Pleader on 5-8-1985 about the receipt of the award by
the court on the basis of the directions of the court". It is, therefore,
clear that no notice as required by
Section 14(2)
of the Arbitration Act,
1940, had been served on the respondents or their advocate on 5th August,
1985. Therefore, that date cannot be the starting point for limitation for
the filing of a petition to impugn the award. The notice of the filing of
the award was given by the court on 7th August, 1985. The petition to
challenge the award was filed by the respondents on 6th September, 1985.
The High Court was, therefore, right in holding that the petition was in
time.
Great emphasis was laid by learned counsel for the appellant upon the
judgment of this court, delivered by a bench of two learned Judges, in
Food
Corporation of India and others v. E. Kuttappan
, [1993] 3 SCC 445. The two
judgments aforementioned were considered and it was said:
"On the strength of afore-mentioned two cases of this Court, i.e.
Nilkantha
case and
Indian Rayon
case it was claimed on behalf of the appellants that
though the legal requirement is that the notice be sent by the court, some
other act of the court is enough to foist awareness of the filing of the
award in court, wherefrom the period of limitation was to commence.
Instantly, it was urged that when the award had factually been placed
before the court and the court had accepted its placement into it on
October 25, 1988 itself, the factual filing of the award had been made and
sequelly notice to the respondent through his counsel. Even though the
court had subsequently on November 3, 1988 issued notice for November 7,
1988, the former act, according to the appellant, was enough compliance
with court sending the notice and the latter act was of no consequence. It
does not lie in the mouth of the respondent to say that though he filed the
award in court through his counsel, with or without the implied or express
authority of the arbitrator, he did not have the corresponding knowledge of
the filing of the award, when the award was readily received by the court.
It seems to us that the mute language inherent in the action of the court
did convey to the party placing the award before it, the factum of the
award being filed in court. The mere fact that at a subsequent stage, the
court issued notice to the parties informing them of the filing of the
award in court for the purpose of anyone to object to die award being made
the rule of the court is an act of the court which cannot in law prejudice
the rights of the parties. If once it is taken that the period of
limitation for the purposes of filing the objection, insofar as the
respondent was concerned, had begun on October 25, 1988, the objections
filed by it on December 6, 1988 were obviously barred by time, those having
been filed beyond the prescribed period of thirty days", (Emphasis
supplied.)

It will be noted that it was held that it did not lie in the mouth of the
party who had filed the award in court through his advocate to contend that
he did not have knowledge of the filing of the award and he could not
contend that it was only the subsequent date upon which the court issued
notice that was the starting point for limitation.
This judgment, as the
passage quoted indicates, does not in any way dilute what was
laid down in
the cases of
Nilkantha Shidramappa Ningashetti and Indian Rayon Corporation
Limited
(supra); indeed, it could not, for those were decisions of a larger
and a coordinate bench, respectively. The judgment holds only that a party
who has filed the award in court through his advocate is estopped from
contending that, so far as he is concerned also, the period of limitation
to challenge the award begins only when the court issues notice in respect
of its filing.
The ratio of the judgment has, therefore, no application to
the facts of the case before us.
There is, accordingly, no merit in the first issue.
As aforestated, the High Court set aside the arbitration award in respect
of Claims 2, 3, 7, 8 and 12 and modified the award in respect of Claims 5,
6, 13 and 14.
Claim 14 related to the payment of interest on the amount claimed in the
arbitration proceedings. The arbitrator awarded interest. The High Court
took the view that he was in error in awarding interest for the period
commencing on the date on which he entered upon the reference and ending
upon the date of the award and set aside the award to that extent. At the
stage of the hearing of the Special Leave Petitions, learned counsel for
the respondents conceded that, in view of the law
laid down by
this Court
in
Secretary, Irrigation Department, Government of Orissa and Ors., v. G.C.
Roy
, [1992] 1 S.C.C. 508, the appellant was entitled to interest even for
this period.
The award in respect to claims 5 and 13 was modified. Learned counsel for
the appellant did not press the appeals in this behalf.
Claim 2 was for "loss sustained due to arranging of wagon for proclaim
excavations". The arbitrator awarded Rs. 20,000 in respect of Claim 2.
Claim 12 was for "payment of extra expenditure incurred due to release of
water in Darsi Branch Canal". The arbitrator awarded Rs. 50,000 in respect
of Claim 12. The arbitrator was appointed by an order of the court and what
he was to decide was indicated therein. This entitled him "to consider such
other points raised in the pleadings before this Court at suit stage."
These pleadings did not make any reference to Claims 2 or 12. The claims in
this behalf were made in the pleadings of another suit. The High Court was,
therefore, right in holding that Claims 2 and 12 were beyond the scope of
the reference to the arbitrator and that the award in respect of Claims 2
and 12 had to be set aside.
Claim 3 was for "extra rate for excavation of rocks, i.e.. F.F. rock, hard
rock, etc." The arbitrator awarded Rs. 7,45,025 and Rs. 1,38,878 in respect
of Claim 3, Claim 7 was for "extra cost due to baling out of water". The
arbitrator awarded Rs. 1,15,945 for Claim 7. It is important to note that
for the extra work that was done the appellant was paid at the contract
rate. What was now sought was an increase in the rate that had been
tendered by the appellant and accepted. The arbitrator awarded an extra
rate of Rs. 6.97 p. for excavation of 1 Cum HR with 10% overheads and Rs.
4.36 p. for excavation of 1 Cum of FFR with 10% overheads under Claim 3. In
respect of Claim 7 he made an award on the basis of Rs. 0.88 per Cum with
10% overheads. Clause 11 of Schedule E of the Special Conditions of
Contract provides that every tenderer is expected, before quoting his
rates, to inspect the site of the proposed work and to carry out such
investigation as may be necessary to enable him to correctly evaluate the
work; the Government would not, after acceptance of the contract rate, be
liable to pay any extra charges in case the successful tenderer made a
misjudgment. Clause 11 also states that it would be presumed that the
successful tenderer had satisfied himself as to the nature and location of
work, general and local conditions, including magnitude of possible
seepage, river stages, etc., before arriving at his rates and the
Government would bear no responsibility for lack of such acquaintance and
the consequences thereof. Clause 6 of Part VII of the General Conditions of
Contract states that no extra payment would be made for baling out water
for dewatering. Having regard to these terms of the contract between the
parties, it is difficult to accept the submission that the appellant had
encountered hard rock due to a tank nearby which had not been disclosed in
the tender documents and that is why he was entitled to the extra rates as
claimed. The High Court was right in pointing out that the contract
expressly stated that no payment would be made on account of the lack of
acquaintance of the contractor with the work site, he having been deemed to
have satisfied himself in respect thereof before having quoted the rates.
The arbitrator was bound by the contract between parties and to decide the
claims referred to him in the light thereof. His award being found to be
contrary to the plain terms of the contract, it was liable to be set aside
to that extent The award in respect of Claims 3 and 7 was, therefore,
rightly set aside.
Claim 6 was in respect of "payment of idle labour charges". The arbitrator
awarded a sum of Rs. 1,00,000 there against. The High Court noted that this
claim was made on three grounds : excess flourine content in drinking water
due to which labourers suffered; idle labour due to supply of ineffective
explosives; and delay in the issue of cement. The High Court noted,
rightly, that it was the obligation of the appellant to make necessary
enquiries about local conditions before quoting his rates and he could not,
therefore, make any claim due to his own lapse in not making enquiries
about the flourine content of the drinking water. It was justified in
holding that the award on that account was bad. It found that the
explosives supplied had been ineffective and that there had been a delay in
the supply of cement. Rather than set aside the award against Claim 6 on
the basis that it was indivisible and a part of it was erroneous, the High
Court limited it to 2/3 rd of Rs. 1,00,000. We see no reason to interefere.
Claim 8 was for "payment of extra rates for work done beyond agreement time
at schedule of rate prevailing at the time of execution". The arbitrator
awarded the sum of Rs. 39,540. Clause 59 of the A.P. Standard
Specifications, which applied to the contract between the parties, stated
that no claim for compensation on account of delays or hindrances to the
work from any cause would lie except as therein defined. The claim falls
outside the defined exceptions. When extensions of time were granted to the
appellant to complete the work, the respondents made it clear that no claim
for compensation would lie. On both counts, therefore, Claim B was
impermissible and the High Court was right in so holding. Learned counsel
for the appellant drew our attention to the judgment of this Court in
P.M.
Paul v. Union of India
. [1989] 1 S.C.R. 115. The disputes that were there
referred to the arbitrator were: who was responsible for the delay in
completion of the building contracted for, what were the repercussions of
such delay and how the consequences of the responsibility were to be
apportioned. After discussing the evidence and the submissions of the
parties, the arbitrator found that there was escalation and that it was
therefore, reasonable to allow compensation on account of losses under the
first claim, which was "on account of losses caused due to increase in
prices of materials and cost of labour and transport during the extended
period of contract......................". In this context, this Court said
that once it was found that the arbitrator had jurisdiction to hold that
there was delay in the execution of the contract due to the conduct of the
respondent, the respondent was liable for the consequences of the delay,
namely, increase in prices.
There was in
P.M. Paul
's case no clause in the
contract which provided that the respondent would not be liable to pay
compensation on account of dealy in the work from any cause nor was it
stipulated, when extension of time was granted to the appellant to complete
the work, that no claims for compensation would lie.
The judgment in
Sudarsan Trading Co. v. Government of Kerala and Anr.
,
[1989] 1 S.C.R. 665, does not assist the appellant, if fully read. It was
there observed that there are two different and distinct grounds involved
in many cases concerning the setting aside of arbitration awards. One is
that there is error apparent on the face of the award and the other is that
the arbitrator exceeded his jurisdiction. In the latter case the court can
look into the arbitration agreement but in the former it cannot. An award
may be set aside on the ground that the arbitrator had exceeded his
jurisdiction in making it. In the case before us, the arbitrator was
required to decide the claims referred to him having regard to the contract
between the parties. His jurisdiction, therefore, was limited by the terms
of the contract. Where the contract plainly barred the appellant from
making any claim, it was impermissible to make an award in respect thereof
and the court was entitled to intervene.
Learned counsel for the appellant also relied upon the judgment in
Jajodia
(Overseas) Pvt. Ltd. v. Industrial Development Corporation of Orissa Ltd.
[1993] 2 S.C.C. 106, and upon the observations made therein that the court
should be very circumspect about setting aside an award reached by an
arbitrator, for parties had agreed that disputes that may arise or had
arisen between them should be resolved not by a court of law but by
arbitration. We agree, but circumspection does not mean that the court will
not intervene when the arbitrator has made an award in respect of a claim
which is, by the terms of contract between parties, plainly barred.
In the result, the appeals are allowed only to this extent, mat the
appellant is entitled to receive, in respect of Claim 1A, interest on the
amount of the award for the period commencing on the date on which the
arbitrator entered upon the reference and ending upon the date of the
award, and the judgment of the High Court shall stand modified to that
extent. For the rest, the judgment of the High Court is affirmed.
The appellant shall pay to the respondents the costs of the appeals,
quantified at Rs. 10,000.