[Cites
32
, Cited by
132
]
Supreme Court of India
University Of Delhi vs Raj Singh on 8 September, 1994
Equivalent citations: AIR 1995 SUPREME COURT 336, 1994 AIR SCW 4520, 1994 AIR SCW 4518, (1994) 5 SERVLR 286, 1994 (3) SCC(SUPP) 516, 1994 (3) SCC(SUPP) 434, (1994) 28 ATC 451, 1994 (6) JT 1, (1995) 1 SCT 258, 1994 SCC (SUPP) 3 434, 1995 SCC (L&S) 118
Bench:
A.M. Ahmadi
,
S.P. Bharucha
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1819 of 1994

PETITIONER:
UNIVERSITY OF DELHI

RESPONDENT:
RAJ SINGH

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 08/09/1994

BENCH:
A.M. AHMADI & S.P. BHARUCHA

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

1994 SUPPL. (3) SCR 217

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by

BHARUCHA, J. Upon a writ petition filed by Raj Singh (the first respondent
in this appeal) the Delhi High Court held that the University Grants
Commission (Qualifications required of a person to be appointed to the
teaching staff of a University and institution affiliated to it)
Regulations, 1991, notified on 19th September, 1991, by the University
Grants Commission (the second respondent in this appeal) were valid and
man-datory and the Delhi University (the appellant) was obliged under law
to comply therewith. The Delhi University was directed to select lecturers
for appointment in itself and in its affiliated colleges strictly in
accordance with the said Regulations. This appeal by special leave is filed
by the Delhi University.
The writ petition was filed because Raj Singh had applied for the post of
lecturer in Commerce in three colleges affiliated to the Delhi University
but had not been called for an interview. He averred that the advertisement
for applications in this behalf did not lay down that can-didates should
have passed the test prescribed by the said Regulations and that candidates
who had not passed that test would not be called for interview. The writ
petition was contested by the Delhi University. It was the case of the
Delhi University that the said Regulations were beyond the competence of
the University Grants Commission (U.G.C.) and that, in any event, they were
directory and not mandatory. The Delhi University, it was submitted, was an
autonomous body and no condition of eligibility could be imposed upon it.
The case of the Delhi University was not accepted by the High Court.
The Delhi University was established under the
Delhi University Act, 1922
,
Section 2(g)
thereof defines 'teachers to include "Professors, Readers,
lecturers and other persons imparting instructions in this University or in
any college or Hall",
Section 2(h)
defines 'teachers of the University to
mean "persons appointed or recognised by the University for the purpose of
imparting instruction in the university or in any college". "College" is
defined in clause (a) thus :
"College", means an institution maintained or admitted to its privileges by
the University, and includes an Affiliated College and a Constituent
College.
By reason of
Section 20
the Court is "the supreme authority of the
University".
Section 21
states that the Executive Council would be the
executed body of the University.
Section 23
states that the Academic
Council would be the academic body of the University and would, subject to
the provisions of the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, "have the
control and general regulation, and be responsible for the maintenance of
standards of instruction, education and examination within the University,
and shall exercise such other powers and perform such other Duties as may
be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes. It shall have the right to
advise the Executive Council on all academic matters...........".
Section
29
deals with the statutes of the University. No statute dealing with,
inter alia, "the conditions on the fulfillment of which the teachers of
colleges and institutions may be recognised as teachers of the University"
may be made, amended or repealed by the Executive Council except with the
prior concurrence of the Academic Council.
Statute 6, so far as is relevant, reads thus :
(1) The Executive Council shall, subject to the control of the Court, have
the management and administration of the revenue and property of the
University and the conduct of all administrative affairs of the university
not otherwise provided for.
(2)  Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances,
the Executive Council shall in addition to all other powers vested in it,
have the following powers namely :
(i) to appoint, from time to time, the Registrar, Librarian, Principals of
Colleges and Institutions established by the University and such
professors, Readers, Lecturers and other members of the teaching staff as
may be necessary on the recommendations of Selection Committees constituted
for the purpose."
Ordinance XXIV sets out the qualifications requisite for the post of
Lecturer in the Delhi University thus :
(a)  A Doctorate's degree or research work of an equally high standard; and
(b)  Good academic record with at least second class (C in the seven point
scale) Master's degree in a relevant subject from an Indian University or
an equivalent degree from a foreign University.
Having regard to the need for developing interdisciplinary Programmes, the
degree in (a) and (b) above may be in relevant subjects.
Provided that if the Selection Committee is of the view that the research
work of a candidate as evident either from his thesis or from his published
work is of very high standard, it may relax the requirement of "at least
second class in Master's degree examination' in terms of level achieved at
the said examination as prescribed in (b) above.
Provided farther that if a candidate possessing a Doctor's degree or
equivalent research work is not available or is not considered suitable, a
person possessing a good academic record, (weightage being given to M..
Phil. or equivalent degree or research work of quality) may be appointed on
the conditions that he will have to obtain Doctor's/M. Phil. degree or give
evidence of research of high standard within ten years of his appointment,
failing which he will not be able to earn future increments until he
fulfils these requirements.
Explanation:
1. For determining 'good academic record' the following criteria shall be
adopted :
(i) A candidate holding a Ph. D./M.Phil, degree should possess at least a
second class Master's degree; or.
(ii) A candidate without a Ph. D./M. Phil. degree should possess a high
second class master's degree and second class in the Bachelor's degree; or
(iii) A candidate not possessing Ph.D./M. Phil. degree but possess-ing
second class Master's degree should have obtained first class in the
bachelor's degree.
(2) persons having securing at least 55% or more marks shall be deemed to
have passed the examination in the high second class."
The Delhi University Act
is "existing law" for the purpose of the
Constitution of India, having been enacted before the Constitution came
into force. Entry 63 of List I of the Seventh Scheduled to the Constitution
reads :
"The Institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as the
Banaras Hindu University, the Aligarh Muslim University and the Delhi
University; the University established in pursuance of
Article 371-E;
any
other institution declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of
national importance."
Therefore, it is Parliament which is invested with the power to legislate
concerning the Delhi University.
The University Grants Commission Act, 1956
, (the U.G.C. Act) is enacted
under the provisions of entry 66 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution. It entitles Parliament to legislate in respect of "co-
ordination and determination of standards in institutions for higher
education or research and scientific and technical institutions".
The short title of the U.G.C. Act repeats the words of Entry 66, thus:
An Act
to make provisions for the co-ordination and determination of
standards in Universities for that purpose, to establish a University
Grants Commission."
Section 2 of the U.G.C. Act is the definition section and clause (f)
thereof defines a University to mean "a University established or
incorporated by or under a central Act, a
Provincial Act
or a State Act,
and includes any such institution as may, in consultation with the
University concerned, be recognised by the Commission in accordance with
the regulations made in this behalf under this Act". Section 12 sets out
the functions of the U.G.C. It says, so far as is relevant for our
purposes.
"It shall be the general duty of the Commission to take, in consultation
with the Universities or other bodies concerned, all such steps as it may
think fit for the promotion and co-ordination of University education and
for the determination and maintenance of standards of teaching, examination
and research in Universities, and for the purpose of performing its
functions under this Act, the Commission may -
xxxxx     xxxxx     xxxxx     xxxxx
(d) recommend to any University the measures necessary for the improvement
of University education and advise the University upon the action to be
taken for the purpose of implementing such recommendation ;
xxxxx     xxxxx     xxxxxx    xxxxxx
(j) perform such other functions as may be prescribed or as may be deemed
necessary by the Commission for advancing the cause of higher education in
India or as may be incidental or conducive to the discharge of the above
functions.
Section 12A enables the U.G.C. to regulate fees and it prohibits donations'
in certain cases. Sub-section (1) of Section 12A sets our certain
definitions expressly for the purpose of Section 12A. Clause (d) thereof
defines qualification to mean "a degree or any other qualification awarded
by a university". Section 14 reads thus :
"If any University grants affiliation in respect of any course of study to
any college referred to in the sub-section (5) of section 12A in
contravention of the provisions of that sub-section or fails within a
reasonable time to comply with any recommendation made by the Commission
under section 12 or section 13, or contravenes the provisions of any rule
made under clause (f) or clause (g) of sub-section (2) of
section 25
, or of
any regulation made under clause (e) or clause (f) or clause (g) of
section
26
, the Commission, after taking into consideration the cause, if any,
shown by the University for such failure or contravention, may withhold
from the University the grants proposed to be made out of the Fund of the
Commission."
Section 20
reads thus :
(l) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Commission shall
be guided by such directions on questions of policy relating to national
purposes as may be given it to by the Central Government.
(2) If any dispute arises between the Central Government and the commission
as to whether a question is or is not a question of policy relating to
national purposes, the decisions of the Central Government shall be final."
Section 25
empowers the Central Government to make rules for the carrying
out of the purposes of the U.G.C. Act.
Section 26
entitles the U.G.C., by
notification in the Official Gazette, to make regulations consis-tent with
the Act and the rules made thereunder for:
"(e) defining the qualifications that should ordinarily be required of any
person to be appointed to the teaching staff of the university, having
regard to the branch of education in which he is expected to give
instruction.
(g) regulating the maintenance of standards and the co-ordination of work
or facilities in Universities.
The said Regulation, that is to say, the University Grants Commission
(Qualifications required of a person to be appointed to the teaching staff
of a University and institutions affiliated to it) Regulations,. 1991, were
made in exercise of the powers conferred by
Section 26(l)(e)
reading with
Section 14 of the U.G.C. Act and were notified on 19th September, 1991, in
the Gazette of India. They apply, by reason of clause 1 (ii) thereof, "to
every University established or incorporated by or under a Central Act.
Provincial Act
or a State Act, every institution including a constituent or
an affiliated college recognised by the Commission in consultation with the
University concerned under clause (f) of
Section 2
of the University Grants
Commission Act, 1956 and every institution deemed to be a University under
Section 3
of the said Act". Clause 2 prescribes the qualifications and
clause 3 the consequences of the failure of Universities to abide
therewith. They need to be reproduced in extenso :
"2. Qualifications - No person shall be appointed to a teaching post in the
University or in any of institutions including constituent or affiliated
colleges recognised under clause (f) of
Section 2
of the University Grants
Commission Act, 1956 or in an institution deemed to be a University under
Section 3
of the said Act in a subject if he does not fulfill the
requirements as to the qualifications for the appropriate subject as
provided in the Schedule 1.
Provided that any relaxation in the prescribed qualification can only be
made by a University in regard to the posts under it or any of the
institutions including constituent or affiliated colleges recognised under
clause (f) of
Section 2
of the aforesaid Act or by any institution deemed
to be a University under
Section 3
of the said Act with the prior approval
of the University Grants Commission.
Provided further that these regulations shall not be applicable to such
cases where selections through duly constituted selection committees for
making appointments to the teaching posts have been made prior to the
enforcement of these regulations.
3. Consequences of failure of Universities to comply with recommendations
of the Commission, as per provisions of
Section 14
or the
University Grants
Commission Act, 1956
:
If any University grants affiliation in respect of any course of study to
any college referred to in sub-section (5) of Section 12A in contravention
of the provisions of that sub-section or fails within a reasonable time to
comply with any recommendation made by the Commission under
Section 12
or
Section 13
, or contravenes the provisions) of any rule made under clause
(f) or clause (g) or sub-section (2) of
Section 25
of any regulation made
under clause (e) or clause (f) or clause (g) of
Section 26
, the Commission;
after taking into the consideration the cause, if any, shown by the
University for such failure of contravention, may without from the
University the grants proposed to be made out of the Fund of the
Commission.''

The genesis of the said Regulations is to be found in recommendations made
by expert bodies of educationists from time to time. In the Report of the
National Commission on Teachers-II dated 23rd March, 1985, it was noted
under the sub-title "Evaluating academic achievements" that categorical
statements had been made by various earlier committees and commissions that
examination results were neither reliable nor valid and comparable. It was
recognised that the standards of performance varied from University to
University, and that Universities which were a little more exacting were
less generous with their scores. A way had to be found to ensure not only
that justice was done but also that it appeared to be done. Thereafter, in
considering an All India Merit Test, the Report said that it had to be
ensured that every citizen aspiring to be a teacher at the tertiary level,
that is, a lecturer, qualified in terms of a national yardstick. Since the
first appointment presupposed doctoral work and since the UGC as well as
the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (C.S.I. R.) held an All-
India test for fellowships at this stage, the grade secured by a candidate
in this test could be utilised for drawing up a list of candidates eligible
for lectureships in colleges and Universities of the country. If this
proposal were to be implemented in such a manner that test became reliable,
valid and comparable from the academic and the technical points of view,
the problem of regulating the induction of persons with high caliber into
the Universities and college of the country would be largely taken care of
and the dream of having a national cadre of academics with high inter-
regional mobility would have been realised. The Report, therefore,
recommended "that the U.G.C, should incorporate the passing of one of the
national tests at least in grade B + on a seven-point scale in its
Regulations laying down the minimum qualification of teachers and that this
should come into force within two years". Under the sub-title "Professional
excellence", The Report reiterated that it was extremely important to make
a rigorous merit-based selection for the entry level into the teaching
profession, and this view corresponded with that of the vast majority of
teachers.
In 1986 the U.G.C. appointed a committee of eminent men in the field of
under the chairmanship of Prof. R.C. Mehrotra to examine the structure of
emoluments and conditions of service of University and college teachers and
to make recommendations in this behalf "having regard to the necessity of
attracting and retraining talented persons in the teaching profession and
providing advancement opportunities to teachers of Universities and
colleges". The Mehrotra Committee noted what the Sen Committee and the
Review Committee of the U.G.C. 1977, had said in regard to the need for
improved qualifications of teachers and observed that whereas high
Standards of M.Phil and Ph.D. continued to be maintained in a number of
Universities, the standards appeared to have been diluted at several places
because of unplanned growth, inadequate faculty and lack of infrastructural
faculties. It was underlined that one very serious consequence of dilution
of minimum standards for initial recruitment had been that already existing
disparities in the standards of teaching between rural colleges, urban
colleges, State Universities and Central Universities had tended to get
further aggravated. The Mehrotra Committee recommended that the minimum
qualification for eligibility to a lecturer's position should be a good
M.A., M.Sc. . M.Com., or equivalent degree. While making this
recommendation the committee expressed its full consciousness of the
importance of research experience and capability as an essential input for
efficiency and quality of teaching b most disciplines at the tertiary
(lecturer's) level. It therefore, strongly recommended the creation of much
better research facilities for universities and colleges, particularly
those dealing with post-graduate education to start with. This would enable
brilliant lecturers recruited without an M.Phil or Ph.D. degree to pursue
course and research work in their own institutions which could be followed
for the completion of their dissertation by more specialised research for a
limited period in a more advanced centre of learning or research. In order
to ensure the quality of new entrants to the teaching profession, the
Mehrotra Committee recommended that all aspirants for the post of lecturer
b a University or college should have passed a national qualifying
examination. This recommendation, it said, was in line with the
recommendation of the National Commission on Teachers II. Such a test would
have the merit of removing disparities in standards of examination at the
Master's level between different Universities. The Mehrotra Committee hoped
that by this step local Influence would be minimised and the eligibility
zone for recruitment would be come wider. The proposed ex-amination was to
be a qualifying one in the sense that it determined only eligibility and
not selection. The Mehrotra Committee recommended the following minimum
qualification for the post of lecturer :
"(i)   Qualifying at the National Test conducted for the purpose by the UGC
or any other agency approved by the UGC.
(ii)   Master's degree with at least fifty five per cent marks or its
equivalent grade and good academic record.
The minimum qualifications mentioned above should not be relaxed even for
candidates possessing M. Phil, Ph.D,, qualification at the time of
recruitment."
A Conference of Vice Chancellors was held under the auspices of the U.G.C.
in 1989. Among the major recommendations made by the conference was one
that related to the 'implementation of qualifying test for recruitment of
lectures". The recommendation read thus :
The National level test to determine the eligibility for lecturers be
conducted. When the State Government conducts such tests, while
accreditating them caution be exercised. It was also suggested that the
test in regional languages be also conducted."
Following up on the Mehrotra Committee report the Department of Education,
Ministry of Human Resources Development, Government of India wrote to the
U.G.C. on 17th June, 1987 on the subject of revision of pay-scales in
Universities and colleges and other measures for the maintenance of
standards in higher education. The letter stated that the Government of
India had, after taking into consideration the recommendations of the
U.G.C. (based upon the Mehrotra Committee report) decided to revise the
pay-scales of teachers in the Central Universities. To enable the same to
be done in the State, separate letter had been ad-dressed. A scheme for the
revision of pay-scales was appended to the letter, which would be
applicable to teachers in all the Central Universities, the colleges in
Delhi and the institutions deemed to be University whose maintenance
expenditure was met by the U.G.C. The implementation of the scheme would be
subject to acceptance of all the conditions attached to the scheme. The
letter stated that the Universities should be advised to amend their
Statutes and Ordinances before the revised Scales became operational. For
our purposes, the relevant portion of the scheme reads thus :
"Only those candidates who, besides fulfilling the minimum academic
qualifications described for the post of lecturer, have qualified in the
comprehensive test, to be specially conducted for the purpose, will be
eligible for appointment as lecturers. The detailed schemes for conducting
the test including its design, content and administration will be worked
out and communicated by the UGC."
Before we proceed to consider the submissions of learned counsel, reference
may be made with advantage to two decisions of this Court which consider
entry 66 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
In
The Gujarat University, Ahmedabad v. Krishna Ranganath Mudhokar and
Others
, [1963] Supp. 1 SCR 112, the central question was whether the
Gujarat University could impose Gujarati or Hindi as the exclusive media of
instruction and examination and whether State legislation authorising the
Gujarat University to impose such media was constitutionally valid in view
of entry 66. As it then read, entry 11 of List II empowered the States to
legislate in respect of education, including universities, subject to the
provisions of entries 63,64,65 and 66 of List I and 25 of List III. Entry
63 of List I, as it then read, invested Parliament with the power to enact
legislation with respect to the institutions known at the commencement of
the Constitution as the Banaras Hindu University, the Aligarh Muslim
University and the Delhi University and other institutions declared by
Parliament by law to be institutions of national importance. By reason of
entry 66. Parliament was invested with the power to legislate on
"coordination and determination of standards in institutions for higher
education or reach and scientific and technical institutions." Item 25 of
List Ill conferred power upon Parliament and the State legislatures to
enact legislation with respect to "vocational and technical training on
labour". A six-Judge bench of this Court observed that the validity of
State legislation on the subjects of University education and education in
technical and scientific institutions falling outside entry 64 of List I as
it then read (that is to say, institutions for scientific or technical
education other than those financed by the Government of India wholly or in
part and declared by Parliament by law to be institutions of national
importance) had to be judged having regard to whether it impinged on the
field reserved for the Union under entry 66. In other words, the validity
of the State legislation depended upon whether it prejudicially affected
the coordination and determination of standards. It did not depend upon the
actual existence of union legislation in respect of coordination and
determination of standards which had, in any event, paramount importance by
virtue of the first part of
Article 254(1).
Even if power under entry 66
was not exercised by Parliament, the relevant legislative entries being in
the exclusive Union List, a State law entrenching upon the Union field
would be invalid. Counsel for the Gujarat University submitted that the
power conferred by entry 66 was merely a power to coordinate and to
determine standard; that is, it was a power merely to evaluate and fix the
standards of education, because the expression "coordination" meant
evaluation and "determination" meant fixation. Parliament had, therefore,
power to legislate only for the purpose of evaluation and fixation of
standards in the institutions referred to in entry 66. In the course of the
arguments, however, it was admitted that steps to remove disparities which
had actually resulted from adoption of regional media and the falling of
standards might be under-taken and legislation for equalising standards in
higher education might be enacted by Parliament. The Court was unable to
agree with the argument. It held that entry 66 was a legislative head and
in interpreting it, unless it was expressly or necessity found conditioned
by words used therein, a narrow or restricted interpretation could not be
put upon the generality of its words. Power to legislate on a subject was
normally to be held to extend to all ancillary or subsidiary matters which
could fairly and reasonably be said to be comprehended in that subject.
Again, there was nothing either in entry 66 or elsewhere in the
Constitution which supported the submission that the expression
"coordination" meant, in the context in which it was used, merely
evaluation. Coordination in its normal connotation meant harmonising or
bringing into proper relation. In which all the things coordinated
participated in a common pattern of action. The power to coordinate,
therefore, was not merely a power to evaluate. It was a power to harmonise
or secure relationship for concerted action. There was nothing in entry 66
which indicated that the power to legislate on coordination of standards in
institutions of higher education did not include the power to legislate for
preventing the occurrence of or for removal of disparities in standards. By
express pronouncement of the Constitution-makers it was a power to
coordinate and, of necessity, implied therein was the power to prevent what
would make coordination impossible or difficult. The power was absolute and
unconditional and in the absence of any controlling reasons it had to be
given full effect according to its plain and expressed intention.
In
Osmania University Teachers Association v. State of Andhra Pradesh and
Anr.
, [1987] 3 SCR 949, the validity of the Andhra Pradesh Commission crate
of Higher Education Act, 1986, was in question. It was enacted to provide
for (he constitution of a Commissionerate to advise the State Government in
matters relating to higher education and to oversee its development and
perform all functions necessary for the furtherance and maintenance of
excellence in the Standards of higher education. The legislation was upheld
by the High Court. This court on appeal held to the contrary. It observed
that entry 66 of List I gave power to the Union to see that the required
standard of higher education in the country was maintained. It was the
exclusive responsibility of the Central Government to coordinate and
determine the standards of higher education. That power included that power
to evaluate, harmonise and secure proper relationship to any project of
national importance. Such coordinate action in higher education with proper
standards was of paramount importance to national progress. Parliament had
exclusive power to legislate with regard to the matters included in List-1
and the State had no power at all in regard to such matters. If the State
legislated on a subject falling within List-I, the State legislation was
void. The Court went on to say, "The Constitution of India vests parliament
with exclusive authority in regard to co-ordination and determination of
standards in institutions for higher education. The Parliament has enacted
the
UGC Act
for that purpose. The University Grants Commission has,
therefore, a greater role to play in shaping the academic life of the
country. It shall not falter of fail in its duty to maintain a high
standard in the Universities. Democracy depends for its very life on high
standards of general, vocational and professional education, Dissemination
of learning with search for new knowledge with discipline all round must be
maintained at all costs. It is hoped that University Grants Com-mission
will duly discharge its responsibility to the national and play in
increasing role to bring about the needed transformation in the academic
life of the Universities."
Mr. P.P. Rao, learned counsel for the Delhi University, submitted that the
said Regulations were recommendatory or advisory in nature and not
mandatory. They could not override the provisions of the
Delhi University
Act
and its Statutes and Ordinances. If the said Regulations were regarded
as binding on all Universities, they would be ultra vires the U.G.C. Act
itself because
Section 12(d)
thereof only provided for recommendation and
advice. The term "qualifications" in Section 26(l)(e) of the U.G.C. Act
meant educational qualifications obtained from recognised Universities. The
test prescribed by the said Regulations did not fall within the term
"qualifications" used in
Section 26(l)(e)
. The definition of
'qualification' given in Section 12A(l)(d) applied to
Section 26(1) (e)
as
well because
Sections 12
, 12A and
26
were inter-connected.
Section 12
outlined the powers and functions of the U.G.C. It was incorporated by
reference in Section 12A(2), The said Regulations were made under
section
26(l)(e)
giving effect to
Section 12(d)
. The word "defining" used in
Section 26(l)(e)
meant describing the nature of or stating precisely or
specifying. The power to define qualifications did not include the power to
create a new qualification, which was what the said Regulations purported
to do. In defining, the U.G.C. could only specify some from among existing
recognised qualifications awarded by Universities. The test prescribed by
the said Regulations was in the nature of a test for screening candidates
possessing educational qualifications obtained from different Universities
by way of preliminary selection or a first step in the process of
selection. Such a screening test formed part of the process of selection.
The U.G.C, Act did not confer upon the U.G.C. the power of selection of
teachers or the power to conduct a test for such selection. The power to
appoint included the power to select and the power to select included the
power to choose the method and manner of selection. The power to appoint
teachers was with the universities. Only the universities could select
teachers and for that purpose only they could conduct a written test. The
U.G.C. had not such power. The power of coordination and determination of
standards had nothing to do with the selection of teachers. It was for each
university to decide whether it would select teachers by a written test and
interview or only by interview. The said Regulations had been made in
consultation with the Department of Education, Ministry of Humans Resources
Development, Government of India. This was in contravention of the
provisions of
Section 12
read with
Section 26(l)(e)
and eroded the autonomy
of every University. The power to relax qualifications was an inherent
power of the appointing authority and was necessarily implied in the power
to make appointments. While recognising the power of a University to relax
qualifications, Clause (2) of the said Regulations shifted the power from
the Universities to the U.G.C. through the requirement of its prior
approval. This was assumption of a part of the power of appointment and was
in contravention of the U.G.C, Act. The clause in the said Regulations
which required Universities to seek prior approval of the U.G.C. for the
relaxation of qualifications was ultra vires Section 14 of the U.G.C. Act
inasmuch as. While the action contemplated by
Section 14
was post facto,
that is, subsequent to the appointment of a teacher in relaxation of the
qualifications, the clause altered the course of action and prohibited the
relaxation of qualifications without prior approval. It was not open to the
U.G.C. to prescribe consequences different from those mentioned in
Section
14
for breach of regulations made under
section 26
or change the sequence
of steps to be taken for securing enforcement thereof. Regulations made
under
Section 26(l)(e)
did not override the
Delhi University Act
and its
Statutes and Ordinances relating to qualifications for the appointment of
teachers. Only regulations made under Sections 12A of the U.G.C. Act were
given over-riding effect by reason of sub-section (7) thereof. The word
"ordinarily" used in
Section 26(l)(e)
meant "not invariably". Therefore,
the qualifications that were required to be defined by Section 26(l)(e) of
the U.G,C. Act were in the nature only of recommendations. A written test
was inappropriate and irrational in the case of appointments of person
belonging to a mature age group like lecturers in a University. On a
reasonable interpretation of the said Regulations the test prescribed
thereby operated only qua candidates possessing the minimum qualification
prescribed by the U.G.C. and not qua candidates who possessed higher
qualifications like M.Phil. and Ph.D. It operated also qua fresh entrants
to the post of lecturer and not qua those who were already lecturers in
other Universities or colleges. Any other interpretation of the said
Regulation would be tantamount to treating unequal as equals and,
therefore, violative of
Articles 14
and
16(1).
The test prescribed by the
said Regulations could not be a substitute higher qualifications, much less
a preferential qualification. Entries 63 and 66 of List-I had to be
construed harmoniously. Entry 66 operated vis-a-vis institutions of higher
education other than those mentioned in entry 63. Section 2(f) of the
U.G.C. Act to be construed accord-ingly. So read, only some of the
provisions of the U.G.C. Act, like
Section 13
, relating to the funding of
Universities would apply to Central Universities and institutions mentioned
in entry 63.
The other provisions of the U.G.C. Act dealing with
coordination and determination of Standards would not apply to Central
Universities and other institutions mentioned in entry 63. These provisions
applied only to Universities and institutions other than those mentioned in
entry 63. The definition of 'University" given in
Section 2(f)
had to be
understood in the context of each provision in the U.G.C. Act and could not
be read mechanically into each and every provision thereof. By reason of
entry 63, the Ordinances of the Delhi University which prescribed
qualifications had to be treated as
laid down by
Parliament itself. The
process of coordination by the U.G.C. could, therefore, only mean that the
standards of other Universities had to be raised to the level of the
standards of the Central Universities.
In support of his submission that only the University could select
candidates and for that purpose conduct a written examination, Mr. Rao
relied upon this Court's judgment in
A.P. Public Service Commission,
Hyderabad &Anr. v. B. Sarat Chandra & Ors.
, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 463. This was a
case where the concerned rule provided that no person would be eligible for
appointment to the post in question by direct recruitment unless he had
completed the age of 21 years and not completed the age of 26 years on the
first day of July of the year in which the selection was made. The State
Administrative Tribunal took the view that the selection could be said to
have been made only when the list had been prepared and the eligibility of
the candidate as to age to be determined at this stage. This Court observed
that if the word 'selection' was understood as meaning only the final act
of selecting candidates and preparation of the list for appointment then
the conclusion of the Tribunal was not unjustified. Before accepting that
meaning, its consequences, anomalies and uncertainties had to be seen.
Having regard thereto, the court came to the conclusion that the date to
attain the minimum or maximum age had to be specific and determinate for
candidates to apply and for the recruiting agency to scrutinise
applications. It was, therefore, unreasonable to construe the word
"selection" to mean only the factum of preparation of the select list for
that date could vary. It is difficult to see how this authority can support
the proposition for which it was intended.
In support of his submission
that it was for each University to decide whether it would select through a
written test and interview, or only an interview, Mr. Rao cited this
Court's judgment in
State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors. v. Lavu Nrendranath &
Ors
. etc., [1971] 3 SCR 699. This was a case on altogether different
issues. This Court held that the Government which ran the colleges in
question had the right to select out of the large number of applicants for
seats and for this purpose it could prescribe a test of its own. Merely
because the Government tried to supplement the eligibility rule by a
written test in subjects with which the candidates were already familiar,
its action could not be impeached. That the University had made regulations
regarding the admission of students to its degree courses did not mean that
anyone who had passed the qualifying examination, such as the P.U.C, or
H.S.C., was ipso facto entitled to admission to such courses.
Mr. Rao
sought to rely upon the judgment of this Court in
Lila Dhar v. State of
Rajasthan & Ors.
, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 320, to support the argument that written
test was unfair and irrational in the case of appointments of candidates
belonging to a major age group. We shall assume that this decision so
holds, but it is, in the facts and circumstances of the present case, of
title assistance. It is very evident that large numbers of educationists
themselves have over the years strongly recommended the imposition of a
written test for candidates holding degrees from Universities all over the
country because of the lack of an uniform standard and it is not for this
Court to say that they were wrong.
Again, the judgments in
Sanatha Gauda v.
Berhampur University
and ors., [1990] 2 S.C.R, 273. and Dr. Amhesh Kumar
etc. etc. v. Principal, LLRM Medical College Meerut and ors. etc. etc.,
[1987] 1 S.C.R. 661, were cited by Mr. Rao in support of the proposition
that the test prescribed by the said Regulations treated unequals as
equals, the unequals being those who possessed higher qualifications like
M. Phil. & Ph.D. and those who were already lecturers in other Universities
and colleges. As we see it, all applicants for the post of lecturer are
equally placed and must be similarly treated.
The learned Attorney General, appearing for the UGC, referred us to the
various reports of committees and commissions of educationists
aforementioned. He drew our attention to the judgments in the cases of the
Gujarat University and the Osmania University, to which we were have made
reference. He took us through the provisions of U.G.C. Act and he stressed
the meaning of the word 'qualification' as given in various dictionaries
and law lexicons. It is enough to cite the Concise Oxford Diction-ary which
defines 'qualification' to mean, inter alia, "the condition that must be
fulfilled before right can be acquired or office held" and Black's Law
Dictionary which defines 'qualification' to mean "the possession by an
individual of the qualities, properties, or circumstances, natural or
adventitious, which are inherently or legally necessary to render him
eligible to fill an office.,...". Upon this basis, the learned Attorney
General submitted that qualification included eligibility. The written test
prescribed by the said Regulations, he submitted, was only a condition of
eligibility and did not entrench upon the university's right to select,
particularly since no marks or ranks were awarded to successful candidates.
The learned Attorney General drew our attention to the provisions of
Section 20 of the U.G.C, Act (which we have extracted above) and to the
letter dated 17th June, 1987, written by the Department of Education,
Ministry of Human Resources Development of the Government of India to the
U.G.C. making the implementation of the scheme annexed thereto a condition
for the revision of pay-scales as recommended by the Mehrotra Committee. He
pointed out that the scheme required that only those candidates who,
besides fulfilling the minimum academic qualifications prescribed for the
post of lecturer, has qualified in a comprehensive test to be specially
conducted for the purpose would be eligible for appointment as lecturers,
The Attorney General submitted that this letter was a directive by the
Central Government to the U.G.C. on a question of policy relating to
national purposes and was, therefore, in any event, binding upon the U.G.C.
and the said Regulations had been made consequential thereon.
Mr. Ganguli, learned counsel for Raj Singh (the first respondent and
original writ petitioner), adopted the argument of the learned Attorney
General. He argued that there was no conflict between the areas of
operation of entries 63 and 66 of List I and that the concept of the
autonomy of an University could not be so construed as to make entry 66
otiose qua Universities that fell under entry 63. In regard to the meaning
of the word qualification Mr. Ganguli drew our attention to the judgment of
this Court in The State of Rajasthan and (anothers v. Shri Fateh Chand and
another, [1970] 4 S.L.R. 55, where the view that the word qualifications
meant only academic qualifications was disproved.
The Delhi University Act
was on the Statute book when the U.G.C. Act was
enacted by Parliament under entry 66 of List I. It must be assumed that
Parliament was aware of the provisions of the
Delhi University Act
when it
enacted the U.G.C. Act, particularly because the power to enact
legislations concerning the Delhi University lay with Parliament under
entry 63 of List I. The Delhi University and other Universities covered by
entry 63 were consciously made subject to the regulation of the U.G.C in so
far as co-ordination and determination of standards were concerned. This
was made explicit by the definition of University in Section 2(f) of the
U.G.C. Act. To take any other view would be to make otiose, qua the
Universities covered by entry 63, not only the U.G.C. Act but entry 66
itself. The argument that Section 2(f) of the U.G.C. Act defining
University had to be read not with reference to the U.G.C. Act as a whole
but only with reference to such provisions of the U.G.C, Act as deal with
funding must be rejected. If there were merit in the argument that entry 66
operated only vis-a-vis institutions other than those mentioned in entry
63, the U.G.C. Act in its entirety would not apply to the Delhi University
and the Delhi University would, consequently, not be entitled to receive
any grant there-under. It is for this reason to avail the grant but shed
the obligation under the U.G.C. Act. That the argument has been so
cautiously advanced.
The ambit of entry 66 has already been the subject of the decision of this
Court in the cases of the Gujarat University and the Osmania University.
The U.G.C, Act is enacted under the provisions of entry 66 to carry out the
objective thereof. Its short title, in fact, reproduces the words of entry
66. The principal function of the U.G.C. is set out in the opening words of
section 12, thus "It shall be the general duty of the Commission to take
................. all such steps as it may think fit for the promotions and
co-ordination of University education and for the determination and
maintenance of standards of teaching, examination and research in
Universities..........." It is very important to note that a duty is cast
upon the Commission to take "all such steps as it may think
fit............... for the determination and maintenance of standards of
teaching". These are very wide ranging powers. Such powers, in our view,
would comprehend the power to require those who possess the education
qualifications required for holding the post of lecturer ia Universities
and colleges to appear for a written test, the passing of which would.
establish that they possess the minimal proficiency for holding such post.
The need for such test is demonstrated by the reports of the commissions
and committees of educationists
referred to above
which take note of the
disparities in the standards of education in the various Universities in
the country. It is patent that the holder of a post-graduate degree from
one University is not necessarily of the same standard as the holder of the
same post-graduate degree from another University. That is the rationale of
the test prescribed by the said Regulations. It falls squarely within the
scope of entry 66 and the U.G.C. Act inasmuch as it is intended to co-
ordinate standards and the U.G.C. Act is armed with the power to take all
such steps as it may think fit in this behalf. For performing its general
duty and its other functions under the U.G.C. Act, the U.G.C. is invested
with the powers specified in the various clauses of Section 12. These
include the power to recommend to a University the measures necessary for
the improvement of University education and to advise in respect of the
action to be taken for the purpose of implementing such recommendation
(clause (d)). The U.G.C. is also invested with the power to perform such
other functions as may be prescribed or as may be deemed necessary by it
for advancing the cause of higher education in India or as may be
incidental or conductive to the discharge of such functions (clause (j)).
These two clauses are also wide enough to empower the U.G.C. to frame the
said regulations. By reason of Section 14, the U.G.C. is authorised to
withhold from a University its grant if the University fails within
reasonable time to comply with its recommendation, but it is required to do
so only after taking into con-sideration the cause, if any, shown by the
University for such failure.
Section 26
authorises the U.G.C, to make
regulations consistent with the U.G.C Act, and the rules made thereunder,
inter alia, defining the qualifications that should ordinarily be required
for any person to be appointed to the teaching staff of a University,
having regard to the branch of education in which he is expected to give
instruction (clause (e) of sub-section (1)); and regulating the maintenance
of standards and the coordination of work or facilities in Universities
(clause (g)). We have no doubt that the word 'defining' means setting out
precisely or specifically. The word 'qualifications', as used in clause
(e), as of wide amplitude and would include the requirement of passing a
basic eligibility test prescribed by the U.G.C. The word 'qualifications'
in clause (e) is certainly wider than the word 'qualification' defined in
Section 12A(1) (d), which in expressly stated terms is a definition that
applies only to the provisions of Section 12A. Were this definition of
qualification, as meaning a degree or any other qualification awarded by a
University, to have been intended to apply throughout the Act, it would
have found place in the definitions section, namely
Section 2
.
We now turn to analyse the said Regulations. They are made applicable to a
University established or incorporated by or under a Central Act, a
Provincial Act
or a State Act, every institution, including a constituent
or an affiliated college recognised by the U.G.C. in consultation with the
University concerned, and every institution deemed to be a University. The
said Regulation are thus intended to have the widest possible application,
as indeed they must have if they are to serve the purpose intended, namely,
to ensure that all applicants for the post of lecturer, from whichever
University they may have procured the minimum qualificatory degree, mast
establish that they possess the proficiency re-quired for lecturers in all
Universities in the country. This is what clause 2 of the said Regulations
mandates, thus :" No person shall be appointed to a teaching post in
university............in a subject if he does not fulfill the requirements
as to the qualifications for the appropriate subject as provided in the
Schedule 1". The first proviso to clause 2 permits relaxation in the
prescribed qualifications by a University provided it is made with the
prior approval of the U.G.C. This is because the said Regulations, made
under the provisions of
Section 26 (l)(e)
, define the qualifications that
are ordinarily and not invariably required of a lecturer. The second
proviso to clause 2 makes the application of the said Regulations
prospective. Clause 3 of the said Regulations provides for the consequence
of the failure of a University to comply with the recommendation made in
clause 2 in the same terms as are set out in section 14 of the U.G.C. Act.
The provisions of clause 2 of the said Regulations are, therefore,
recommendatory in character. It would be open to a University to comply
with the provisions of clause 2 by employing as lecturers only such persons
as fulfill the requirements as to qualifications for the appropriate
subject provided in the schedule to the said Regulations. It would also be
open, in specific cases, for the University to seek prior approval of the
U.G.C. to relax these requirements. Yet again, it would be open to the
University not to comply with the provisions of clause 2, in which case, in
the event that it failed to satisfy the U.G.C. that it had done so for good
cause, it would lose its grant from the U.G.C. The said Regulations do not
impinge upon the power of the University to select its teachers. The
University may still select its lecturers by written test and interview or
either. Successful candidates at the basic eligibility test prescribed by
the said Regulations are awarded no marks or ranks and, therefore, all who
have cleared it stand at the same level. There is, therefore, no element of
selection in the process. The University's autonomy is not entrenched upon
by the said Regulations.
Mr. Rao was at pains to tell us that there were men and women in the field
of education who possessed far higher qualifications than the minimum
prescribed for lecturers who were willing to join the Delhi University as
Lecturers but would be deterred from doing so by reason of the test
prescribed by the said Regulations. We have not doubt that there must be
highly qualified men and women in the country who, to serve their chosen
field, would be willing to become lecturers. We have no doubt that they
would appreciate the sound objective of the said Regulations and would,
therefore, not consider it infra dig to appear at and clear the test
prescribed thereby. We have also no doubt that in the case of eminently
qualified men and women, the U.G.C. would not hesitate to grant prior
approval to the relaxation of the requirement of clearing the test.
In the view that we take, it is, we think, not necessary to consider
whether or not the letter dated 17th June, 1987 addressed by the Depart-
ment of Education. Ministry of Human Resource Development, Govern-ment of
India to the U.G.C. can be said to be a directive under Section 20 of the
U.G.C. Act concerning a question of policy relating to national purposes.
It is enough to say that the facts do not bear out the submission of Mr.
Rao that the said Regulations were made at the behest of the Government of
India.
It is now appropriate to clarify the direction that the Delhi High Court
issued in allowing the writ petition. It held that the notification dated
19th September, 1991, by which the said Regulations were published, was
valid and mandatory and the Delhi University was obliged under law to
comply therewith. The Delhi University was directed to select lecturers for
itself and its affiliated and subordinate colleges strictly in accordance
with the notification. Put shortly, the Delhi University is mandated to
comply with the said regulations. As analysed above, therefore, the Delhi
University may appoint as a lecturer in itself and its affiliated colleges
one who has cleared the test prescribed by the said regulations: or it may
seek prior approval for the relaxation of this requirement in a specific
case, or it may appoint as lecturer one who does not meet this requirement
without having first obtained the UGC's approval, in which event it would,
if it failed to show cause for its failure to abide by the said Regulations
to the satisfaction of the U.G.C., forfeit its grant from the U.G.C. If,
however, it did show cause to the satisfaction of the U.G.C. it not only
would not forfeit its grant but the appointment made without obtaining the
U.G.C.'s prior approval would stand regularised.
The appeal is dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.