[Cites
5
, Cited by
45
]
Supreme Court of India
Shri Mahinder Kumar Gupta Etc vs Union Of India, Ministry Of Petroleum ... on 22 September, 1994
Equivalent citations: 1995 SCC (1) 85, JT 1995 (1) 11, 1994 AIR SCW 5139, 1995 (1) SCC 85, (1995) 1 MAD LJ 64, 1995 ALL CJ 1 29, (1995) 1 ALL WC 36, (1995) 57 DLT 284, (1995) 25 ALL LR 160, (1994) 3 CURCC 545, (1995) 1 JT 11 (SC)
Author:
K. Ramaswamy
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
,
N Venkatachala
PETITIONER:
SHRI MAHINDER KUMAR GUPTA ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA, MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS

DATE OF JUDGMENT22/09/1994

BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
VENKATACHALA N. (J)

CITATION:
 1995 SCC  (1)	85	  JT 1995 (1)	 11
 1994 SCALE  (4)803


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
ORDER
1.    This appeal arises from the judgment and order of	 the
Division  Bench of Delhi High Court in Civil  Writ  Petition
No.3165	 of 1991 dated 1.11.1991.  Writ	 Petition  No.253/93
was  filed  by	an  Association and also  a  Partner  as  an
individual.   Writ  Petition  64/1994  was  filed   by	 the
petitioner  who	 is  a widow and daughter  of  a  dealer  in
petroleum products. These matters relate to the contracts of
dealership   or	  distributorship  of	petroleum   products
awardable  by the Government of India Undertakings.  In	 the
first  case,  admittedly,  the	appellant's  son-in-law	  is
already	 having a dealership for distribution  of  petroleum
products. In the second case it is an admitted fact that one
of  the appellant's partners is already having a  dealership
of petroleum products and in the third case, the appellant's
mother is already having a dealership of petroleum products.
2.     The questions raised in these  appeals/petitions	 are
whether the government
12
is  justified in imposition of eligibility  restrictions  in
the  award of retail outlets (other than ""'  wheeler  ROs),
SKO-LD dealerships and LPG distributorships guidelines. Part
III  of the guidelines prescribes the  eligibility  criteria
viz.,	nationality,  age  on  the  date   of	application,
educational  qualifications, residence, SC/ST  Certificates,
eligibility    for   freedom   fighters	   and	  physically
handicapped/government personnel disabled on duty/widows  of
govt.  personnel  who  die  in the  course  of	duty.	Then
dealer's  relationship (applicable for all  categories)	 has
been prescribed as one of the criteria which reads as  under
:-
(a)  No  person  or  a  Consumer	Co-operative
	      Society  shall  be awarded a  new	 dealership/
	      distributorship if he/she or the Consumer	 Co-
operative Society already holds a	 dealership/
	      distributorship	     of		LPG/Kerosene
	      /LDO/HSD/MS/Lubricating	Oil   of   any	 Oil
	      Company.
(b)   No	person	shall  be  awarded   a	 new
	      Dealership/Distributorship   if  any  of	 the
	      following	 close	relatives  (including	step
	      relatives)  of  the  person  already  hold   a
	      dealership/distributorship     of	   LPG	   /
	      Kerosene/LDO/HSD/MS/Lubricating  oil  or	 ,my
	      other petroleum products of any Oil Company.
For other than PH candidates in	   ] For PH candidates only
PH Category FF,DEF,SC/ST and OPEN
i0) Spouse			   ] i)	 Spouse
ii) Father/Mother		   ] ii) Father/Mother
iii)Brother/Sister		   ] iii)Son/daughter-in-law
iv) Son/daughter		   ]
v)  Son-in-law/daughter		   ]
    in-law			   ]
vi) Parents-in-law		   ]
3.	Clause 10 of the guidelines relates to	Partnerships
with  which  we	 are concerned in one of  the  matters.	 The
procedure  for selection has been prescribed in Part  VI  of
the  guidelines. Criterion No.2 relates to screening of	 the
applicants for interview. Then, Rule 3 relates to norms	 for
evaluation of. Competing  claims of the candidates and	Rule
5 regulates selection of dealer/distributors. In this  ease,
we  are	 concerned  with dealership  of	 petroleum  products
applicable for all categories in which Clause (b) prescribes
ineligibility  of  persons if one of the  persons  mentioned
therein has already a dealership. It is seen that one of the
conditions subject to which a candidate is entitled to apply
for  grant of dealership is that his spouse,  father/mother,
brother/sister,	 son/  daughter,  son-in-law/daughter-in-law
and  parents-in-law  if already had been  given	 dealership,
he/she	is made ineligible to apply for dealership.  In	 the
case of partner-
13
ships,	partners  should  individually	fulfil	the   above-
mentioned  eligibility criteria/conditions and all  of	them
must appear for an interview together.
4.	 Shri  Ravindra	 Bhat,	learned	 counsel   for	 the
appellant/petitioners contended that under
Art. 19(1)(g)
all
citizens  have	the right to practice any profession  or  to
carry	 on    any   occupation,    trade    or	   business.
Appellant/petitioners being eligible candidates to apply for
the dealership or distributorship, then, one or the other of
them  cannot be made ineligible on the ground  that  his/her
spouse,	 parents,  son's-in-law	 or a  relative	 is  already
having a dealership, because it is his/her own business	 and
he  has	 nothing  to  do with  his  son's-in-law  and  that,
therefore,   the  prescription	of  ineligibility   due	  to
relationship  is  void	under
Art.  19(1)(g).
It  is	also
arbitrary,  unjust and also it bears no reasonable nexus  to
the object sought to be achieved. He further contended	that
while  prescribing  the ineligibility criteria	for  persons
other	than  the  physically  handicapped  'PH'   category,
discrimination	has been made between the other persons	 and
physically  handicapped	 candidates  in	 whose	favour	 the
ineligibility  is  only	 in  respect  of  spouse,   parents,
son/daughter-in-law.   The daughters and others having	been
excluded from the eligibility, the inclusion of	 parents-in-
law, sons-in-law etc. in respect of others is also violative
of
Art.  14
of the Constitution. We find no  force  in	 the
contention.
5.	The  preamble  to  the	Constitution  envisages	 the
securing  of  economic	and   social  justice  to  all	 its
citizens;  accorded  equality of status and  of	 opportunity
assuring   the	dignity	 of  the  individual.
Art.   39(b)
postulates that the, ownership and  control of the  material
resources  of the community are to be so distributed  as  to
best   subserve	 the  common  good.  Clause   (c)   prevents
concentration  of  wealth  and means of	 production  to	 the
common	 detriment.   Since  the  grant	 of  dealership	  or
distributorship	 of  the petroleum products belongs  to	 the
Govt.  largess,	 the  gevt. in its policy  of  granting	 the
largesse  have prescribed the eligibility criteria.  One  of
the  eligibility  criteria  is	that  one  among  the	near
relations  or partners or associates in other words among  a
named  group  of persons alone should  have  dealership	 and
there  should  not  be	any concentration  by  them  in	 the
distribution   of   its	 petroleum  products   through	 the
dealership.   The  guidelines  further	intend	to   prevent
frustration  of	 the  State  policy  by	 process  of   legal
ingenuity or subterfuge One of the criteria is relationship-
The  relationship criteria has been prescribed to  see	that
the persons who already had one dealership should not  apply
so  that  the  above  objectives  of  the  Constitution	 are
achieved.  In  Part  II1, clause  (b)  of  the	relationship
category,  a person among specified near relatives has	been
made  ineligible to apply for another  dealership   to	 any
of	the	nationalised	 oil	 companies.	 The
petitioners/appellants	de  hors  the  guidelines  have	  no
independent  right  to	have business or  avocation  in	 the
distribution  or  production  or ownership  of	one  of	 the
petroleum  products.  Production and distribution of  the  :
Petroleum  products are the exclusive monopoly of the  State
under
Art.  19(6)
of the Constitution. As a  part  of	 its
policy of the	distribution of its largesse government have
prescribed the eligibility criteria to the persons to obtain
dealership  for	 distribution  of  petroleum  products.	 The
distribution of the largesse of the State is for the  common
good  and to subserve the common good of as many persons  as
possible. The
14
Govt.  of  India  intended to group  together  certain	near
relations   as	a unit and one among that  unit	  alone	 was
made  eligible	 to  apply  for	 and  claim   for  grant  of
dealership.  Further  economic	 and  social   justice	  as
envisaged  in the preamble  of the Construction is sought to
be  achieved.  Therefore   there  is  a	  reasonable   nexus
between the object  and the prescription of the	 eligibility
criterial  envisages  in  the  guidelines.  All	 those	 who
satisfy	  the eligibility  criteria alone are  entitled	  to
apply for the consideration for the grant  of dealership. It
is true that  in case of physically handicapped persons were
made  ineligible. Physically handicapped  persons  have been
treated	   as	a  class  by	 themselves.   Under   these
circumstances	any  other  person   other  than  PH  cannot
claim  parity  with PH persons. As  far as  partnership	  is
concerned, if one  of the persons  either have a  dealership
or  relations  who   were found to  be	eligible  under	 teh
relationship  criteria, and had the dealership, than  clause
10   of	 the  said  guidelines	gets  attracted	  and	such
partnership   also  did not become  eligible to	 apply	 for
dealership/distributorship. The object of clause 10  appears
to  be that  for those	partners  had dealership, the  other
partner	  or the specified  relations also not	be  eligible
to  apply  for grant of dealership  individually  or  as   a
member	of  the partnership. Therefore	the  guidelines	 are
based on public policy	to give effect to the constitutional
creed of Part IV of the Indian Court.
6.	Under these circumstances, we find no  arbitrariness
or  unjustness	in prescription of the	guidelines  for	 the
eligibility  criteria.	 The  second  writ  petition  stands
liable	to  be	dismissed  on  the  sale  ground  that	 the
Association  cannot  file  a writ  petition  as	 it  has  no
fundamental right under
Art.32
of the Constitution. One  of
the    petitioners/appellants	has   claimed	as    having
partnership, but the details thereof have not been given. We
therefore dismiss teh appeal as well as the writ   petitions
with costs quantified at Rs. 20,000/- each.
15