[Cites
36
, Cited by
142
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Tamil Nadu & Ors vs Ananthi Ammal & Ors on 22 November, 1994
Equivalent citations: 1995 AIR 2114, 1995 SCC (1) 519, AIR 1995 SUPREME COURT 2114, 1995 AIR SCW 355, 1995 (3) SCC(SUPP) 402, 1996 (1) SCT 446, 1995 (1) JT 247, (1996) 88 FJR 203, (1995) 2 LAB LN 530, 1995 LABLR 1076, (1995) 2 MAH LJ 210, (1996) 73 FACLR 1045, (1995) 3 BOM CR 701
Author:
S.P Bharucha
Bench:
S.P Bharucha
,
Jagdish Saran  Verma
,
K.S. Paripoornan
PETITIONER:
THE STATE OF TAMIL NADU & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
ANANTHI AMMAL & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT22/11/1994

BENCH:
BHARUCHA S.P. (J)
BENCH:
BHARUCHA S.P. (J)
VERMA, JAGDISH SARAN (J)
PARIPOORNAN, K.S.(J)

CITATION:
 1995 AIR 2114		  1995 SCC  (1) 519
 JT 1995 (1)   247	  1994 SCALE  (4)1106


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
1.   This  appeal by special leave is filed by the State  of
Tamil Nadu against the judgment and order of the High  Court
of Madras dated 9th September, 1981, whereby the Tamil	Nadu
Acquisition  of Land for Harijan Welfare Schemes Act,  1978,
was  struck  down as being ultravirus  the  Constitution  of
India.	The High Court came to the conclusion that the	said
Act  did not enjoy the protection of
Articles 31-C
or 31  -A
and that it was violative of
articles 14
, 19
and
300A
of the
Constitution.
2.   Learned  counsel for the appellants submitted that	 the
said act was not violative of
Articles 14
or 19 or 300A	 and
that, in any event, it was protected by reason of
Article  3
1-A.  Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the
said  Act  was violative of
Article 14
inasmuch	 as  it	 was
enacted	 to acquire lands for a purpose which could as	well
be  served  by the provisions of the
Land  Acquisition	Act,
1894
, and that comparison of the provisions of the said	 Act
with  those  of	 the
Land Acquisition Act
showed  that	 the
provision  of the said Act were far harsher insofar  as	 the
land   owner  was  concerned.	Learned	 counsel   for	 the
respondents  also submitted that the said Act did not  enjoy
the protection conferred by
Article 31C
notwithstanding	 the
declaration in that behalf contained in
Section 2
thereof
3.   The  said Act contains in
section 2
the	 declaration
aforementioned, namely, that it is enacted to give effect to
the policy of the State towards securing the principles laid
down  in  Part	IV and, in particular,
Article	 46
of	 the
Constitution.	It is enacted to provide for acquisition  of
land for Harijan Welfare Scheme.
4.
Section 3
of the said Act is the defines	  'Court' to
mean, in the City of Madras,  the  Madras City	Civil  Court
and   elsewhere,  the  Subordinate  Judge's   Court   having
jurisdiction,  and if there is no such	Subordinate  Judge's
Court,	the District Court having jurisdiction.	 a  "Harijan
Welfare Scheme" is defined to mean any scheme for  provision
of house sites for Harijans, for constructing, extending  or
improving any dwelling house for Harijans, for providing any
burial	or  burning ground for Harijans, for  providing	 any
pathway	 leading to such dwelling house, burial	 or  burning
ground or for providing any other
250
amenity	 for the benefit of Harijans.
Sections 4
,
5
,
6
and
7
of the said Act read thus:
"4.  Power  to  acquire land   (1)  Where	 the
	      District	Collector is satisfied that for	 the
	      purpose  of any Harijan Welfare Scheme, it  is
	      necessary to acquire any land, he may  acquire
	      the land by publishing in the District Gazette
	      a notice to the effect that he has decided  to
	      acquire the land in pursuance of this section.
	      (2)   Before  publishing a notice	 under	sub-
section  (1),  the District Collector  or	 any
			    officer  authorised by the District	 Collector
	      in  this behalf, shall call upon the owner  or
	      any  other person. who, in the opinion of	 the
	      District	 Collector   or	  the	officer	  so
	      authorised  may be interested in such land  to
	      show cause why it should not be acquired.
(3)   (a) The District Collector may, where he
	      has  himself  called upon the owner  or  other
	      person  to  show cause under  subsection	(2),
	      pass  such  orders as he may deem fit  on	 the
	      cause, so shown;
(b)   Where  any	officer	 authorised  by	 the
	      District	Collector has called upon the  owner
	      or  other	 person	 to show  cause	 under	sub-
section  (2), the officer so authorised  shall
	      make  a report to the the	 District  Collector
	      containing his recommendations on the cause so
	      shown   for  the	decision  of  the   District
	      Collector.  After considering such report	 the
	      District	Collector may pass such order as  he
	      may deem fit.
5.    Land acquired to vest in Government free
	      from  all	 encumbrances  When a  notice  under
	      sub-section  (1) of
section 4
is published  in
	      the  District Gazette, the land to  which	 the
	      said  notice  relates shall, on and  from	 the
	      date on which the notice is so published	vest
	      absolutely  in  the Government free  from	 all
	      encumbrances.
6.    Right  to receive amount   Every  person
	      having any interest in any land acquired under
	      this  Act shall be entitled to receive and  be
	      paid an amount as hereinafter provided.
7.    Determination of amount  (1) The  amount
	      payable in respect of any land acquired  under
	      this  Act	 shall be the market value  of	such
	      land on the date of publication of the  notice
	      under sub-section (1)	of
section 4
.
Section	 8
sets out the matters that are to be	 ignored  in
determining  the amount under
section 7
.
Section 9
entities
any person who does not agree with the amount determined  by
the  prescribed	 authority under
section 7(2)
to  prefer  an
appeal	to  the	 "Court"  within  such	period	as  may	  be
prescribed.   Sub-section  (1) of
section  10
requires	 the
prescribed  authority to determine who, in his opinion,	 are
entitled  to receive the amount where several persons  claim
to  be	interested therein and what is payable	to  each  of
them.  Sub-section (2) states that where a dispute arises in
this  behalf the prescribed authority may refer it  for	 the
decision  of the court and the court must in  deciding	such
dispute,  follow  the  provisions of
Part III  of  the	Land
Acquisition Act
,
Section 11
reads thus:
"11.  Payment of amount  (1) After the  amount
	      has been determined, the prescribed  authority
	      shall  tender  payment of the  amount  to	 the
	      persons  entitled thereto and shall pay it  to
	      them -
(i)   in	a lump-sum in a case, where it	does
	      not exceed two thousand rupees, and
(ii)  in	all other cases, in such  number  of
	      equal annual instalments not exceeding five as
	      may be determined	 by the prescribed authority
	      and the amount of each such annual  instalment
	      shall not be less than two thousand rupees:
251
Provided that where the balance of the  amount
	      due  in  any  instalment	is  less  than	 two
	      thousand rupees, only the actual amount so due
	      shall be paid.
(2)   If the persons entitled to the amount do
	      not  consent to receive it or if there  be  no
	      person  competent to alienate the land, or  if
	      there  by	 any  dispute as  to  the  title  to
	      receive the amount or as to the  apportionment
	      of it, the prescribed authority shall  deposit
	      the  amount in the Court, and the Court  shall
	      deal  with  the  amount so  deposited  in	 the
	      manner laid down in
sections 32
and
33
of	 the
	      Land  Acquisition Act, 1894 (Central  Act1  of
	      1894)".
Section	 12
provides for payment of interest.  It says	that
when the compensation amount is not paid or deposited on  or
before	taking	possession  of	the  land,  the	  prescribed
authority  shall pay it with interest at the rate of 6%	 per
annum  from  the time of taking	 possession  until  payment.
Section 13
reads thus:
"	 13.  Appeal to High Court  Subject  to	 the
	      provisions
of  the Code of  Civil  Procedure
,
	      1908  (Central  Act V of 1908)  applicable  to
	      appeals	 from	 original    decrees,	 and
	      notwithstanding  anything to the	contrary  in
	      any  enactment for the time being in force,  a
	      second appeal shall lie to the High Court from
	      any  decision of the Court under this Act,  if
	      the  amount  as determined by  the  prescribed
	      authority	  exceeds   such  sum  as   may	  be
	      prescribed.
Sections   10
states  that  the  provisions  of  the
Land
Acquisition  Act,  1894
, save as provided in the  said	Act,
shall  cease to apply to any land which is required for	 the
purpose	 specified  in
section 4(1)
and such land  shall  be
acquired only in accordance with the provisions of the	said
Act.
Section 22
reads thus:
"22.   Application  of  the  act	to   certain
	      pending  cases  of acquisition  (1)  The	pro-
	      visions  of this Act shall apply also  to	 any
	      case  or cases in which proceedings have	been
	      started  before the commencement of  this	 Act
	      for  the	acquisition  of	 any  land  for	 the
	      Harijan	Welfare	  Scheme  under	  the	Land
	      Acquisition Act, 1894 (Central Act 1 of  1894)
			    (hereinafter in this section referred to as th
e
	      said  Act) but no award has been made  by	 the
	      Collector	 under	section 11 of the  said	 Act
	      before such commencement, as if
(i)   the	 notification published	 under	sub-
	      section (1) of section 4 of the said Act, or
(ii)  the declaration made under section 6  of
	      the said Act, or
(iii) the notice given under sub-section
	      (1)   of
section 9
of the said Act,
	      were  a  notice  to  show-cause  against	 the
	      acquisition  of  the land	 served	 under	sub-
	      section (2) of
section 4
of this Act.
	      (2)   Nothing  contained	in  sub-section	 (1)
	      shall apply in relation to any land unless and
	      until   after  the  District   Collector	 has
	      published a notice in the District Gazette  to
	      the effect that the said land is required	 for
	      the purpose specified in	sub-section   (1) of
section 4
of this Act.
5.   It was submitted by learned counsel for the respondents
that no enquiry by
section 5
of the Land Acquisition Act was
contemplated by the said Act. whereas it was the  Government
which  was required to consider objections and the need	 for
acquisition and make a declaration thereafter that the	land
was required for a public purpose under the
Land Acquisition
Act
.   It  was,	 under the said Act, left  to  the  District
Collector to be satisfied that the land was required for the
purpose of a Harijan
252
Welfare	 Scheme.  No enquiry into the value of the land	 was
contemplated  under  the said Act inasmuch  as	a  provision
equivalent to
section 11
of the Land Acquisition Act was not
to  be found in the said Act.  Whereas the Land	 Acquisition
Act set out the matters that were required to be  considered
for the purposes of award of compensation there was no	such
provision in the said Act.  The said Act did not provide for
a  reference  to  the  court  in  regard  to  a	 claim	 for
enhancement  of compensation in the manner of
section 18
of
the land Acquisition Act; it provided only for an appeal  to
the court and, having regard to the terms of
section 9
, that
appeal	was  restricted to the amount  of  solatium  payable
under
section 7(2)
of the said Act.
Section 11
of the	said
Act  provided for the payment of the compensation amount  in
instalments  in the event that the amount  thereof  exceeded
Rs.2,000/-.
Section 13
of the said Act provided for a second
appeal to the High Court only if the amount as determined by
the  prescribed	 authority  exceeded such sum  as  might  be
prescribed.   This  sum,  it may be mentioned,	was  at	 the
relevant time Rs. 50,000/-, which was the amount  prescribed
for  the  purpose of all second appeals to  the	 High  Court
under the rules for the purpose.
6.
In
The State of Madhya Pradesh v. G.C. Mandawar
, (1955)
1 S.C.R. 599, a Constitution Bench held that
Article 14
does
not  authorise the striking down of the law of one State  on
the  ground that, in contrast with the law of another  State
on the same subject, its provisions are discriminatory,	 nor
does  it  contemplate the law of the Center or	of  a  State
dealing	  with	similar	 subjects  being  held	to  be	 un-
constitutional	by  a process of comparative  study  of	 the
provisions of the two.	The sources of authority for the two
being different,
Article 14
can have no application.
In
Sant
Lal Bharti v. State of Punjab
. (1988) 2 S.C.R. 107, this was
reiterated.
7.   When  a  statute is impugned under Article14  what	 the
court  has to decide is whether the statute is so  arbitrary
or  unreasonable  that it must be struck down.	At  best,  a
statute	 upon a similar subject which derives its  authority
from  another source can be referred to, if  its  provisions
have  been held to be reasonable or have stood the  test  of
time, only for the purpose of indicating what may be said to
be  reasonable	in the context.	 We proceed to	examine	 the
provisions of the said Act upon this basis.
8.   Sub-section (1) of
section 4
empowers   the    District
Collector, if he is satisfied that   it	 is   necessary	  to
acquire	 some  land for the purpose of	an  Harijan  Welfare
Scheme,	 to acquire that land by publishing in the  District
Gazette	 a  notice  to the effect that	he  has	 decided  to
acquire	 it  in pursuance of
section 4
. Sub-section  (2)  of
section	 4
obliges the District Collector  or	any  officer
authorised  by him in this behalf to call upon the owner  or
any  other  person  who,  in the  opinion  of  the  District
Collector  or  the officer so authorised, is  interested  in
such  land  to	show cause why it should  not  be  acquired.
Where  the District Collector has called upon the  owner  or
other person to show cause under subsection (2), clause	 (a)
of sub-section (3) requires him to pass orders on the  cause
so  shown.   Where  an officer authorised  by  the  district
Collector has called upon the owner or other person to	show
cause  under  sub-section  (2),	 clause	 (b)  of
section  3
requires  that officer to report to the	 District  Collector
his recommendations on the
253
cause  so  shown and the District Collector is	required  to
pass  such orders as he may deem fit after  considering	 the
report.	  Sub section (2) of
section 4
,	 therefore,  obliges
the acquiring authority to serve notice upon the land  owner
and other persons interested in the land to shown cause	 why
it should not be acquired.  By reason of sub-section (3)  of
section	 4
,  such  cause has to be taken  into	account	 and
orders passed in respect thereof It is only thereafter	that
the acquiring authority can arrive at the satisfaction	that
it is necessary to acquire the land.  The provisions of sec-
tion 4, therefore, substantially encapsulate the  provisions
of
section  4
to
6
of the Land Acquisition  Act,  the	only
major  difference being that, under the said Act, it is	 the
District Collector and not the State Government who must  be
satisfied that the land is-required to be acquired.  It does
not  appear  to	 us  that  this	 is  a	provision  which  is
unreasonable or arbitrary.
9.By  reason  of
section 5
, the land in  respect  of  which
notice	under
section 4(1)
is published vests absolutely  in
the   State  Government	 on  and  from	the  date  of	such
publication.   Every person having an interest in such	land
is,   by   reason  of
section	6
,   entitled	to   receive
compensation.
Section 12
says that where the amount thereof
is  not	 paid  or  deposited on	 or  before  the  taking  of
possession  of the land, interest thereon is payable at	 the
rate  of 6% per annum from the time of taking of  possession
until payment or deposit.
10.
Section  7
states that the amount payable in	 respect  of
land  that  is	acquired under the said Act  "Shall  be	 the
market value of such land on the date of publication of	 the
notice under sub-section (1) of
section 4
".  What is payable
as compensation is the market value of the land and it is to
be  determined	as  on the date on which  the  notice  under
section 4(1)
is published.  To that extent the provisions of
the  said  Act	are more favorable than those  of  the
Land
Acquisition Act
for, under that statute, market value as  on
the  date of the
Section 4
notification is payable,  not  on
the date of the
Section 6
notification.
11.It  is true that the said Act provides for matters  which
are to be ignored in determining the amount under
section  8
but  does  not make provision, as the
Land  Acquisition	 Act
does,  in  determining the amount.  It has, however,  to  be
realised  that the concept of market value and how it is  to
be  determined is well established.
In
State of	 Gujarat  v.
Shantilal  Mangaldas & Ors.
(1969) 3 S.C.R. 341, this  Court
said,  "Specification  of principles within the	 meaning  of
Article	 31(2)
as it then read means  laying  down  general
guiding	 rules	applicable to all  persons  or	transactions
governed   thereby.
Under  the   Land   Acquisition	 Act
compensation is determined on the basis of "market value" of
the land on the date of the notification under
section	4(1)
of   the  Act.	 That  is  a  specification  of	  principle.
Compensation  determined  on  the  basis  of  market   value
prevailing  on a date anterior to the date of extinction  of
interest is still determined on a principle specified".	  It
is,  therefore,	 of no great consequence that the  said	 Act
does  not go on to specify what is to be taken into  account
in  determining the amount payable as compensation for	land
that is acquired thereunder.
12.Sub-section	(1) of
section 7
, as aforesaid, states	that
the  amount payable in respect of the land that is  acquired
under the said Act shall be its market value
254
on the date of publication of the notice under
section 4(1)
.
Sub-section (2) of
section 7
states that, in addition to the
market value of the land, the prescribed authority shall  in
every case award a sum of 15 per centum on such market value
as solatium in consideration of the compulsory nature of the
acquisition.   Sub-section (3) of
Section 7
states that	 the
prescribed manner, determine by order the amount payable un-
der  sub-section (1) and a copy of the said order  shall  be
communicated  to  the owner of such land  and  every  person
interested  therein.   The purport of
section 7
, read  as  a
whole,	is that the market value of the land is	 payable  as
compensation and subsection (3) states that the market value
shall  be determined after holding an  inquiry	contemplates
notice to the owner and other person interested in the	land
and  consideration of their claims for compensation and	 the
basis  thereof,	 namely,  the evidence	they  adduce.	Upon
determination of the market value of the land after inquiry,
the prescribed authority is obliged under sub-section (2) of
section	 7
to award as compensation for the acquisition	 the
market value and as additional 13% as solatium.
13.An  appeal is prescribed under
section 9
to the court  by
any person who does not agree with the amount determined  by
the  prescribed authority "under sub-section (7) of
section
7
".  It was argued that the appeal was limited to the  award
of solatium and that, therefore, there was no appeal against
the  determination of market value and no reference  to	 the
court in that behalf in the manner of
section 18
of the Land
Acquisition Act.  We do not think
sections 7
and
9
may be so
read as to render
section 9
an absurdity.  As aforesaid,  it
is  the	 obligation of the prescribed authority	 under	sub-
section	 (2) of
section 7
to award the market value  of	 the
land  plus  15%	 as solatium.  The  appeal  contemplated  by
section	 9
is, therefore in respect of the award in  respect
of the land which comprises its market value and solatium.
14.  That  no  reference  as  in
Section  18
of  the	Land
Acquisition Act in regard to the amount of compensation	 for
land that is acquired is provided for does not, in our view,
make the said Act unreasonable.	 Under the provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act
the award is no more than an offer.  If
the  land owner of other person interested in the land	does
not  accept  the offer,
section 18
gives him  the  right  of
having	the  compensation amount decided by the	 court	(See
Raja Harish Chandra Raj Singh v. The Deputy Land Acquisition
Officer
.  (1962)  1  S.C.R. 676.)  In  the  reference  court
compensation  has  to  be  established.
(See
Periyar	 and
Pareekanni Rubbers Ltd. v. State of Kerala
.
(1991) 4  S.C.C.
195.)  The record before the Collector does not	 ipso  facto
become	the record of the reference court.  In the  case  of
the said Act an appeal is provided under
section 9
from	 the
award,	that is,the market value of the land  and  solatium,
under
section	7
.  The	 market	 value	is  required  to  be
determined. by reason of sub-section (3) of
section 7
,	upon
an  enquiry  as hereinabove explained.	The  land  owner  or
other  person  interested in the land  has,  therefore,	 the
opportunity  to establish its market value before  the	pre-
scribed	 authority.  Such evidence as he places	 before	 the
prescribed  authority  becomes a part of the record  of	 the
court  in appeal under
section 5
. The court in appeal  under
section	 9
would also, in appropriate cases, have the  right
to call for additional evidence.
15.  The provisions of
section 13
of the
255
Act  provide  for a second appeal to the  High	Court.	 The
second	appeal lies only if to amount as determined  by	 the
prescribed  authority exceeds such sum as may be  prescribed
The sum prescribed appears to be the sum which is  otherwise
prescribed  in	regard to all second appeals.  There  is  no
obligation  to provide for a second appeal in all cases	 and
there is, therefore, no unreasonableness in this behalf
16.In the event that the court in appeal under
section 9
or
the  High Court in second appeal under
section	13
enhances
the  compensation  amount  the power to	 award	interest  as
prescribed in
section 12
is implicit.
17.
Section  11
has already been quoted.	 By reason  of	sub-
section (1) thereof, payment of the compensation amount	 can
be  made  in a lump sum only where it does  not	 exceed	 Rs.
2000/.	 In all other cases it must be made in equal  annual
instalments  not exceeding five, but so that the  amount  of
each annual instalment is not less than Rs. 2,000/-.  In our
view,  the  provision  in  regard  to  the  payment  of	 the
compensation amount by instalments in this manner is  wholly
unreasonable.  the  owner  of the  land	 or  another  person
interested therein would require compensation in lieu of the
land  forth  with to re-establish himself whether in  a	 new
residence  or another piece of agricultural land  or  other-
wise.	The  provisions of the section in  this	 behalf	 are
clearly	 severable.   The said Act can stand even  when	 the
provisions  in	regard to the payment  of  the	compensation
amount by instalment excised.  To the extent that
section11
provides  for payment of compensation by instalments  it  is
ultravirus
Article  14.
The provisions  of
section  11(1)
subsequent to the words "in a lump-sum" must, therefore,  be
struck down.
18.
Section 20
of the said Act states that the provisions  of
the land Acquisition Act, save as expressly provided in	 the
said Act,shall cease to apply to any land which is  required
for  the  purpose specified in
section 4(1)
and  such	land
shall be acquired only 'in accordance with the provisions of
the said Act.  Consequently,
section 22
makes the provisions
of  the said Act applicable also to cases in which  proceed-
ings  have been started before the commencement of the	said
Act  under  the
Land Acquisition Act
for  the	 purpose  of
Harijan Welfare Schemes, provided that judgment under appeal
striking down the said Act was delivered no award have	been
made   under   the
Land  Acquisition  Act
.    We   see	  no
unreasonableness  in  this  provision,	particularly  having
regard	to the terms of
section 20
.  We must, however,	take
account	 the  fact that the judgment under  appeal  striking
down the said Act was delivered as far as back as  September
,  198 1, and no stay thereof, was obtained from the  court.
It  is	likely, therefore, that in cases  where	 proceedings
under  the
Land Acquisition Act
had already been started  to
acquires lands for Harijan Welfare Schemes, they might	have
been   revived	and  completed	in  the	 interregnum.	 We,
therefore,  make it clear that the provisions of
section  22
shall  have no effect in such cases where awards  have	been
made.
19.  In	 the  result, we do not find the provisions  of	 the
said  Act,  except for the provision as	 to  instalments  in
section 11
. violative of the provisions of
Article 14
of the
Constitution  of  India, It is,	 therefore,  unnecessary  to
consider  whether or not the said Act has the protection  of
article
256
31-C
of the Constitution.
20.The	appeal is allowed in part.  The judgment  and  order
under  appeal  is set aside.  Except for  the  provision  of
Section	 11 (1)
of the said Act insofar as they provide	 for
payment of the compensation amount in instalments, the	said
Act  is	 intra vires the constitution.
Section	 11  (1)
is
valid only to this extent:
"11.  Payment of amount- (1) After the  amount
	      has been determined, the prescribed  authority
	      shall  tender  payment of the  amount  to	 the
	      person  entitled	there to and  shall  pay  it
	      them-
(1) in a lump-sum."
The rest of
Section 11 (1)
is ultra vires the Constitution.
Civil Appeal 4461 of 1964 3978-4302 of 1990 & 2114 of 1991.
21.There  civil	 appeals arise out of orders of	 the  Madras
High Court that, following the judgment dated 9th September,
1981,  aforementioned,	struck down the	 said  Act.   Having
regard	to  the discussion set out above, we have  held	 the
said  Act to be valid legislation, except in so far  as	 the
provisions of
Section 11 (1)
thereof require the payment  of
the  compensation amount in instalments.  For the same	rea-
sons,	these  appeals	are  set  aside.   Except  for	 the
provisions  of
section 11 (1)
of the said Act in so  far  as
they  provide  for  payment of the  compensation  amount  in
instalments,  the said Act is intra vires the  constitution.
Section 11(1)
is valid only to this extent:
"11.   Payment of amount (1) After the  amount
	      has been determined, the prescribed  authority
	      shall  tender  payment of the  amount  to	 the
	      persons  entitled thereto and shall pay it  to
	      them-
(1) in a lump sum."
The rest of
Section 11 (1)
is intra vires the Constitution.
Civil appeal(Nos.) 7886-7891 of 1994 (Arising out of  S.L.P.
(c) Nos. 16729- 34 of 1983.
22.  Leave granted.
23.  The  judgment and order of the Madras High Court  under
appeal in these civil appeals, following the  aforementioned
judgment   dated  9th  September,  1981,  struck  down	 the
provisions  of chapter VI of the Tamil Nadu Slum  clearance.
The provision of chapter VI are substantially similar to the
provisions  of the said Act, that is to say the	 Tamil	Nadu
Acquisition  of	 Land for Harijan Welfare Scheme  Act,	1978
except that by reason of
Section 21
, no solatium is  payable
to  the land owner whose land is acquired.  The Madras	High
Court, relying on the judgment dated 9th September, 1981  in
relation to the said Act, found the provisions of chapter VI
to be violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution and struck
them own.
24.  We have held the provisions of the said Act to be intra
vires  the Constitution, except in regard to  the  provision
for payment of the compensation amount in instalments.
The
Slum  Clearance	 Act
does not provide for  payment  of	 the
compensation amount in instalments.
25.  That  no solatium is payable under the  Slum  Clearance
act does not, in our view, make any substantial	 difference.
In
Prakash Amichand Shah v. State of
257
Gujarat	 &  Ors.
(1985) Suppl. 3 SCR  1025,  a	Constitution
Bench  held  that it could not be said as a  rule  that	 the
State,	which has to supply and maintain large	public	ser-
vices  at  great  cost, should always pay,  in	addition  to
reasonable  compensation for acquired land, some  amount  by
way  of	 solatium: the interest of the	public	was  equally
important.   It is, to our mind, not unreasonable  that	 the
State  should not have to pay solatium in  consideration  of
the  compulsory	 nature of the acquisition of land  that  is
slum land.
26.  In	 the  result,  the  appeals  are  allowed  and	 the
provisions of
Chapter VI of the Slum Clearance Act
are	held
to be intra vires the Constitution.
Civil Appeal No. 7885 of 1994 (Arising out of &L.P. (C)	 No.
16989 of 1991:
27.  Leave granted.
28.  This  is an appeal by the owner of land whose land	 was
sought	to  be	acquired under the provisions  of  the
Land
Acquisition Act
for the purpose of a Harijan Welfare  Scheme
after  the  coming into force of the said Act, that  is	 the
Tamil  Nadu Acquisition of Lands for Harijan Welfare  Scheme
Act, 1978 the appellant filed a writ petition in the  Madras
High  Court  for a direction to the State to for  bear	from
continuing  with the proceedings under the
Land	 Acquisition
Act
having  regard to the provisions of
Section 20
of	 the
said Act which required that for such purpose land could  be
acquired only in accordance with the provisions of the	said
Act.   The learned single Judge dismissed the writ  petition
and  the Division Bench the appeal filed therefrom, both  on
the   ground  that  said  Act,	had  been  struck  down	  as
unconstitutional.  Hence this appeal.
29.  We have held the provisions of the said Act to be valid
legislation except in so far as they provide for payment  of
the compensation amount in instalments.	 The said Act  being
valid  legislation,its	provisions preclude the	 State	from
acquiring  land for the purpose of a Harijan Welfare  Scheme
under  the
Land Acquisition Act
.  The appeal is allowed	 and
the  proceedings under the
Land Acquisition Act
to  acquire
the  appellant's land for the purpose of a  Harijan  Welfare
Scheme are, therefore, quashed and set aside.
30.  In all these civil appeals each party shall  bear	 and
pay its own costs.
259