[Cites
3
, Cited by
46
]
Supreme Court of India
Ganeshlal vs Shyam on 26 September, 2013
Bench:
J. Chelameswar
,
H.L. Gokhale
REPORTABLE


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 331    OF 2007


GANESHLAL                                             Appellant(s)
                           :VERSUS:
SHYAM                                                 Respondent(s)






                                  O R D E R
Heard Mr. Kishor Lambat, learned counsel in support  of  this
      appeal. None appears for the respondent though served.
2.       The appellant herein had agreed to sell a plot of land to the
      respondent by virtue of an agreement entered  into  with  him  on  2nd
      August, 1999. Inasmuch as  the  appellant  failed  to  hand  over  the
      possession of the concerned plot  of  land,  the  respondent  filed  a
      complaint,  bearing  No.62  of  2000,  before  the  District  Consumer
      Redressal Forum at Wardha. The appellant  had  raised  the  contention
      that the Consumer Forum had no jurisdiction to try the  matter  and  a
      claim for specific performance of the agreement would lie only  before
      the Civil Court and not before the District Consumer Redressal  Forum.
      The District Forum, however, in its order dated  10.10.2000  took  the
      view that no civil dispute was involved, and that it  was  a  case  of
      deficiency in rendering service to the respondent. The District  Forum
      therefore passed an order  directing  the  appellant  to  deliver  the
      possession of the concerned plot of land.
3.       The appellant carried this matter  in  appeal  to  the  State
      Commission under
Section 15
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986  (the
      Act, for short). The State Commission rejected the said appeal by  its
      order dated 23.10.2000. Being aggrieved  by  the  judgment  and  order
      passed by the State  Commission,  a  revision  was  filed  before  the
      National  Consumer  Disputes  Redressal   Commission.   The   National
      Commission took the same  view  and  dismissed  the  revision  by  the
      impugned order dated 14.9.2001.  Being aggrieved by this judgment  and
      order the present appeal has been filed.  Though  the  respondent  has
      been served, he has not turned up to defend the cause.
4.       Mr. Lambat, learned counsel for the appellant submitted  that
      the dispute between the parties was concerning the sale of a  plot  of
      land. A complaint as defined under Section  2(1)(c)  of  the  Act  was
      lodged to look into the allegations of
(i) unfair trade  practice  or  a  restrictive  trade
           practice adopted by any trader or service provider;
(ii) the goods bought by him or agreed to  be  bought
           by him suffer from one or more defects;
(iii) the services hired or availed of or  agreed  to
           be hired or availed of by  him suffer  from  deficiency  in  any
           respect;
(iv) a trader or the service provider,  as  the  case
           may be, has charged for the goods or for the services  mentioned
           in the complaint, a price in excess of the price;
(v) goods which are sold are hazardous  to  life  and
           safety when used;
(vi) services which are hazardous  or  likely  to  be
           hazardous to life and safety of the public when used, are  being
           offered by the service provider which  such  person  could  have
           known with due diligence to be injurious to life and safety.
5.        Learned  counsel  submits  that  a  sale  of  plot  of  land
      simpliciter cannot lead to a complaint to the District Consumer  Forum
      or to the State or National Consumer  Disputes  Redressal  Commission.
      The jurisdiction of the District Consumer Forum under
Section  11
of
      the Act is to entertain a complaint and as seen  above,  complaint  is
      defined in a particular manner, and primarily it is  with  respect  to
      the deficiency in making available the goods and  services.  The  term
      “deficiency” is also defined under
Section 2(1)(g)
of  the  Act  which
      reads as follows:
“deficiency”  means  any  fault,  imperfection,  shortcoming  or
           inadequacy in the quality,  nature  and  manner  of  performance
           which is required to be maintained by or under any law  for  the
           time being in force or has been undertaken to be performed by  a
           person in pursuance of a contract or otherwise  in  relation  to
           any service.”
6.       It is submitted that failure to hand over possession  of  the
      plot of land simpliciter cannot come within the  jurisdiction  of  the
      District Consumer Forum, State Commission or National  Commission.  We
      quite see merit in this submission of Mr. Lambat, particularly  having
      seen the definition of 'deficiency' as quoted above.  We may, however,
      note that when it comes to “housing construction”, the same  has  been
      specifically covered under the definition of 'service' by an amendment
      inserted by Act 50 of 1993 with effect from  18th  June,  1993.   That
      being the position, as far as the housing  construction  by  sale   of
      flats by builders or societies  is  concerned,  that  would  be  on  a
      different footing.  On the other hand, where a sale of  plot  of  land
      simpliciter is concerned, and if there  is  any  complaint,  the  same
      would not be covered under the said Act.
7.       Having noted this submission of Mr. Lambat, we must, however,
      record that he has fairly pointed out that subsequent to the order  of
      the State Commission, the appellant has executed the  sale  deed,  and
      the concerned plot of land has been handed  over  to  the  respondent.
      That being so, although we accept the legal submission made on  behalf
      of the appellant, he cannot be granted any relief, namely  to  dismiss
      the complaint which was filed in the District Consumer Forum which has
      now been entertained and acted upon by the conduct  of  the  appellant
      himself.  The appeal is therefore disposed of with these observations.
.........................J
               (H.L. GOKHALE)








                                     .........................J
                                     (J. CHELAMESWAR)


      New Delhi;
September 26, 2013.