[Cites
3
, Cited by
34
]
Supreme Court of India
Punjab State Power Corp.Ltd.Patiala ... vs Atma Singh Grewal on 17 September, 2013
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2013 SC 18, (2014) 3 MAD LW 97, (2015) 2 SCT 420, (2014) 2 ALL WC 1933, (2014) 1 SCALE 626, 2014 (13) SCC 666
Bench:
A.K. Sikri
,
K.S. Radhakrishnan
REPORTABLE


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


              SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 29589 OF 2009




    Punjab State Power Corporation Ltd. Patiala & Ors.       …......
    Petitioners




                                   Versus




    Atma Singh Grewal                                   ….......Respondent




                                  O R D E R
1. Petitioner  No.  1  is  the  Punjab  State  Electricity  Board  (PSEB);
     Petitioner No. 2 is the Chief  Engineer,  HRD-cum-Inquiry  Officer  and
     Petitioner No. 3 is the Senior  Executive  Engineer  working  in  PSEB.
     Respondent was the employee of PSEB  who  retired  from  service,  with
     effect from 30.4.2004.  He  had  given  the  notice  on  27.2.2004  for
     voluntary retirement which was accepted. As a  result,  the  respondent
     stood voluntary retired from 30.4.2004. However, almost 4  years  after
     his retirement i.e. on 7.1.2008, the respondent  was  served  with  the
     charge sheet  levelling  certain  allegations  against  him,  allegedly
     committed between 15.5.2002 to 3.12.2002. These charges which were  for
     the period May 2002 to December 2002 were obviously of  a  period  much
     earlier than 4 years before the  serving  of  the  charge  sheet  dated
     7.1.2008 and much after his retirement when he had  ceased  to  be  the
     employee of PSEB.
2. The Respondent filed the  Writ  Petition  in  the  High  Court  seeking
     quashing of the said charge sheet on the ground that it was  barred  in
     view of Rule 2.2.(B) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules 2 reserves right
     with the Government to withhold or withdraw a pension or a part  of  it
     under certain  circumstances  viz.  when  in  judicial  proceedings  or
     departmental proceedings, such an employee is found to  have  committed
     grave misconduct or  negligence.  It  also  provides  for  recovery  of
     peculiar loss, if caused. However,  second  proviso  to  the  aforesaid
     provision stipulates the  time  limit  within  which  the  departmental
     inquiry can be instituted, in respect of an ex-employee if it  was  not
     stated while such a Government officer  was  in  service.  The  precise
     language of second proviso is as follows:-
“Such departmental proceedings,  if  not  instituted  while  the
           officer was in service whether before his retirement  or  during
           his re-employment:-
(i)    shall not be instituted save with the sanction of the
                Government;
(ii)   shall not be in respect of any event which took place
                more than four years before such institution; and if he  has
                retired, the event should not be more than 4 years old.
iii) shall be conducted by such authority and in  such  place  as
                the  Government  may  direct  and  in  accordance  with  the
                procedure applicable to departmental proceedings in which an
                order of dismissal from service could be made in relation to
                the officer during his service.
3. In the present case since the changes were of the year 2002 and  charge
    sheet served in the year 2008, it was manifest that the  alleged  event
    took place much more than 4 years before the serving  of  charge  sheet
    and after his retirement. In  this  ground  the  learned  Single  Judge
    quashed the said chargesheet dated 7.1.2008. The petitioners  chose  to
    file appeal before the Division Bench which has also been dismissed  by
    the Division Bench vide impugned judgment dated 20.8.2009.
4. After hearing the Counsel for the parties we are of the opinion that in
    view of aforesaid admitted facts, second proviso of Rule  2  states  at
    the face of the petitioner and no fault can be found in the judgment of
    the High Court.
5. Virtually accepting the aforesaid position the learned Counsel for  the
    petitioner made a fervent plea the  cost  of  Rs.  10,000/-  which  the
    Division Bench of the High  Court  has  imposed  upon  the  PSEB,  with
    direction that PSEB  shall  recover  the  same  from  the  officer  who
    authorised the filing of the said appeal. He submitted that in any case
    such a direction for recovery of the amount from the concerned  officer
    should be done away with.
6. The reason given by the High Court while imposing the cost is as under:
“This is yet another instance of a frivolous appeal filed at the
           hands of a statutory body. There was absolutely no merit and  no
           cause to file the instant appeal. Despite the same,  the  Punjab
           State Electricity Board, chose  to  prefer  the  instant  appeal
           without application of mind. In  this  case,  the  Punjab  State
           Electricity Board has not only  incurred  unnecessary  expenses,
           but also wasted precious Court time.
In view of the above, we are  of  the  view,  that  the  instant
           appeal deserves to be dismissed with costs. The  instant  appeal
           is, accordingly, dismissed with costs quantified at Rs. 10,000/-
           . the aforesaid costs shall not  be  borne  by  the  Electricity
           Board, but shall be recovered from the  officer  who  authorized
           the filing of the instant appeal. The aforesaid costs shall,  in
           the first instance, be deposited by the appellant with the Legal
           Services Authority, Punjab, within one  month  from  today.  The
           recovery thereof shall be made from the concerned officer within
           a further period of two months.
In case, the aforesaid recovery is  made  from  an  officer  who
           feels that the actual  responsibility  for  filing  the  instant
           appeal rested on the shoulders of some other officer,  it  would
           be open to such officer to approach this Court by moving a civil
           miscellaneous application (in the instant Letters Patent Appeal)
           so as to require this Court to determine the  accountability  of
           the officer concerned”.
Since the provisions of the aforesaid statutory rule are crystal
    clear, we are  in  agreement  with  the  High  Court  that  the  appeal
    preferred by the petitioners was totally frivolous. Therefore, the High
    Court has rightly awarded the cost while dismissing such a  merit  less
    appeal. The only question is of recovery of this cost from the  officer
    who authorised the filing of the said appeal.
7.     Here we may note that the Courts are burdened  with  unnecessary
    litigation primarily because of  the reason that the Government or PSUs
    etc. decide to file the appeals even when there is absolutely no  merit
    therein. Commenting on such a tendency to file frivolous appeals,  this
    Court in a recent judgment in a case of
Gurgaon Gramin Bank v. Khazani
;
    (2012) 8 SCC 781, speaking through one of us (K.S.  Radhakrishnan,  J.)
    expressed its discomfiture in the following words:
“The number of litigations in our country is on  the  rise,  for
           small and trivial matters, people and sometimes the Central  and
           the State Governments and their  instrumentalities  like  banks,
           nationalised or private, come to Courts may be due to ego  clash
           or  to  save  the  officers  skin.  The   judicial   system   is
           overburdened which naturally causes  delay  in  adjudication  of
           disputes. Mediation Centres  opened  in  various  parts  of  our
           country have, to some extent, eased the burden of the courts but
           we are still in the tunnel and the light is far  away.  On  more
           than  on  occasion,  this  Court  has   reminded   the   Central
           Government, the State Governments and other instrumentalities as
           well as to the various  banking  institutions  to  take  earnest
           efforts to resolve the disputes at their  end.  At  times,  some
           give and take attitude should be  adopted  or  both  will  sink.
           Unless serious questions of law of general importance arise  for
           consideration or a question which  affects  a  large  number  of
           persons or the stakes are very  high,  the  courts  jurisdiction
           cannot be invoked for resolution of small and  trivial  matters.
           We are really disturbed by the manner in which  those  types  of
           matters are being brought to courts even at  the  level  of  the
           Supreme Court of India and this case falls in that category”.
8.      It is not the first time that the  Court  had  to  express  its
    anguish. We would like to observe that the mind set of  the  Government
    agencies/ undertakings in filing unnecessarily appeals was  taken  note
    of by the Law Commission of India way back in 1973, in its 54th report.
    Taking cognizance of the aforesaid report of the Law Commission as well
    as National Litigation Policy for the States which was  evolved  at  an
    All India Law Ministers Conference in the year 1972, this Court had  to
    emphasize that there should not be unnecessary litigation  or  appeals.
    It was so done in the case of
Mundrika Prasad Singh v. State of  Bihar
;
    1979 (4) SCC 701.
We would also like to reproduce the  following  words
    of wisdom expressed by Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer,  who  spoke  for  the
    Bench, in  Dilbagh Rai Jarry v. Union of India and Ors.; 1974  (3)  SCC
554.
           “But it must be remembered that the State is no  ordinary  party
           trying to win a case against one of its own citizens by hook  or
           by crook; for the State's interest is  to  meet  honest  claims,
           vindicate a substantial defence and never to score  a  technical
           point or overreach a weaker party to avoid a just  liability  or
           secure an unfair advantage, simply because legal devices provide
           such an opportunity. The State is a virtuous litigant and  looks
           with unconcern on immoral forensic successes so that if  on  the
           merits the case is  weak,  government  shows  a  willingness  to
           settle the dispute  regardless  of  prestige  and  other  lesser
           motivations which move private parties to fight  in  court.  The
           lay out on litigation costs and executive time by the State  and
           its agencies is so staggering these days because  of  the  large
           amount of litigation in which it is involved that a positive and
           wholesome policy of cutting back on the volume of law  suits  by
           the twin methods of not being tempted into forensic  show  downs
           where a reasonable adjustment is feasible and ever  offering  to
           extinguish a pending proceeding on just terms, giving the  legal
           mentors of government some  initiative  and  authority  in  this
           behalf”.
9. In its 126th Report (1988),  the  Law  Commission  of  India  adversely
    commented  upon  the  reckless  manner  in  which  appeals  are   filed
    routinely. We quote hereunder the relevant passage therefrom:
“2.5. The litigation is thus sometimes engendered by failing  to
           perform duty as if discharging a trust. Power inheres a kind  of
           trust. The State enjoys the power to deal with public  property.
           That power has to be discharged like a trust keeping in view the
           interests of the cesti que trust. Failure on this front has been
           more often commented upon by the court which, if it was taken in
           the spirit in which it was made, would have long back  energised
           the Government and the public sector to draw up  its  litigation
           policy. When entirely frivolous litigation reaches the doorsteps
           of the Supreme Court, one feels exasperated by the inaction  and
           the policy to do  nothingness  evidenced  by  blindly  following
           litigation from court  to  court.  Dismissing  a  Special  Leave
           Petition by the State of Punjab, the  Court  observed  that  the
           deserved defeat of the State in the  courts  below  demonstrates
           the gross indifference of the administration towards  litigative
           diligence. The court then suggested effective remedial measures.
           It may be extracted:
We would like to  emphasize  that  Government  must  be  made
               accountable  by  parliamentary  Social  audit  for   wasteful
               litigative  expenditure  inflicted  on   the   community   by
               inaction. A statutory notice of  the  proposed  action  under
               section 80CPC is intended to alert the state to  negotiate  a
               just settlement or at least have the  courtesy  to  tell  the
               potential outsider why  the  claim  is  being  resisted.  Now
               section 80 has become a ritual because the administration  is
               often unresponsive and hardly lives up  to  the  parliament's
               expectation in continuing section 80 in the Code despite  the
               Central Law Commission's recommendations for its deletion. An
               opportunity for setting the dispute through  arbitration  was
               thrown away by sheer inaction. A litigative  policy  for  the
               State  involves  settlement  of  governmental  disputes  with
               citizens in a sense of conciliation rather than in a fighting
               mood. Indeed, it should be a directive on  the  part  of  the
               State to empower its law officer to  take  steps  to  compose
               disputes  rather  than  continue  them  in  court.   We   are
               constrained to make these observations because  much  of  the
               litigation in which governments are involved adds to the case
               load  accumulation  in  courts  for  which  there  is  public
               criticism. We hope that a  more  responsive  spirit  will  be
               brought to bear upon governmental litigation so as  to  avoid
               waste of public money and promote expeditious work in  courts
               of cases which deserve to be attended to.
Nearly a decade has passed since the observations but not a leaf
           has turned, not a step has been taken, and the Law Commission is
           asked to deal with the problem.
2.6.   A  little  care,  a  touch  of  humanism,  a  dossier  of
           constitutional philosophy and awareness of  futility  of  public
           litigation would considerably improve the situation which  today
           is  distressing.  More  often   it   is   found   that   utterly
           unsustainable contentions are taken on behalf of Government  and
           public sector undertakings.”
10.    Even when Courts  have,  time  and  again,  lamented  about  the
    frivolous appeals filed by the Government authorities, it has no effect
    on the bureaucratic psyche. It is not that there is no  realisation  at
    the level of policy makers to curtail  unwanted  Government  litigation
    and there are deliberations in this behalf from time to time. Few years
    ago only, the Central Government formulated National Litigation Policy,
     2010 with the “vision/ mission” to transform the  Government  into  an
    efficient and responsible  litigant.  This  policy  formulated  by  the
    Central Government is based on the recognition that it was its  primary
    responsibility to protect the rights of citizens, and to respect  their
    fundamental rights and in the process  it  should  become  “responsible
    litigant”.  The  policy  even  defines  the   expression   'responsible
    litigant' as under:-
“Responsible litigant” means


              • That litigation will not be resorted  to  for  the  sake  of
                litigating.
• That false pleas and technical points will not be taken  and
                shall be discouraged.
• Ensuring that the correct facts and all  relevant  documents
                will be placed before the Court.
• That nothing will be suppressed from  the  Court  and  there
                will not attempt to mislead any court or tribunal.
That Government must cease to  be  a  compulsive  litigant.  The
           philosophy that  matters  should  be  left  to  the  courts  for
           ultimate decision has to be discarded. The easy  approach,  “Let
           the Court decide”, must be eschewed and condemned.
The purpose underlying this policy is also to reduce  government
           litigation in courts so that valuable court time would be  spent
           in resolving other pending cases so as to achieve  the  goal  in
           the national legal mission to reduce average pendency time  from
           15 years to 3 years. Litigators on behalf of the Government have
           to keep in mind the  principles  incorporated  int  eh  national
           mission  for  judicial  reforms   which   includes   identifying
           bottlenecks  which  the  Government  and  its  agencies  may  be
           concerned with and also removing unnecessary government cases.
Prioritisation in litigation has to be achieved with  particular
           emphasis on welfare legislation, social reform, weaker  sections
           and senior citizens and other  categories  requiring  assistance
           must be given utmost priority”.
11.    This policy recognises the fact that  its  success  will  depend
    upon its strict implementation. Pertinently there is even  a  provision
    of accountability on  the  part  of  the  officers  who  have  to  take
    requisite steps in this behalf.
12.    The policy also contains the provision  for  filing  of  appeals
    indicating as to under what circumstances appeal should be filed. In so
    far as service matters are concerned, this  provision  lays  down  that
    further proceedings will not be filed in service matters merely because
    the order of the Administrative Tribunal affects a number of employees.
    Also, appeals will not be filed to espouse the cause of one section  of
    employees against another.
13.    The aforesaid litigation policy was seen as a silver  living  to
    club unnecessary and uncalled for  litigation  by  this  Court  in  the
    matter of
Urban Improvement Trust, Bikaner v. Mohan Lal
; 2010 (1)  SCC
    512 in the following manner:-
“The Central Government is now  attempting  to  deal  with  this
           issue by formulating realistic and practical norms for defending
           cases filed against the Government and for filing  appeals   and
           revisions  against  adverse   decisions,   thereby   eliminating
           unnecessary litigation. But it is not sufficient if the  Central
           Government  alone  undertakes  such  an  exercise.   The   State
           Governments  and  th4e  statutory  authorities,  who  have  more
           litigations  than  the  Central  Government,  should  also  make
           genuine efforts to eliminate unnecessary litigations.  Vexatious
           and unnecessary litigations have been  clogging  the  wheels  of
           justice for  too  long,  making  it  difficult  for  courts  and
           tribunals to provide easy and speedy access to justice  to  bona
           fide and needy litigants”.
14.    Alas, inspite of the Government's own policy and reprimand  from
    this Court, on numerous occasions, there  is  no  significant  positive
    effect on various Government officials who continue to take decision to
    file frivolous and vexatious appeals.  It imposes unnecessary burden on
    the Courts. The opposite party which has succeeded in the  Court  below
    is also made to incur avoidable expenditure. Further, it  causes  delay
    in allowing the successful litigant to reap the fruits of the  judgment
    rendered by the Court below.
15.    No doubt, when a case is decided in favour of a party, the Court
    can award cost as well in his favour. It is stressed by this Court that
    such cost should be in real  and  compensatory  terms  and  not  merely
    symbolic. There can be exemplary costs  as  well  when  the  appeal  is
    completely devoid of any  merit.  [See  Rameshwari  Devi  and  Ors.  v.
Nirmala Devi and Ors.; (2011) 8 SCC 249]. However, the moot question is
    as to whether imposition of costs alone will prove deterrent?  We don't
    think so. We are of the firm opinion that imposition  of  cost  on  the
    State/ PSU's alone is not going to make much difference as the officers
    taking such irresponsible decisions to file appeals are not  personally
    affected because of the reason that cost, if imposed,  comes  from  the
    government's coffers.   Time has, therefore, come  to  take  next  step
    viz. recovery of cost  from  such  officers  who  take  such  frivolous
    decisions of filing appeals, even after knowing  well  that  these  are
    totally vexatious and uncalled for appeals. We  clarify  that  such  an
    order of recovery of cost from the concerned officer be passed only  in
    those cases where appeal is found to  be  ex-facie  frivolous  and  the
    decision to file the appeal is also found to be palpably irrational and
    uncalled for.
16.     In a case like the present, where the  concerned  officer  took
    the decision to file the  appeal,  direction   of  the  High  Court  to
    recover  the  cost  from  him  cannot  be  faulted   with.   Sense   of
    responsibility would drawn on such officers only when they are made  to
    pay the costs from their pockets, instead of burdening the exchequer.
17.     We  are,  therefore,  not  inclined  to  recall  the  aforesaid
    direction of the High Court  to  recover  the  cost  from  the  officer
    concerned.
18.    Dismissed with further cost of Rs. 10,000/-.
…........................................J.
                                                        [K.S. RADHAKRISHNAN]








                               …..........................................J.
                                                                [A.K. SIKRI]






    New Delhi
    September 17, 2013