[Cites
16
, Cited by
95
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Smt. B. Manjula vs District Collector, Civil Supplies, ... on 26 November, 2014
Equivalent citations: AIR 2015 (NOC) 367 (HYD.)
Author:
C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy
Bench:
C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy
HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY          

W.P.No.32713 of 2011  

26-11-2014 

Smt. B. Manjula.. Petitioner

District Collector, Civil Supplies, Kurnool and others  .. Respondents 

Counsel for petitioner : Sri K. Rajanna

Counsel for respondents : Assistant Government Pleader 
                           for Civil Supplies (AP)

<GIST: 

>HEAD NOTE:    

? CASES REFERRED:      
1.  (2008) 8 SCC 236
2. ILR  1967 A.P. 904
3.  (1973) 2 SCC 378
4. 1987 (Supp) SCC 518  
5. 2011(2) ALD 477 
6. AIR 1966 S.C. 671 
7. (2010) 2 SCC 497 
8. (2010) 3 SCC 732 


HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE C.V. NAGARJUNA REDDY          
W.P.No.32713 of 2011  
Date : 26-11-2014

The Court made the following

ORDER:
This Writ Petition is filed for a mandamus to set-aside order dated
Nil-4-2011 of respondent No.3 and orders dated 3-8-2011 and 1-12-2011
of respondent Nos.2 and 1, passed in the appeal and revision,
respectively.
The facts of the case lie in a very narrow compass.  The
petitioners fair price shop was inspected by the Tahsildar, Gonegandla
Mandal.  The charges framed based on the said inspection and the
explanation offered thereto by the petitioner, as reflected in the
impugned order, are as follows :
Sl.No.
Charges framed 
Explanation offered by the
dealer/petitioner
1
There are no entries in stock
register of rice
The dealer has explained that she
received P.D.S. rice on 2-2-2011 and
get the release orders from the Mandal
Revenue Inspector on 3-2-2011 and 
started distribution of rice and
distributed upto 48 Qtls. On 4th & 5th
and made all entries and she attended a
marriage at Adoni returned on 8th and
again she went to attend alliance at
Adoni and could not make entries as
she returned on 10th.
2
Rice stock has been 
compared with reference to
issue register and the
ground balance and it
should be 90 kgs. But the
actual ground balance found
is 2.50 Qtls i.e., 1.60 Qtls of
rice is excess.
The dealer has explained that as she
was not in the town, some card holders
left the cards in the shop in her absence
with the weighman.  There was a 
balance of 1.60 Qtls. of rice.  The
Officer has not examined the card
holders and come to decision.
3
The sugar stocks are NIL as
per the stock register but 20
kgs. of ground balance is
available in the F.P. Shop
The dealer has explained that 20 kgs.
of sugar has purchased by her clerk in
open market and kept in the shop.  A
bill was also said to be produced.
4
6 white ration cards are
available in the shop
(details are in Panchanama)
and one Arogyasree card 
and one bogus pattadar 
passbook have been seized.
The dealer has explained that the six
cards were collected from the card
holders and kept in the shop as she was
not in town.
5
Empty bottles of liquor
(IMFL) of different liquor
companies in different sizes
are found in the F.P. shop.
The dealer has explained that they
were kept to close the holes put by the
rats after breaking them.
6
That the dealer has failed to
display the board showing
the particulars of stock and
their rates.
The dealer has explained that the stock
board was inside the shop which was 
also shown to the vigilance officer.
By order dated Nil-4-2011, respondent No.3 has cancelled the
petitioners authorisation while not accepting the explanation of the
petitioner.  This order was confirmed in appeal and revision by
respondent Nos.2 and 1, respectively.
I have heard Sri K. Rajanna, learned Counsel for the petitioner and
the learned Assistant Government Pleader for Civil Supplies (AP).
The power of respondent No.3 to impose penalties on fair price
shop dealers is derived from sub-clause (5) of Clause 5 of the A.P. State
Public Distribution System (Control) Order 2008.  The said provision
reads as under :
The appointing authority may, at any time whether at the request
of the authorised fair price shop dealer/nominated retailer/hawker or
authorised establishment on suo motu after making such enquiry as may 
be deemed necessary and for reasons to be recorded in writing, add to,
amend, vary, suspend or cancel the authorisation issued or deemed to be
issued to him under this clause. (Emphasis added)

The Clause reproduced above enjoins on the appointing authority to
follow two mandatory conditions before imposing any penalty as
envisaged therein.  The first, it shall make an enquiry as deemed
necessary; and the second, it shall record reasons in writing.
As per the Oxford Dictionary Thesaurus, Indian Edition-2007,
meaning of the word enquiry includes probe, examine, explore, delve
into.  The word enquiry fell for judicial interpretation by the Apex
Court in the context of service law jurisprudence.
In
State of
Uttaranchal Vs. Kharak Singh
, the Supreme Court, inter alia, held
that enquiries must be conducted bonafide and care must be taken to see
that they do not become empty formalities.
In G.K. Doriaswamy Naidu Vs. State of A.P.  this Court while
considering
Section 8
of the A.P. Civil Services (Disciplinary
Proceedings) Tribunal Act, 1960 held that the word enquiry covers the
hearing of the proceedings i.e., recording evidence, admitting documents
and generally complete the record upon which a finding would be based.
This view was approved by the Apex Court in
Dr.M.N. Dasanna Vs. 
State of A.P.
.
In
Chandrama Tewari Vs. Union of India
the Supreme Court
held that the disciplinary enquiry must be held in accordance with the
rules in a just and fair manner and that the procedure at the enquiry must
be consistent with the principles of natural justice; that the principles of
natural justice require that a copy of the document, if any, relied upon
against the party charged should be given to him and he should be
afforded opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses and to produce his
own witnesses in his defence; that if the findings are recorded against a
Government servant placing reliance on a document which may not have 
been disclosed to him or the copy whereof may not have been supplied
to him during the enquiry when demanded, that would contravene the
principles of natural justice rendering the enquiry and the consequential
order of punishment illegal and void.
In Kondamudi Banerjee Vs. Revenue Divisional Officer,
Ongole , I have held at paras 6 and 7 as under :
Indubitably the order cancelling the privilege of distribution
of essential commodities through a licence visits the holder of
the licence with adverse consequences.  Before subjecting the
licensee to such an adverse order, it is obligatory on the part of
the competent authority to apply his mind to the charges framed
against and the explanation offered by the licensee.  Failure to
follow this fair procedure renders the very purpose of framing
the charges and calling for explanation otiose.  The principles of
natural justice, it is trite, are embedded in the administrative law
field.  Whenever an action, which is likely to cause adverse civil
consequences is sought to be taken, the person, who is likely to
be affected by such action, is entitled to reasonable opportunity
of defending himself (See :
State of Orissa Vs. Dr. (Miss)
Binapani Devi and others
AIR 1967 SC 1269, Menaka Gandhi   
Vs. Union of India
AIR 1978 SC 597, Swadeshi Cotton Mills
Vs. Union of India
AIR 1981 S.C. 818 and Rajesh Kumar Vs. 
Deputy CIT  (2007) 2 SCC 181).
By failing to consider the explanation of the petitioner with
reference to the charges framed against him, respondent No.1 has
indulged in serious violation of principles of natural justice.
Therefore, the impugned order cannot be sustained in law and is
accordingly quashed.  This order, however, does not preclude
respondent No.1 from considering the petitioners explanation
and passing a speaking order afresh with reference to the charges
framed against the petitioner.
This Court is conscious of the fact that the law discussed above
was laid down by the Courts in the context of disciplinary proceedings
against Government servants and it may not be possible to adhere to the
same rigors of procedure in an enquiry against a fair price shop dealer.
However, this Court is of the considered opinion that since an order of
cancellation of fair price shop visits the dealer with adverse
consequences, the appointing authority must adhere to the fundamental
ingredients of an enquiry.  The enquiry need not be too elaborate as in
the case of a disciplinary proceeding against a Government servant, but
it shall follow the basic requirement of an enquiry which in my view
must be as described infra.
An enquiry pre-supposes an opportunity of personal hearing to
the dealer to explain his/her case based on the records such as sales and
stock registers.  If need be, such enquiry must also include recording
the sworn statement of the dealer and witnesses, if any, from his/her
side.  In cases where either card holders or other persons sent any
complaint, they must also be examined in the presence of the dealer or
his/her lawyer and the dealer shall be given an opportunity of cross-
examining such persons.  The licencing /disciplinary authority shall also
supply to the dealer all the reports on which he is likely to place reliance
to the detriment of the dealer.  Unless the dealer has no explanation at all
to offer, the licensing/disciplinary authority is bound to hold a detailed
enquiry.
The experience of this Court reveals that the appointing authorities
of fair price shop dealers are dispensing with the requirement of making
personal enquiry by summoning the dealers.  They are merely relying
upon the reports sent by their subordinates i.e., Deputy Tahsildars and
Tahsildars, behind the back of the dealers and resting their decisions
solely upon those reports.  This procedure is anathema to the concept of
enquiry which otherwise means affording the dealer an opportunity of
a fair hearing.
As regards the second mandatory requirement under sub-clause  
(5) of Clause 5, namely; reasons to be recorded in writing, reasons
constitute the heart and soul of a decision.
In
Madhya Pradesh
Industries Ltd. Vs. Union of India and others
, the Supreme Court,
while dealing with an order passed by the Central Government under
Rule 55 of the A.P. Mineral Concession Rules 1960, emphasized on the 
need for giving reasons in support of the order.  The Supreme Court
inter alia held that the condition to give reasons introduces clarity and
excludes or at any rate minimises arbitrariness; it gives satisfaction to the
party against whom the order is made; and it also enables an appellate or
supervisory Court to keep the Tribunals within bounds.
In
G. Vallikumari Vs. Andhra Education Society and others
,
the Supreme Court, at para-19, held:
The requirement of recording reasons by every quasi-
judicial or even an administrative authority entrusted with the
task of passing an order adversely affecting an individual and
communication thereof to the affected person is one of the
recognised facets of the rules of natural justice and violation
thereof has the effect of vitiating the order passed by the
authority concerned.
In
Secretary and Curator, Victoria Memorial Hall Vs. Howrah
Ganatantrik Nagrik Samity and others
, the Supreme Court held at
paras 40, 41 and 42, as under:
It is a settled legal proposition that not only an administrative
but also a judicial order must be supported by reasons, recorded
in it.  Thus, while deciding an issue, the court is bound to give
reasons for its conclusion.  It is the duty and obligation on the
part of the court to record reasons while disposing of the case.
The hallmark of an order and exercise of judicial power by a
judicial forum is to disclose its reasons by itself and giving of
reasons has always been insisted upon as one of the
fundamentals of sound administration of justice-delivery system,
to make known that there had been proper and due application of
mind to the issue before the court and also as an essential
requisite of the principles of natural justice.  The giving of
reasons for a decision is an essential attribute of judicial and
judicious disposal of a matter before courts, and which is the
only indication to know about the manner and quality of exercise
undertaken, as also the fact that the court concerned had really
applied its mind. (
Vide State of Orissa v. Dhaniram Luhar
(
2004) 5 SCC 568 and State of Rajasthan v. Sohan Lal
(2004) 5
SCC 573) 
        Reason is the heartbeat of every conclusion.  It introduces
clarity in an order and without the same, it becomes lifeless.
Reasons substitute subjectivity by objectivity.  Absence of
reasons renders the order indefensible/unsustainable particularly
when the order is subject to further challenge before a higher
forum. (Vide:
Raj Kishore Jha v. State of Bihar
(2003) 11 SCC
519, SCC p.527, para 19;
Vishnu Dev Sharma v. State of U.P.
(2008) 3 SCC 172; SAIL v. STO ((
2008) 9 SCC 407, State of 
Uttaranchal v. Sunil Kumar Singh Negi
(
2008) 11 SCC 205, U.P. 
SRTC v. Jagdish Prasad Gupta
(2009) 12 SCC 609, Ram Phal v.   
State of Haryana (2009) 3 SCC 258, Mohd. Yusuf v. Faji
Mohammad (
2009) 3 SCC 513 and State of H.P. v. Sada Ram
(2009) 4 SCC 422).
Thus, it is evident that the recording of reasons is a principle
of natural justice and every judicial order must be supported by
reasons recorded in writing.  It ensures transparency and fairness
in decision making.  The person who is adversely affected may
know, as to why his application has been rejected.
Unfortunately, a perusal of the impugned order shows that
respondent No.3 has not even attempted to hold an enquiry and he has
allowed himself to be swayed away by the report of the Tahsildar,
Gonegandla without trying to test the veracity of the explanation offered
by the petitioner.  Unless the petitioner is given an opportunity of
substantiating her explanation, it would be a grave travesty of justice to
reject her explanation without holding an enquiry.  As respondent No.3
has not followed this procedure, the impugned order cannot be sustained
and the same is accordingly set-aside.  The orders of respondent Nos.2
and 1, which confirmed the order of respondent No.3 are also set-aside.
The fair price shop authorisation of the petitioner stands restored and she
shall be permitted to function as the fair price shop dealer.  This order,
however, will not prevent respondent No.3 from holding a detailed
enquiry in the light of the observations made hereinbefore and pass a
fresh order.
Subject to the above observation, the Writ Petition is allowed.
        As a sequel to the disposal of the Writ Petition, WPMP No.40663
of 2011 is disposed of as infructuous.
________________________    
Justice C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy 
Date : 26-11-2014