[Cites
12
, Cited by
1104
]
Supreme Court of India
S. A. Builders Ltd. .. Petitioner vs Commissioner Of Income Tax (Appeals) ... on 14 December, 2006
Equivalent citations: AIR 2007 SUPREME COURT 482, 2007 (1) SCC 781, 2007 AIR SCW 1, 2007 TAX. L. R. 82, 2006 (14) SCALE 60, (2007) 51 ALLINDCAS 409 (SC), (2007) 197 TAXATION 1, (2006) 14 SCALE 60, (2006) 206 CURTAXREP 631, (2006) 8 SUPREME 1033, (2007) 288 ITR 1, AIRONLINE 2006 SC 635
Author:
Markandey Katju
Bench:
S. B. Sinha
,
Markandey Katju
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  5811 of 2006

PETITIONER:
S. A. Builders Ltd.					        ..			Petitioner

RESPONDENT:
Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) Chandigarh & Anr.  ..		     Respondents

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 14/12/2006

BENCH:
S. B. SINHA & MARKANDEY KATJU

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition Nos. 21707-21710/2004)

[with CA Nos. 5812 /2006 @ SLP(Civil) Nos. 1300-1301/2005]



MARKANDEY KATJU, J.
Leave granted.
These two appeals involve  common questions of law and fact and 
hence are being disposed of by a common judgment.
Since the leading case is that of S.A. Builders [SLP(C) 21707-
21710/2004], we shall be taking note of the facts of this case.
These appeals have been filed against the impugned judgment of the 
Punjab and Haryana High Court dated 13.5.2004 in Income Tax Appeal 
Nos. 6, 7, 119 and 120 of 2003, and the judgment dated 21.5.2004 in ITA 
No. 117/118 of 2003.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
During the course of the proceeding for the relevant assessment 
year(s), the Assessing Officer under the
Income Tax Act
observed that the 
assessee had transferred a huge amount of Rs. 82 lakhs to its subsidiary 
company M/s. SAB Credits Limited out of the cash credit account of the 
assessee in which there was a huge debit balance.  He, therefore, held that 
since the assessee had diverted its borrowed funds to a sister concern 
without charging any interest, proportionate interest relating to the said 
amount out of the total interest paid to the bank deserved to be disallowed.  
Accordingly, he disallowed a sum of Rs. 5, 66, 729/- .
The assessee preferred an appeal to the Commissioner of Income Tax 
(Appeals) Chandigarh [for short hereinafter referred to as the CIT(A)], who 
vide his order dated 15.4.1993 partially accepted the claim of the assessee.  
According to the CIT (A), out of the total amount of Rs. 82 lacs advanced by 
the assessee in the relevant assessment year to M/s. SAB Credit Limited, 
only a sum of Rs. 18 lacs had a clear nexus with the borrowed funds, as the 
balance amount had been paid out of the receipts from other parties to whom 
no interest had been paid.  Accordingly, the CIT(A) directed  the Assessing 
Officer to calculate disallowance of interest only relating to the sum of Rs. 
18 lacs, and the disallowance was reduced accordingly.
Both the assessee as well as the Revenue filed appeals before the 
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the 'Tribunal').  
The Tribunal by its order dated  20.6.2002 allowed the appeal of the 
Revenue, and held that the entire amount of Rs. 82 lacs had been advanced 
by the assessee by utilizing the overdraft account, and hence it was of the 
view that disallowance made by the Assessing Officer was justified.  
Accordingly, the appeal filed by the Revenue was allowed and the appeal 
field by the assessee was dismissed.
Against the order of the Tribunal, the assessee filed appeals in the 
High Court which were dismissed by the impugned judgment.
In the assessment year 1991-92, the Assessing Officer noticed that in 
addition to the sum of Rs. 82 lacs advanced in the assessment year 1990-91, 
a further sum of Rs. 37,85,000/- had been advanced to M/s. SAB Credits Ltd 
which also had a clear nexus with the amounts borrowed by the assessee on 
payment of interest. Accordingly, the Assessing Officer disallowed 
proportionate interest relatable to these amounts amounting to Rs. 
20,08,836/-.
On appeal by the assessee, the CIT(A) upheld the finding of the 
Assessing Officer that the sum of Rs. 37,85,000/- advanced during 
assessment year 1990-91, was relatable to the borrowed funds.  However, in 
view of the findings of her predecessor in assessment year 1990-91, that out 
of Rs. 82 lacs advanced during that year, advance of Rs. 64 lacs had no 
nexus with the borrowed funds, she reduced the disallowance from Rs. 
20,08,836 to Rs. 10,03,538/- vide her order dated 28.7.1994.  The assessee 
was granted further relief of Rs. 1,48,464/- by the CIT(A) vide order dated 
6.9.1995 under
Section 154
of the Act.  On the cross-appeals filed by the 
assessee as well as the Revenue, the Tribunal following its order for 
assessment year 1990-91, upheld the disallowance as made by the Assessing 
Officer.   Accordingly, the appeal of the revenue on this issue was allowed 
and that of the assessee dismissed.
Against this decision also, the assessee filed an appeal before the High 
Court.
In the impugned judgment dated 13.5.2004, the High Court held that 
the Tribunal had recorded a categorical finding of fact that the amount 
advanced by the assessee to M/s. SAB Credits Limited by utilizing the 
overdraft account and that on the date on which the amount was advanced 
there was no credit balance in the bank account of the assessee.  The 
Tribunal further observed that the assessee has not been able to explain the 
purpose for which the amount had been advanced to its sister concern 
without charging any interest and there was no material on record to show 
that the assessee had derived any business benefit by advancing the interest 
free amounts to its sister concern.
The High Court held that since it stands established that the amount of 
Rs. 82 lacs and Rs. 37.85 lacs had been advanced by the assessee to its sister 
concern from out of the overdraft account with the bank in which there was 
already a debit balance, the order of the Tribunal does not suffer from any 
factual or legal infirmity.   Accordingly, the High Court dismissed the 
appeal.
Learned counsel for the appellant-assessee submitted that the High 
Court has erred in failing to consider the fact that the appellant had made the 
advances to its sister concern by withdrawals from its bank accounts in 
which there was sufficient credit balance as the appellant had received 
payments from its clients.  It is an admitted fact that the appellant had 
received these payments from its clients and had deposited these in the 
account out of which advances were subsequently made to the sister 
concern.  These deposits/payments/advances of Rs. 82 lacs as and when 
received and made by the appellant to its sister concern, namely, SAB 
Credits Ltd in the Assessment Year 1990-91 are reproduced hereunder in a 
tabular form:
Date
Ch. No.
Amount
Name of Bank
Course of funds
16.9.1989
683366
24.00 lacs
State Bank of 
Patiala, CC Account
Amount received from 
R.C.I., Hyderabad, a 
client
25.9.1989
684404
18.00 lacs
-do-
From cash credit 
account (Debit balance 
account)
27.12.1989
676546
20.00 lacs
-do-
From Indian Acrylics 
Ltd., a client
12.01.1990
476582
20.00 lacs
-do-
-do-
Rs. 82.00 lacs
----------------
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that a perusal of the 
above tabular statement makes it apparent that such payments as claimed 
were in fact received and deposited.  Thus, there is no direct nexus between 
the amount borrowed by the appellant-assessee from the bank and the loans 
advanced by the appellant-assessee to its sister concern, as no amount was so 
advanced by raising an interest bearing loan.
Learned counsel submitted that the High Court has erred in not 
considering the categorical finding of the CIT(A) in this regard.  He further 
stated that the CIT(A) in its order dated 15.4.1993 had given a clear finding 
of fact that except a sum of Rs. 18 lacs there was no clear nexus between the 
amount received on interest and the interest free advance made to M/s. SAB 
Credits Limited.    He further stated that the amount of Rs. 24 lacs, 20 lacs 
and 20 lacs respectively, were not paid out of the cash credit account but 
were paid out of the receipts from other parties to whom no interest had been 
paid.  The amount of Rs. 18 lacs was paid out of the cash credit account 
because there was a debit balance of Rs. 18 lacs on that date and, therefore, a 
clear nexus is proved in respect of the amount of Rs. 18 lacs  in the interest 
bearing loans and interest free advances.  On this view, the CIT(A) held that 
the Assessing Officer should have only disallowed interest relatable to Rs. 
18 lacs and not the entire amount of Rs. 82 lacs.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that even this 
disallowance of Rs. 18 lacs by the CIT(A) was erroneous and the entire sum 
of Rs. 82 lacs should have been allowed.
In paragraph 35-41 of its order the Tribunal has considered in detail 
the question of allowability of the interest amount on the borrowed funds.  
The Tribunal was of the view that the assessee had given an advance of Rs. 
82 lacs to its sister concern without charging any interest.  The Tribunal 
further observed that there was no material on record to show that the 
assessee derived any business advantage by advancing an interest free 
amount of Rs. 82 lacs to its sister concern.  It referred to several decisions in 
support of the view which it took.
We have considered the submission of the respective parties.  The  
question involved in this case is only about the allowability of the interest on 
borrowed funds and hence we are dealing only with that question.  In our 
opinion, the approach of the High Court as well as the authorities below on 
the aforesaid question was not correct.
In this connection we may refer to
Section 36(1)(iii)
of the Income 
Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Act') which states that "the 
amount of the interest paid in respect of capital borrowed for the purposes of 
the business or profession" has to be allowed as a deduction in computing 
the income tax under
Section 28
of the Act.
In
Madhav Prasad Jantia vs. Commissioner of Income Tax U.P.
AIR 1979 SC 1291, this Court held that the expression "for the purpose of 
business" occurring under the provision is wider in scope than the 
expression "for the purpose of earning income, profits or gains", and this has 
been the consistent view of this Court.
In our opinion, the High Court in the impugned judgment, as well as 
the Tribunal and the Income Tax authorities have approached the matter 
from an erroneous angle.  In the present case, the assessee borrowed the fund 
from the bank and lent some of it to its sister concern (a subsidiary) on 
interest free loan.  The test, in our opinion, in such a case is really whether 
this was done as a measure of commercial expediency.
In our opinion, the decisions relating to
Section 37
of the Act will also 
be applicable to
Section 36(1)(iii)
because in
Section 37
also the expression 
used is "for the purpose of business".  It has been consistently held in 
decisions relating to
Section 37
that the expression "for the purpose of 
business" includes expenditure voluntarily incurred for commercial 
expediency, and it is immaterial if a third party also benefits thereby.
Thus in Atherton vs. British Insulated & Helsby Cables Ltd (1925)10 
TC 155 (HL), it was held by the House of Lords that in order to claim a 
deduction, it is enough to show that the money is expended, not of necessity 
and with a view to direct and immediate benefit, but voluntarily and on 
grounds of commercial expediency and in order to indirectly to facilitate the 
carrying on the business.
The above test in Atherton's case (supra) has been 
approved by this Court in several decisions e.g.
Eastern Investments Ltd. 
vs. CIT
(
1951) 20 ITR 1, CIT vs. Chandulal Keshavlal & Co.
(1960) 38 
ITR 601 etc.

	In our opinion, the High Court as well as the Tribunal and other 
Income Tax authorities should have approached the question of allowability 
of interest on the borrowed funds from the above angle.  In other words, the 
High Court and other authorities should have enquired as to whether the 
interest free loan was given to the sister company (which is a subsidiary of 
the assessee) as a measure of commercial expediency, and if it was, it should 
have been allowed.
The expression "commercial expediency" is an expression of wide 
import and includes such expenditure as a prudent businessman incurs for 
the purpose of business. The expenditure may not have been incurred under 
any legal obligation, but yet it is allowable as a business expenditure if it 
was incurred on grounds of commercial expediency.
No doubt, as held in
Madhav Prasad Jantia vs. CIT
(supra), if the 
borrowed amount was donated for some sentimental or personal reasons and 
not on the ground of commercial expediency, the interest thereon could not 
have been allowed under
Section 36(1)(iii)
of the Act.
In
Madhav Prasad
's 
case (supra), the borrowed amount was donated to a college with a view to 
commemorate the memory of the assessee's deceased husband after whom 
the college was to be named.  It was held by this Court that the interest on 
the borrowed fund in such a case could not be allowed, as it could not be 
said that it was for commercial expediency.
Thus, the ratio of
Madhav Prasad Jantia
's case (supra) is that the 
borrowed fund advanced to a third party should be for commercial 
expediency if it is sought to be allowed under
Section 36(1)(iii)
of the Act.
In the present case, neither the High Court nor the Tribunal nor other 
authorities have examined whether the amount advanced to the sister 
concern was by way of commercial expediency.
It has been repeatedly held by this Court that the expression "for the 
purpose of business" is wider in scope than the expression " for the purpose 
of earning profits" vide
CIT vs. Malayalam Plantations Ltd.
(
1964) 53 ITR 
140, CIT vs. Birla Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills Ltd
(1971) 82 ITR 
166 etc.

The High Court and the other authorities should have examined the 
purpose for which the assessee advanced the money to its sister concern, and 
what the sister concern did with this money, in order to decide whether it 
was for commercial expediency, but that has not been done.
It is true that the borrowed amount in question was not utilized by the 
assessee in its own business, but had been advanced as interest free loan to 
its sister concern.  However, in our opinion, that fact is not really relevant.  
What is relevant is whether the assessee advanced such amount to its sister 
concern as a measure of commercial expediency.
Learned counsel for the Revenue relied on a Bombay High Court 
decision in
Phaltan Sugar Works Ltd. Vs. Commissioner of Wealth-Tax
(1994) 208 ITR 989 in which it was held that deduction under
Section 
36(1)(iii)
can only be allowed on the interest if the assessee borrows capital 
for its own business.  Hence, it was held that interest on the borrowed 
amount could not be allowed if such amount had been advanced to a 
subsidiary company of the assessee.  With respect, we are of the opinion that 
the view taken by the Bombay High Court was not correct.  The correct view 
in our opinion was whether the amount advanced to the subsidiary or  
associated company or any other party was advanced as a measure of 
commercial expediency.
We are of the opinion that the view taken by the 
Tribunal in
Phaltan Sugar Works Ltd
(supra) that the interest was 
deductible as the amount was advanced to the subsidiary company as a 
measure of commercial expediency is the correct view, and the view taken 
by the Bombay High Court which set aside the aforesaid decision is not 
correct.
Similarly, the view taken by the Bombay High Court in
Phaltan 
Sugar Works Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Wealth-Tax
(1995) 215 ITR 582 
also does not appear to be correct.
We agree with the view taken by the Delhi High Court in
CIT vs. 
Dalmia Cement (Bhart) Ltd.
(2002) 254 ITR 377 that once it is established 
that there was nexus between the expenditure and the purpose of the 
business (which need not necessarily be the business of the assessee itself), 
the Revenue cannot justifiably claim to put itself in the arm-chair of the 
businessman or in the position of the board of directors and assume the role 
to decide how much is reasonable expenditure having regard to the 
circumstances of the case.  No businessman can be compelled to maximize 
its profit.  The income tax authorities must put themselves in the shoes of the 
assessee and see how a prudent businessman would act.  The authorities 
must not look at the matter from their own view point but that of a prudent 
businessman.   As already stated above, we have to see the transfer of the 
borrowed funds to a sister concern from the point of view of commercial 
expediency and not from the point of view whether the amount was 
advanced for earning profits.
We wish to make it clear that it is not our opinion that in every case 
interest on borrowed loan has to be allowed if the assessee advances it to a 
sister concern.  It all depends on the facts and circumstances of the 
respective case.  For instance, if the Directors of the sister concern utilize the 
amount advanced to it by the assessee for their personal benefit, obviously it 
cannot be said that such money was advanced as a measure of commercial 
expediency.  However, money can be said to be advanced to a sister concern 
for commercial expediency in many other circumstances (which need not be 
enumerated here).  However, where it is obvious that a holding company has 
a deep interest in its subsidiary, and hence if the holding company advances 
borrowed money to a subsidiary and the same is used by the subsidiary for 
some business purposes, the assessee would, in our opinion, ordinarily be  
entitled to deduction of interest on its borrowed loans.
In view of the above, we allow these appeals and set aside the 
impugned judgments of the High Court, the Tribunals and other authorities 
and remand the matter to the Tribunal for a fresh decision, in accordance 
with law and in the light of the observations made above.
We also make it clear that we are not setting aside the order of the 
Tribunal or other Income Tax authorities in relation to the other points dealt 
with by these authorities, except the point of deduction of interest on the 
borrowed funds.