[Cites
33
, Cited by
36
]
Supreme Court of India
Adityapur Industrial Area Development ... vs Union Of India & Ors on 3 May, 2006
Equivalent citations: AIR 2006 SUPREME COURT 2375, 2006 (5) SCC 100, 2006 AIR SCW 3085, 2006 (3) AIR JHAR R 546, 2006 TAX. L. R. 557, 2006 (5) SCALE 321, (2006) 153 TAXMAN 107, (2006) 4 JCR 202 (SC), (2006) 5 SUPREME 352, (2006) 5 SCALE 321, (2006) 3 PAT LJR 152, (2006) 6 SCJ 173, (2006) 202 CURTAXREP 464, (2006) 3 JLJR 132, MANU/SC/2725/2006, (2006) 283 ITR 97, (2006) 193 TAXATION 570
Author:
B.P. Singh
Bench:
B.P. Singh
,
S. H. Kapadia
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  6382 of 2003

PETITIONER:
Adityapur Industrial Area Development Authority

RESPONDENT:
Union of India & Ors.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 03/05/2006

BENCH:
B.P. SINGH & S. H. KAPADIA

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T 



B.P. SINGH, J.
Adityapur Industrial Area Development Authority  the appellant 
herein challenged, by a writ petition, the notice issued by the Deputy 
Commissioner of Income Tax, TDS Circle, Jamshedpur dated February 14, 
2003 to the Manager of the Central Bank of India, Jamshedpur bringing to 
the notice of the Manager of the Bank that the
Finance Act, 2002
had 
brought about changes in the
Income Tax Act
and while
Section 10(20A)
had been omitted, an Explanation was added to
Section 10(20)
of the Act.  
The provisions of the
Income Tax Act, 1961
as they stood after the 
amendment obliged the Bank to deduct income tax at source from the 
interest accrued on fixed deposit receipts of the appellant/Authority.  The 
Manager of the Bank was required to comply with the provisions and deduct 
tax at source and report compliance.  The High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi 
in the aforesaid writ petition pronounced its judgment on May 8, 2003 
dismissing the writ petition holding that in view of the amended provisions 
of the
Income Tax Act
, the notice was valid and legal.  The appellant/ 
Authority has impugned the judgment and order of the High Court in this 
appeal by special leave.
The appellant/Authority has been constituted under the
Bihar 
Industrial Areas Development Authority Act, 1974
to provide for planned 
development of industrial area, for promotion of industries and matters 
appurtenant thereto.  The appellant/Authority is a body corporate having 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and 
dispose of properties, both moveable and immovable, to contract, and by the 
said name sue or be sued. The Authority consists of a Chairman, a Managing 
Director and five other Directors appointed by the State Government.  The 
Authority is responsible for the planned development of the industrial area 
including preparation of the master plan of the area and promotion of 
industries in the area and other amenities incidental thereto.  The Authority 
has its own establishment for which it is authorized to frame regulations 
with prior approval of the State Government.  The State Government is 
authorized to entrust the Authority from time to time with any work 
connected with planned development, or maintenance of the industrial area 
and its amenities and matters connected thereto.
Section 7
of the Act obliges 
the Authority to maintain its own fund to which shall be credited moneys 
received by the Authority from the State Government by way of grants, 
loans, advances or otherwise, all fees, rents, charges, levies and fines 
received by the Authority under the Act, all moneys received by the 
Authority from disposal of its moveable or immovable assets and all moneys 
received by the Authority by way of loan from financial and other 
institutions and debentures floated for the execution of a scheme or schemes 
of the Authority duly approved by the State Government.  Unless the State 
Government otherwise, directs, all moneys received by the Authority shall 
be credited to its funds which shall be kept with the State Bank of India and/ 
or one or more of the Nationalized Banks and drawn as and when required 
by the Authority.
Article 289
of the Constitution of India provides as follows:-
"289.  Exemption of property and income of a State from 
Union taxation.  (1) The property and income of a State shall 
be exempt from Union taxation.
(2)   Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the Union from 
imposing, or authorising the imposition of, any tax to such 
extent, if any, as Parliament may by law provide in respect of a 
trade or business of  any kind carried on by, or on behalf of, the 
Government of a State, or any operations connected therewith, 
or any property used or occupied for the purposes of such trade 
or business, or any income accruing or arising in connection 
therewith.
(3)	Nothing in clause (2) shall apply to any trade or business, 
or to any class of trade of business which Parliament may by 
law declare to be incidental to the ordinary functions of 
Government."
It is also necessary to notice the relevant provisions of the
Income Tax 
Act, 1961
.
Chapter III of the Income Tax Act
relates to incomes which do 
not form part of total income.  The relevant part of
Section 10
as it stood 
before its amendment by the
Finance Act
of 2002 read as follows:-
"10.  In computing the total income of a previous year of any 
person, any income falling within any of the following clauses 
shall not be included:-
. 				.				.
(20)	the income of a local authority which is chargeable under 
the head "Income from house property", "Capital gains"
or "Income from other sources" or from a trade or 
business carried on by it which accrues or arises from the 
supply of a commodity or service (not being water or 
electricity) within its own jurisdictional area or from the 
supply of water or electricity within or outside its own 
jurisdictional area ;
(20A)	any income of an authority constituted in India by or 
under any law enacted either for the purpose of dealing 
with and satisfying the need for housing accommodation 
or for the purpose of planning, development or 
improvement of cities, towns and villages, or for both."
By the Finance Act, 2002
with effect from April 1, 2003 an 
Explanation was added to
Section 10(20)
and
Section 10(20A)
was omitted.  
The Explanation added to
Section 10(20)
is as follows :-
"Explanation.  For the purposes of this clause, the expression 
"local authority" means
(i)	Panchayat as referred to in clause (d) of article 243 of the 
Constitution ; or
(ii)	Municipality as referred to in clause (e) of article 243P of 
the Constitution; or
(iii)	Municipal Committee and District Board,
legally entitled to, or entrusted by the Government with, 
the control or management of a Municipal or local fund;
or
(iv)	Cantonment Board as defined in
section 3
of the 
Cantonments Act, 1924 (2 of 1924). "
It would thus be seen that the income of a local authority chargeable 
under the head "Income from house property", "Capital gains" or "Income 
from other sources" or from a trade or business carried on by it was earlier 
excluded in computing the total income of the Authority of a previous year.  
However, in view of the amendment, with effect from April 1, 2003, the 
Explanation "local authority" was defined to include only the authorities 
enumerated in the Explanation, which does not include an authority such as 
the appellant.  At the same time
Section 10 (20A)
which related to income of 
an authority constituted in India by or under any law enacted for the purpose 
of dealing with and satisfying the need for housing accommodation or for 
the purpose of planning, development or improvement of cities, towns and 
villages, which before the amendment was not included in computing the 
total income, was omitted.  Consequently, the benefit conferred by (20A) on 
such an authority was taken away.
The High Court by its impugned judgment and order held that in view 
of the fact that
Section 10(20A)
was omitted and an Explanation was added 
to
Section 10(20)
enumerating the "local authorities" contemplated by
Section 10(20)
, the appellant/Authority could not claim any benefit under 
those provisions after April 1, 2003.  It further held that the exemption under
Article 289(1)
was also not available to the appellant/Authority as it was a 
distinct legal entity, and its income could not be said to be the income of the 
State so as to be exempt from Union taxation.  The said decision of the High 
Court is impugned in this appeal.
Shri K.K. Venugoal, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of 
the appellant submitted that having regard to
Section 3(3)
of the General 
Clauses Act and the provisions of
Section 7
of the Bihar Industrial Areas 
Development Authority Act, 1974, it must be held that the appellant is a 
local Authority.  According to him the appellant/Authority must be held to 
be a local Authority within the meaning of
Section 10(20)
of the Income Tax 
Act.  He further submitted that
Article 289 (1)
exempted from Union 
taxation, the properties and income of a State.  Referring to Clause (2) of
Article 289
, he submitted that it contemplates a trade or business being 
carried on by or on behalf of the Government of a State.  That brings in the 
concept of agency under the
Contract Act
.  Therefore, by necessary 
implication, an agency of the State, not carrying on trade or business, is not 
covered by Clause (2) of
Article 289
and, therefore, the exemption must 
extend to such an agency of the State Government.  He also relied on some 
decisions of this Court.  He also submitted that the amendment referred to 
above in
Section 10
of the Income Tax Act is not made by reference to
Article 289
of the Constitution of India and that was perhaps not present to 
the mind of the Legislature.  He commended a public policy approach in 
such matters.
Mr. T.S. Doabia, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the 
Union of India, repelled the submissions urged on behalf of the appellants by 
contending that unless the income generated by an agency or instrumentality 
of the State went to the coffers of the State directly and remained the income 
of the State, the agency, whether Corporation, Company or an Authority, 
could not claim the exemption from Union taxation under
Article 289 (1).
The true test to be applied in the context of
Article 289 (1)
of the 
Constitution was whether the income accruing is the income of the State.  
What is exempted under
Article 289 (1)
from Union taxation is the income 
of the State and not the income of any authority under the State.  In the facts 
of this case he submitted that the appellant/ Authority being a distinct legal 
entity, earning income and managing its own funds, cannot claim that its 
income is the income of the State.  In particular, he laid emphasis on
Section 
17
of the Bihar Industrial Area Development Authority Act, 1974 which 
reads as follows:-
"When the State Government is satisfied that the purpose for 
which the Authority was established under this Act has been 
substantially achieved so as to render the continuance of the 
Authority unnecessary, the Government may by notification in 
the official Gazette, declare that the Authority shall be 
dissolved with effect from such date as may be specified in the 
notification and the authority shall be deemed to be dissolved 
accordingly from the said date and all the properties, funds and 
dues realizable by the authority alongwith its liabilities shall 
devolve upon the State Government."
He submitted that the Government has powers to dissolve the appellant/ 
Authority with effect from such date as it may specify in the Notification.  
With effect from that date the properties, funds and dues realizable by the 
Authority along with its liabilities devolve upon the State Government. It, 
therefore follows as a necessary corollary that till such time as the Authority 
is not dissolved, its properties, funds and dues are those of the Authority 
itself and not of the State.  If it were otherwise there was no need for
Section 
17
to prescribe that as from the date of dissolution of the Authority, 
properties, funds and dues realizable by the Authority along with its 
liabilities shall devolve upon the State Government.
A mere perusal of
Article 289(1)
discloses that a claim of exemption 
under it must proceed on the foundation that the exemption is claimed in 
respect of property and income of a State.  Once it is held that the property 
and income is that of the State, a question may well arise whether it is still 
taxable in view of the provision of Clause (2) of
Article 289
which 
dominantly is in the nature of a proviso. Clause (2) empowers the Union to 
impose any tax to such extent as Parliament may by law provide, in respect 
of a trade or business of any kind carried on by, or on behalf of, the 
Government of a State, or any operation connected therewith.  Thus, even 
the income of the State within the meaning of Clause (1) of
Article 289
may 
be taxed by law made by the Parliament, if such income is derived from a 
trade or business of any kind carried on by or on behalf of the Government 
of a State or any operations connected therewith.  Clause (1) of
Article 289
, 
therefore empowers Parliament to frame law imposing a tax on income of a 
State which is earned by means of trade or business of any kind carried by or 
on behalf of the State Government.
It is true, as submitted by Sri Venugopal, that Clause (2) of
Article 
289
empowers the Parliament to make a law imposing a tax on income 
earned only from trade or business of any kind carried by or on behalf of the 
State.  It does not authorize the Parliament to impose a tax on the income of 
a State if such income is not earned in the manner contemplated by Clause 
(2) of
Article 289.
This, to our mind, does not answer the question which 
arises for our consideration in this appeal.  Clause (2) of
Article 289
pre-
supposes that the income sought to be taxed by the Union is the income of 
the State, but the question to be answered at the threshold is whether in 
terms of Clause (1) of
Article 289
, the income of the appellant/ Authority is 
the income of the State.  Having regard to the provisions of the
Bihar 
Industrial Areas Development Authority Act, 1974
, particularly
Section 17
thereof, we have no manner of doubt that the income of the appellant/ 
Authority constituted under the said Act is its own income and that the 
appellant/ Authority manages its own funds.  It has its own assets and 
liabilities.  It can sue or be sued in its own name.  Even though, it does not 
carry on any trade or business within the contemplation of Clause (2) of
Article 289
, it still is an Authority constituted under an Act of the 
Legislature of the State having a distinct legal personality, being a body 
corporate, as distinct from the State.
Section 17
of the Act further clarifies 
that only upon its dissolution its assets, funds and liabilities devolve upon 
the State Government.  Necessarily therefore, before its dissolution, its 
assets, funds and liabilities are its own.  It is, therefore, futile to contend that 
the income of the appellant/ Authority is the income of State Government, 
even though the Authority is constituted under an Act enacted by the State 
Legislature by issuance of a Notification by the Government thereunder.
According to Basu's Commentary on the Constitution of India (Sixth 
Edition, page 50, volume 'L')
Articles 285
and
289
are analogous to each 
other inasmuch as while
Article 285
exempts Union property from State 
taxation,
Article 289
exempts the State property from taxation.  While clause 
(1) of
Article 289
exempts from Union taxation any income of a State, 
derived from governmental or non-governmental activities, clause (2) 
provides an exception, namely, that income derived by a State from trade or 
business will be taxable, provided a law is made by Parliament in that 
behalf.  Clause (3) of
Article 289
is an exception of the exception prescribed 
by clause (2) of
Article 289
and it provides that income derived from 
particular trade or business may be made immune from Union taxation if 
Parliament declares such trade or business as incidental to the ordinary 
functions of Government (emphases supplied).  The reason is obvious.  
Under the constitution, the State has no power to tax any income other than 
agricultural income.  Under the Constitution, power to tax "income" is 
vested only in the Union.  Therefore, while any property of the Union is 
immune from State taxation under
Article 285(1)
, income derived by the 
State from business, as distinguished from governmental purposes, shall not 
have exemption from Union taxation unless the Parliament declares such 
trade or business as incidental to the ordinary functions of Government of 
the State [See
Article 289(3)]  (emphasis supplied).
Applying the above test to the facts of the present case it is clear that 
the benefit, conferred by
Section 10(20A)
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 on 
the assessee herein, has been expressly taken away.  Moreover, the 
explanation added to
Section 10(20)
enumerates the "local authorities"
which do not cover the assessee herein.  Therefore, we do not find any merit 
in the submission advanced on behalf of the assessee.
In 1964 7 SCR 17 :
Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport 
Corporation Vs. Income Tax Officer and Anr.
, the question arose as to 
whether the income derived from trading activity by the Andhra Pradesh 
Road Transport Corporation established under the
Road Transport 
Corporation Act, 1950
was not the income of the State of Andhra Pradesh 
within the meaning of
Article 289 (1)
of the Constitution and hence 
exempted from Union taxation.  This Court considered the scheme of
Article 
289
and observed as follows :-
"The scheme of
Art. 289
appears to be that ordinarily the 
income derived by a State both from governmental and non-
governmental or commercial activities shall be immune from 
income-tax levied by the Union, provided, of course, the 
income in question can be said to be the income of the State.  
This general proposition flows from cl. (1).
Clause (2) then provides an exception and authorities the 
Union to impose a tax in respect of the income derived by the 
Government of a State from trade or business carried on by it, 
or on its behalf; that is to say, the income from trade or business 
carried on by the Government of a State or on its behalf which 
would not have been taxable under cl. (1), can be taxed, 
provided a law is made by Parliament in that behalf.  If clause 
(1) had stood by itself, it may not have been easy to include 
within its purview income derived by a State from commercial 
activities, but since cl. (2), in terms, empowers the Parliament 
to make a law levying a tax on commercial activities carried on 
by or on behalf of a State, the conclusion in inescapable that 
these activities were deemed to have been included in cl. (1) 
and that alone can be the justification for the words in which cl. 
(2) has been adopted by the Constitution.  It is plain that cl. (2) 
proceeds on the basis that but for its provision, the trading 
activity which is covered by it would have claimed exemption 
from Union taxation under cl. (1).  That is the result of reading 
cls. (1) and (2) together.
Clause (3) then empowers the Parliament to declare by 
law that any trade or business would be taken out of the 
purview of cl. (2) and restored to the area covered by cl. (1) by 
declaring that the said trade or business is incidental to the 
ordinary functions of government.  In other words, cl. (3) is an 
exception to the exception prescribed by cl. (2).  Whatever trade 
or business is declared to be incidental to the ordinary functions 
of government, would cease to be governed by cl. (2) and 
would then be exempt from Union taxation.  That, broadly 
stated, appears to be the result of the scheme adopted by the 
three clauses of
Art. 289".
Reading these three Clauses together this Court held that the property 
as well as the income in respect of which exemption is claimed under Clause 
(1) must be the property and income of the State, and thus the crucial 
question to be answered is: "Is the income derived by the State from its 
transport activities the income of the State"?  It was observed that if a trade 
or business is carried on by a State departmentally or through its agents 
appointed exclusively for that purpose, there would be no difficulty in 
holding that the income made from such trade or business is the income of 
the State.  Difficulties arise when one is dealing with trade or business 
carried on by a Corporation established by a State by issuing a Notification 
under the relevant provisions of the Act.  In this context, the Court observed:
".The corporation, though statutory, has a 
personality of its own and this personality is distinct from that 
of the State or other shareholders.  It cannot be said that a 
shareholder owns the property of the corporation or carries on 
the business with which the corporation is concerned.  The 
doctrine that a corporation has a separate legal entity of its own 
is so firmly rooted in our notions derived from common law 
that it is hardly necessary to deal with it elaborately; and so, 
prima facie, the income derived by the appellant from its 
trading activity cannot be claimed by the State which is one of 
the shareholders of the corporation".
This Court considered the scheme of the Act under which the State 
Corporation was constituted and held :-
".The main point which we are examining at 
this stage is: is the income derived by the appellant from its 
trading activity, income of the Stage under
Art. 289 (1)?
In our 
opinion, the answer to this question must be in the negative.  
Far from making any provision which would make the income 
of the Corporation the income of the State, all the relevant 
provisions emphatically bring out the separate personality of 
the Corporation and proceed on the basis that the trading 
activity is run by the Corporation and the profit and loss of the 
Corporation.  There is no provision in the Act which has 
attempted to lift the veil from the face of the Corporation and 
thereby enable the shareholders to claim that despite the form 
which the organization has taken, it is the shareholders who run 
the trade and who can claim the income coming from it as their 
own.
Section 28
which provides for the payment of interest 
clearly brings out the duality between the Corporation on the 
one hand and the State and Central Governments on the other.  
Take for instance the case of supersession of the Corporation 
authorized by
S. 38
.
Section 38 (2)
( c) emphatically brings out 
the fact that the property really vests in the corporation, because 
it provides that during the period of supersession, it shall vest in 
the State Government ..
Therefore, we are 
satisfied that the income derived by the appellant from its 
trading activity cannot be said to be the income of the State 
under
Art. 289 (1)
, and if that is so, the facts that the trading 
activity carried on by the appellant may be covered by
Art. 289 
(2)
, does not really assist the appellant's case.  Even if a trading 
activity falls under cl. (2) of
Art. 289
, it can sustain a claim for 
exemption from Union taxation only if it is shown that the 
income derived from the said trading activity is the income of 
the State.  That is how ultimately, the crux of the problem is to 
determine whether the income in question is the income of the 
State and on this vital test, the appellant fails".
Considerable reliance was placed on the principles
laid down in
the 
aforesaid decision by learned counsel appearing for the Union of India.  He 
submitted that having regard to the provisions of the Act under which the 
appellant/Authority is established, the same conclusion may be reached.
In 
particular, emphasizing the fact that as in
Andhra Pradesh Road Transport 
Corporation
case, so in the instant case as well,
Section 17
of the Act 
provides that upon dissolution of the appellant/Authority, the properties, 
funds and dues realizable by the Authority along with its liabilities shall 
devolve upon the State Government.  Impliedly, therefore, such properties, 
funds and dues vest in the Authority till its dissolution, and only thereafter it 
vests in the State Government.  He also referred to various other provisions 
of the Act and submitted that there was nothing in the Act which attempted 
to lift the veil from the face of the Corporation.  Even though the Authority 
was created under an Act of the Legislature, it was still an Authority which 
had a distinct personality of its own, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with powers to acquire, hold and dispose of property, and to 
contract, and could sue and be sued in its own name.  Shri Venugopal, on the 
other hand, tried to distinguish the judgment on the ground that the Andhra 
Pradesh Road Transport Corporation is being run on business lines, and a 
Corporation that runs on business lines is distinguishable and different from 
a Corporation which is not run on those lines.  Even if such a distinction is 
drawn, that will not have the effect of making the income of the Corporation 
the income of the State Government having regard to the other features 
noticed above.
Shri Venugopal then relied upon two decisions of this Court reported 
in 1970 (
3) SCC 323 Shri Ramtanu Co-operative Housing Society Ltd. and 
Anr. Vs. State of Maharashtra and Ors.
and (1997) 7 SCC 339 New Delhi 
Municipal Council Vs. State of Punjab and Ors..  In Shri Ramtanu Co-
operative Housing Society; the question which arises for consideration in the 
instant appeal did not arise at all.  The question was whether the State of 
Maharashtra was competent to enact the
Maharashtra Industrial 
Development Act, 1961
and whether the impugned Legislation fell within 
Entry 43 List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, so that only the 
Parliament was empowered to enact such Legislation and not the State of 
Maharashtra.  In that context, this Court considered the true character scope 
and intent of the Act by reference to the purposes and the provisions of the 
Act.  Having considered the various provisions of the Act including those 
relating to the functions and powers of the Corporation, this Court concluded 
that in pith and substance the Act was meant for the establishment, growth 
and organization of industries, acquisition of land in that behalf and carrying 
out the purposes of the Act by setting up the Corporation as one of the limbs 
or agencies of the Government.  It held that even though the Corporation 
received moneys from disposal of lands, buildings and other properties and 
also received rents and profits, such receipts arose not out of any business or 
trade but out of sole purpose of establishment, growth and development of 
industries.  The Corporation was not a trading Corporation, as it was not 
involved in buying or selling activity.  The true character of the Corporation 
was to act as an architectural agent of the development and growth of 
industrial towns by establishing and developing industrial estates and 
industrial areas.  It, therefore, negative the argument that the Corporation 
being a trading one, the impugned Legislation fell within Entry 43 of List I 
of the Seventh Schedule.
This decision does not help the appellant because even if it is held that 
the appellant/ Authority is not a trading Authority, yet that does not answer 
the question whether the income of the Authority is the income of the State 
so as to attract Clause (1) of
Article 289.
Similarly, the decision in
New Delhi Municipal Council Vs. State of 
Punjab and Ors.
(supra) does not advance the case of the appellant.  It was 
held that the property/ municipal taxes levied by the New Delhi Municipal 
Council under the relevant Act constituted Union taxation within the 
meaning of Clause (1) of
Article 289
of the Constitution of India.  The levy 
of property taxes under the aforesaid enactments on lands or buildings 
belonging to the State Government was invalid and incompetent by virtue of 
the mandate contained in Clause (1) of
Article 289.
However, if any land or 
building is used or occupied for the purpose of any trade or business, 
meaning thereby a trade or business carried on with profit motive, by or on 
behalf of the State Government, such land or building shall be subject to the 
levy of the property taxes levied by the said enactments.  In other words, 
State property exempted under Clause (1) means such property as is used for 
the purpose of the Government and not for the purpose of trade or business.  
That was a case where the question arose in relation to the levy of property 
tax on lands and buildings owned by the State Governments which was 
"property of the State Government".  In the instant case, we are concerned 
with the income of the appellant/ Authority and the same principles apply.  
The exemption can be claimed only if the income can be said to be the 
income of the State Government.  In the facts of this case, it is not possible 
to hold that the income of the appellant/ Authority is the income of the State 
Government.
Learned counsel for the Union of India also relied upon two decisions 
reported in (
1999) 6 SCC 74 Food Corporation of India Vs. Municipal 
Committee, Jalalabad and Anr.
and (1999) 6 SCC 78 Board of Trustees for 
the
Visakhapatnam Port Trust Vs. State of A.P. and Ors.
and submitted that 
this Court has consistently taken the view that a Corporation having the 
attributes of a Company must be held to be distinct from the Central 
Government, and not eligible for exemption from taxation under
Article 285.
The High Court also in its impugned judgment and order has referred to 
several decisions of this Court wherein this Court dealing with cases arising 
under
Article 285
of the Constitution of India, which exempts properties of 
the Union from State taxation, took a similar view.
We may usefully refer to 
the cases reported in: AIR 1999 SC 2573 Food Corporation of India Vs. 
Municipal Committee, Jalalabad & Anr., (1995) 5 SCC 251 Municipal 
Commissioner of Dum Dum Municipality and Ors. Vs.  Indian Tourism 
Development Corporation and Ors., 1994 Supp (3) SCC 316 Central 
Warehousing Corporation Vs. Municipal Corporation and
AIR 1982 SC 
697 Western Coalfields Ltd. Vs. Special Area Development Authority, Korba 
and Anr.
and
Bharat Aluminium Company Ltd. Vs. Special Area 
Development Authority, Korba and Ors
.
Having considered all aspects of the matter we hold that the High 
Court is right in concluding that the appellant/ Authority could not claim 
exemption from Union taxation under
Article 289 (1)
of the Constitution of 
India.  The impugned notice issued by the Income Tax Authorities was, 
therefore, valid and legal and could not be successfully challenged in the 
writ petition.  Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed but without any order as 
to costs.