[Cites
37
, Cited by
66
]
Supreme Court of India
M.C. Mehta vs Union Of India & Ors on 16 February, 2006
Equivalent citations: AIR 2006 SUPREME COURT 1325, 2006 (3) SCC 399, 2006 AIR SCW 979, 2006 (4) SRJ 62, 2006 (4) COM LJ 480 SC, 2006 (2) SCALE 364, 2006 (1) HRR 532, (2006) 4 ALLMR 49 (SC), (2006) 4 COMLJ 480, 2006 HRR 1 532, 2006 (4) ALL MR 49 NOC, (2006) 2 RECCIVR 322, (2006) 1 RENTLR 569, (2006) 3 SCJ 405, (2006) 1 RENCR 321, (2006) 127 DLT 226, (2006) 2 SUPREME 179, (2006) 2 SCALE 364
Bench:
B.N.Srikrishna
,
R.V. Raveendran
CASE NO.:
Writ Petition (civil)  4677 of 1985

PETITIONER:
M.C. Mehta

RESPONDENT:
Union of India & Ors

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 16/02/2006

BENCH:
Y.K. Sabharwal, B.N.Srikrishna & R.V. Raveendran

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
INTERLOCUTORY APPLICATION NO. 22
IN
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.4677 OF 1985
[With IA Nos.1816 & 1860 in WP (C) No.4677/1985, 
C.A.Nos.5413 & 8694 of 2002, SLP(C) Nos.23145, 23220, 
23896, 23934 of 2002, 7128/2004, 23139/2002 & 
C.A.Nos.608-611/2003]

Y.K. Sabharwal, CJI.
In respect of large number of immoveable properties 
throughout Delhi, flagrant violations of various laws including 
Municipal Laws, Master Plan and other plans besides 
Environmental Laws have been engaging the attention of this 
Court for number of years.  With a view to secure the 
implementation of laws and protect fundamental rights of the 
citizens, various orders were passed from time to time.
	This Court has a constitutional duty to protect the 
fundamental rights of Indian citizens.  What happens when 
violators and/or abettors of the violations are those, who have 
been entrusted by law with a duty to protect these rights?  The 
task becomes difficult and also requires urgent intervention by 
court so that the rule of law is preserved and people may not 
lose faith in it finding violations at the hands of supposed 
implementers.  The problem is not of the absence of law, but of 
its implementation.
Considering such large-scale flagrant violations, this 
Court had to prioritize as to which violations may be taken up 
first and then issue appropriate directions.  In this view, at 
first instance, directions were issued in respect of shifting of 
hazardous and noxious industries out of Delhi.  Directions 
were also issued for shifting of heavy and large industries as 
also some extensive industries.  For shifting polluting 
industries had to be given top most priority.  Later, directions 
were issued for shifting of other extensive industries 
considering the continued unauthorized use contrary to 
Master Plan and Zonal Plan, by those industries as well as 
some other industries continuing in residential/non-
conforming areas.
On one hand repeated orders were made to seek 
implementation of the laws and, on the other hand, 
simultaneously, more and more violations were taking place.  
Detailed reference to earlier orders made from time to time, the 
shifting stand of the authorities, various laws being violated, 
requirements of Town Planning and the constitutional 
obligations of the authorities, has been made by this Court in 
the judgment dated 7th May, 2004 while dealing with 
unauthorized industrial activity and issuing time bound 
directions for compliance and appointing a Monitoring 
Committee with directions for filing of periodical progress 
reports (
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India
[(2004) 6 SCC 588].  
The order dated 19th August, 2003 sets out various issues 
involved including the issue of misuse but, at that stage, the 
issue of unauthorized industries was given priority and the 
directions in respect of shifting of industries were issued.  In a 
way, this judgment is in continuation of the judgment dated 
7th May, 2004 with the difference that now we have taken up 
the issue of large scale misuse of residential premises for 
commercial use.
With regard to commercial use of premises in residential 
areas, it has been more than three years, i.e., 30th September, 
2002 when the order was made directing respondents to file 
reply.  In fact, the question of misuse of residential premises 
for commercial purposes was taken up even earlier as is 
apparent from the orders dated 31st July, 2001 and 20th 
February, 2002.  By order dated 31st July, 2001 passed in Writ 
Petition No.725 of 1994 titled
News Item AQFMY v. Central 
Pollution Control Board
, the Court directed that :
"The MCD will also inform this Court in 
the affidavit to be filed as to why no 
requisite action has been taken for 
stopping the gross misuse of buildings in 
the residential areas for commercial 
purposes and in the construction of 
commercial buildings in residential areas 
where only residential usage is 
permitted."
Again on 20th February, 2002, the Order dated 31st July 
was reiterated in the following terms :
"MCD is also directed to file within four 
weeks from today an affidavit indicating 
as to what it intends to do for stopping 
the misuse of the buildings in the 
residential areas which are being used for 
commercial purposes as has been 
directed by this Court's order dated 31st 
July, 2001.  If no affidavit is filed, the 
explanation in respect thereof should be 
given to the Court by the Municipal 
Commissioner."
The learned Amicus Curiae filed IA No.1860/04 referring 
to aforesaid orders dated 31st July, 2001, 20th February 2002, 
30th September, 2002 and 19th August, 2003 and bringing to 
the notice of this Court a press release dated 22nd July, 2004 
issued by Municipal Corporation of Delhi ('MCD' for short) 
declaring a scheme to facilitate registration of shops, 
establishments, commercial establishments etc. in the non-
conforming/residential areas by granting ad hoc licences in 
respect of premises existing till 31st March, 2003.  This shows 
the apathy of a municipal body, which is constituted, amongst 
others, to ensure compliance of the laws.  In this application, 
learned Amicus Curiae sought stay of the press release and 
the scheme.  By order dated 2nd August, 2004, the press 
release and the ad hoc Trade Registration Scheme were stayed 
by this Court.
The question under consideration also is about the power 
of MCD and Delhi Development Authority (DDA) to direct 
demolition and/or sealing of the properties being misused.  
Few residents of a residential colony by the name of 
Green Park Extension, making averments about large scale 
unauthorized constructions and stating that various letters 
written to the MCD complaining about the illegal and 
unauthorized constructions and misuser and consequent 
violation of Master Plan etc. resulted in no action, filed in 
about October 1994, a writ petition in Delhi High Court 
alleging how misuse of residential premises for commercial 
purposes was taking place, citing specific instances and 
complaining about total inaction on the part of the authorities 
in stopping such misuse.  According to them, the officers were, 
in fact, encouraging or conniving with persons who were 
indulging in such misuse.  The officers failed to carryout their 
statutory duties in stopping such misuse.  A writ of 
mandamus was sought against the authorities directing them 
not to allow illegal commercial user.  Petitioners therein 
alleged that such misuser and acts of omission and 
commission by the authorities was resulting in the 
environment in the residential colony being totally polluted 
and civic amenities jeopardised.
MCD, in reply, filed in April 1995, i.e., more than 10 
years ago, admitted the violations and said that show cause 
notices had been issued under the
Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957
(for short, 'the
DMC Act
') and the 
Corporation was doing its best in the matter.  The same was 
the stand of DDA.  All officers being directed to file affidavits 
reporting as to what action had been taken, filed affidavits 
with reference to the properties of which instances had been 
given, inter alia, stating that owners had been booked and 
action was being taken.  Similar affidavits were filed by both 
MCD and DDA.  In March 2000, MCD filed a status report 
giving particulars of approximately 663 properties in Green 
Park Main and 407 properties in Green Park Extension stating 
that many properties were being used as commercial and 
others partly commercial.  When this was the position in a 
small colony, one can well imagine the plight in manifold other 
residential colonies and of residents living in those colonies in 
the capital city of Delhi.
By impugned judgment dated 31st May, 2002, disposing 
of the aforenoted writ petition and other connected matters, a 
Full Bench of the High Court came to the conclusion that 
neither under the
DMC Act
nor under the Delhi Development 
Act, there was any power to seal property for its misuse, inter 
alia, holding that the power of sealing of premises is drastic as 
by reason of such sealing, a person could become homeless, 
thus, affecting his human or fundamental rights and that the 
power of sealing in relation to misuse has been intentionally 
excluded  from the provisions of two Acts.  Later, some other 
matters were also decided by the High Court following the Full 
Bench decision.  Those judgments are also under challenge.
	The judgment of the Full Bench is under challenge in 
Civil Appeal No.5413 of 2002 filed by the original writ 
petitioners/residents of Green Park colony and Civil Appeal 
No.8694 of 2002 filed by the MCD.
The questions to be determined are :
A.	Whether MCD under the
DMC Act
has power to seal the 
premises in case of its misuser?
B.	Whether DDA, under the Delhi Development Act, has 
also similar power of sealing or not?
C.	Directions to be issued in respect of residential properties 
used illegally for commercial purposes.
	In these matters, we are considering only the issue of 
misuser.  We are not considering the issue of unauthorized 
constructions.
Re : 	Question A  Whether MCD under the
DMC Act
has power to seal premises in case of its misuser


It is not in dispute that large numbers of residential 
premises are being misused for commercial purposes.  The 
question is  can the MCD stop such misuser by putting a seal 
on misused property?  For dealing with the question of power 
of MCD to seal the premises in case of misuser, it is necessary 
to examine few provisions of the
DMC Act
.  The expression 
'building' is defined in
Section 2(3)
of the DMC Act as a house, 
out-house, stable, latrine, urinal, shed, hut, wall (other than a 
boundary wall) or any other structure, whether of masonry, 
bricks, wood, mud, metal or other material but does not 
include any portable shelter.  
The expression 'land' as per
Section 2(24)
includes 
benefits to arise out of land, things attached to the earth or 
permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth and 
rights created by law over any street.
Section 2(26)
defines 'market' as under:
"
Sec.2(26)
-  "market" includes any place 
where persons assemble for the sale of, or 
for the purpose of exposing for sale, meat, 
fish, fruits, vegetables, animals intended 
for human food or any other articles of 
human food whatsoever, with or without 
the consent of the owner of such place 
notwithstanding that there may be no 
common regulation for the concourse of 
buyers and sellers and whether or not 
any control is exercised over the business 
of, or the person frequenting, the market 
by the owner of the place or by any other 
person;"
Section 2(34)
defines 'occupier' as under:
"
Sec.2(34)
"occupier" includes-
(a) any person who for the time being is 
paying or is liable to pay to the owner the 
rent or any portion of the rent of the land 
or building in respect of which such rent 
is paid or is payable;
(b) an owner in occupation of, or 
otherwise using his land or building;
(c) a rent-free tenant of any land or 
building;
(d) a licensee in occupation of any land or 
building; and
(e) any person who is liable to pay to the 
owner damages for the use and 
occupation of any land or building;"
Under
Section 2(59)
'trade premises' means:
"2(59) -  "trade premises" means any 
premises used or intended to be used for 
carrying on any trade or industry;"
Chapter XVI of the DMC Act
deals with building 
regulations and comprises
Sections 330A
to
349A
.  
The definition of the expression 'building' shows that it is 
very wide and encompasses any structure only excluding 
portable shelter with which we are not concerned.  We are 
concerned with the building and its erection.  
The definition of the words 'to erect a building' is very 
pertinent for deciding the present question.  The expression 'to 
erect a building' is defined in
Section 331
as under:
"
Sec.331
Definition.--
In this Chapter, unless the context 
otherwise requires, the expression "to 
erect a building" means--
(a) to erect a new building on any site 
whether previously built upon or not;
(b) to re-erect--
(i) any building of which more than 
one-half of the cubical contents 
above the level of the plinth have 
been pulled down, burnt or 
destroyed, or
(ii) any building of which more than 
one-half of the superficial area of 
the external walls above the level of 
the plinth has been pulled down, or
(iii) any frame building of which 
more than half of the number of the 
posts or beams in the external walls 
have been pulled down;
(c) to convert into a dwelling house any 
building or any part of a building not 
originally constructed for human 
habitation or, if originally so constructed, 
subsequently appropriated for any other 
purpose;
(d) to convert into more than one dwelling 
house a building originally constructed as 
one dwelling house only;
(e) to convert into a place of religious 
worship or into a sacred building any 
place or building not originally 
constructed for such purpose;
(f) to roof or cover an open space between 
walls or buildings to the extent of the 
structure which is formed by the roofing 
or covering of such space;
(g) to convert two or more tenements in a 
building into a greater or lesser numbers;
(h) to convert into a stall, shop, 
warehouse or godown, stable, factory or 
garage any building not originally 
constructed for use as such or which was 
not so used before the change;
(i) to convert a building which when 
originally constructed was legally exempt 
from the operations of any building 
regulations contained in this Act or in 
any bye laws made thereunder or in any 
other law, into a building which had it 
been originally erected in its converted 
form, would have been subject to such 
building regulations;
(j) to convert into or use as a dwelling 
house any building which has been 
discontinued as or appropriated for any 
purpose other than, a dwelling house."
Clauses (c), (h) and (j) are very significant.  These clauses 
bring in the concept of user of a building for the purpose of 
definition of the expression 'to erect a building'.  Under clause
(h), if any building not originally constructed for use as a stall, 
shop, warehouse etc. is converted for use as such, it would fall 
within the expression 'to erect a building'.  
In respect of an area where the notified/specified land 
use is residential, sanction for erection of a commercial 
building cannot be accorded, as is apparent from sub-section 
(2) of
Section 336
.
Section 336
reads as under:
"
Section 336
. -  Sanction or refusal of 
building or work.--
(1) The Commissioner shall sanction the 
erection of a building or the execution of 
a work unless such building or work 
would contravene any of the provisions of 
sub-section (2) of this section or the 
provisions of
section 340
.
(2) The grounds on which the sanction of 
a building or work may be refused shall 
be the following, namely:--
(a) that the building or work or the 
use of the site for the building or 
work or any of the particulars 
comprised in the site plan, ground 
plan, elevation, section or specifica-
tion would contravene the 
provisions of any bye-law made in 
this behalf or of any other law or 
rule, bye-law or order made under 
such other law;
(b) that the notice for sanction does 
not contain the particulars or is not 
prepared in the manner required 
under the bye-laws made in this 
behalf;
(c) that any information or 
documents required by the 
Commissioner under this Act or any 
bye-laws made thereunder has or 
have not been duly furnished;
(d) that in cases falling under
section 312
, lay-out plans have not 
been sanctioned in accordance with
section 313
;
(e) that the building or work would 
be an encroachment on Government 
land or land vested in the 
Corporation;
(f) that the site of the building or 
work does not abut on a street or 
projected street and that there is no 
access to such building or work 
from any such street by a passage 
or pathway appertaining to such 
site.
(3) The commissioner shall communicate 
the sanction to the person who has given 
the notice; and where he refuses sanction 
on any of the grounds specified in sub-
section (2) or under
section 340
he shall 
record a brief statement of his reasons for 
such refusal and communicate the 
refusal along with the reasons therefor to 
the person who has given the notice.
(4) The sanction or refusal as aforesaid 
shall be communicated in such manner 
as may be specified in the bye-laws made 
in this behalf."
This takes us to the provision of sealing as contained in
Section 345A
of the DMC Act.  That provision was inserted by 
Act 42 of 1984 with effect from 10th December, 1985.  One of 
the objects for the amendments, as stated in the Statement of 
Objects & Reasons, is to contain massive conversion of 
residential constructions into commercial complexes.  The 
Statement of Objects and Reasons, inter alia, states that 'in 
recent years, growth of unauthorized colonies, encroachment 
on public streets, unauthorized construction of public and 
private lands and conversion of residential constructions into 
commercial complexes have assumed alarming proportions'.
Section 345A
reads as under:
"
Section 345A
. Power to seal 
unauthorised constructions.--
(1) It shall be lawful for the 
Commissioner, at any time, before or 
after making an order of demolition under
section 343
or of the stoppage of the 
erection of any building or execution of 
any work under
section 343
or under
section 344
, to make an order directing 
the sealing of such erection or work or of 
the premises in which such erection or 
work is being carried on or has been 
completed in the manner prescribed by 
rules, for the purpose of carrying out the 
provisions of this Act, or for preventing 
any dispute as to the nature and extent 
of such erection or work.
(2) Where any erection or work or any 
premises in which any erection or work is 
being carried on, has or have been 
sealed, the Commissioner may, for the 
purpose of demolishing such erection or 
work in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act, order such seal to be removed.
(3) No person shall remove such seal 
except--
(a) under an order made by the 
Commissioner under sub-section 
(2); or
(b) under an order of an Appellate 
Tribunal or the Administrator, made 
in an appeal under this Act."
A plain reading of the aforesaid provisions shows that 
sealing can be resorted to at any time, before or after making 
an order of demolition under
Section 343
or under
Section 344
in respect of such erection being carried on or completed, for 
the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the Act.
Sections 343
and
344
read as under:
"
Sec. 343
Order of demolition and 
stoppage of buildings and works in 
certain cases and appeal.--
(1) Where the erection of any building or 
execution of any work has been 
commenced, or is being carried on, or has 
been completed without or contrary to 
the sanction referred to in
section 336
or 
in contravention of any condition subject 
to which such sanction has been 
accorded or in contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or bye-laws made 
thereunder, the Commissioner may, in 
addition to any other action that may be 
taken under this Act, make an order 
directing that such erection or work shall 
be demolished by the person at whose 
instance the erection or work has been 
commenced or is being carried on or has 
been completed, within such period (not 
being less than five days and more than 
fifteen days from the date on which a 
copy of the order of demolition with a 
brief statement of the reasons therefor 
has been delivered to that person), as 
may be, specified in the order of 
demolition:
Provided that no order of demolition 
shall be made unless the person has been 
given by means of a notice served in such 
manner as the Commissioner may think 
fit, a reasonable opportunity of showing 
cause why such order shall not be made:
Provided further that where the 
erection or work has not been completed, 
the Commissioner may by the same order 
or by a separate order, whether made at 
the time of the issue of the notice under 
the first proviso or at any other time, 
direct the person to stop the erection or 
work until the expiry of the period within 
which an appeal against the order of 
demolition, if made, may be preferred 
under sub-section (2).
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order of 
the Commissioner made under sub-
section (1) may prefer an appeal against 
the order to the Appellate Tribunal within 
the period specified in the order for the 
demolition of the erection or work to 
which it relates.
(3) Where an appeal is preferred under 
sub-section (2) against an order of 
demolition the Appellate Tribunal may, 
subject to the provisions of sub-section 
(3) of
section 347C
stay the enforcement 
of that order on such terms, if any, and 
for such period, as it may think fit:
Provided that where the erection of 
any building or execution of any work has 
not been completed at the time of the 
making of the order of demolition, no 
order staying the enforcement of the 
order of demolition shall be made by the 
Appellate Tribunal unless security, 
sufficient in the opinion of the said 
Tribunal has been given by the appellant 
for not proceeding, with such erection or 
work pending the disposal of the appeal.
(4) No court shall entertain any suit, 
application or order proceeding for 
injunction or other relief against the 
Commissioner to restrain him from 
taking any action or making any order in 
pursuance of the provisions of this 
section.
(5) Subject to an order made by the 
Administrator on appeal under
section 
347D
, every order made by the Appellate 
Tribunal on appeal under this section, 
and subject to the orders of the 
Administrator and the Appellate Tribunal 
on appeal, the order of demolition made 
by the Commissioner shall be final and 
conclusive.
(6) Where no appeal has been preferred 
against an order of demolition made by 
the Commissioner under sub-section (1) 
or where an order of demolition made by 
the Commissioner under that sub-section 
has been confirmed on appeal, whether 
with or without variation, by the 
Appellate Tribunal in a case where no 
appeal has been preferred against the 
order of the Appellate Tribunal, and by 
the Administrator in a case where an 
appeal has been preferred against the 
order of the Appellate Tribunal the person 
against whom the order has been made 
shall comply with the order within the 
period specified therein, or as the case 
may be, within the period, if any fixed by 
the Appellate Tribunal or the 
Administrator on appeal and on the 
failure of the person to comply with the 
order within such period, the 
Commissioner may himself cause the 
erection or the work to which the order 
relates to be demolished and the 
expenses of such demolition shall be 
recoverable from such person as an 
arrear of tax under this Act."
Sec. 344
Order of stoppage of 
buildings or works in certain cases.--
(1) Where the erection of any building or 
execution of any work has been 
commenced or is being carried on (but 
has not been completed) without or 
contrary to the sanction referred to in
section 336
or in contravention of any 
condition subject to which such sanction 
has been accorded or in contravention of 
any provisions of this Act or bye-laws 
made thereunder, the Commissioner may 
in addition to any other action that may 
be taken under this Act, by order require 
the person at whose instance the building 
or the work has been commenced or is 
being carried on to stop the same 
forthwith.
(2) If an order made by the Commissioner 
under
section 343
or under sub-section 
(1) of this section directing any person to 
stop the erection of any building or 
execution of any work is not complied 
with, the Commissioner may require any 
police officer to remove such person and 
all his assistants and workmen from the 
premises or to seize any construction 
material, tool, machinery, scaffolding or 
other things used in the erection of any 
building or execution of any work within 
such time as may be specified in the 
requisition and such police officer shall 
comply with the requisition accordingly.
 (2A) Any of the things caused to be 
seized by the Commissioner under sub-
section (2) shall be disposed of by him in 
the manner specified in
section 326
.
(3) After the requisition under sub-section 
(2) has been complied with, the Commis-
sioner may, if he thinks fit, depute by a 
written order a police officer or a 
municipal officer or other municipal 
employee to watch the premises in order 
to ensure that the erection of the building 
or the execution of the work is not 
continued.
(4) Where a police officer or a municipal 
officer or other municipal employee has 
been deputed under sub-section (3) to 
watch the premises, the cost of such 
deputation shall be paid by the person at 
whose instance such erection or 
execution is being continued or to whom 
notice under sub-section (1) was given 
and shall be recoverable from such 
person as an arrear of tax under this 
Act."
Section 347
contains a specific prohibition for change of 
the use of any land or building.  The said section reads as 
under:
"
Sec. 347
Restrictions on uses of 
buildings.--
No person shall, without the written 
permission of the Commissioner, or 
otherwise than in conformity with the 
conditions, if any, of such permission--
(a) use or permit to be used for human 
habitation any part of a building not 
originally erected or authorised to be 
used for that purpose or not used for that 
purpose before any alteration has been 
made therein by any work executed in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and the bye-laws made thereunder;
(b) change or allow the change of the use 
of any land or building;
(c) convert or allow the conversion of one 
kind of tenement into another kind."
Section 349A
contains the power of the Central 
Government to make bye-laws for carrying out the provisions 
of Chapter XVI.  Regulations may provide for various matters 
including the use of sites for buildings from different areas etc. 
as mentioned in Clauses (a) to (w) of sub-section (2) of
Section 
349A
, having regard to the requirement of town planning by 
the municipalities. Town planning is now part of constitutional 
obligation on insertion of Part IX-A in the Constitution of India 
w.e.f. 1st June, 1993.
Section 349A
was inserted soon 
thereafter on 1st October, 1993.
Reference may also be made to
Chapter XX of the DMC 
Act
which deals with markets, slaughter houses, trades and 
occupations and maintenance and regulations thereof.
Section 
416
recognises the importance of the density of population, 
pressure on the services in case more number of persons use 
the facilities or services.  The said section under the heading 
'Trade and Occupations' reads as under:
"
Sec. 416
Factory, etc., not to be 
established without permission of the 
Commissioner.
(1) No person shall, without the previous 
permission in writing of the 
Commissioner, establish in any premises, 
or materially alter, enlarge or extend, any 
factory, workshop or trade premises in 
which it is intended to employ steam, 
electricity, water or other mechanical 
power.
(2) The Commissioner may refuse to give 
such permission, if he is of the opinion 
that the establishment, alteration, 
enlargement or extension of such factory, 
workshop or trade premises, in the 
proposed position would be objectionable 
by reason of the density of the population 
in the neighbourhood thereof, or would 
be a nuisance to the inhabitants of the 
neighbourhood."
A bare perusal of building bye-laws shows how relevant 
is the user, commercial or residential, and the large impact of 
occupation load on various facilities including water, 
sanitation and drainage.
Keeping future needs in view, experts prepare Master 
Plans.  Perusal of the Delhi Master Plan, 1962 and 2001 
shows what were plan projections.  At the time of planning, 
the experts in the field of town planning, take into account 
various aspects, such as, healthy living, environment, lung 
space need, land use intensity, areas where the residential 
houses to be built and where the commercial buildings to be 
located, need of household industries etc. Provision for 
household industries in residential areas does not mean 
converting residential houses in the commercial shops. It only 
means permitting activities of household industry in a part of 
a residential property.  It does not mean that residential 
properties can be used for commercial and trading activities 
and sale and purchase of goods.  Master Plan contemplates 
shops in District Centres, Community Centres, Local Shopping 
Centres etc. and not in residential areas.  Be that as it may, 
for the present, we are not considering the cases of small 
shops opened in residential houses for catering to day-to-day 
basic needs, but are considering large-scale conversion, in 
flagrant violation of laws, of residential premises for 
commercial use.
In respect of planning, reference can usefully be made to
Section 313
of the DMC Act as well.  The said section provides 
for the requirement of layout plan of the land.  It, inter alia, 
provides that before utilizing, selling or otherwise dealing with 
any land under
Section 312
, the owner thereof shall send to 
the Commissioner a written application with a layout plan of 
the land showing various particulars including the purpose for 
which the building will be used.  For breach of
Section 313
, 
action can be taken under
Section 314
.  It has rightly not been 
disputed by any counsel that neither layout plan, nor the 
building plan, can be sanctioned by MCD except in the 
manner and for the purpose provided in the Master Plan. If in 
the master plan, the land use is residential, MCD cannot 
sanction the plan for any purpose other than residential.  
In the impugned judgment, while dealing with the 
provisions of the layout plan, it was observed that the 
provisions for user 'are only regulatory in nature'.  While 
dealing with the user, the High Court observed that 'the 
power, whereby and whereunder the basic human rights or 
the fundamental rights conferred upon a person is taken 
away, must be specifically conferred by a statute'.  The 
provision of user may be regulatory but all the same, they are 
mandatory and binding.  In fact, almost all the planning 
provisions are regulatory.  The violations of the regulatory 
provisions on massive scale can result in plans becoming 
merely scraps of papers.  That is the ground reality in the 
capital of the country.  None has any right, human or 
fundamental, to violate the law with immunity and claim any 
right to use a building for a purpose other than authorised.  
Further, the words 'unless the context otherwise requires' in
Section 331
of the DMC Act are of no consequence for 
determining the point in issue as the context herein does not 
provide otherwise for the present purposes.  It does not 
provide that the power of sealing under
Section 345A
cannot 
be exercised in case of misuser.  In view of the clear language 
of
Section 345A
, we are also unable to sustain the view of the 
High Court that action under
Section 345A
can be taken only 
when there exists order of demolition under
Section 343
or an 
order under sub-section (1) of
Section 344
.  The conclusion of 
the High Court that action under
Section 345A
can be taken 
only when there exists an order of demolition under
Section 
343
, or on passing of an order under sub-section (1) of
Section 
344
, and in no other contingency cannot be accepted in view 
of the clear provision of
Section 345A
that action can be taken 
even before or after an order is made under those provisions.     
It is clear from a conjoint reading of the definition of the 
expression 'to erect a building' in
Section 331
and
Section 
345A
that conversion of user would come within the purview 
of the expression 'to erect a building'. In this respect useful 
reference can also be made to Building Bye-Laws for the Union 
Territory of Delhi, 1983, in particular Bye-Law Nos. 2.17 and 
2.85, defining the expressions 'Conversion' and 'To Erect' 
respectively, which read as under:
"2.17 Conversion The change of an 
occupancy to another occupancy or 
change in building structure or part 
thereof resulting into change of space or 
use requiring additional occupancy 
certificates.
2.85 To Erect To erect a building 
means:
(a) 	To erect a new building on any site 
whether previously built upon or 
not;
(b) 	To re-erect any building of which 
portions above the plinth level have 
been pulled down, burnt or 
destroyed; and
(c) 	Conversion from one occupancy to 
another."
Having regard to these definitions if a Building/structure 
not originally constructed for use as a shop, is put to use as a 
shop, such conversion of use would come within the ambit of 
the expression 'to re-erect' and, consequently, within the 
ambit of the definition of the expression 'to erect a building'.  
In view of the aforesaid, reversing the impugned 
judgment of the High Court, we hold that under
Section 345A
of the DMC Act, the Commissioner of MCD is empowered to 
exercise power of sealing in case of misuser of any premises.    
Re : 	Question No.B  Whether under the Delhi 
Development Act, DDA has power to seal 
premises on account of its misuser?
The High Court held that both under
Section 345A
of the 
DMC Act and under Section 31-A of the Delhi Development 
Act, there is no power to seal premises on account of 'its' 
misuser.  We have held that MCD has such a power under the
DMC Act
.  The position, however, is different when the 
provisions of the Delhi Development Act are examined.   
The Delhi Development Act defines in
Section 2(e)
'development area' to mean any area declared to be a 
development area under sub-section (1) of
Section 12
.
Section 
12
reads as under:
"
Sec. 12
Declaration of development 
areas and development of land in those 
and other areas.--
(1) As soon as may be after the 
commencement of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, declare any area in Delhi 
to be a development area for the purposes 
of this Act :
Provided that no such declaration 
shall be made unless a proposal for such 
declaration has been referred by the 
Central Government to the Authority and 
the Municipal Corporation of Delhi for 
expressing their views thereon within 
thirty days from the date of the receipt of 
the reference or within such further 
period as the Central Government may 
allow and the period so specified or 
allowed has expired.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, 
the Authority shall not undertake or 
carry out any development of land in any 
area which is not a development area.
(3) After the commencement of this Act 
no development of land shall be 
undertaken or carried out in any area by 
any person or body (including a 
department of Government) unless,--
(i) where that area is a development 
area, permission for such 
development has been obtained in 
writing from the Authority in 
accordance with the provision of 
this Act,
(ii) where that area is an area other 
than a development area, approval 
of, or sanction for, such 
development has been obtained in 
writing from the local authority 
concerned or any officer or authority 
thereof empowered or authorised in 
this behalf, in accordance with the 
provisions made by or under the law 
governing such authority or until 
such provisions have been made, in 
accordance with the provisions of 
the regulations relating to the grant 
of permission for development made 
under the Delhi (Control of Building 
Operations) Act, 1955, (53 of 1955), 
and in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Act:
Provided that the local authority 
concerned may subject to the provisions 
of section 53A amend those regulations 
in their application to such area.
(4) After the coming into operation of any 
of the plans in any area no development 
shall be undertaken or carried out in that 
area unless such development is also in 
accordance with such plans,
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in sub-sections (3) and (4) development of 
any land begun by any department of 
Government or any local authority before 
the commencement of this Act may be 
completed by that department or local 
authority without compliance with the 
requirements of those sub-sections."
The power of DDA to develop land in non-development 
area is provided in Section 22-A, which reads as under:
"Sec. 22-A Power of Authority to develop 
land in non-development area.--
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (2) of
Section 12
, the Authority may, if 
it is of opinion that it is expedient to do so, 
undertake or carry out any development of any 
land which has been transferred to it or placed 
as its disposal under
Section 15
or
Section 22
even if such land is situate in any area which 
is not a development area."
Under
Section 36
, DDA has been empowered to require 
the local authority, within whose local limits area developed by 
it is situated, to assume responsibility for the maintenance of 
the amenities provided in the area by DDA and other ancillary 
matters.
Section 30
provides for power of DDA to make an 
order of demolition of building where any development has 
been commenced or is being carried on or has been completed 
in contravention of the master plan or zonal development plan 
or without the permission, approval or sanction referred to in
Section 12
or in contravention of any condition subject to 
which such permission, approval or sanction has been 
granted.
Section 31
empowers DDA to stop development which 
is in contravention of the plan, permission, approval or 
sanction, mentioned therein or contravention of the conditions 
stipulated in such permission, approval or sanction.
	Section 31A empowers DDA to seal unauthorised 
development.  If the misuser of the premises would come 
within the ambit of unauthorised development, DDA would 
have power to seal the premises.  On the other hand, if 
misuser does not come within the ambit of 'unauthorised 
development', the power of sealing would be lacking.  Section 
31-A of the Delhi Development Act reads as under:
"Sec. 31-A Power to seal unauthorised 
development.--
(1) It shall be lawful for the Authority or 
the competent authority, as the case may 
be, at any time, before or after making an 
order for the removal or discontinuance 
of any development under
Section 30
or
Section 31
, to make an order directing 
the sealing of such development in the 
manner prescribed by rules, for the 
purpose of carrying out the provisions of 
this Act, or for preventing any dispute as 
to the nature and extent of such 
development.
(2) Where any development has been 
sealed, the Authority or the competent 
authority, as the case may be, may, for 
the purpose of removing or discontinuing 
such development, order the seal to be 
removed.
(3) No person shall remove such seal 
except--
(a) under an order made by the 
Authority or the competent 
authority under sub-section (2); or
(b) under an order of the Appellate 
Tribunal or the Lieutenant Governor 
of the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi, made in an appeal under this 
Act."
The expression 'development' is defined in
Section 2(d)
as 
under:
"
Sec.2(d)
"development" with its 
grammatical variations means the 
carrying out of building, engineering, 
mining or other operations in, on, over or 
under land or the making of any material 
change in any building or land and 
includes redevelopment;"
The Scheme under the Act clearly seems to be that 
during development it is the responsibility of DDA to demolish 
and seal any premises if there is contravention.  After the 
handing over of the area to the local authority under
Section 
36
, the power of demolition and/or sealing is conferred on that 
authority.  That local authority may be MCD or cantonment or 
any other authority depending upon the developed area falling 
in the local limits of one or the other.  The 'development area' 
is any area declared to be such under sub-section (1) of
Section 12
.  So long as an area is a development area, the 
power to deal with it remains with the 'authority' which means 
Delhi Development Authority in terms of
Section 3(1)
of the 
Act.  After the responsibility of any area has been assumed by 
the local authority in the manner provided in
Section 36
, the 
power to deal with properties in that area for any 
contravention would be exercisable by such authority 
depending upon the statutory provisions governing the said 
local authority, referred to in Section 31-A as 'competent 
authority'.  The power of 'Competent Authority' to seal 
premises would depend upon the statute governing it.  The 
language of Section 31-A when it states that 'it shall be lawful 
for the authority, or the competent authority, as the case may 
be' shows that either the authority or the competent authority 
would have the power therein.
The Act
does not contemplate 
that both DDA and the competent authority would have 
concurrent power even after the local authority has assumed 
responsibility as provided in
Section 36
.  Unlike
Section 331
, 
there is no provision in the Delhi Development Act to confer on 
the authority the power of sealing in case of misuse.   The 
power under Section 31-A is to seal development under
Section 30
or
Section 31
.  The words 'such development' in 
Section 31-A refers to removal or discontinuance of 
development under
Section 30
or Sec. 31-A and not for any 
development for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of 
the Act, as was sought to be contended by Mr. Ranjit Kumar.  
Section 31-A does not provide that sealing can be resorted to 
also for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the Act.  
It can be resorted to for sealing of development under
Section 
30
or
Section 31
for the purpose of carrying out the provisions 
of the Act.  Misuse does not come within the ambit of 
development.
In view of the aforesaid, the High Court has rightly held 
that under the Delhi Development Act, there is no power of 
sealing in case of misuser.
Re : 	Individual cases and the Directions to be issued 
in respect thereof and also in respect of other 
residential properties used illegally for 
commercial purposes.
In Special Leave Petitions and Civil Appeal Nos. 608-
611of 2003 challenge is to the judgments of High Court 
disposing of writ petitions in terms of law
laid down by
Full 
Bench.
In Civil Appeal No.610 of 2003, it is contended on behalf 
of the private respondents that a factual error seems to have 
occurred when the matter was disposed of by the High Court 
along with batch matters.  It has been pointed out that the 
Court has failed to note that the plot in question has been 
leased out by DDA for commercial purposes; due licence has 
been issued by the MCD to open a restaurant which is being 
run in the name of Copper Chimney and, therefore, there is no 
misuser.  Our attention has been drawn to the copy of the 
lease deed and the licence.  If this is the factual scenario, the 
authorities will examine it before taking action, if any, and the 
same would be subject to such legal remedy as may be 
available in law to the private respondents. 
In Special Leave Petition No.23896 of 2002 on behalf of 
respondentbank, it has been pointed out that as per scheme 
of DDA, banks have been permitted in the residential 
properties.  For DDA, it was submitted that the benefit of the 
scheme is available subject to the fulfillment of various 
conditions stipulated therein. In this view, the matter will have 
to be examined by the authorities in the light of the scheme, 
before proceeding to take action, if any, that may be available 
in law and subject to legal remedies of the Bank.  
In respect of C.A. No. 608 of 2003, MCD issued to the 
respondents, a show cause notice dated 1st August, 2000 
under
Section 345A
read with
Sections 347
,
343
and
344
of 
the DMC Act stating that property No. 39 Ring Road, Lajpat 
Nagar III was being misused in the name and style of "Jagdish 
Store".  In reply dated 15th September, 2000, it was, inter alia, 
stated that the MCD itself has been allowing non-residential 
activities in residential areas under a special scheme, without, 
however, giving any details or filing any document in support 
thereof.   Further, we asked the learned counsel for the 
respondents to place on record the plan for the construction of 
the building which may have been sanctioned so as to 
ascertain whether the sanction was for construction of the 
residential property or commercial property.  The plan has not 
been filed.  The reasons are not far to seek.  One of the simple 
method for ascertaining that there is misuser or not, is to 
examine the sanctioned plan.
At this stage, it would be useful to notice letter dated 28th 
August, 2000 sent by the Ministry of Urban Development to 
the Commissioner, MCD, Vice-Chairman, DDA and other 
authorities conveying the deep concern of Parliament 
Consultative Committee over the rising menace of 
unauthorized construction, suspected connivance of the staff 
of the different authorities in the matter and requesting the 
authorities to take strong and prompt action and suggesting 
ten measures for strict enforcement.  The letter reads as 
under:
"Annexure-R-1
No.J-13036/3/96-DDIIB
Government of India
Ministry of Urban Development & Poverty 
Alleviation
***
Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated: 28.08.2000

To
1.	Shri P.S.Bhatnagar,
	Chief Secretary, 
Government of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi,
	Delhi.
2.	Shri P.K.Ghosh,

	Vice-Chairman,
	Delhi Development Authority,
	Vikas Sadan, INA, New Delhi
3.	Shri S.P.Aggarwal,
	Commissioner,
	Municipal Corporation of Delhi,
	Town Hall,
	Delhi
4.	Shri B.P.Misra,
	Chairperson
	New Delhi Municipal Committee,
	Palika Kendra,
	New Delhi
5.	The Development Commissioner,
Government of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi,	Town Hall,
	New Delhi

Subject:	Unauthorised Encroachment 
and Illegal Constructions in 
Delhi

Sir,

	I am directed to say that the menace 
of illegal encroachment/unauthorised 
construction in Delhi has been 
considered by the Government of India at 
its highest level and it has been decided 
to eliminate this menace with a firm 
hand.  You are, therefore, requested to 
take strong and prompt action against all 
illegal constructions/unauthorised 
encroachments and also against misuses 
of land in violation of the provisions of 
the Master Plan of Delhi.  The following 
measures are particularly required to be 
enforced strictly.
(i)	All illegal constructions should be 
demolished, not cosmetically but in 
toto.
(ii)	The cost of demolition should be 
recovered from the illegal builders 
within 15 days of demolition.  In 
case of non-payment within 15 
days, the amount due should be 
recovered as arrears of land 
revenue.
(iii)	In all cases of illegal constructions, 
prosecution should invariably be 
launched against builders under the 
Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 
Delhi Development Authority Act, 
New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 
etc. and the cases followed 
vigorously with the police 
authorities/courts.
(iv)	Wherever the property is on lease, 
action should be taken under the 
terms and conditions of lease 
agreement and re-entry effected 
within the shortest permissible 
period under such lease agreement.
After re-entry, physical possession 
of the property should be taken by 
invoking the provisions of Public 
Premises Eviction Act and damages 
collected immediately.  The rates of 
damages/misuse charges should be 
the same as per the formula 
followed by the L&DO and approved 
by the Ministry of Urban 
Development.
(v)	In case of DDA flats, where 
constructions have come up beyond 
the condonable limits, cancellation 
of allotment should be carried out in 
addition to the demolition of the 
additional construction.  Orders in 
respect of condonable and non-
condonable items are being issued 
separately.
(vi)	In cases, where after demolition, 
reconstruction is done, personal 
responsibility of the officer in-charge 
should be fixed and departmental 
action taken against him.
(vii)	In cases where illegal construction 
have taken place on rural 
agricultural lands, action under the
Provisions of the Delhi Land 
Reforms Act, 1954
, should also be 
taken and such lands should be 
taken over as per provisions of the 
Delhi land Reforms Act.  Action in 
this respect should be taken as soon 
as the plots are cut by the 
colonisers and construction done in 
the shape of boundary walls, etc.  In 
other words, construction should be 
nipped in the bud.  If it comes up, it 
should be demolished immediately.
Action in this respect should also be 
taken by the concerned local 
agencies/DDA as per the bye-laws 
pertaining to lay out/service plans, 
etc.
(viii)	In all cases where party obtains 
stay/status quo orders, prompt 
action to get the stay order vacated 
should be taken and higher court 
moved, wherever necessary.
(ix)	All Senior Field Officers should be 
asked to carry out physical 
inspection of the area under their 
charge and the Supervising Officer 
should also make surprise checks to 
ensure that the subordinate staff 
takes immediate action to 
check/demolish unauthorised 
construction.  Deterrent action 
should also be taken against the 
subordinate staff such as Building 
Inspectors, Junior Engineers, 
Assistant Engineers, etc. who do not 
take prompt action.
(x)	Field officers should be asked to 
maintain filed diaries and submit 
them to the Supervisory Officer 
regularly.
2.	It is also requested that a monthly 
report should be sent to the Ministry of 
Urban Development by the 5th of each 
succeeding month.
3.	In this connection, it may be noted 
that both the Parliament and the 
Parliament Consultative Committee have 
expressed deep concern, through 
questions and interpolations, over the 
rising menace of unauthorised 
constructions in Delhi and the suspected 
connivance of the staff of the different 
authorities in the matter.  A Flying Squad 
has been constituted in the Ministry and 
if, as a result of findings of this Squad, it 
is found that the subordinate staff has 
not done its duty or not carried out the 
aforesaid instructions, strict action 
against the Subordinate/Supervisory 
Staff would be taken by the Government.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(Dr.Nivedita P.Haran)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

Copy for information and necessary 
action to:
1.  Deputy C.V.O., Ministry of UD&PA, 
Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi.
2.  L&DO, Ministry of UD&PA, Nirman 
Bhawan, New Delhi
3.  DG(W), CPWD, Nirman Bhawan, New 
Delhi

Sd/-
(N.L. Upadhyay)"
The aforesaid letter has been considered by this Court 
while passing order dated 31st July, 2001, part whereof has 
been quoted earlier.  Although the letter and also the 
observations made in the order are in the context of 
unauthorized constructions, the same would equally apply to 
the misuser as well.  It would be useful to reproduce the entire 
order which reads as under:
"Order dated 31.7.2001 in W.P.(C) 
No.725/1994

We have seen two affidavits, one of the 
Chief Secretary as well as the affidavit on 
behalf of the M.C.D.   We are sorry to 
note that the affidavits do not specifically 
deal with the points in issue.  Vide our 
order dated 9th May, 2001 these 
authorities along with Vice-Chairman, 
D.D.A, Chairperson, N.D.M.C. and the 
Development Commissioner were 
required to file affidavit to indicate as to 
what measures they have taken in the 
implementation of the letter dated 28th 
August, 2000.  At least ten measures 
were required to be taken in terms of the 
said letter dated 28th August, 2000.  The 
affidavits in reply do not deal with them 
specifically and general averments have 
been made which are not satisfactory.
The perusal of the affidavits further 
shows that the parties concerned have 
not even touched the tip of the iceberg as 
far as demolition of unauthorised 
constructions is concerned.  The number 
of unauthorised constructions which are 
said to have been demolished are a small 
fraction of what is required to be done.  It 
is quite evident that there is now no fear 
of the law catching up at least with those 
persons who do not believe in adhering to 
following the rules and regulations laid 
down with respect to construction of 
property.  Unauthorised encroachment 
and illegal construction even as per the 
affidavits are increasing.  It is dangerous 
trend if the people do not have either 
respect for or fear of law primarily due to 
non-enforcement of the law.  It is 
something which causes us some concern 
and it would be appropriate if serious 
thought is given to this aspect at the 
highest quarters.
We direct the Chief Secretary as well 
as the Commissioner, M.C.D. to file 
within four weeks specific affidavit 
dealing with each of the clauses of the 
letter dated 28th August, 2000.  They will 
also indicate as to what is the total 
encroached area in Delhi as well as the 
number of unauthorised/illegal 
constructions which have been raised.
The affidavit of the Chief Secretary 
seems to give some indication of action 
taken for removing encroachment from 
some of these areas in Delhi.  We would 
require the Union of India/Ministry of 
Urban Development to check and inform 
the Court whether what is stated in the 
annexures to the affidavit of the Chief 
Secretary from pages 43 to 63 is correct.  
The Central Government will be at liberty 
to ask for information from the local 
authority in order to enable it to comply 
with the orders passed today.
The M.C.D. will also inform this 
Court in the affidavit to be filed as to why 
no requisite action has been taken for 
stopping the gross misuse of the 
buildings in the residential areas for 
commercial purposes and in the 
construction of commercial buildings in 
residential areas where only residential 
houses are permitted.  To come up after 
four weeks."
Now, we revert to the task of implementation.  Despite its 
difficulty, this Court cannot remain a mute spectator when the 
violations also affect the environment and healthy living of 
law-abiders.  The enormity of the problem which, to a great 
extent, is the doing of the authorities themselves, does not 
mean that a beginning should not be made to set things right.  
If the entire misuser cannot be stopped at one point of time 
because of its extensive nature, then it has to be stopped in a 
phased manner, beginning with major violators.  There has to 
be a will to do it.  We have hereinbefore noted in brief, the 
orders made in the last so many years but it seems, the same 
has had no effect on the authorities.  The things cannot be 
permitted to go on in this manner forever.  On one hand, 
various laws are enacted, master plans are prepared by expert 
planners, provision is made in the plans also to tackle the 
problem of existing unauthorised constructions and misusers 
and, on the other hand, such illegal activities go on unabated 
openly under the gaze of everyone, without having any respect 
and regard for law and other citizens.
We have noticed above 
the complaints of some of the residents in respect of such 
illegalities.  For last number of years even the High Court has 
been expressing similar anguish in the orders made in large 
number of cases.  We may briefly notice some of those orders.
More than fifteen years ago, on 17th May, 1990, a 
Division Bench of the Delhi High Court presided over by 
Justice B.N. Kirpal (as the former Chief Justice of India then 
was) in the case of
Ahuja Property Developers (P) Ltd. v. 
M.C.D.
[1990 (42) Delhi Law Times 474], dealt with a writ 
petition in respect of a building in Kailash Colony, New Delhi 
and noticed the extent of illegalities and the massive 
construction made that could not be used for residential 
purposes since there was no kitchen or kitchen facilities.  
Dealing with the argument put forth on behalf of builder that 
there is no power to seal any building under
Section 345A
, 
dismissing the writ petition, it was observed that the petitioner 
had admittedly violated the law and cannot now be permitted 
to cry wolf.  The Court said that the petitioner had admittedly 
constructed a building not only at variance with the 
sanctioned plan but also at variance with the completion 
certificate and completion drawings.
Again on 22nd October, 1990, another Division Bench 
dealt with a property in Greater Kailash II, New Delhi in the 
case of
DDA v. Rajinder Mittal
, [1991(20) DRJ 65] and 
observed that the residential buildings can only be used for 
residential purposes. The use of premises for widespread 
commercial activities is prohibited.  This was while dealing 
with a criminal matter arising out of prosecution under 
Section 29 of the Delhi Development Act.
On May 18, 1995, Justice R.C. Lahoti (as the former 
Chief Justice of India, then was) in the case of
ANZ Grindlays 
Bank v. The Commissioner, M.C.D. & Ors.
[1995(34)DRJ 
492]  echoed similar words and referred to decision of this 
Court, observing that the word 'environment' is of broad 
spectrum which brings within its ambit hygienic atmosphere 
and ecological balance.  It is, therefore, not only the duty of 
the State but also the duty of every citizen to maintain 
hygienic environment.  There is constitutional imperative on 
the State Government and the municipalities, not only to 
ensure and safeguard proper environment but also an 
imperative duty to take adequate measures to promote, protect 
and improve both the man-made and the natural 
environment.  Dealing with the Municipal Laws providing for 
power of demolition, it was observed that while interpreting 
municipal legislation framed in public interest, a strict 
constitutional approach must be adopted. A perusal of the 
Master Plan shows that the public purpose behind it is based 
on historic facts guided by expert opinion.  
The injurious effects on the health and well being of 
those living in the neighbourhood were also noticed.  Further, 
notice was taken of the fact of the unscrupulous builders 
building properties in deviation of laws, master plan with the 
connivance or collusion of the authorities.
On 9th February, 1996 dealing with various properties at 
Pusa Road in the case of
Anil Kumar Khurana v. MCD
[1996 
(36) DRJ 558] writing separate opinion as a member of 
Division Bench of Delhi High Court, one of us (Y.K.Sabharwal, 
CJ) noticed that the unauthorised constructions and 
unauthorised user of residential building for commercial 
purposes in Delhi had gained alarming proportions and 
crossed all limits.  It was said that these activities are against 
the interests of the society at large and need to be dealt with 
firmly and that the public interest demands that the court 
should not come to the aid of those who break the law with 
immunity and put up commercial complexes on the land 
meant admittedly for residential use.  These complexes are put 
up and spaces purchased for petty commercial consideration 
without any regard to the hardship and inconvenience of other 
citizens.  It was further said that in respect of blatant 
unauthorised constructions and misuser, it cannot be said 
that the Commissioner of MCD has a discretion to order 
demolition or not and vesting of discretion in the 
circumstances would itself be arbitrary and illegal. 
	In the concluding paragraph it was stated that:
"In the end, I regret to notice that despite 
warning and caution given by the Apex 
Court and also this court, from time to 
time, that stern action will be taken 
against unauthorised constructions and 
misuse, these activities have gone on 
unabated, without any let or hindrance 
and all the warnings have fallen on deaf 
ears without any effect on the 
unscruplous builders and purchasers of 
these spaces. It is, therefore, necessary to 
once again send a message, loudly, 
clearly and firmly to all those who indulge 
in such illegal activities that courts will 
not come to the aid of persons who 
indulge in such blatant unauthorised 
constructions and misuser of the 
properties. It is also the duty of the 
courts to examine these matters carefully 
before granting injunction restraining 
demolition of such unauthorised 
constructions. Ordinarily the courts 
before issuing injunctions in such 
matters should insist upon filing of the 
sanctioned plans and details about the 
existing structures to prima facie find out 
whether the existing structures are in 
accordance with the sanctioned plan and 
building bye laws etc or not. The courts 
may also consider appointment of 
independent person to verify correctness 
of representations made about existing 
structures as in many cases 
unauthorised constructions are raised 
after issue of injunctions and in cover 
and garb of orders of injunction. The 
alarming nature of such illegal activities 
can be controlled only by due cooperation 
from all citizens including the Media and 
the Press. It is the duty of all to expose 
these law breakers. I hope the Media 
would bring to the notice of public in 
general that unauthorised constructions 
and misuser have been severely dealt 
with by this court and henceforth also no 
leniency would be shown in such 
matters. A copy of this judgment shall be 
sent forthwith to Delhi Doordarshan and 
All India Radio. Everyone has to be told 
that such unauthorised activities are 
against public interest. These activities 
have to be stopped forthwith. If in spite of 
this warning anyone indulges in such 
unauthorised construction or misuse or 
in purchase of these unauthorized 
constructions he would be doing it at his 
own risk and peril and would not be 
heard to say that he has made large 
investments. I hope that at least now this 
message would be taken with all 
seriousness.
In view of the above, in my opinion, 
all the petitions and appeals deserve 
dismissal with costs quantified at 
Rs.10,000/- in each case. These costs 
would be utilised by M.C.D. for creating 
in a Special Cell which should be set up 
to curb unauthorised construction and 
misuser of the immoveable properties so 
that at least a beginning is made now to 
promptly check these illegal activities. 
The officials and officers manning this 
Cell will have to be informed that any 
dereliction of duty would be severely dealt 
with."
It seems that in view of the aforesaid judgment attaining 
finality, some formal or cosmetic demolition had taken place.  
What is the position of these properties now is evident from 
the affidavit dated 16th November, 2005 filed by Additional 
Commissioner, MCD placing on record the present status after 
conducting inspections in second week of November, 2005.  A 
perusal of the status report in respect of properties referred in 
the aforesaid case shows large scale violations in the shape of 
show-rooms, commercial offices, shops, law institutes and 
gymnasiums.  The report shows that even after a lapse of 10 
years, commercial activity is in full swing.  This also shows the 
urgent need to introduce stringent measures for fixing 
accountability.
Despite passing of the laws and repeated orders of the 
High Court and this Court, the enforcement of the laws and 
the implementation of the orders are utterly lacking.  If the 
laws are not enforced and the orders of the courts to enforce 
and implement the laws are ignored, the result can only be 
total lawlessness.  It is, therefore, necessary to also identify 
and take appropriate action against officers responsible for 
this state of affairs.  Such blatant misuse of properties at large 
scale cannot take place without connivance of the concerned 
officers.  It is also a source of corruption.  Therefore, action is 
also necessary to check corruption, nepotism and total apathy 
towards the rights of the citizens.  Those who own the 
properties that are misused have also implied responsibility 
towards the hardship, inconvenience, suffering caused to the 
residents of the locality and injuries to third parties.  It is, 
therefore, not only the question of stopping the misuser but 
also making the owners at default accountable for the injuries 
caused to others.  Similar would also be the accountability of 
errant officers as well since, prima facie, such large scale 
misuser, in violation of laws, cannot take place without the 
active connivance of the officers.  It would be for the officers to 
show what effective steps were taken to stop the misuser.
	We have perused the suggestions given by MCD.  It has 
suggested four steps.  MCD requires six months to complete 
the whole survey in 12 zones divided into 134 wards.  As a 
second step, after initial survey of all the zones, notice of the 
proposed action/sealing and/or stopping misuse to be given to 
the concerned persons.  The third step is grant of opportunity 
to them of being heard.  The fourth step is the operations for 
sealing blatant and obvious cases of large scale misuse at the 
first instance.  Further suggestion is that the major violations 
would be sealed first and simultaneously action in all 12 zones 
would be conducted after following the due process of law.  It 
is stated that the success of operation would largely depend on 
the availability of the Police force.  Recognising that the parties 
later tamper the seal, it is suggested that necessary directions 
be issued warning those who tamper the seal that they shall 
be punished for contempt of court.
Regarding the Ad hoc Trade Registration Scheme, 2004, 
the stand of the MCD is that, if allowed by the Court, it will be 
implemented in the same area as is permitted by the Master 
Plan for category 'A' household industry to the extent of 25% of 
the floor space or 30 sq. mt., whichever is less, and this will be 
the maximum space permissible.  The minimum space having 
already been specified in the scheme as 30 sq. ft.  We may 
note that the scheme for ad hoc registration itself provides 
that it is applicable to the following areas :
1.	Walled city and other built up areas.
2.	Schemes executed by the Delhi Improvement Colonies.
3.	Schemes executed by the Ministry of Rehabilitation 
Colonies.
4.	Resettlement Colonies.
5.	Urban Villages
6.	Unauthorised regularized colonies.
	This scheme is not applicable to the following areas :
1.	NDMC and Delhi Cantonment area.
2.	Planned Colonies and housing schemes developed after 
1957.
3.	Unauthorised colonies not regularized.
4.	J.J. Clusters.
5.	Staff Housing colonies.
6.	Rural Settlement (except household and rural industrial 
units Group A & A1-Annexure-II)
The areas and the colonies above-referred themselves 
show that the so-called Registration Scheme, 2004 can have 
no applicability to the nature of misuse under consideration.
It deserves to be noted that it is implicit in the scheme that a 
person to get benefit of the scheme has himself to be resident 
of such premises.
The introduction of the Ad hoc Registration Scheme 
would not only regularize the illegalities but further encourage 
more illegalities to take place by sending a wrong message 
underlying the press release.  This ad hoc scheme has been 
stayed by this Court.  A similar scheme was also sought to be 
introduced by DDA as well  for grant of temporary permission 
for commercial use in industrial plots and for condonation of 
misuse of industrial premises for offices and other commercial 
purposes on payment of requisite charges.  On learned Amicus 
Curiae filing IA 1816 of 2002 seeking stay of the said scheme, 
the scheme was given up and an affidavit filed that no action 
is being taken by DDA upon the scheme or the notice, subject 
matter of the application.  The introduction of such schemes 
by MCD and DDA show the extent of the apathy and lack of 
concern of these bodies.
Mr. Ashwini Kumar, learned senior Advocate appearing 
for MCD, also contended that since there is a large scale 
misuse of residential premises for commercial purposes, it is a 
physical impossibility to remove the misuser.  The contention 
deserves outright rejection.  We have already noted how the 
misuser has attained such enormity.  Despite repeated orders 
and directions, MCD took no action.  Such a contention is not 
open to MCD.  It is not merely a case of only lack of will to 
take action, it appears to be a case of predominance of 
extraneous considerations.
Rule of law is the essence of Democracy.  It has to be 
preserved.  Laws have to be enforced.  In the case in hand, the 
implementation and enforcement of law to stop blatant misuse 
cannot be delayed further so as to await the so called proposed 
survey by MCD.  The suggestions would only result in further 
postponement of action against illegalities.  It may be noted 
that the MCD has filed zonewise/wardwise abstract of 
violations in terms of commercialisation as in November, 2005.   
According to MCD, the major violation has been determined in 
respect of those roads where commercialisation of the 
buildings is more than 50%.  According to it, the major 
violations in 12 zones are spread on 229 roads.  Roads on 
which there are major violations are, thus, known.  In respect 
of these, there is no need for any survey or individual notice.  
Beginning must be made to stop misuser on main roads of 
width of 80 ft. or more.  The names of these roads can be 
published in newspapers and adequate publicity given, 
granting violators some time to bring the user of the property 
in conformity with the permissible user, namely, for residential 
use if the plans have been sanctioned for construction of a 
residential house.  In case owner/user fails to do so, how, in 
which manner and from which date, MCD will commence 
sealing operation shall be placed on record in the form of an 
affidavit of its Commissioner to be filed within two weeks.  On 
consideration of this affidavit, we will issue further directions 
including constitution of a Monitoring Committee, if 
necessary.  The issue of accountability of officers and also the 
exact manner of applicability of Polluter Pay Principle to 
owners and officers would be further taken up after misuser is 
stopped at least on main roads.  Civil Appeal Nos.608/2003 
above referred relates to Ring Road, Lajpat Nagar-II.  The other 
cases relate to areas like Green Park Extn., Green Park Main, 
Greater Kailash, New Friends Colony, Defence Colony, West 
Patel Nagar, etc.  These areas are illustrative.  The activities 
include Big Furnishing Stores, Galleries, Sale of Diamond and 
Gold Jewellary, sale of Car Parts etc.  
Having held that the Commissioner of MCD has power 
under the
DMC Act
to seal premises in case of its misuser, we 
issue the following directions for taking immediate steps to 
seal residential premises being used for commercial purpose :
1.	MCD shall within 10 days give wide publicity in the 
leading newspapers directing major violations on main 
roads (some instances of such violators and roads have 
been noted hereinbefore) to stop misuser on their own, 
within the period of 30 days.
2.	It shall be the responsibility of the owner/occupier to file 
within 30 days an affidavit with Commissioner of MCD 
stating that the misuser has been stopped.
3.	In case misuser is not stopped, sealing of the premises 
shall commence after 30 days, from the date of public 
notice, first taking up the violations on roads which are 
80 ft. wide and more.  All authorities are directed to 
render full assistance and cooperation.  After expiry of 30 
days from the date of public notice, electricity and water 
supply shall be disconnected.
4.	Details of the Roads and the violations shall also be 
placed on the website by the MCD and copies also sent to 
Resident Welfare Associations of the area which should 
be involved in the process of sealing of misuser.  The 
Commissioner of MCD shall file an affidavit, within two 
weeks, in terms of directions contained in this judgment, 
whereafter directions for constitution of the Monitoring 
Committee would be issued.  The sealing would be 
effected by the officers authorised by the Commissioner 
of MCD in consultation with the Monitoring Committee.
5.	The appropriate directions for action, if any, against the 
officers responsible for the misuse and for payment of 
compensation by them and by violators would be issued 
after the misuser is stopped.
6.	None will tamper with the seals.  Any tampering with seal 
will be sternly dealt with.  Tampering with seal will 
include opening another entrance for use of premises.
7.	It would be open to the owner/occupier to approach the 
Commissioner for removal of the seal on giving 
undertaking that the premises would be put to only 
authorised use.
8.	Particulars of cases where violators may have obtained 
orders of stay will be filed in this Court by MCD.
9.	MCD shall file monthly status report as to action taken 
by 15th of each month commencing from 10th April, 2006.
10.	In case misuser is not stopped in the premises involved 
in the civil appeals and special leave petitions, subject to 
what is stated in this judgment, the MCD will take 
immediate steps to seal those premises soon after expiry 
of 30 days.
Civil Appeals, Interlocutory Applications (except I.A.22) 
and Special Leave Petitions are disposed of but MCD is 
granted liberty to seek further directions from this Court from 
time to time.