[Cites
19
, Cited by
133
]
Supreme Court of India
Smt. Seema vs Ashwani Kumar on 14 February, 2006
Equivalent citations: AIR 2006 SUPREME COURT 1158, 2006 (2) AIR BOM R 783, 2006 (2) AIR KANT HCR 402, (2006) 2 SUPREME 66, (2006) 1 KER LT 791, (2006) 2 PAT LJR 116, (2006) 3 SCJ 101, (2006) 1 RECCIVR 643, (2006) 2 ICC 475, (2006) 2 ALL WC 1599, (2006) 2 CAL HN 191, (2006) 39 ALLINDCAS 46 (SC), (2006) 127 DLT 282, (2006) 33 OCR 640, (2006) 1 PUN LR 834, (2006) 2 KANT LJ 481, (2006) MATLR 256, (2006) 62 ALL LR 794, 2006 BLJR 1 356, (2006) 2 CHANDCRIC 68, 2007 HRR 2 575, (2006) 101 CUT LT 639, (2006) 2 ALLMR 11 (SC), (2006) 4 CIVLJ 57, (2006) 1 CURCC 205, (2006) 2 BOM CR 497, 2006 (2) AIR KAR R 402
Author:
Arijit Pasayat
Bench:
Arijit Pasayat
,
S.H. Kapadia
CASE NO.:
Transfer Petition (civil)  291 of 2005

PETITIONER:
Smt. Seema

RESPONDENT:
Ashwani Kumar

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 14/02/2006

BENCH:
ARIJIT PASAYAT & S.H. KAPADIA

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.
The origin of marriage amongst Aryans in India, as noted 
in Mayne's Hindu Law and Usage, as amongst other ancient 
peoples is a matter for the Science of anthropology.  From the 
very commencement of the Rigvedic age, marriage was a well-
established institution, and the Aryans ideal of marriage was 
very high.
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination Against Women (in short 'CEDAW') was 
adopted in 1979 by the United Nations General Assembly. 
India was a signatory to the Convention on 30th July, 1980 
and ratified on 9th July, 1993 with two Declaratory Statements 
and one Reservation.
Article 16(2)
of the Convention says 
"though India agreed on principle that compulsory registration 
of marriages is highly desirable, it was said as follows:
"'It is not practical in a vast country like India 
with its variety of customs, religions and level 
of literacy' and has expressed reservation to 
this very clause to make registration of 
marriage compulsory".
While a transfer petition was being heard it was noted 
with concern that in large number of cases some 
unscrupulous persons are denying the existence of marriage 
taking advantage of the situation that in most of the States 
there is no official record of the marriage.  Notice was issued to 
various States and Union Territories and learned Solicitor 
General and Mr. Ranjit Kumar, learned senior counsel were 
requested to act as Amicus Curiae to assist the Court in laying 
down guidelines in the matter of registration of marriages.  
Without exception, all the States and the Union Territories 
indicated their stand to the effect that registration of 
marriages is highly desirable.
It has been pointed out that compulsory registration of 
marriages would be a step in the right direction for the 
prevention of child marriages still prevalent in many parts of 
the country. In the Constitution of India, 1950 (in short the 
'Constitution') List III (the Concurrent List) of the Seventh 
Schedule provides in Entries 5 and 30 as follows:
"5.	Marriage and divorce; infants and 
minors; adoption; wills, intestacy and 
succession; joint family and partition; all 
matters in respect of which parties in judicial 
proceedings were immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution subject to 
their personal law.
30.	Vital statistics including registration of 
births and deaths."
It is to be noted that vital statistics including registration 
of deaths and births is covered by Entry 30. The registration of 
marriages would come within the ambit of the expression 'vital 
statistics'.
From the compilation of relevant legislations in respect of 
registration of marriages, it appears that there are four 
Statutes which provide for compulsory registration of 
marriages. They are: (1) The Bombay Registration of Marriages 
Act, 1953 (applicable to Maharashtra and Gujarat), (2)
The 
Karnataka Marriages (Registration and Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1976
, (3)
The Himachal Pradesh Registration 
of Marriages Act, 1996
, and (4)
The Andhra Pradesh 
Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act, 2002
.  In five States 
provisions appear to have been made for voluntary registration 
of Muslim marriages. These are Assam, Bihar, West Bengal, 
Orissa and Meghalaya. The "
Assam Moslem Marriages and 
Divorce Registration Act, 1935
," the "Orissa Muhammadan 
Marriages and Divorce Registration Act, 1949" and the "
Bengal 
Muhammadan Marriages and Divorce Registration Act, 1876
"
are the relevant statutes.  In Uttar Pradesh also it appears 
that the State Government has announced a policy providing 
for compulsory registration of marriages by the Panchayats 
and maintenance of its records relating to births and deaths.
Under the Special Marriage Act, 1954
which applies to Indian 
citizens irrespective of religion each marriage is registered by 
the Marriage Officer specially appointed for the purpose. The 
registration of marriage is compulsory under the
Indian 
Christian Marriage Act, 1872
. Under the said Act, entries are 
made in the marriage register of the concerned Church soon 
after the marriage ceremony along with the signatures of bride 
and bridegroom, the officiating priest and the witnesses.
The 
Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936
makes registration of 
marriages compulsory. Under
Section 8
of the Hindu Marriage 
Act, 1955 (in short the '
Hindu Act
') certain provisions exist for 
registration of marriages. However, it is left to the discretion of 
the contracting parties to either solemnize the marriage before 
the Sub-Registrar or register it after performing the marriage 
ceremony in conformity with the customary beliefs. However, 
the Act makes it clear that the validity of the marriage in no 
way will be affected by omission to make the entry in the 
register.  In Goa, the Law of Marriages which is in force in the 
territories of Goa, Daman and Diu w.e.f. 26.11.1911 continues 
to be in force. Under
Articles 45
to 47 of the Law of Marriages, 
registration of marriage is compulsory and the proof of 
marriage is ordinarily by production of Certificate of Marriage 
procured from the Register maintained by the Civil Registrar 
and issued by the concerned Civil Registrar appointed for the 
purpose by the Government.  The procedural aspects about 
registration of marriages are contained in Articles 1075 to 
1081 of the Portuguese (Civil) Code which is the common Civil 
Code in force in the State. It is pointed out in the affidavit filed 
on behalf of the respondent-State of Goa that the
Hindu Act
is 
not in force in the said State since it has not been extended to 
the State either by the Goa, Daman and Diu Laws Regulations, 
1962 or by the Goa, Daman and Diu Laws No.2 Regulations, 
1963 by which Central Acts have been extended to the State 
after the liberation of the State. Procedure for marriages is also 
provided in Code of Civil Registration (Portuguese) which is in 
force in the State.
The Foreign Marriage Act, 1969
also 
provides for registration of marriages.
As noted above, the
Hindu Act
enables the State 
Government to make rules with regard to the registration of 
marriages. Under Sub-section (2) of
Section 8
if the State 
Government is of the opinion that such registration should be 
compulsory it can so provide. In that event, the person 
contravening any rule made in this regard shall be punishable 
with fine.
In various States different marriage Acts are in operation 
e.g. in
Jammu and Kashmir, Jammu and Kashmir Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1980
empowers the Government to make rules 
to provide that the parties (Hindus) shall have their particulars 
relating to marriages entered in such a manner as may be 
prescribed for facilitating proof of such marriages. Admittedly, 
no rules have been framed. As regards Muslims, Section 3 of 
the Jammu and Kashmir Muslim Marriages Registration Act, 
1981 provides that marriage contracted between Muslims after 
the commencement of the Act shall be registered in the 
manner provided therein within 30 days from the date of 
conclusion of Nikah ceremony. However, the Act has not been 
enforced. So far as Christians are concerned, the
Jammu and 
Kashmir Christian Marriage and Divorce Act, 1957
provides 
for registration of marriages in terms of
Sections 26
and 37 for 
registration of marriages solemnized by Minister of Religion 
and marriages solemnized by, or in the presence of a Marriage 
Registrar respectively.
In exercise of powers conferred by
Section 8
of the Hindu 
Act the State of U.P. has framed U.P. Hindu Marriage 
Registration Rules, 1973 which have been notified in 1973. In 
the affidavit filed by the State Government it is stated that the 
marriages are being registered after enactment of the Rules.
In Pondicherry, the Pondicherry Hindu Marriage 
(Registration) Rules, 1969 have come into force w.e.f. 7th April, 
1969. All Sub-Registrars of Pondicherry have been appointed 
under
Section 6
of the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (in short 
the '
Registration Act
') as Marriage Registrars for the purposes 
of registering marriages. In the State of Haryana, the Haryana 
Hindu Marriage Registration Rules, 2001 under
Section 8
of 
the Hindu Act have been notified.  In the State of West Bengal, 
Hindu Marriage Registration Rules, 1958 have been notified.
From the affidavit filed on behalf of the State of Tripura, 
it appears that the said State has introduced rules called 
Tripura Hindu Marriage Registration Rules, 1957. It has also 
introduced Tripura Special Marriage Rules, 1989 under the
Special Marriage Act, 1954
. So far as the State of Karnataka is 
concerned, it appears that Registration of Hindu Marriages 
(Karnataka) Rules, 1966 have been framed. It further appears 
that
Karnataka Marriages (Registration and Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1976
has been introduced.
Section 3
of the Act 
requires compulsory registration of all marriages contracted in 
the State.
So far as the Union Territory of Chandigarh is concerned, 
Hindu Marriage Registration Rules, 1966 have been framed.
In the affidavit filed on behalf of the National 
Commission for Women (in short the 'National Commission') it 
has been indicated as follows:
"That the Commission is of the opinion that 
non-registration of marriages affects the most 
and hence has since its inception supported 
the proposal for legislation on compulsory 
registration of marriages. Such a law would be 
of critical importance to various women related 
issues such as:
(a)	prevention of child marriages and to 
ensure minimum age of marriage.
(b)	prevention of marriages without the 
consent of the parties.
(c)	Check illegal bigamy/polygamy
(d)	Enabling married women to claim their 
right to live in the matrimonial house, 
maintenance, etc.
(e)	Enabling widows to claim their 
inheritance rights and other benefits and 
privileges which they are entitled to after the 
death of their husband.
(f)	Deterring men from deserting women 
after marriage.
(g)	Deterring parents/guardians from selling 
daughters/young girls to any person including 
a foreigner, under the garb of marriage."
As noted supra, except four statutes applicable to States 
of Maharashtra, Gujarat, Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh and 
Andhra Pradesh registration of marriages is not compulsory in 
any of the other States.
As is evident from narration of facts though most of the 
States have framed rules regarding registration of marriages, 
registration of marriage is not compulsory in several States. If 
the record of marriage is kept, to a large extent, the dispute 
concerning solemnization of marriages between two persons is 
avoided. As rightly contended by the National Commission, in 
most cases non registration of marriages affects the women to 
a great measure. If the marriage is registered it also provides 
evidence of the marriage having taken place and would provide 
a rebuttable presumption of the marriage having taken place. 
Though, the registration itself cannot be a proof of valid 
marriage per se, and would not be the determinative factor 
regarding validity of a marriage, yet it has a great evidentiary 
value in the matters of custody of children, right of children 
born from the wedlock of the two persons whose marriage is 
registered and the age of parties to the marriage. That being 
so, it would be in the interest of the society if marriages are 
made compulsorily registrable. The legislative intent in 
enacting
Section 8
of the Hindu Act is apparent from the use 
of the expression "for the purpose of facilitating the proof of 
Hindu Marriages".
As a natural consequence, the effect of non registration 
would be that the presumption which is available from 
registration of marriages would be denied to a person whose 
marriage is not registered.
Accordingly, we are of the view that marriages of all 
persons who are citizens of India belonging to various religions 
should be made compulsorily registrable in their respective 
States, where the marriage is solemnized.
Accordingly, we direct the States and the Central 
Government to take the following steps:
(i)	The procedure for registration should be 
notified by respective States within three 
months from today.  This can be done by 
amending the existing Rules, if any, or by 
framing new Rules.  However, objections from 
members of the public shall be invited before 
bringing the said Rules into force.  In this 
connection, due publicity shall be given by the 
States and the matter shall be kept open for 
objections for a period of one month from the 
date of advertisement inviting objections.  On 
the expiry of the said period, the States shall 
issue appropriate notification bringing the 
Rules into force.
(ii)	The officer appointed under the said Rules of 
the States shall be duly authorized to register 
the marriages.  The age, marital status 
(unmarried, divorcee) shall be clearly stated.
The consequence of non-registration of 
marriages or for filing false declaration shall 
also be provided for in the said Rules.
Needless to add that the object of the said 
Rules shall be to carry out the directions of 
this Court.
(iii)	As and when the Central Government enacts 
a comprehensive statute, the same shall be 
placed before this Court for scrutiny.
(iv)	Learned counsel for various States and Union 
Territories shall ensure that the directions 
given herein are carried out immediately.
The Registry is directed to handover a copy of this order 
to learned Solicitor General for necessary follow-up action.
We record our appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered by Mr. G.E. Vahanvati, the Solicitor General and Mr. 
Ranjeet Kumar, senior advocate, who appeared as amicus 
curiae.