[Cites
16
, Cited by
211
]
Supreme Court of India
Rajinder Arora vs Union Of India And Ors on 10 March, 2006
Equivalent citations: AIR 2006 SUPREME COURT 1719, 2006 (4) SCC 796, AIR 2006 (NOC) 1000 (KER), 2006 AIR SCW 1510, (2006) 3 RECCIVR 218, 2006 (4) SRJ 390, (2006) 3 CIVILCOURTC 643, 2006 (2) CALCRILR 123, 2006 (2) SCC(CRI) 418, 2006 (3) SCALE 202, (2006) 131 ECR 192, 2006 CALCRILR 2 123, (2006) 2 KER LT 77, 2006 CRILR(SC&MP) 363, (2006) 44 ALLINDCAS 403 (KER), (2006) ILR(KER) 2 KER 392, (2006) 2 CURCRIR 8, (2006) 2 EFR 298, (2006) 2 MADLW(CRI) 490, (2006) 1 MAD LJ(CRI) 398, (2006) 34 OCR 18, (2006) 2 RAJ CRI C 340, (2006) 2 RECCRIR 752, (2006) 4 SCJ 140, (2006) 3 SUPREME 139, (2006) 3 SCALE 202, (2006) 3 ALLCRILR 582, (2006) 2 CURLJ(CCR) 165, (2006) 2 CHANDCRIC 132, (2006) 1 ALLCRIR 1135, (2006) 2 CRIMES 61, (2006) SC CR R 724, MANU/SC/1437/2006, (2006) 2 KER LT 61
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
S.B. Sinha
,
P.K. Balasubramanyan
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  311 of 2006

PETITIONER:
Rajinder Arora

RESPONDENT:
Union of India and Ors

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 10/03/2006

BENCH:
S.B. Sinha & P.K. Balasubramanyan

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
[Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.4708 of 2005]


S.B. SINHA, J :
Leave granted.
The Appellant is an industrialist.  He manufactures acrylic yarn, 
blankets and shawls.  The said goods are exportable items.  The units of the 
Appellant are recognized export houses.  They were awarded the highest 
export performance Awards by Wool and Woolen Export Promotion 
Council for manufacture of the aforementioned goods.  The Appellant 
imported some raw materials on the premise that the imported items would 
be utilized for manufacture of the goods which were meant for export.  A 
raid was conducted in his residence on 26.05.2004 by the Directorate of 
Revenue Intelligence (DRI) and he was taken in custody.  He allegedly was 
continuously tortured for two days.  During his detention statements under
Section 108
of the Customs Act were recorded allegedly under coercion, 
duress and threat.  He was shown arrested on 28.05.2004 and produced 
before a Magistrate.  He was medically examined whereupon marks of 
multiple injuries on his person were found.  After he was remanded to 
judicial custody by the Magistrate by an order dated 28.5.2004, he retracted 
his alleged confession stating that the same had been obtained under 
coercion, duress and torture.  He remained under treatment for 45 days out 
of the total period of 60 days of his judicial remand (the requisite statutory 
period for filing a complaint).  Upon failure on the part of the DRI 
Department to file a complaint against the Appellant within the statutory 
period of 60 days, he was enlarged on bail on 28.7.2004.  In the meanwhile, 
his family members were forced to deposit a sum of Rs.60 lakhs as customs 
duty.  Such deposit, however, was made without prejudice to the rights and 
contentions of the Appellant.  Several representations were made by the 
Appellant stating the aforesaid facts.
He filed a criminal complaint on 18.02.2005.  The Medical Officer 
concerned was examined in the said proceeding wherein he stated:
"On 28.05.2004 at 8.40 PM I examined physically 
Sh. Rajinder Arora vide my emergency OPD No. 
6607/04.  Patient was brought to me by Mr. R.K. 
Saini, Intelligence Officer, DRI, Ludhiana 
Regional Unit.  I found following injuries on the 
person of Rajinder Arora who is present today:
1. Multiple abrasions, superficial, in an area of 4 
inch x 2 inch over mid of left upper arm, antero 
laterally.  Patient also complaint of heaviness in 
chest.  His B.P. was 150/106 mm Hg.
In my opinion, duration of injury was about 24 
hours.  I have seen the certified copy of injury 
report which is correct according to original report 
and is Ex. CW2/1, which is signed by me.  When 
Rajinder Arora was brought to me he was under 
the custody of DRA authorities."
In the meanwhile, a proposal was forwarded to the DRI, Delhi Zonal 
Unit, Delhi for his detention under COFEPOSA.  A proposal was also sent 
to COFEPOSA Unit by the said authority.  Allegedly, on 15.2.2005, the DRI 
Ludhiana opined that no case has been made out for his detention under 
COFEPOSA.  A proposal, however, was made by the said authorities for 
determination of detention of Shital Vij, who was said to be the brain behind 
utilization of the unlawful import.
Only on 31.3.2005, the order of detention was issued.
A writ petition was filed by the Appellant herein before the High 
Court of Punjab and Haryana praying for quashing of the said order of 
detention.  By reason of the impugned order, the writ petition has been 
dismissed.  The Appellant is, thus, in appeal before us.
The High Court in his impugned judgment opined:
(i)	In the grounds of detention, the detaining authority had adverted to all 
the evidences collected against the Appellant including his statement 
under
Section 108
of the Customs Act as also the subsequent 
retraction.
(ii)	The activities of the Appellant come within the purview of the 
expression "smuggling" as defined in
Section 2(39)
of the Customs 
Act read with
Section 2(e)
of the COFEPOSA Act.
(iii)	Delay in issuing the order of detention is not fatal.  Delay, per se, 
cannot be a circumstance to set aside an order of detention.
(iv)	The subjective satisfaction of the authority is based upon sufficient 
material and is sufficient to warrant an order of preventive detention.
(v)	No discrimination has been committed as against the Appellant in not 
recommending Shital Vij's detention as its recommendation was 
rejected by the Screening Committee.
(vi)	Only because a redemption certificate was issued by the concerned 
authority, it cannot be presumed that the Appellant had discharged his 
export obligations, without violation of the terms and conditions of his 
licences.
(vii)	The complaint petition filed by the Appellant herein, contending 
illegal detention and torture, by itself is not a ground for detracting 
from the orders passed by the detaining authority as mere filing of a 
criminal complaint would not lead to a conclusion that the order of 
detention was mala fide.
Mr. Uday U. Lalit, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the 
Appellant, would raise the following contentions:
(i)	Licences granted to the Appellant were allowed to be surrendered by 
the competent authorities only after an objective assessment was made 
in that behalf.
(ii)	The status report called for by the Customs Authorities from DGFT 
having not been considered, the detaining authority must be held to 
have failed to take into consideration a relevant fact, as therein it was 
opined that no case had been made out for detention.
(iii)	As the Appellant filed a complaint against the officer alleging illegal 
detention and torture meted out by him, the impugned order of 
detention has been passed malafide.
(iv)	The Appellant having deposited Rs.60 lakhs without prejudice to his 
rights and contentions, and, thus, the impugned order of detention 
having been made for unauthorized purpose, was mala fide.  Had 
there been any material before the appropriate authority, they would 
have lodged a complaint against the Appellant.
(v)	There was absolutely no reason as to why such a long time was 
taken for passing the order of detention.
Mr. K. Radhakrishnan, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of 
the Respondent, on the other hand, relying on or on the basis of the findings 
of the High Court, as noticed supra, would support the order of detention.
It is not in dispute that the authorities in terms of
Sections 9(4)
,
10
and
11
of the Foreign Trade Development and Regulation Act, 1994 exercise a 
wide jurisdiction.  Although the raid was made on 26.05.2004, admittedly, 
till date, no prosecution has been lodged as against the Appellant by DGFT.  
It is also not in dispute that the statutory authorities has not yet issued any 
show cause notice on the Appellant on the ground that the export 
commitments were not fulfilled.  It is furthermore not in dispute that the 
authorities had granted redemption certificates.
A pre-detention order can be quashed only on a limited ground.  This 
Court in
Additional Secretary to the Government of India and Others v. Smt. 
Alka Subhash Gadia and Another
[1992 Supp (1) SCC 496] laid down the 
criterias therefor upon a detailed consideration of the provisions of the  
Preventive Detention Laws and the right of individual to assail an order of 
detention without surrendering in the following terms:
"Thirdly, and this is more important, it is not 
correct to say that the courts have no power to 
entertain grievances against any detention order 
prior to its execution. The courts have the 
necessary power and they have used it in proper 
cases as has been pointed out above, although such 
cases have been few and the grounds on which the 
courts have interfered with them at the pre-
execution stage are necessarily very limited in 
scope and number, viz., where the courts are prima 
facie satisfied (i) that the impugned order is not 
passed under the Act under which it is purported to 
have been passed, (ii) that it is sought to be 
executed against a wrong person, (iii) that it is 
passed for a wrong purpose, (iv) that it is passed 
on vague, extraneous and irrelevant grounds or (v) 
that the authority which passed it had no authority 
to do so. The refusal by the courts to use their 
extraordinary powers of judicial review to interfere 
with the detention orders prior to their execution 
on any other ground does not amount to the 
abandonment of the said power or to their denial to 
the proposed detenu, but prevents their abuse and 
the perversion of the law in question."
Recently a 3-Judge Bench of this Court in
Naresh Kumar Goyal v. 
Union of India and Others
[(2005) 8 SCC 276] (in which one of us P.K. 
Balasubramanyan, J. was a member), opined:
"It is trite law that an order of detention is not a 
curative or reformative or punitive action, but a 
preventive action, avowed object of which being to 
prevent the anti-social and subversive elements 
from imperiling the welfare of the country or the 
security of the nation or from disturbing the public 
tranquility or from indulging in smuggling 
activities or from engaging in illicit traffic in 
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances etc. 
Preventive detention is devised to afford protection 
to society. The authorities on the subject have 
consistently taken the view that preventive 
detention is devised to afford protection to society. 
The object is not to punish a man for having done 
something but to intercept before he does it, and to 
prevent him from doing so. It, therefore, becomes 
imperative on the part of the detaining authority as 
well as the executing authority to be very vigilant 
and keep their eyes skinned but not to turn a blind 
eye in securing the detenue and executing the 
detention order because any indifferent attitude on 
the part of the detaining authority or executing 
authority will defeat the very purpose of 
preventive action and turn the detention order as a 
dead letter and frustrate the entire proceedings. 
Inordinate delay, for which no adequate 
explanation is furnished, led to the assumption that 
the live and proximate link between the grounds of 
detention and the purpose of detention is snapped. 
(See :
P.U. Iqbal v. Union of India and Ors.
,;
Ashok Kumar v. Delhi Administration
, and
Bhawarlal Ganeshmalji v. State of Tamilnadu
)"
In that case, however, the order of detention had not been 
implemented for a long time and having considered
Alka Subhash Gadia
(supra) and several other decisions, it was held:
"Coming to the facts of this case, at the highest the 
case of the appellant is that the order of detention 
was belatedly passed and the State of Bihar 
thereafter took no steps whatsoever to implement 
the order of detention. Counsel for the appellant 
sought to bring this case under the third exception 
enumerated in
Alka Subhash Gadia
(supra), 
namely, that the order was passed for a wrong 
purpose. In the facts and circumstances of this 
case, it is not possible to accept the submission that 
the order was passed for a wrong purpose.
Apparently the order has been passed with a view 
to prevent the appellant from smuggling goods or 
abetting the smuggling thereof etc. The facts of the 
present case are no different from the facts in 
Muneesh Suneja (supra).
We do not find that the 
case falls within any of the exceptions enumerated 
in
Alka Subhash Gadia
(supra). The High Court 
was, therefore, justified in refusing to exercise 
jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution 
of India to quash the order of detention at the pre-
arrest stage. This appeal is, therefore, devoid of 
merit and is dismissed."
Mr. Lalit, however, is not correct in his submissions that only because 
a redemption certificate had been granted by DGFT, the same would itself 
be sufficient for quashing an order of detention as the activities of smuggling 
on the part of the importer may come to their notice at a later part of time.
We may, however, notice that the Appellant has categorically stated 
that a status report was submitted by the Respondent No. 3 to the DRI, Delhi 
on their request but the same had not been placed before the detaining 
authority.
In Ground 'U' of the SLP filed by the Appellant, herein, it is stated:
"Because the High Court has failed to appreciate 
that, as per the knowledge of the petitioner, the 
respondent No. 3 submitted the status report of the 
present case vide its letter dated 15.02.2005 to the 
DRI Delhi on their request which was not placed 
before the detaining authority the respondent No. 2 
herein.  As per the knowledge of the petitioner, the 
status report had negated the passing of the order 
of detention.  This status report/ letter has been 
deliberately withheld with a malafide intention.  It 
is a settled law that the non-production of relevant 
and vital documents before the detaining authority 
renders the detention order invalid."
The said pleas raised by the Appellant has been traversed by the 
Respondent in the following terms:
"In reply to the contents of Para U, it is submitted 
that the status report dated 15.2.2005 is an internal 
correspondence of the department and has not been 
relied upon in the detention orders dated 
31.03.2005 and hence are not required to be served 
upon the petitioner."
It is, however, not in dispute that although the raid was conducted on 
26.05.2004, no material had been brought on record for even launching a 
prosecution as against the Appellant as yet.  When the aforementioned 
question was raised by the Appellant, herein before the High Court, the 
Respondent contended that the prosecution would be launched soon.  But, 
when the same point was raised before us, the Respondents in their counter 
affidavit merely stated:
"OO) In reply to the contents of para OO, it is 
submitted that the Show Cause Notice in the 
matter has been drafted and is being issued shortly.
Complaint in the matter will be filed only after 
adjudication.  However, detention under the
COFEPOSA Act
1974 is not a punitive action and 
is preventive in nature.  Prevention detention under
COFEPOSA Act
is independent of adjudication 
and prosecution proceedings."
The said counter affidavit has been affirmed in November, 2005.  It is 
beyond anybody's comprehension as to why despite a long passage of time, 
the Respondents have not been able to gather any material to lodge a 
complaint against the Appellant.  It has furthermore not in dispute that even 
the DGFT authorities have not issued any show cause notice in exercise of 
their power under
Foreign Trade Development and Regulation Act, 1994
.
Furthermore no explanation whatsoever has been offered by the 
Respondent as to why the order of detention has been issued after such a 
long time.  The said question has also not been examined by the authorities 
before issuing the order of detention.
The question as regard delay in issuing the order of detention has been 
held to be a valid ground for quashing an order of detention by this Court in
T.D. Abdul Rahman v. State of Kerala and others
[AIR 1990 SC 225] 
stating:
"The conspectus of the above decisions can be 
summarised thus: The question whether the 
prejudicial activities of a person necessitating to 
pass an order of detention is proximate to the time 
when the order is made or the live-link between 
the prejudicial activities and the purpose of 
detention is snapped depends on the facts and 
circumstances of each case. No hard and fast rule 
can be precisely formulated that would be 
applicable under all circumstances and no 
exhaustive guidelines can be
laid down in
that 
behalf. It follows that the test of proximity is not a 
rigid or mechanical test by merely counting 
number of months between the offending acts and 
the order of detention. However, when there is 
undue and long delay between the prejudicial 
activities and the passing of detention order, the 
court has to scrutinise whether the detaining 
authority has satisfactorily examined such a delay 
and afforded a tenable and reasonable explanation 
as to why such a delay has occasioned, when 
called upon to answer and further the court has to 
investigate whether the causal connection has been 
broken in the circumstances of each case.
Similarly when there is unsatisfactory and 
unexplained delay between the date of order of 
detention and the date of securing the arrest of the 
detenu, such a delay would throw considerable 
doubt on the genuineness of the subjective 
satisfaction of the detaining authority leading to a 
legitimate inference that the detaining authority 
was not really and genuinely satisfied as regards 
the necessity for detaining the detenu with a view 
to preventing him from acting in a prejudicial 
manner."
The delay caused in this case in issuing the order of detention has not 
been explained.  In fact, no reason in that behalf whatsoever has been 
assigned at all.
Admittedly, furthermore, the status report called for from the Customs 
Department has not been taken into consideration by the competent 
authorities.
A Division Bench of this Court in
K.S. Nagamuthu v. State of Tamil 
Nadu & Ors.
[2005 (9) SCALE 534] struck down an order of detention on 
the ground that the relevant material had been withheld from the detaining 
authority; which
in that case
was a letter of the detenu retracting from 
confession made by him.
Having regard to the findings aforementioned, we are of the opinion 
that grounds (iii) and (iv) of the decision of this Court in
Alka Subhash 
Gadia
(supra) are attracted in the instant case.
For the reasons aforementioned, the impugned order of detention 
cannot be sustained, which is set aside accordingly.  The appeal is allowed.