[Cites
12
, Cited by
39
]
Supreme Court of India
Jagannath Amin vs Seetharama (Dead) By Lrs. And Ors on 9 November, 2006
Equivalent citations: 2007 (1) SCC 694, 2006 AIR SCW 6351, (2007) 49 ALLINDCAS 426 (SC), (2007) 2 KANT LJ 311, (2006) 8 SUPREME 863, (2006) 11 SCALE 599, (2007) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 388, (2007) 1 CAL HN 39, 2007 (66) ALR SOC 31 (SC)
Author:
Arijit Pasayat
Bench:
Arijit Pasayat
,
Lokeshwar Singh Panta
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  4739 of 2006

PETITIONER:
Jagannath Amin

RESPONDENT:
Seetharama (dead) by lrs. and Ors.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 09/11/2006

BENCH:
ARIJIT PASAYAT & LOKESHWAR SINGH PANTA

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
(Arising Out of S.L.P. (C) No.6221 of 2003)


ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.
Leave granted.
Challenge in this appeal is to the order passed by a 
learned single judge of the Karnataka High Court dismissing 
the Civil Revision Petition filed by the appellant.
Challenge before the High Court was to the order passed 
by learned First Additional Civil Judge, Junior Division, 
Mangalore, holding that Section 35(1) of the Karnataka Court 
Fee and Suit Valuation Act, 1958 (in short the 'Act') was 
applicable and not Section 35(2) of the said Act in a suit for 
partition relating to agricultural land.  Originally the suit was 
filed by the appellant's mother. She had filed the suit for 
partition of the scheduled property claiming that the same 
should be divided into two equal shares by meets and bounds 
through the process of Court. Plaintiff had filed suit under 
Section 7(2)(d) of the Act and paid court fee of  Rs.200/- under 
Section 35(2) of the Act. Four defendants filed written 
statement. Defendant Nos. 2 and 3 also filed written statement 
separately. After hearing the appellant, learned First 
Additional Civil Judge framed several issues on 19.12.1998.  
Appellant contended before the trial court that being a co-
owner under the law she is presumed to be in constructive  
possession of the property and as such court fee is to be paid 
on the deemed market value and not on actual market value.  
Plaint scheduled property being agricultural property as such 
court fee is valued under Section 7(2)(d) of the Act and she 
cannot be compelled to value the said under Section 35(1) of 
the Act being a co-owner in respect of the plaint scheduled 
property along with the defendants. Defendants took the stand 
that the property is not agricultural property and is a house 
site and as such court fee under Section 35(1) of the Act is to 
be paid on the actual market value and not on deemed market 
value.
When PW1 was examined during the cross examination 
of the said witness the defendant No. 4 filed an I.A. under 
Order XIV, Rule 2(2)
of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (in 
short the '
C.P.C
.') for framing additional issues and the same 
was allowed.  Accordingly three additional issues were framed.  
Thereafter, defendant No.4 again filed an I.A. under Order XIV 
Rule 2(2)
CPC
for taking up additional issue No.3 i.e. regarding 
payment of court fee as preliminary issue.  The trial court was 
of the view that additional issue No.3 cannot be tried as a 
preliminary issue and posted the matter for consideration of 
all issues. Challenging the said order revision was filed before 
the High Court which disposed of the application stating that 
the defendant will be at liberty to adduce evidence on the 
court fee issue as permissible under law. Thereafter the matter 
proceeded. Again four defendants preferred revision before the 
High Court questioning direction of the trial court to adduce 
evidence on all issues.  The High Court directed the trial court 
to treat additional issue no.3 as a preliminary issue and that 
is how the said issue was framed as preliminary issue.  The 
trial court held that Section 35(1) of the Act was applicable 
and not Section 35(2) of the Act.  The same was challenged by 
the appellant before the High Court. As noted above, the High 
Court dismissed the revision petition. The High Court held 
that though it is true that there is a graded scale under 
Section 35(2) of the Act which applies to partition suits etc. the 
trial court had "perhaps" rightly gone into special 
requirements and has concluded that
Section 35(1)
would 
apply to the facts of the present case.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the 
approach of the High Court is clearly erroneous.
Learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand 
supported the judgments of the trial court and the High Court.
Identical issues came for consideration before the same  
High Court in
T.K. Srinivasamurthy & Ors. v. T. 
Seetharamaiah and Ors.
(AIR 1990 Karnataka 149).  In para 4 
of the judgment it was noted as follows:
"That question came up for consideration 
in CRP 309 of 1987 disposed of on Dec. 2nd, 
1988 by one of us. Following the decision of 
Supreme Court in the case of
Neelavathi v. 
Natarajan
(1980) 1 Kant U (SN) Item 126: (AIR 
1980 SC 691), concerning
S. 37
of the Tamil 
Nadu Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 
which is in pari materia with
S. 35
of the Act, 
it was held that in a partition suit, plaintiff or 
plaintiffs was only required to set out the joint 
family properties in respect of which she or 
they sought partition and separate possession 
and pay court fee in accordance with sub-sec. 
(2) of
S. 35
of the Act.
The Supreme Court had 
expressed the following view in
Neelavathi
's 
case (AIR 1980 SC 691):
"126. Court feels pay able under S. 
37 (1), T.N. Act, if the plaintiff is 
'excluded' possession of the joint 
property. The general principle of law is 
that in the case of co-owners, possession 
of one is possession of all unless ouster 
or exclusion is proved. To continue to be 
in joint possession in law it is not 
necessary that the plaintiff should be in 
actual possession of the whole or part of 
the property. Equally it is not necessary 
that he should be getting a share or some 
income from the property. So long as his 
right to a share and the nature of the 
property is not disputed, the law 
presumes that he is in joint possession. 
To apply
S. 37(1)
there should be a clear 
and specific averment in the plaint that 
Plaintiff has been excluded from joint 
possession. An averment that remain in 
joint possession would not amount to 
exclusion from possession."
Similar provisions were examined by this Court in M/s. 
Commercial Aviation and Travel Company and others v. Mrs. 
Vimla Pannalal (AIR 1988 SC 1636) it was noted as follows:
"In this connection, we may refer to a five 
Judge Bench decision of this Court in
S. Rm. 
Ar. S. Sp. Sathappa Chettiar v. S. Rm. Ar. Rm. 
Ramanathan Chettiar
, 1958 SCR 1021(1024) :
(AIR 1958 SC 245 at pp. 251-52) 
Gajendragadkar, J. speaking for the Court 
observed as follows:
"If the scheme laid down for the 
computation of fees payable in suits 
covered by the several sub-sections of
S. 7
is considered it would be clear 
that in respect of suits falling under 
sub-s. (iv), a departure has been made 
and liberty has been given to the 
plaintiff to value his claim for the 
purposes of court-fees. The theoretical 
basis of this provision appears to be 
that in cases in which the plaintiff is 
given the option to value his claim, it is 
really difficult to value the claim with 
any precision or definiteness. Take for 
instance the claim for partition where 
the plaintiff seeks to enforce his right 
to share in any property on the ground 
that it is joint family property. The 
basis of the claim is that the property 
in respect of which a share is claimed 
is joint family property. In other words, 
it is property in which the plaintiff has 
an undivided share. What the plaintiff 
purports to do by making a claim for 
partition is to ask the court to give him 
certain specified properties separately 
and absolutely on his own account for 
his share in lieu of his undivided share 
in the whole property. Now it would be 
clear that the conversion of the 
plaintiff's alleged undivided share in 
the joint family property into his 
separate share cannot be easily valued 
in terms of rupees with any precision 
or definiteness. That is why legislature 
has left it to the option of the plaintiff 
to value his claim for the payment of 
court-fees. It really means that in suits 
falling under
S. 7(iv)(b)
the amount 
stated by the plaintiff as the value of 
his claim for partition has ordinarily to 
be accepted by the court in computing 
the court-fees payable in respect of the 
said relief. In the circumstances of this 
case it is unnecessary to consider 
whether, under the provisions of this 
section, the plaintiff has been given an 
absolute right or option to place any 
valuation whatever on his relief."
In
the above decision
, this Court took 
the view that the conversion of the plaintiff's 
undivided share in the joint family property 
into his separate share cannot be easily valued 
in terms of rupees with any precision or 
definiteness. It is true that the Court did not 
consider whether the plaintiff had been given 
an absolute right or option to place any 
valuation whatever on his relief under the 
provision of
Section 7(iv)
of the Court-fees Act, 
but the difficulty that would be felt by the 
Court in exercising its power under Order VII, 
Rule 11(b)
of the Code of Civil Procedure
is 
that if it is unable to determine the correct 
value of the relief, it cannot direct the plaintiff 
to correct the valuation. Order VII, Rule 11(b) 
contemplates correct valuation and not 
approximate correct valuation and such 
correct valuation of the relief has to be 
determined by the Court. If the Court cannot 
determine the correct valuation of the relief 
claimed, it cannot require the plaintiff to 
correct the valuation and, consequently. Order 
VII, Rule 11(b) will not be applicable."
Reference was also made to the decision in
Neelavathi 
and Ors. v. N. Natarajan and Others
(AIR 1980 SC 691).  In 
para 8 this court while considering the identical provision of 
the
Tamil Nadu Court Fee and Suits Valuation Act, 1955
stated as follows:
"8.
Section 37
of the Tamil Nadu Court 
Fees and Suits Valuation Act relates to 
Partition Suits.
Sec. 37
provides as follows:
"37 (1) In a suit for partition and 
separate possession of a share of joint 
family property or of property owned, 
jointly or in common, by a plaintiff who 
has been excluded from possession of 
such property, fee shall be computed on 
the market value of the plaintiff's share.
"37 (1) In a suit for partition and 
separate possession of joint family 
property or property owned, jointly or in 
common by a plaintiff who is in joint 
possession of such property, fee shall be 
paid at the rates prescribed."
It will be seen that the Court Fee is nay- able 
under
Section 37 (1)
if the plaintiff is 
"excluded" from possession of the property. 
The plaintiffs who are sisters of the 
defendants, claimed to be members of the joint 
family, and prayed for partition alleging that 
they are in joint possession. Under the proviso 
to
Section 6
of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 
(Act 30 of 1956) the plaintiffs being the 
daughters of the male Hindu who died after 
the commencement of the Act, having at the 
time of the death an interest in the mitakshara 
coparcenary property, acquired an interest by 
devolution under the Act. It is not in dispute 
that the plaintiffs are entitled to a share. The 
property to which the plaintiffs are entitled is 
undivided 'joint family property' though not in 
the strict sense of the term. The general 
principle of law is that in the case of co-
owners, the possession of one is in law 
possession of all, unless ouster or exclusion is 
proved. To continue to be in joint possession in 
law, it is not necessary that the plaintiff should 
be in actual possession of the whole or part of 
the property. Equally it is not necessary that 
he should be getting a share or some income 
from the property. So long as his right to a 
share and the nature of the property as joint is 
not disputed the law presumes that he is in 
joint possession unless he is excluded from 
such possession. Before the plaintiffs could be 
called upon to pay court fee under
Sec. 37 (1)
of the Act on the ground that they had been 
excluded from possession, it is necessary that 
on a reading of the plaint, there should be a 
clear and specific averment in the plaint that 
they had been "excluded" from joint possession 
to which they are entitled to in law. The 
averments in the plaint that the plaintiff could 
not remain in joint possession as he was not 
given any income from the joint family 
property would not amount to his exclusion 
from possession. We are unable to read into 
the plaint a clear and specific admission that 
the plaintiff had been excluded from 
possession."
In view of what has been stated in M/s Commercial 
Aviation's case (
supra) and Neelavathi
's case (supra) the view 
of the trial judge as affirmed by the High Court cannot be 
sustained.
The order of the High Court is set aside.  The appeal is 
allowed but without any order as to costs.