[Cites
4
, Cited by
4907
]
Supreme Court of India
Kulwinder Singh vs State Of Punjab on 5 December, 2006
Equivalent citations: 2006 AIR SCW 6441, 2006 (12) SCC 538, 2007 CRI. L. J. 766, (2007) 1 CHANDCRIC 6, 2007 CRILR(SC&MP) 63, 2007 (2) SCC(CRI) 115, 2007 (1) JLJR 315, 2007 (2) SRJ 559, 2007 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 63, 2006 (13) SCALE 168, (2007) 51 ALLINDCAS 614 (SC), (2006) 13 SCALE 168, (2007) 1 PAT LJR 323, (2007) 1 MAD LJ(CRI) 1130, (2007) 2 KER LJ 304, (2007) 1 CURCRIR 382, (2007) 1 ALLCRIR 143, (2007) 1 CRIMES 308, (2007) 57 ALLCRIC 1085, 2007 (2) ANDHLT(CRI) 308 SC
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
S.B. Sinha
,
Markandey Katju
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  675 of 2006

PETITIONER:
Kulwinder Singh

RESPONDENT:
State of Punjab

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 05/12/2006

BENCH:
S.B. Sinha & Markandey Katju

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T


S.B. SINHA, J :
Appellant herein was arrayed as Accused No. 4 before the trial court.  
He along with one Baldev Singh was allegedly hired to kill Rajbir Singh 
(deceased) by Nirpal Singh, Nardev Singh and their father Pargat Singh.
A First Information Report was lodged by Harinder Singh son of the 
deceased.  The incident occurred at about 7.45 a.m. on 15.10.1997 at village 
Behman Diwana.  The family members of informant are agriculturists.  The 
informant and his father had gone to their field situated at Niai Wala.  They 
gave some instructions to their agricultural workers.  When they were 
returning back on foot to their village, the deceased was walking 30/35 steps 
ahead of the informant.  When his father reached near the Circular Road of 
the village, two persons covering their bodies with 'khes' were standing 
there.  They raised exhortations to kill him.  Hearing that, the deceased 
started running towards the street leading to the village.  He was followed by 
both the said persons.  They opened fire from their pistols which they had 
been holding in their respective hands.  The shots fired from the pistols hit 
the deceased on his back.  He fell down with his face downward in front of 
the house of  one Budha Singh.  The door was closed.  The informant raised 
an alarm.  Hearing it they fled away towards the Circular Road.  Harinder 
Singh could not identify them immediately but in the FIR he claimed that he 
would be able to do so.  In the First Information Report itself needle of 
suspicion was pointed out to Nirpal Singh, Nardev Singh and their father 
Pargat Singh as they had land dispute with the deceased.  The deceased was 
taken to hospital.  He breathed his last at the hospital.
The investigating officer came to the spot.  He prepared a site plan.  In 
the said plan, the veracity whereof is not in dispute, the place wherefrom the 
informant witnessed the occurrence was shown.  It was marked as Point A in 
the site plan.  Point B was also shown from where the appellant and Baldev 
Singh were said to be present.  The incident was seen by Gurbux Singh 
(PW-3) and Gurmit Singh.  Their statements were recorded on the same day 
near the place of occurrence.  They had named the assailants, the appellant 
being one of them.
Balbir Singh was a Vice-President of a Cooperative Society Behman 
Diwana.  The parties in regard to their dispute had gone to him on an earlier 
occasion.  A purported settlement was arrived at his instance.
Accused Nos. 1 to 3, viz., Nirpal Singh, Nardev Singh and Pargat 
Singh went to him.  Balbir Singh who was examined as PW-7 to make a 
confession to which we would advert to a little later.  Accused Nos. 1, 2 and 
3 were known to him.  Nirpal Singh, Nardev Singh and Pargat Singh were 
sons-in-law of one Chand Kaur.  The deceased was said to have been 
adopted by the said Chand Kaur.  The lands of the said Chand Kaur had 
been partitioned.  Some lands had been transferred to the deceased Rajbir 
Singh which made Nirpal Singh and Nardev Singh unhappy.  A quarrel took 
place amongst them.  Allegedly, the deceased assaulted Nardev Singh as a 
result whereof his arm was fractured.  They were thus bearing grudge 
against the deceased.
According to PW-7, on 18.10.1997, Accused Nos. 1,2 and 3 stated 
that they had hired Baldev Singh and Kulwinder Singh alia Kala to kill 
Rajbir Singh and they got him murdered.  They had requested him to 
produce them before the police as the police was after them.  They came to 
him as PW-7 was said to have some influence with the police authorities.  
He asked them to bring Baldev Singh and the appellant with them on the 
next day.  On 19.10.1997, he went to the police station and made a statement 
there before the Investigating officer.
Appellant, the said Baldev Singh and Pargat Singh came to the house 
of PW-7 on 26.10.1997.  They made a statement that owing to greed of 
money, they had murdered Rajbir Singh and they may be taken to the police.  
When they were going to the police station, they met the police party at the 
crossing of village Behman Diwana.  They were taken in custody.  The 
appellant on being interrogated by Davinder Singh SI in presence of Ajaib 
Singh ASI disclosed that he had concealed by burying a .32 bore pistol in the 
pits near the bank of canal at a distance of 1 = furlong from the bridge of 
canal.  He made an offer to get the same recovered.  The statement to that 
effect was reduced into writing.  His thumb impression was also obtained.  
Similarly, Baldev Singh on interrogation disclosed that he had kept 
concealed and buried a .12 bore pistol wrapped in a glazed paper at a 
distance of about 1 furlong from the bridge of the canal in the said area.  His 
statement was recorded, reduced to writing and marked as Ex. PQ/1.  It was 
also signed by him and attested by PW-7.  Indisputably, recoveries were 
made pursuant to the informations furnished by the appellant and the said 
Baldev Singh.  The said country-made pistols were sent for examination 
before the Forensic Science Laboratory, Punjab.  No definite opinion could 
be given regarding firing of the vital shot from the said weapons due to lack 
of sufficient individual characteristic obtaining marks therein.
Rajbir Singh was examined by Dr. Shushil Gupta (PW-1).  He found 
the following injuries on his person:
"(1) One wound of entry which is lacerated  and 2 
x 2 cm. circular in shape with inverted margin and 
it is situated on the right side of the back of chest 
and about 8th-9th rib area, 10 cm. medial to the 
vertebral column.  Fresh blood from wound was 
present.  On probing the wound that was going at 
lower side of abdomen.  Injury kept for X-ray.
(2)  Wound of entry which was lacerated and 2 x 
1<  cm circular in shape with inverted margins and 
situated on the right side of the back just on the 
vertebral column and on the  survical throx (sic) 
region.  Blood was present on the wound.  Wound 
could not probe up.   Injury kept for X-ray."
Post mortem examination was conducted by Dr. U.S. Sooch (PW-2) 
on 16.10.1997 at 1.15 p.m. and he found the following injuries:
"(1)	Lacerated wound >" x =" with inverted 
Margins on the right interscapular area in its lower 
part near the vertebral column.
(2)	Circular lacerated wound > x >" with 
inverted margins just below the inferior angle of 
the right scapula.  Surgical midline vertical wound 
on the front of the abdomen 6" long was present.
Two Surgical drain wounds on each side of flanks 
of the abdomen and two  surgical stiched drain 
wound on both sides of the chest with vene section 
wound on the left ankle and left elbow."
Relying on or on the basis of the said evidences brought on record by 
the prosecution, the learned Additional Sessions Judge convicted the 
appellant, Baldev Singh, Nirpal Singh and Nardev Singh under
Section 302
of the Indian Penal Code and
Sections 25
and
27
of the Arms Act and 
sentenced them to suffer imprisonment for life.  Pargat Singh, however, was 
acquitted.
Appeals thereagainst were preferred by all the four convicted accused 
before the High Court.  A criminal revision application was also filed by 
Harinder Singh against the order of acquittal of Pargat Singh.  By reason of 
the impugned judgment, the Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana 
High Court dismissed both the appeals and revision.
Mr. Yashank Adhyaru, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of 
the appellant, would submit that having regard to the fact that the appellant 
was not named in the First Information Report, his participation in the 
commission of the offence is doubtful.  It was pointed that he was a resident 
of Jodhpur Pakhar village which was situated at a distance of 45 kms. from 
the place of occurrence and, thus, it was unlikely that he would undertake to 
commit a heinous offence, particularly, in view of the fact that no money 
was proved to have passed hands.  Identification of the accused by PW-3,  it 
was urged, is also doubtful.  The statements made by the said witness as also 
the informant that they had known the appellant and the said Baldev Singh, 
the learned counsel contended, thus,  were wholly unreliable; as had it been 
so they would have been named in the First Information Report and specific 
overt acts on their parts would have been mentioned therein.  It was argued 
that there was no reason as to why for a period of about 11 days, the 
appellant could not be arrested and, thus, the possibility of their having been 
falsely implicated cannot be ruled out.
Our attention was also drawn to the statement of PW-3 wherein it was 
stated that 4-5 days after the incident he had gone to the police station and 
found the appellant to be in custody.
It was furthermore stated that extra-judicial confession purported to 
have been made by the accused before PW-7 appeared to be wholly 
unnatural particularly in view of the fact that if the appellant and the said 
Baldev Singh were hardened criminals they would not have gone to a person 
of another village for the purpose of making confession. Although,  recovery 
of the weapons might have been proved, keeping in view of the forensic 
evidence that the shots could not be proved to have been fired from the 
weapons,  would not lead to an inference that the appellant committed the 
said crime.
Ms. Avneet Toor, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State, on 
the other hand, supported the judgment.
Information about the incidence was received by PW-9 Davinder 
Singh through a wireless message regarding admission of the deceased in the 
Civil Hospital, Bhatinda.  He went to the hospital and recorded the statement 
of the informant.  He on the same day itself went to the place of occurrence.  
He recorded the statement of Gurmit Singh.  He also prepared the rough 
sketch map.  He found a .12 bore cartridge at the spot as also an empty 
cartridge of .32 bore.  He also recorded the statement of Gurbux Singh at the 
spot as also Jaskaran Singh, Mohinder Singh and other witnesses.
The appellant and the said Baldev Singh might not have been named 
by the first informant in his First Information Report, but what, however, is 
clear and explicit in his statement made therein, was that they were the 
persons who could be identified by the informant.  The occurrence took 
place at 7.45 a.m.  In the same night, the investigating officer PW-9 came to 
the spot and recorded the statement inter alia of PW-3 Gurbax Singh.  It is 
not in dispute that in his statement, he named the appellant and the said 
Baldev Singh as the persons who had fired on the deceased.  Their names 
specifically found mention in the site plan prepared by the investigating 
officer on the same day.  It is, therefore, not a case where the appellant and 
the said Baldev Singh could be falsely implicated.  Appellant may be a 
resident of village Jodhpur Pakhar, but  from the statements made by Gurbax 
Singh, in his cross-examination, it appears that before the lands were allotted 
by Chand Kaur to them, Nirpal Singh and others had been residing in the 
said village. All the accused, thus, used to reside at village Jodhpur Pakhar. 
They were, therefore, known to each other. The appellant and Baldev Singh 
had been seen visiting the house of Nirpal Singh and Nardev Singh many 
times.
Presence of PW-3 at the spot is not disputed as at his instance his jeep 
was brought to the place of occurrence wherein the deceased was taken to 
hospital.
In his cross-examination, he had categorically stated that he had 
disclosed the names of the appellant and Baldev Singh to the police when 
the investigating officer came to the spot and prepared the recovery memo.  
The first informant also  might have recollected their names after some time.
It is furthermore not correct as was contended by Mr. Adhyaru that 
the police did not take any sep to arrest the appellant from 15.10.1997 to 
26.10.1997.  PW-9 in his deposition categorically stated that he had made 
efforts to arrest the accused but were not successful in doing so. Nirpal 
Singh and Nardev Singh were arrested on 24.10.1997 when they were going 
from village Bir Behman to Behman Diwana.  Other accused persons 
including the appellant were produced by Balbir Singh PW-7.  The statemnts 
of PW-3 Gurbax Singh were corroborated in material particulars by the first 
informant PW-4 Harinder Singh.
The site plan prepared by the investigating officer also clearly showed 
the place where Gurbax Singh and Gurmit Singh were standing.  The place 
of occurrence was intervened only by a vacant piece of land.
Certain minor discrepancies might be existing in their statements in 
regard to the timing or the manner in which the occurrence had taken place 
but nothing much turns out of the same.
Recovery of the pistols is not in question.  Although in absence of any 
specific characteristic of the said weapons having been fired, the fact as to  
whether the empty cartridges seized from the place of occurrence were fired 
from the respective weapons held by the appellant and the said Baldev Singh 
could not be definitely ascertained, but the same by itself would not lead to 
the conclusion  that they had not committed the crime.  We may furthermore 
notice that no suggestion had also been put by the accused persons to PW-9 
that the names of the appellant was not disclosed to him.
We may also notice that the appellant and the said Baldev Singh 
refused to participate the in test identification parade.  They, according to 
PW-9, were asked to muffle their faces but they did not do it.
It is interesting to note that the only suggestion given to PW-9 was 
that the names of all accused persons had been mentioned in the site plan 
only because it was prepared on 16.10.1997 and not on 15.10.1997 and by 
that time he had come to know the names of other accused also.  It is, 
therefore, the defence case that at least by the next date the names of the 
accused who were not known to the investigating officer were mentioned in 
the site plan.  It is, therefore, inconceivable that despite the same he would 
not make any attempt to arrest them.  His statement, as noticed hereinbefore, 
that he had made attempts to arrest but did not succeed, thus, cannot be 
disbelieved particularly in view of the fact that two of the accused persons 
were arrested on 24.10.1997.
Extra-judicial confession made by the accused before PW-7 must be 
judged having regard to the entire factual matrix.  He was Vice-President of 
a Cooperative Society.  The accused persons were known to him for about 
four years.  The reason for making confession was that when Rajbir Singh 
had assaulted Nardev Singh as a result whereof his arm was fractured, his 
intervention was sought for.  They had gone to him so that he can exercise 
his influence over the police. As he asked them to produce the appellant and 
the said Baldev Singh, they must have been persuaded by the other accused 
persons to go to him for similar purpose particularly when two of the 
accused persons, viz., Nirpal Singh and Nardev Singh had already been 
arrested by that time.  All the accused by that time came to know that their 
involvement in the crime is known to the investigating officer.
In his statements under
Section 313
of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, the appellant might have contended that he did not know Baldev 
Singh but the fact remains that he, Baldev Singh and Pargat Singh were 
produced by PW-7.  PW-9 also said so.  He was not cross-examined on that 
part.  Even otherwise nothing has been brought on record to show that they 
had not been arrested on 26.10.1997 having been produced by PW-7 before 
PW-9.  PW-7 categorically stated that the deceased Rajbir Singh although 
was known to him but they were not friends.  He, therefore, had no personal 
interest in the matter.  He was a witness to the recovery of the weapons also.
PW-7 is an independent witness.  He also stated about the fight 
between the deceased and Nardev Singh as a result whereof the arm of 
Nardev Singh was fractured.  Thus, the land dispute between the parties had 
been proved.  Fight on an earlier occasion between them had also been 
proved.
Motive of the accused to eliminate Rajbir Singh also cannot be said to 
be wholly non-existent.
Both the learned Sessions Judge as also the High Court had relied on 
the statement of PW7.  We do not find any reason why to differ therewith.
The evidentiary value of an extra-judicial confession must be judged 
in the fact situation obtaining in each case.  It would depend not only on the 
nature of the circumstances but also the time when the confession had been 
made and the credibility of the witness who testifies thereto.
Existence of dispute between the parties has not been questioned.  It 
has been brought on record that Rajbir Singh was the brother's son of Chand 
Kaur.  He was adopted by her.  He was residing with her along with his 
children for a long time.  She transferred some land in his favour.  The 
documents evidencing the said transfer being Ex. PU and Ex. PV had been 
proved.  Nirpal Singh and Nardev Singh who are her sons-in-law were, thus, 
bearing grudge against him.  In the First Information Report they and their 
father were named as suspects although they were not present at the place of 
occurrence.  They knew the appellant and the said Baldev Singh.  He 
although belonged to a distant village but other accused had also been 
resident of the same village.  The fact that he had been seen visiting Nirpal 
Singh and Nardev Singh on some occasions is also not in much dispute.  He 
must have undertaken to kill the deceased for greed of money.
Whether the money was paid by them to the appellant and Baldev 
Singh was not necessary to be proved.  It was within their  special 
knowledge.
For the reasons aforementioned, we are of the opinion that the 
impugned judgment does not suffer from any infirmity.  The appeal is 
accordingly dismissed.