[Cites
37
, Cited by
69
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Pandey & Co. Builders Pvt. Ltd vs State Of Bihar & Anr on 10 November, 2006
Equivalent citations: AIR 2007 SUPREME COURT 465, 2007 (1) SCC 467, 2006 AIR SCW 5871, 2007 (1) AIR JHAR R 791, 2007 CLC 26 (SC), 2006 (11) SCALE 665, (2007) 1 ALLMR 897 (SC), (2007) 3 GAU LR 536, (2007) 2 JCR 360.2 (SC), (2007) 51 ALLINDCAS 142 (SC), 2007 (66) ALL LR 86 SOC, (2007) 1 ALL WC 837, (2007) 1 ICC 611, (2007) 2 MAD LW 961, (2007) 2 CIVLJ 783, (2007) 1 CURCC 286, (2007) 76 CORLA 12, (2007) 1 PAT LJR 62, (2007) 2 SUPREME 261, (2007) 2 RECCIVR 457, (2007) 1 JLJR 62, (2006) 11 SCALE 665, (2006) 4 ARBI L.R. 192
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
S.B. Sinha
,
Dalveer Bhandari
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  4780 of 2006

PETITIONER:
M/s. Pandey & Co. Builders Pvt. Ltd

RESPONDENT:
State of Bihar & Anr

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 10/11/2006

BENCH:
S.B. Sinha & Dalveer Bhandari

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 8861 of 2006) 

S.B. SINHA, J.
Leave granted.
The parties hereto entered into a contract in terms whereof Appellant 
herein undertook a contract for execution of canal repair work for Rs. 
11,33,421/-.  An additional agreement was entered into by and between the 
parties.  The said contract contained an arbitration clause being Clause 23 of 
the contract.
Disputes and differences having arisen between the parties, Appellant 
invoked the said arbitration clause.  The Superintending Engineer of the 
Circle who was the named Arbitrator entered into reference.  There being 
alleged undue delay in conclusion of the proceedings of the arbitral tribunal, 
a notice was served by Appellant purported to be in terms of
Sections 14
and
15
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short "the 1996 Act").  
The named Arbitrator retired and his successor did not proceed with the 
reference for a long time.  Another notice was issued by Appellant asking 
the then incumbent of the office of Superintending Engineer to proceed with 
the arbitration.  He, however, instead of proceeding with the arbitration 
sought for directions in this behalf from his superior officers.  On 23.8.2002, 
he expressed his inability to continue with the proceedings.  A notice under
Section 14
of the 1996 Act was again served.  A proposal was made 
thereunder to nominate another independent person as an Arbitrator.  The 
Irrigation Department of the State of Bihar asked the Superintending 
Engineer to conclude the arbitration proceedings within three months by an 
office order dated 20th November, 2002.
An objection, however, was filed by Appellant questioning the 
jurisdiction of the said Arbitrator on the premise that his nomination has 
already been terminated.  On the said plea that the named Arbitrator in terms 
of Clause 23 could not have functioned as such, an application under
Section 
11
of the 1996 Act was filed before the Chief Justice of the Patna High 
Court.  Justice P.S. Sahay, a former Judge of the Patna High Court was 
appointed but the Superintending Engineer fixed a date for hearing on 
12.2.2003 by an order dated 8.2.2003, to which an objection was raised by 
Appellant.  Appointment of Justice P.S. Sahay was intimated to the said 
Superintending Engineer.
An award was passed by the Superintending Engineer on 20th 
February, 2003.  In the meantime, Appellant had filed his claim before 
Justice P.S. Sahay.  Respondents also appeared on 21.2.2004 and filed an 
application under
Section 14
of the 1996 Act seeking termination of his 
mandate on the ground that the earlier Arbitrator has already given his 
award.  The learned Arbitrator held that he had no jurisdiction to proceed 
with the matter.
A purported appeal was filed thereagainst by Appellant under
Section 
37
of the 1996 Act before the High Court.  By reason of the impugned 
judgment, the High Court opined that it had no jurisdiction to hear the 
appeal as in terms of Sub-section (2) of
Section 37
of the 1996 Act, the 
appeal lay before the District Court.  A review application filed thereagainst 
was also dismissed.
It is not in dispute that in terms of
Section 16
of the 1996 Act, the 
Arbitrator could have determined his own jurisdiction.  The learned 
Arbitrator, nominee of the Chief Justice of the High Court, opined that there 
could not be two awards in one proceeding.  It was held:
"19. Thus, on a careful consideration of the 
submission made on behalf of the parties and after 
going through the papers filed by them, I hold that 
I have no jurisdiction to continue with this 
proceedings for the reasons, mentioned above."
The High Court in passing the impugned judgment opined that the 
Patna High Court having no original jurisdiction, in view of the provisions 
contained in the
Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act, 1857
(for short 
"the 1857 Act"), the appeal filed under
Section 37(2)
of the 1996 Act was 
not maintainable before it stating:
"Accordingly, I am of the opinion that this Court 
being not a court of ordinary original civil 
jurisdiction to entertain the suit had the subject 
matter of the arbitration being the subject matter of 
the suit, the appeal is not maintainable.
Accordingly, I sustain the preliminary 
objection raised by Mr. Lalit Kishore.  Appellant, 
if so desire may take recourse to the remedy 
available to it before the competent forum."
Two submissions were made on behalf of Appellant before us, viz, :
(i)	Having regard to the definition of "court" as contained in
Section 
2(1)(e)
of the 1996 Act, the court of the Principal Civil Court 
should be held to be not empowered to hear an appeal against an 
order of the arbitral tribunal insofar as if
Section 37
of the 1996 
Act is not construed, a second appeal being prohibited, no appeal 
shall ever lie against the order of the District Judge, Principal Civil 
Court before the High Court.
(ii)	As the order of the nominee of the Chief Justice of the Patna High 
Court under
Section 11
of the 1996 Act is a judicial order, in view 
of the provisions contained in
Section 42
thereof, a proceeding was 
maintainable only before the High Court.
The purport and object sought to be achieved by the 1996 Act vis-`-
vis the
Arbitration Act, 1940
(for short "the 1940 Act") is well known.
The 1996 Act makes a radical departure from the 1940 Act. It has 
embodied the relevant rules of the modern law but does not contain all the 
provisions thereof.  The 1996 Act, however, is not as extensive as the
English Arbitration Act
.
Different statutes operated in the field in respect of a domestic award 
and a foreign award prior to coming into force of the 1996 Act, namely, the 
1940
Act, the Arbitration (Protocol and Convention) Act, 1937
and the
Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) Act, 1961
.  All the 
aforementioned statutes have been repealed by the 1996 Act.  It makes 
provisions in two different parts, namely, matters relating to domestic award 
and foreign award respectively.
The Scheme of 1996 Act is absolutely distinct and different from the 
1940 Act as also the 1961 Act.
In the 1940 Act, no reason was required to be stated in the award 
unless otherwise agreed upon.  In the 1996 Act, reasons are required to be 
stated unless agreed to otherwise by the parties.  The court's intervention is 
sought to be minimized under the provisions of the 1996 Act not only having 
regard to the concerns expressed in the international community as regards 
delay in the arbitration proceedings but also in view of the fact that an award 
under the 1996 is to be a reasoned one.  In a large number of judgments, this 
Court has emphasized that the extent of power of the court's intervention in 
relation to a reasoned award and unreasoned one would be different.  
Whereas in relation to an unreasoned award, the court's jurisdiction to 
interfere with the award was absolutely limited, a greater latitude had been 
given in relation to a reasoned award.
After the 1996 Act came into force, under
Section 16
of the Act the 
party questioning the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator has an obligation to raise 
the said question before the Arbitrator.  Such a question of jurisdiction could 
be raised if it is beyond the scope of his authority.  Such a question was 
required to be raised during arbitration proceedings or soon after initiation 
thereof as a preliminary issue.
Unlike the 1940 Act, the Arbitrator is entitled to determine his own 
jurisdiction.  In the event, the Arbitrator opines that he has jurisdiction in the 
matter, he may proceed therewith, which order can be challenged along with 
the award in terms of
Section 34
of the 1996 Act.  If the Arbitrator opines 
that he has no jurisdiction to hear the matter, an appeal lies before the court.  
'Court' has been defined in
Section 2(1)(e)
of the 1996 Act in the following 
terms:
""Court" means the principal Civil Court of 
original jurisdiction in a district, and includes the 
High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil 
jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the 
questions forming the subject-matter of the 
arbitration if the same had been the subject-matter 
of a suit, but does not include any civil court of a 
grade inferior to such principal Civil Court, or any 
Court of Small Causes;"
It is not disputed before us that the Patna High Court does not exercise 
any original civil jurisdiction.  The definition of "court" as noticed 
hereinbefore means the Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a 
district and includes the High Court which exercises the original civil 
jurisdiction.  If a High Court does not exercise the original civil jurisdiction, 
it would not be a 'court' within the meaning of the said provision.  
Constitution of the courts vis-`-vis the hierarchy thereof is governed by the 
1857 Act,
Section 3
whereof reads as under:
"3. Classes of Courts  There shall be the 
following classes of Civil Courts under this Act, 
namely: -
(a)	The Court of the District Judge;
(b)	The Court of the Additional Judge;
(c)	The Court of the Subordinate Judge; and
(d)	The Court of the Munsif."
Chapter III of the 1857 Act relates to ordinary jurisdiction of the civil 
courts.
Section 18
provides for extent of original jurisdiction of District and 
Subordinate Judge in the following terms:
"18. Extent of original jurisdiction of District or 
Subordinate Judge  Save as otherwise provided 
by any enactment for the time being in force, the 
jurisdiction of a District Judge or Subordinate 
Judge extends, subject to the provisions of
Section 
15
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 to all 
original suits for the time being cognizable by 
Civil Courts."
The rules framed by the Patna High Court in exercise of its 
jurisdiction under
Article 225
of the Constitution of India also do not 
authorize it to entertain a suit as a court of original jurisdiction.
Section 37
of the 1996 Act reads as under:
"37. Appealable orders.(1)  An appeal shall lie 
from the following orders (and from no others) to 
the Court authorised by law to hear appeals from 
original decrees of the Court passing the order, 
namely:
(a)  granting or refusing to grant any 
measure under
section 9
:
(b) setting aside or refusing to set aside an 
arbitral award under
section 34
.
(2)  An appeal shall also lie to a court from an 
order of  the arbitral tribunal
(a)  accepting the plea referred to in sub-
section (2) or sub-section (3) of
section 16
;
or
(b)  granting or refusing to grant an interim 
measure under
section 17
.
(3)  No second appeal shall lie from an order 
passed in appeal under this section, but nothing in 
this section shall affect or taken away any right to 
appeal to the Supreme Court."
An appeal in terms of Sub-section (2) of
Section 37
is a statutory 
appeal.  It may be true that Sub-section (3) of
Section 37
of the 1996 Act 
debars a second appeal from an appellate order under Sub-sections (1) and 
(2) thereof but having regard to
Section 5
of the 1996 Act, the provisions for 
second appeal may be held to be superfluous.
In The Law and Practice of Arbitration and Conciliation by O.P. 
Malhotra and Indu Malhotra, page 1270, it is stated:
"In the context of this Act, s 37(3) barring second 
appeal against an appellate order under s 37(1) and 
(2) is really superfluous.
This Act
has not enacted 
any provision analogous to s 41 of the previous 
Act.  It is radically different from the Act of 1940.
Therefore,
the Code of Civil Procedure
1908 
proprio vigore does not apply to the proceedings 
before the court in its original or appellate 
jurisdiction.
Section 5
imposes a blanket ban on 
judicial intervention of any type in the arbitral 
process except 'where so provided under Part I' of 
this Act.  Pursuant to this provision, s 37(1) 
provides appeals against certain orders of the 
court, while s 37(2) provides appeal against certain 
orders of the arbitral tribunal.  However, s 37(3) 
prohibits a second appeal against the appellate 
order under s 37(1) and (2).  However, in view of 
the provisions of s 5, a second appeal against the 
appellate order under s 37(1) and (2) would not be 
permissible, even if s 37(3) had not been enacted.  
It was, therefore, not really necessary to enact this 
provision, and it seems to have been enacted by 
way of abundant caution."
In this case, it is not necessary for us to go into the question as to 
whether Sub-section (3) of
Section 37
of the 1996 Act would debar an 
appeal from appellate order passed under Sub-section (2) of
Section 37
thereof.  The consequences of the statutory embargo would ensue but then 
the question will have to be considered as and when occasion arises therefor.  
Sub-section (2) of
Section 37
of the 1996 Act prescribes for an appeal to a 
court.  We do not see any reason as to why having regard to its plain 
language, the definition of "court" shall not be put into service.  It may be 
true that the interpretation clause provides for "unless the context otherwise 
requires".  If application of the interpretation clause contained in
Section 2
of the 1996 Act shall lead to anomalous and absurd results, one may not 
stick to the definition but we do not think that such a case has been made 
out.
Section 42
of the 1996 Act, to which our attention has been drawn by 
the learned counsel appearing for Appellant, in the instant case has no 
application.  The said provision reads, thus:
"42. Jurisdiction.Notwithstanding anything 
contained elsewhere in this Part or in any other law 
for the time being in force, where with respect  to 
an arbitration agreement any application under this 
Part has been made in a Court, that Court alone 
shall have jurisdiction over the arbitral proceedings 
and all subsequent applications arising out of that 
agreement and the arbitral proceedings shall be 
made in that Court and in no other Court."
An order passed by a Chief Justice or his nominee under Sub-section 
(6) of
Section 11
of the 1996 Act may be a judicial order, as has been held 
by a Seven-Judge Bench of this Court in SBP & Co. v. Patel Engineering 
Ltd. and another [(2005) 8 SCC 618] but the same does not take away the 
effect of the appellate jurisdiction to be exercised by a court under Sub-
section (2) of
Section 37
of the 1996 Act.
Section 42
of the 1996 Act refers to applications and not to appeals.
Reliance placed by the learned counsel on M/s. Guru Nanak 
Foundation v. M/s. Rattan Singh and Sons [(1981) 4 SCC 634] is not 
apposite.  Therein, the court was dealing with a provision of Sub-section (4) 
of
Section 31
of the 1940 Act and as the appointment was made by the High 
Court, it was held that an application for setting aside of the award in terms 
of Sub-section (4) of
Section 31
of the 1940 Act would lie before this Court.  
It is significant to note that therein also a contention of losing of a further 
right of appeal was raised and rejected in the following terms:
"Mr Narula lastly urged that if this Court were to 
arrogate jurisdiction to itself by the putting on sub-
section (4) of
Section 31
a construction as 
canvassed for on behalf of the 1st respondent it 
would deprive the appellant of its valuable right to 
prefer an appeal under the letters patent and 
approach this Court under
Article 136
of the 
Constitution. If this Court has jurisdiction to 
entertain the Award and this Court in view of
Section 31(4)
alone has jurisdiction for 
entertaining the Award meaning that the Award 
has to be filed in this Court alone and no other, the 
same cannot be defeated by a specious plea that 
the right of appeal would be denied"
Section 31(4)
of the 1940 Act reads, thus:
"(4) Notwithstanding anything contained 
elsewhere in this Act or in any other law for the 
time being in force, where in any reference any 
application under this Act has been made in Court 
competent to entertain it, that court alone shall 
have jurisdiction over the arbitration proceedings 
and all subsequent applications arising out of that 
reference and the arbitration proceedings shall be 
made in that court and in no other Court."
In M/s. Guru Nanak Foundation (supra), analysing the said provision, 
this Court held:
"It opens with a non-obstante clause and is 
comprehensive in character. The non-obstante 
clause excludes anything anywhere contained in 
the whole Act or in any other law for the time 
being in force if it is contrary to or inconsistent 
with the substantive provision contained in sub-
section (4). To that extent it carves out an 
exception to the general question of jurisdiction of 
the court in which Award may be filed elsewhere 
provided in the Act in respect of the proceedings 
referred to in sub-section (4). The provision 
contained in sub-section (4) will have an 
overriding effect in relation to the filing of the 
Award if the conditions therein prescribed are 
satisfied. If those conditions are satisfied the court 
other than the one envisaged in
Section 14(2)
or
Section 31(1)
will be the court in which Award 
will have to be filed. That is the effect of the non-
obstante clause in sub-section (4) of
Section 31
. 
Sub-section (4) thus invests exclusive jurisdiction 
in the court, to which an application has been made 
in any reference and which that court is competent 
to entertain as the court having jurisdiction over 
the arbitration proceedings and all subsequent 
applications arising out of reference and the 
arbitration proceedings shall have to be made in 
that court and in no other court. Thus sub-section 
(4) not only confers exclusive jurisdiction on the 
court to which an application is made in any 
reference but simultaneously ousts the jurisdiction 
of any other court which may as well have 
jurisdiction in this behalf. To illustrate the point, if 
an Award was required to be filed under
Section 
14(2)
read with
Section 31(1)
in any particular 
court as being the court in which a suit touching 
the subject-matter of Award would have been 
required to be filed, but if any application in the 
reference under the Act has been filed in some 
other court which was competent to entertain that 
application, then to the exclusion of the first 
mentioned court the latter court alone, in view of 
the overriding effect of the provision contained in
Section 31(4)
, will have jurisdiction to entertain 
the Award and the Award will have to be filed in 
that court alone and no other court will have 
jurisdiction to entertain the same."
In
Mukesh K. Tripathi v. Senior Division Manager, LIC and Others
[(2004) 8 SCC 387], this Court observed:
"The interpretation clause contained in a statute 
although may deserve a broader meaning having 
employed the word "includes" but therefor also it 
is necessary to keep in view the scheme of the 
object and purport of the statute which takes him 
out of the said definition. Furthermore, the 
interpretation section begins with the words 
"unless the context otherwise requires".
In
Ramesh Mehta v. Sanwal Chand Singhvi
, it was 
noticed: (SCC p. 426, paras 27-28)
"A definition is not to be read in isolation. It must 
be read in the context of the phrase which would 
define it. It should not be vague or ambiguous. The 
definition of words must be given a meaningful 
application; where the context makes the definition 
given in the interpretation clause inapplicable, the 
same meaning cannot be assigned.
In
State of Maharashtra v. Indian Medical Assn.
one of us (V.N. Khare, C.J.) stated that the 
definition given in the interpretation clause having 
regard to the contents would not be applicable. It 
was stated: (SCC p. 598, para 8)
'A bare perusal of
Section 2
of the Act shows that 
it starts with the words "in this Act, unless the 
context otherwise requires ". Let us find out 
whether in the context of the provisions of
Section 
64
of the Act the defined meaning of the 
expression "management" can be assigned to the 
word "management" in
Section 64
of the Act. In 
para 3 of the Regulation, the Essentiality 
Certificate is required to be given by the State 
Government and permission to establish a new 
medical college is to be given by the State 
Government under
Section 64
of the Act. If we 
give the defined meaning to the expression 
"management" occurring in
Section 64
of the Act, 
it would mean the State Government is required to 
apply to itself for grant of permission to set up a 
government medical college through the 
University. Similarly it would also mean the State 
Government applying to itself for grant of 
Essentiality Certificate under para 3 of the 
Regulation. We are afraid the defined meaning of 
the expression "management" cannot be assigned 
to the expression "management" occurring in
Section 64
of the Act. In the present case, the 
context does not permit or requires to apply the 
defined meaning to the word "management"
occurring in
Section 64
of the Act.'"
In M/s.
Raval and Co. v. K.G. Ramachandran and Others
[(1974) 1 
SCC 424], whereupon reliance has been placed by the leaned counsel, the 
question arose as to whether the landlord can file an application for fixation 
of fair rent under
Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960
.  
In that context, it was held:
"As the object of the statute was to protect those 
inhabitants who had previously no access to the 
rates (which the churchwardens had), the meaning 
of the term "inhabitants" was limited to them. The 
same approach in interpretation must be adopted 
by us in the present case. We must not allow 
ourselves to be unduly obsessed by the meaning of 
"landlord" given in the definition or by its ordinary 
etymological meaning but we must examine the 
scheme of the relevant provisions of the statute, 
the contextual setting in which
Section 4
, sub-
section (1) occurs and the object which the 
legislation is intended to achieve, in order to 
determine what is the sense in which the word 
"landlord" is used in
Section 4
, sub-section (1)  
whether it is intended to include contractual 
landlord."
No such anomaly arises in the instant case.
To the similar effect is the decision of this Court in
Whirlpool 
Corporation v. Registrar of Trade Marks, Mumbai and Others
[(1998) 8 SCC 
1] wherein it was stated:
"Now, the principle is that all statutory definitions 
have to be read subject to the qualification 
variously expressed in the definition clauses which 
created them and it may be that even where the 
definition is exhaustive inasmuch as the word 
defined is said to mean a certain thing, it is 
possible for the word to have a somewhat different 
meaning in different sections of the Act depending 
upon the subject or context. That is why all 
definitions in statutes generally begin with the 
qualifying words, similar to the words used in the 
present case, namely "unless there is anything 
repugnant in the subject or context". Thus there 
may be sections in the Act where the meaning may 
have to be departed from on account of the subject 
or context in which the word had been used and 
that will be giving effect to the opening sentence in 
the definition section, namely "unless there is 
anything repugnant in the subject or context". In 
view of this qualification, the court has not only to 
look at the words but also to look at the context, 
the collocation and the object of such words 
relating to such matter and interpret the meaning 
intended to be conveyed by the use of the words 
"under those circumstances"."
There exists a distinction between an appeal and an application.  
Whereas
Section 31(4)
of the 1940 Act or
Section 42
of the 1996 Act 
provides for an application, Sub-section (2) of
Section 37
of the 1996 Act 
provides for a statutory appeal.  A forum of an appellate court must be 
determined with reference to the definition thereof contained in the 1996 
Act.
We, therefore, see no reason to differ with the High Court.  The 
appeal is dismissed.  No costs.