[Cites
12
, Cited by
84
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of M.P. & Ors vs Arjunlal Rajak on 24 February, 2006
Equivalent citations: 2006 AIR SCW 1128, 2006 (2) SCC 711, 2006 LAB IC 1319, (2006) 2 LABLJ 104, (2006) 2 JCR 135 (SC), (2006) 2 LAB LN 842, (2006) 2 SCALE 610, (2006) 109 FACLR 156, 2006 (2) AIR JHAR R 318, (2006) 7 SERVLR 257, (2006) 1 UPLBEC 991, (2006) 3 SCJ 583, (2006) 5 ALL WC 5143, 2006 LABLR 381, (2006) 2 SUPREME 322, (2006) 2 ESC 135, 2006 ALL CJ 2 959, (2006) 2 PAT LJR 144, (2006) 2 JAB LJ 24
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
S.B. Sinha
,
P.K. Balasubramanyan
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1266 of 2006

PETITIONER:
State of M.P. & Ors

RESPONDENT:
Arjunlal Rajak

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 24/02/2006

BENCH:
S.B. Sinha & P.K. Balasubramanyan

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
[Arising out of SLP (C) No. 2567 of 2005] 



 S.B. SINHA, J :
Leave granted.
The respondent was appointed as a Chowkidar by the appellants. 
Admittedly, no offer of appointment was issued to him nor the recruitment 
rules applicable  for filling up of a permanent or temporary post have been 
followed.  The appellants contend that the respondent was engaged in the 
production division of Forest Department of District Guna which has since 
been wound up.  His services were thereafter terminated.  Contending, inter 
alia, that he had worked in different departments of the State from  August,  
1984 to  July 8, 1992,   his services were terminated without complying with 
the requirements of
Section 25F
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, a 
complaint petition was filed by the respondent before the Presiding Officer, 
Labour Court No. 3, Gwalior.  By reason of an award dated 12.7.1999 on a 
finding that the Respondent had worked for more than 240 days in a 
calendar year and  having regard to the fact that no retrenchment 
compensation was paid, he was directed to be reinstated in service with full 
back wages.
The Labour Court does not appear to have taken into consideration the 
pleas raised by the appellant herein that the production division at Guna was 
wound up by an order dated 3.7.1992 of the State of Madhya Pradesh,  even 
while considering the relief which was required to be given in the facts and 
circumstances of the case. The High Court on a writ petition filed by the 
appellant although noticed the said fact dismissed  the same petition stating:
"Even though on behalf of the employer, statement of 
one Ashok Kumar was recorded  but the aforesaid 
witness could not dispute the fact with regard to working 
of the employee.  On the contrary, the said witness, in his 
cross-examination admitted that the certificates have 
been issued to the respondent/employee by the competent 
authority of the employer and he had worked for more 
than 240 days in a calendar year.  Considering the fact 
that no show cause notice was issued or retrenchment 
compensation was paid or enquiry was conducted before 
terminating the service of respondent/employee, a finding 
has been recorded  that the respondent No. 1 was in 
employment since 1.8.1984 and he had completed more 
than 240 days continuous service in a calendar year.  
That being so, in view of the provisions of
Section 25-B
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 service of 
respondent/employee had been terminated without 
following  the mandatory provisions of
Section 25-F
, no 
show cause notice was issued or retrenchment 
compensation paid to him.  Therefore, the finding 
recorded is based on appreciation of evidence and 
material available on record.  The said finding is neither 
perverse nor warrant interference in any manner 
whatsoever by this Court."
Mr. B.S. Banthia, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
appellants would submit  that having regard to the fact that the respondent 
was appointed on daily wages and the unit in which he was working had 
been wound up, the Respondent could not have been directed to be 
reinstated with full back wages.
Mrs. K. Sharada Devi, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondent, on the other hand, would contend that the appellants had not 
made out any case before the Labour Court that the respondent was 
appointed under a Scheme.  He, according to the learned counsel, might 
have been shifted from one department to the other but the same  would not 
mean that he was appointed to work in a particular project/scheme.  It was 
pointed out that by reason of the order of reinstatement, the respondent 
continues to be a daily wager and there is, thus, no reason  as to why after he 
having been reinstated and having worked in one or the other department of 
the State from 2001, this Court should exercise its jurisdiction under
Article 
136
of the Constitution of India.
It is beyond any doubt or dispute that a daily wager does not hold a 
post.  The Forest  Department is a wing of the State.  Its employees hold a 
status.  For acquiring that status and for obtaining the constitutional 
protection in terms of
Article 311
of the Constitution of India, all 
appointments must be made in conformity with the Constitutional Scheme as 
laid down under
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution of India as well as the 
rules made in terms of the proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution of India 
or in terms of a
Legislative Act
. Concededly, while appointing the 
respondent, the constitutional provision or the statutory provisions had not 
been followed.  The rights and liabilities of the parties are, therefore,  
governed by the terms of the contract and/or the provisions of the  statute  
applicable in relation thereto.  The respondent was not given any offer of 
appointment in writing.  He admittedly worked in different departments of 
the State.  His last posting was in the production division of Forest 
Department in the District of Guna which as noticed above stood abolished.  
It is, however, true that while terminating the services of the respondent the 
appellants had not complied with the mandatory requirements of
Section 25-
F
of the Industrial Disputes Act and, thus, ordinarily, the workman could 
have been directed to be reinstated with or without back wages, but it is also 
well settled that a project or a Scheme or an office itself is abolished, relief 
by way of reinstatement is not granted.
The question came up for consideration before a Division Bench of 
this Court in
Mahendra L. Jain & Ors. Vs. Indore Development Authority & 
Ors.
[ (2005 (1) SCC 639] wherein it was categorically held:
"This case involves 31 employees. A distinction is 
sought to be made by Dr. Dhavan that out of them 
27 had been appointed to a project and not in a 
project. The distinction although appears to be 
attractive at the first blush but does not stand a 
moment's scrutiny. As noticed hereinbefore, the 
High Court's observation remained unchallenged, 
that the project was to be financed by ODA. The 
project was indisputably to be executed by the 
Indore Development Authority; and for the 
implementation thereof, the appointments had to 
be made by it. If the appellants were appointed for 
the purpose of the project, they would be deemed 
to have been appointed therefor and only because 
such appointments had been made by the 
respondent would by itself not entitle them to 
claim permanency. The life of the project came to 
an end on 30-6-1997. The maintenance job upon 
completion thereof had been taken over by the 
Indore Municipal Corporation. The appellants 
were aware of the said fact and, thus, raised an 
alternative plea in their statements of claims. The 
Labour Court could not have granted any relief to 
them as prayed for, as the Indore Municipal 
Corporation is a separate juristic person having 
been created under a statute. Such a relief would 
have been beyond the scope and purport of the 
reference made to the Labour Court by the State 
Government. Furthermore, the Indore Municipal 
Corporation was not a party and, thus, no 
employee could be thrust upon it without its 
consent.
In A. Umarani this Court held that once the 
employees are employed for the purpose of 
scheme, they do not acquire any vested right to 
continue after the project is over (see paras 41 and 
43 : SCC paras 55 and 57). (See also Karnataka 
State Coop. 	Apex
Bank Ltd. v. Y.S. Shetty
and
M.D., U.P. Land Development Corpn. v. Amar 
Singh10
.)

 It is furthermore evident that the persons 
appointed as daily-wagers held no posts. The 
appointments, thus, had been made for the purpose 
of the project which, as indicated hereinbefore, 
came to an end. The plea of Dr. Dhavan to the 
effect that the appellants in Civil Appeal No. 337 
of 2002 were asked to perform other duties also 
may not be of much significance having regard to 
our foregoing findings. However, it has been seen 
that even services of one of them had been 
requisitioned only for the project work. The High 
Court, in our opinion, was right in arriving at the 
conclusion that the appellants were not entitled to 
be regularised in service.'


	It is also trite that even for grant of back wages, application of mind  
on the part of the Industrial Court is imperative, as a relief of full back  
wages may not be granted automatically. In U.P. State Brassware Corpon. 
Ltd. & anr. Vs. Uday Narain Pandey [(2006) 1 SCC 479] this Court opined:
"No precise formula can be laid down as to under 
what circumstances payment of entire back wages 
should be allowed.  Indisputably, it depends upon 
the  facts and circumstances of each case.  It 
would, however, not be correct to contend that it is 
automatic.  It should not be granted mechanically 
only because on technical grounds or otherwise an 
order of termination   is found to be in 
contravention of the provisions of
Section 6-N
of 
the U.P. Industrial Disputes Act."
It was further held that while a decision to close down the 
establishment has been taken, ordinarily, back wages to a limited extent 
should be granted 

	The onus to prove that he had completed 240 days of work or he had 
not been gainfully employed within the said period  was on the workman.
Keeping in view the fact that the services of the respondent were 
terminated on the ground that the production unit in which he was working 
itself had been closed, we are of the opinion that interest of justice would be 
sub-served if a monetary compensation  of Rs. 10,000/- is granted to him.  It, 
however, goes without saying that he would be entitled to the wages for the 
period he had actually worked pursuant to  or in furtherance of the order of 
the Labour Court and as also of the High Court upon his reinstatement.  The 
award of the Labour Court as also the judgment of the High Court are set 
aside.
For the reasons aforementioned, the appeal is allowed to the 
aforementioned extent.   However, there shall be no order as to costs.