[Cites
14
, Cited by
118
]
Supreme Court of India
Bhogpur Co-Op Sugar Mills Ltd vs Harmesh Kumar on 10 November, 2006
Equivalent citations: AIR 2007 SUPREME COURT 288, 2006 AIR SCW 6084, 2007 (1) AIR KAR R 569, 2006 (11) SCALE 631, 2007 (2) SRJ 542, 2006 (13) SCC 28, (2007) 3 RAJ LW 2137, (2007) 1 LAB LN 95, (2007) 1 SCT 277, (2007) 1 SERVLR 542, (2007) 1 CURLR 227, (2006) 111 FACLR 1202, (2006) 11 SCALE 631
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
S.B. Sinha
,
Markandey Katju
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  4771 of 2006

PETITIONER:
Bhogpur Co-op Sugar Mills Ltd. 				

RESPONDENT:
Harmesh Kumar						          

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 10/11/2006

BENCH:
S.B. Sinha & Markandey Katju

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 17885 of 2005) 

S.B. SINHA, J.
Leave granted.
Appellant is a cooperative society.  It is registered under the
Punjab 
Cooperative Societies Act, 1961
.  It operates a sugar mill.  It is said to be a 
seasonal industry.  At the beginning of the season, workmen are recruited 
and they are retrenched at the end of it.  Respondent was appointed as a 
seasonal workman.  He was appointed on daily wage basis.  On or about 
14.03.1992, he raised an industrial dispute in terms of
Section 2A
of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short "the Act") pursuant whereto or in 
furtherance whereof the State of Punjab in exercise of its jurisdiction under
Section 10(1)(c)
of the Act referred the following dispute to the Labour 
Court by a notification dated 8.07.1996:
"Whether termination of services of Sh. Harmesh 
Kumar workman is justified and in order?  If not, 
to what relief/ exact amount of compensation is he 
entitled?"
The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Gurdaspur opining that the 
workman has not been able to establish that he had worked for 240 days held 
that the respondent having not been called by the appellant in the subsequent 
crushing seasons and also having called his juniors violated the provisions of
Section 25-G
of the Act.  He, therefore, passed the following award:
"In the result, in view of my findings on the above 
issue, I pass an award directing the respondent to 
reemploy the workman from the season in which 
juniors to him were called and workman was not 
called.  The workman shall also be entitled to back 
wages, etc. with all allied and monetary benefits 
which are granted to his juniors from their joining 
when workman was not called"
A writ petition was filed by the appellant herein questioning the 
legality and/ or validity of the said award and by reason of the impugned 
judgment a Division Bench of the High Court rejected the contention raised 
by the appellant herein that the provisions of
Section 25-G
of the Act cannot 
be said to have any application in the instant case stating:
"We, however, find no merit in this argument for 
the reason that a positive finding has been recorded 
by the Tribunal that persons junior to the workman 
had been retained and it is also admitted by the 
Management that they had not offered any 
appointment to the respondent on account of 
pendency of the dispute in Court.  We are of the 
opinion that had it been the case of the 
Management that the exigencies of services did not 
warrant his re-employment, something could be 
said in its favour but this is not the case of the 
Management.  No offer was made to the workman 
on account of the pendency of the proceedings 
before the Labour Court."
The fact that the appellant operates a seasonal factory and the 
respondent had not been in continuous service for 240 days during twelve 
months preceding his termination is not in dispute.
Contention of the appellant is that the termination of the respondent's 
services did not come within the purview of the term 'retrenchment' as 
contained in
Section 2(oo)(bb)
of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The Labour Court derived its jurisdiction from the terms in reference.  
It ought to have exercised its jurisdiction within the four corners thereof.
The principal question which was referred by the State Government 
was as to whether the termination of services of the respondent was justified.  
The Labour Court was, therefore, not required to go into the question as to 
whether the appellant was bound to take the services of the respondent in all 
subsequent seasons or not.
We are not oblivious of the distinction in regard to the legality of the 
order of termination in a case where
Section 25-F
of the Act applies on the 
one hand, and a situation where
Section 25-G
thereof applies on the other.  
Whereas in a case where
Section 25-F
of the Act applies the workman is 
bound to prove that he had been in continuous service of 240 days during 
twelve months preceding the order of termination, in a case where he 
invokes the provisions of
Sections 25-G
and
25-H
thereof he may not have 
to establish the said fact. [See
Central Bank of India vs. S. Satyam & 
Ors.
(
1996) 5 SCC 419, Samishta Dube vs. City Board, Etawah & Anr.
(
1999) 3 SCC 14, Regional Manager, SBI vs. Rakesh Kumar Tewari
(2006) 
1 SCC 530 and Jaipur Development Authority v. Ram Sahai & Anr.8Civil 
Appeal No. 4626 of 2006 decided on 31st October, 2006]

  	However, category-wise seniority is required to be maintained when 
different categories of workmen are appointed so as to apply the principle of 
'last-cum-first go'.  A seniority list is also required to be maintained so as to 
enable the employer to offer services to the retrenched employees 
maintaining the order of seniority.  The said provisions, however, would 
have no application in a case where
Section 2(oo)(bb)
of the Act is attracted.  
The said provision reads, thus:
"2. (oo) retrenchment means the termination by the 
employer of the service of a workman for any 
reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment 
inflicted by way of disciplinary action, but does 
not include
(a)-(b) 	*		*		*
(bb) termination of the service of the workman as a 
result of the non-renewal of the contract of 
employment between the employer and the 
workman concerned on its expiry or of such 
contract being terminated under a stipulation in 
that behalf contained therein;"
Termination of services of a workman as a result of non-renewal of 
the contract of employment on its expiry or termination of such contract of 
appointment under a stipulation in that behalf contained therein would, thus, 
not attract the definition of the term 'retrenchment'.  [See
Municipal 
Council, Samrala v. Sukhwinder Kaur
, (2006) 6 SCC 516 and Municipal 
Council, Samrala v. Raj Kumar, (2006) 3 SCC 81]

	The issue is squarely covered by a decision of this Court in
Morinda 
Coop. Sugar Mills Ltd. v. Ram Kishan and Others
[(1995) 5 SCC 653] 
wherein it was opined:
"It would thus be clear that the respondents were 
not working throughout the season. They worked 
during crushing seasons only. The respondents 
were taken into work for the season and 
consequent to closure of the season, they ceased to 
work.
The question is whether such a cessation would 
amount to retrenchment. Since it is only a seasonal 
work, the respondents cannot be said to have been 
retrenched in view of what is stated in clause (bb) 
of
Section 2(oo)
of the Act. Under these 
circumstances, we are of the opinion that the view 
taken by the Labour Court and the High Court is 
illegal. However, the appellant is directed to 
maintain a register for all workmen engaged 
during the seasons enumerated hereinbefore and 
when the new season starts the appellant should 
make a publication in neighbouring places in 
which the respondents normally live and if they 
would report for duty, the appellant would engage 
them in accordance with seniority and exigency of 
work."
Yet again, recently in
Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board v. 
Subhash Chand and Another
[(2006) 2 SCC 794], this Court held:
"It is the contention of the appellant that the 
respondent was appointed during the wheat season 
or the paddy season. It is also not in dispute that 
the appellant is a statutory body constituted under 
the Punjab and Haryana Agriculture Produce 
Marketing Board Act. In terms of the provisions of 
the said Act, indisputably, regulations are framed 
by the Board laying down the terms and conditions 
of services of the employees working in the 
Market Committees. A bare perusal of the offer of 
appointment clearly goes to show that the 
appointments were made on contract basis. It was 
not a case where a workman was continuously 
appointed with artificial gap of 1 day only. 
Indisputably, the respondent had been re-employed 
after termination of his services on contract basis 
after a consideration period(s)."
[See also
Municipal Council, Samrala v. Sukhwinder Kaur
, (
2006) 6 SCC 
516 and State of Rajasthan v. Sarjeet Singh & Anr.
, 2006 (10) SCALE 417]

 	For the reasons aforementioned, the impugned judgment cannot be 
sustained which is set aside accordingly.  The appeal is allowed.  No costs.