[Cites
9
, Cited by
129
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of U.P. & Ors vs Desh Raj on 23 November, 2006
Equivalent citations: AIR 2007 SUPREME COURT 628, 2007 AIR SCW 222, 2007 (1) ALL LJ 107, 2007 (1) ALL WC 431, 2007 (1) SCC 257, 2006 (13) SCALE 382, 2007 (66) ALL LR 61 SOC, (2007) 112 FACLR 456, (2007) 1 LAB LN 585, (2006) 13 SCALE 382, (2007) 1 SCT 631, (2007) 1 ALL WC 4(31), (2006) 3 CPR 165, (2007) 2 SUPREME 559, (2007) 1 CPJ 131
Bench:
S.B. Sinha
,
Markandey Katju
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  5674 of 2006

PETITIONER:
State of U.P. & Ors

RESPONDENT:
Desh Raj

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 23/11/2006

BENCH:
S.B. SINHA & MARKANDEY KATJU

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
(Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No.22947 of 2005)


S.B. SINHA J:
Leave granted.
The State of U.P has herein questioned an interim order 
dated 15.1.04 passed by the learned Single Judge of the 
Allahabad High Court as also order dated 22.8.2005 passed by 
a Division Bench of the said Court affirming the same.
	The respondent was said to have been appointed on daily 
wages for specific work on Muster Roll purported to be under 
the provisions of paragraphs 429, 430 and 431 of the 
Financial Hand Book Volume-VI read with paragraph 476 of 
the Part-I of the Public Works Department of Manual of orders 
in local
:2:
arrangements.
A writ petition was filed by the respondent herein, inter alia, 
praying for his regularization.  A learned Single Judge of the 
Lucknow Bench of the Allahabad High Court on the day of 
preliminary hearing while issuing rule passed the following 
order:
"In  the meantime, the opposite parties no.3 
to 5 shall examine the petitioner's claim for 
regularization under the Regularization Rules 
2001 and pass appropriate orders.  However, his 
claim shall not be rejected on the ground of the 
post being not available.  Supernumerary posts 
have to be created to comply with the provisions of 
the Regularization Rules and kept alive until 
regular posts fall vacant.  Till a decision is taken, 
the petitioner shall be paid wages equivalent to the 
minimum of pay scale admissible to a Mate 
working in the department with effect from 1st 
January, 2004."
A special appeal filed therein against but the same was 
barred by limitation.  The Division Bench, inter alia, on the 
said premise refused to interfere with the order passed by the 
learned Single Judge stating:
:3:
"In  these circumstances, the appeal Court 
should not interfere but leave the matter to be 
decided by the Hon'ble single Judge on a final 
basis.  The appeal is thus dismissed on merits and 
also on the ground of delay which we are not 
minded to condone, although this is illogical, we 
thought it better to make our minds  known."
A bare perusal of the impugned order should show that the 
learned Single Judge for all intent and purport had allowed the 
writ petition on the very first day, which in our opinion, was 
not justified.  It is  now well-settled that a relief which can be 
granted only at the final hearing of the matter, should not 
ordinarily be granted by way of an interim order.  It is also 
doubtful as to whether the impugned directions could have 
been issued even at the final  hearing of the matter which 
would amount to creation of supernumerary post in purported 
compliance of the regularisation rules.
	Whatever may be the import and purport of such 
regularization rules, in view of the recent Constitution Bench 
decision of this Court in
Secretary, State of Karnataka & Ors. 
vs. Umadevi & Ors.
[(2006) 4 SCC 1)], it is now well-settled 
that the
:4:
appointments, if made in violation of the constitutional 
scheme of equality as enshrined under
Articles 14
and
16
of 
the Constitution of India, would be rendered illegal and, thus 
void ab initio.  No  regularization rules, therefore, could have 
been made by the State of Uttar Pradesh in derogation to the 
statutory or constitutional scheme.
Furthermore, the State of Uttar Pradesh must have made 
rules in terms of the proviso appended to
Article 309
of the 
Constitution of India, providing for the mode and manner in 
which recruitments are to be made.  Such rules have statutory 
force.
The learned counsel for the respondents, however, drew our 
attention to paragraphs 53 of
Umadevi
(supra), which reads as 
under:
"One  aspect needs to be clarified.  There may 
be cases where irregular appointments [not  illegal 
appointments] as explained in S.V. Narayanappa, 
R.N. Nanjundappa and B.N. Nagarajan and referred 
to in para 15 above, of duly qualified persons of duly 
qualified persons in duly sanctioned vacant posts 
might have been made and the employees have 
continued to work for ten years or more but without 
the intervention of orders of the courts or of 
tribunals.  The question of regularization of the
:5:
services of such employees may have to be 
considered on merits in the light of the principles 
settled by this Court in the cases abovereferred to 
and in the light of this judgment.  In that context, 
the Union of India, the State Governments and their 
instrumentalities should take steps to regularize as 
one time measure, the services of said irregularly 
appointed, who have worked for ten years and more 
in duly sanctioned post but not under cover of orders 
of the Courts or of Tribunals and should further 
ensure that regular recruitments are undertaken to 
fill that vacant sanctioned posts that required to be 
filled up, in cases where temporary employees or 
daily wagers are being now employed.  The process 
must be set in motion within six months from this 
date.  We also clarify that regularization, if any 
already made, but not subjudice, need not be 
reopened based on this judgment. but there should 
be no further byepassing of the constitutional 
requirement and regularizing or making permanent, 
those not duly appointed as per the constitutional 
scheme."
The observations made in the said paragraph must be read 
in the light of the observations made in paragraphs 15 and 16 
of the judgment.  The Constitution Bench referred to the 
decisions of this Court in
State of Mysore vs. S.V. 
Narayanappa
1967 (
1) SCR 128, R.N. Nanjundappa vs. T. 
Thimmiah
, 1972 (
1) SCC 409 and B.N. Nagarajan vs. State of 
Karnataka
1979 (4) SCC 507, B.N. Nagarajan is a decision 
rendered by a three judge bench
:6:
of this Court in which it has clearly been held that the 
regularisation does not mean permanence.  A distinction has 
clearly been made in those decisions between 'irregularity' and 
'illegality'.  An appointment which was made throwing all 
constitutional obligations and statutory rules to winds would 
render the same illegal whereas irregularity pre supposes 
substantial compliance of the rules.
Distinction between irregularity and illegality is explicit.  It 
has been so pointed out in
National Fertilizers Ltd. & Ors. vs. 
Somvir Singh
(2006) 5 SCC 493) in the following terms:
"the  contention of the learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of the respondents that the 
appointments were irregular and not illegal, cannot 
be accepted for more than one reason.  They were 
appointed only on the basis of their applications.  
The Recruitment Rules were not followed.  Even the 
Selection Committee had not been properly 
constituted.  In view of the ban on employment, no 
recruitment was permissible in law.  The reservation 
policy adopted by the appellant had  not been 
maintained.  Even cases of minorities had not been 
given due consideration.
The Constitution Bench thought of directing 
regularization of the services only of those 
employees whose appointments were irregular as
:7:
explained in
State of Mysore vs. S.V. Narayanappa
,
R.N. Narayandappa vs. T. Thimmiah
and
B.N. 
Nagarajan vs. State of Karnataka
wherein this Court 
observed: [ Umadevi (3) case 1, SCC p.24. para 16[

	"16.
In
B.N. Nagarajan v. State of Karnataka
this Court clearly held that the words 'regular' or 
'regularization' do not connote permanence and 
cannot be construed so as to convey an idea of the 
nature of tenure of appointments.  They are terms 
calculated to condone any procedural irregularities 
and are meant to cure only such defects as are 
attributable to methodology followed in making the 
appointments."
Judged by standards
laid down by
this Court 
in the aforementioned decisions, the appointments 
of the respondents are illegal.  They do not thus, 
have any legal right to continue in service."
{See also State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. vs. 
Yogesh Chandra Dubey & Ors.	[ (2006) 8 SCC
67)]

	It is not the case of the respondents that they were recruited 
in terms of the provisions of the recruitment rules framed 
under the proviso appended to
Article 309
of the Constitution 
of India.  In that view of the matter ex facie their appointments 
were illegal.  We, however, must observe that we have not been 
taken through the purport and import or the
:8:
various provisions of the PWD rules to which we have made 
reference heretobefore.  But in any event, the question of 
regularisation of the employees by reason of any policy 
decision adopted by the State is impermissible in law.  The 
learned Division Bench could have dismissed the special 
appeal filed by the appellant on the ground of delay.  It did not 
do so.  It purported to uphold the order of the learned Single 
Judge  even on merits.
In that view of the matter only we had to enter into the 
merits of the matter.  The judgment of the High Court, for the 
reasons stated hereinbefore suffer from a legal error.  It is set 
aside accordingly.  We are, however, of the opinion that the 
respondents should be compensated, as the appeal preferred 
by the State of Uttar Pradesh was barred by limitation,  We 
quantify the same at Rs.10,000/- (Rupees ten thousands 
only).  We, however, may observe that it would be open to the 
State to recover the said amount from the officers who may be 
found responsible for causing the delay in preferring the 
appeal.
:9:
With the aforementioned directions, the impugned orders 
are set aside.  The appeal is allowed.  No costs.