[Cites
32
, Cited by
191
]
Supreme Court of India
Central Bureau Of Investigation vs Shri Ravi Shankar Srivastava, Ias And ... on 10 August, 2006
Equivalent citations: 2006 AIR SCW 3990, 2006 (7) SCC 188, 2006 CRI. L. J. 4050, 2006 (5) ALL LJ NOC 1062, 2006 (5) AIR BOM R 553, (2007) 1 NIJ 71, (2006) 35 OCR 461, (2006) SC CR R 1291, (2006) 3 ALLCRIR 2486, (2006) 4 EASTCRIC 141, (2006) 3 RAJ CRI C 766, (2006) 7 SCALE 618, (2006) 3 CHANDCRIC 272, (2006) 4 BANKCAS 475, (2006) 3 ALLCRIR 2609, (2006) 6 SUPREME 305, (2006) 45 ALLINDCAS 51 (SC), 2007 CALCRILR 1 391, (2006) 3 CRIMES 222, (2007) 1 KER LJ 79, (2006) 3 CURCRIR 190, 2007 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 424, 2007 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 202, 2006 ALL CJ 3 1763, (2006) 55 ALLCRIC 193, (2006) 3 BANKCLR 836, (2007) 2 ANDHLT(CRI) 64, 2006 (3) SCC (CRI) 233, AIR 2006 SUPREME COURT 2872
Author:
Arijit Pasayat
Bench:
Arijit Pasayat
,
Altamas Kabir
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  36 of 2002

PETITIONER:
Central Bureau of Investigation				

RESPONDENT:
Shri Ravi Shankar Srivastava, IAS and Anr.	

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 10/08/2006

BENCH:
ARIJIT PASAYAT & ALTAMAS KABIR

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T



ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.
Central Bureau of Investigation (in short 'CBI') questions 
legality of the judgment rendered by a learned Single Judge of 
the Rajasthan High Court, Jaipur Bench.  Respondent No.1, a 
member of Indian Administrative Service filed a petition under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short 
'the Code') for quashing the FIR registered by the appellant 
alleging commission of offences punishable under
Sections 
120B
,
167
,
168
,
177A
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short 
'
IPC
') and
Sections 13(2)
and
13(1)
of the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1988 (in short '
PC Act
'). The only ground on 
which the respondent no.1 prayed for quashing the FIR is that 
the CBI had no jurisdiction to register the FIR under the
Delhi 
Special Police Establishment Act, 1946
(in short the 'Act'). FIR 
was registered by Shri Rajiv Sharma, Superintendent of Police, 
Jaipur at the Police Station, CBI on the information received 
through some sources as in regard to certain advertisements 
involving criminal conspiracy resulting in the commission of 
offences noted above.
Respondent no.1 filed the petition before the High Court 
questioning legality of the proceedings.
With reference to
Sections 3
,
5
and
6
of the Act, the 
respondent no.1 took the stand that the CBI had no 
jurisdiction to register the case.  In substance the stands were:
(a) consent necessary by the concerned State for operation of 
the Act had been withdrawn as is evident from the letter dated 
26.6.1999 of the Special Officer (Home), Secretary, 
Department in response to the letter dated 21.11.1989 written 
by the Government of India, Department of Personnel and 
Training, New Delhi. (b) consent of the State Government 
which was given in 1956 was extended in 1989 after the
PC 
Act
was promulgated but subsequently the State Government 
had not considered it appropriate to accord consent to extend 
some provisions of the Act to the whole of the State of 
Rajasthan, (c) though the consent had been given by the State 
of Rajasthan in 1956 and extended in 1989, same did not 
relate to any particular officer to act in terms of the Act and, 
therefore, the FIR as lodged had no validity in the eye of law.
The High Court accepted the stands. It held that the consent 
was earlier given in 1956 and extended in 1989 after the Act 
was enacted. The same became inoperative after the State 
Government refused to accord consent for extending the same 
provisions of the Act to the whole of Rajasthan. It was also 
held that for the authorized officers to function under the Act 
it was necessary that the officers were required to be 
individually notified and a general notification would not 
suffice.
In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the 
appellant submitted that the High Court has committed patent 
errors in law. First, prayer of the respondent no.1 could not 
have been adjudicated in a petition instituted under Section 
482 of the Code. Secondly, the High Court has lost sight of the 
fact that the notification issued under
Section 5
of the Act had 
not been rescinded or revoked at any point of time. Further an 
inter departmental communication has been treated as a 
notification to hold that the State Government had not 
extended the notification. The authority of the person who 
wrote that letter has not been established. In any event, the 
same cannot be treated to be one covered under
Article 166
of 
the Constitution of India, 1950 (in short 'the Constitution').  
Thirdly, there was no specific order required in respect of each 
officer as has been held in various decision of this Court.
In response, learned counsel for the respondent no.1 
submitted that when the proceeding itself was void ab initio 
the High Court was justified in quashing the FIR. Further, 
there is no material on record to show that the consent which 
was given in 1956 and extended in 1989 was intended to be 
continued.
The rival contentions need careful consideration.
Exercise of power under Section 482 of the Code in a 
case of this nature is the exception and not the rule. The 
Section does not confer any new powers on the High Court. It 
only saves the inherent power which the Court possessed 
before the enactment of the Code. It envisages three 
circumstances under which the inherent jurisdiction may be 
exercised, namely, (i) to give effect to an order under the Code,
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of court, and (iii) to 
otherwise secure the ends of justice. It is neither possible nor 
desirable to lay down any inflexible rule which would govern 
the exercise of inherent jurisdiction. No legislative enactment 
dealing with procedure can provide for all cases that may 
possibly arise. Courts, therefore, have inherent powers apart 
from express provisions of law which are necessary for proper 
discharge of functions and duties imposed upon them by law. 
That is the doctrine which finds expression in the section 
which merely recognizes and preserves inherent powers of the 
High Courts. All courts, whether civil or criminal possess, in 
the absence of any express provision, as inherent in their 
constitution, all such powers as are necessary to do the right 
and to undo a wrong in course of administration of justice on 
the principle "quando lex aliquid alicui concedit, concedere 
videtur et id sine quo res ipsae esse non potest" (when the law 
gives a person anything it gives him that without which it 
cannot exist). While exercising powers under the section, the 
court does not function as a court of appeal or revision. 
Inherent jurisdiction under the section though wide has to be 
exercised sparingly, carefully and with caution and only when 
such exercise is justified by the tests specifically laid down in 
the section itself. It is to be exercised ex debito justitiae to do 
real and substantial justice for the administration of which 
alone courts exist. Authority of the court exists for 
advancement of justice and if any attempt is made to abuse 
that authority so as to produce injustice, the court has power 
to prevent abuse. It would be an abuse of process of the court 
to allow any action which would result in injustice and prevent 
promotion of justice. In exercise of the powers court would be 
justified to quash any proceeding if it finds that 
initiation/continuance of it amounts to abuse of the process of 
court or quashing of these proceedings would otherwise serve 
the ends of justice. When no offence is disclosed by the 
complaint, the court may examine the question of fact. When a 
complaint is sought to be quashed, it is permissible to look 
into the materials to assess what the complainant has alleged 
and whether any offence is made out even if the allegations are 
accepted in toto.
In
R. P. Kapur v. State of Punjab
(AIR 1960 SC 866) this 
Court summarized some categories of cases where inherent 
power can and should be exercised to quash the proceedings.
(i) where it manifestly appears that there is a 
legal bar against the institution or continuance 
e.g. want of sanction;
(ii) where the allegations in the first 
information report or complaint taken at its 
face value and accepted in their entirety do not 
constitute the offence alleged;
(iii) where the allegations constitute an offence, 
but there is no legal evidence adduced or the 
evidence adduced clearly or manifestly fails to 
prove the charge.
In dealing with the last case, it is important to bear in 
mind the distinction between a case where there is no legal 
evidence or where there is evidence which is clearly 
inconsistent with the accusations made, and a case where 
there is legal evidence which, on appreciation, may or may not 
support the accusations. When exercising jurisdiction under 
Section 482 of the Code, the High Court would not ordinarily 
embark upon an enquiry whether the evidence in question is 
reliable or not or whether on a reasonable appreciation of it 
accusation would not be sustained. That is the function of the 
trial Judge. Judicial process should not be an instrument of 
oppression, or, needless harassment. Court should be 
circumspect and judicious in exercising discretion and should 
take all relevant facts and circumstances into consideration 
before issuing process, lest it would be an instrument in the 
hands of a private complainant to unleash vendetta to harass 
any person needlessly. At the same time the section is not an 
instrument handed over to an accused to short-circuit a 
prosecution and bring about its sudden death. The scope of 
exercise of power under Section 482 of the Code and the 
categories of cases where the High Court may exercise its 
power under it relating to cognizable offences to prevent abuse 
of process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of 
justice were set out in some detail by this Court in
State of 
Haryana v. Bhajan Lal
(1992 Supp (1) 335).  A note of caution 
was, however, added that the power should be exercised 
sparingly and that too in rarest of rare cases. The illustrative 
categories indicated by this Court are as follows:
"(1) Where the allegations made in the first 
information report or the complaint, even if 
they are taken at their face value and accepted 
in their entirety do not prima facie constitute 
any offence or make out a case against the 
accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first 
information report and other materials, if any, 
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a 
cognizable offence, justifying an investigation 
by police officers under Section 156(1) of the 
Code except under an order of a Magistrate 
within the purview of Section 155(2) of the 
Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made 
in the FIR or complaint and the evidence 
collected in support of the same do not 
disclose the commission of any offence and 
make out a case against the accused. 
(4) Where the allegations in the FIR do not 
constitute a cognizable offence but constitute 
only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation 
is permitted by a police officer without an 
order of a Magistrate as contemplated under 
Section 155(2) of the Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or 
complaint are so absurd and inherently 
improbable on the basis of which no prudent 
person can ever reach a just conclusion that 
there is sufficient ground for proceeding 
against the accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar 
engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code 
or the Act concerned (under which a criminal 
proceeding is instituted) to the institution and 
continuance of the proceedings and/or where 
there is a specific provision in the Code or Act 
concerned, providing efficacious redress for the 
grievance of the aggrieved party. 
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly 
attended with mala fide and/or where the 
proceeding is maliciously instituted with an 
ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the 
accused and with a view to spite him due to 
private and personal grudge."
As noted above, the powers possessed by the High Court 
under Section 482 of the Code are very wide and the very 
plenitude of the power requires great caution in its exercise. 
Court must be careful to see that its decision in exercise of 
this power is based on sound principles. The inherent power 
should not be exercised to stifle a legitimate prosecution. The 
High Court being the highest court of a State should normally 
refrain from giving a prima facie decision in a case where the 
entire facts are incomplete and hazy, more so when the 
evidence has not been collected and produced before the Court 
and the issues involved, whether factual or legal, are of 
magnitude and cannot be seen in their true perspective 
without sufficient material. Of course, no hard-and-fast rule 
can be
laid down in
regard to cases in which the High Court 
will exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction of quashing the 
proceeding at any stage.
(See:
Janata Dal v. H. S. Chowdhary
(1992 (4) SCC 305), and Raghubir Saran (Dr.) v. State of Bihar 
(AIR 1964 SC 1).  It would not be proper for the High Court to 
analyse the case of the complainant in the light of all 
probabilities in order to determine whether a conviction would 
be sustainable and on such premises arrive at a conclusion 
that the proceedings are to be quashed. It would be erroneous 
to assess the material before it and conclude that the 
complaint cannot be proceeded with. In a proceeding 
instituted on complaint, exercise of the inherent powers to 
quash the proceedings is called for only in a case where the 
complaint does not disclose any offence or is frivolous, 
vexatious or oppressive. If the allegations set out in the 
complaint do not constitute the offence of which cognizance 
has been taken by the Magistrate, it is open to the High Court 
to quash the same in exercise of the inherent powers under 
Section 482 of the Code. It is not, however, necessary that 
there should be meticulous analysis of the case before the trial 
to find out whether the case would end in conviction or 
acquittal. The complaint has to be read as a whole. If it 
appears that on consideration of the allegations in the light of 
the statement made on oath of the complainant that the 
ingredients of the offence or offences are disclosed and there is 
no material to show that the complaint is mala fide, frivolous 
or vexatious, in that event there would be no justification for 
interference by the High Court. When an information is lodged 
at the police station and an offence is registered, then the 
mala fides of the informant would be of secondary importance. 
It is the material collected during the investigation and 
evidence led in court which decides the fate of the accused 
person. The allegations of mala fides against the informant are 
of no consequence and cannot by themselves be the basis for 
quashing the proceedings.
(See:
Dhanalakshmi v. R. Prasanna 
Kumar
(1990 Supp SCC 686), State of Bihar v. P. P. Sharma 
(
AIR 1996 SC 309), Rupan Deol Bajaj v. Kanwar Pal Singh Gill
(
1995 (6) SCC 194), State of Kerala v. O. C. Kuttan
(
AIR 1999 
SC 1044), State of U.P. v. O. P. Sharma
(
1996 (7) SCC 705), 
Rashmi Kumar v. Mahesh Kumar Bhada
(
1997 (2) SCC 397), 
Satvinder Kaur v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi
) (AIR 1996 SC 
2983), Rajesh Bajaj v. State NCT of Delhi (1999 (3) SCC 259) 
and	in
State of Karnataka v. M. Devendrappa and Another
(2002 (3) SCC 89).
Coming to the question as to whether specific order in 
respect of each of the officer, the position is no longer res 
integra.
In
Central Burea of Investigation v. State of Rajasthan 
and Ors.
(1996 (9) SCC 735) it was held as follows:
"21. On a careful consideration of the facts 
and circumstances of the case and 
submissions made by the learned Counsel for 
the parties, it appears to us that under
Section 
3
of DSPE Act, the Central Government may, 
by notification, specify the offences which are 
to be investigated by the members of DSPE. It 
is not disputed that notification under
Section 
3
of DSPE Act has been issued by the Central 
Government specifying the offences under 
FERA to be investigated by the members of 
DSPE. It is also not in dispute that a 
notification dated October 26, 1977 by the 
Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Department of Personnel and Administrative 
Reforms, has been issued in exercise of the 
powers conferred by Sub-section (1) of
Section 
5
read with
Section 6
of DSPE Act. By the said 
notification the Central Government, with 
consent of the various State Governments as 
mentioned in the said notification including 
the State Government of Rajasthan, has 
extended the powers and jurisdiction of the 
members of DSPE, inter alia, to the State of 
Rajasthan for the investigation of the offences 
specified in the Schedule to the said 
notification. In the schedule under Clause (a), 
offences punishable under the FERA and 
under Clause (b) attempts, abatements and 
conspiracies in relation to or in connection 
with any offence mentioned in Clause (a) and 
any other offence committed in the course of 
the same transaction arising out of the same 
facts have been mentioned.
22. It is, however, to be noted that under
Section 2
of DSPE Act, the Central 
Government has been empowered to constitute 
a special police force to be called the DSPE for 
the investigation in any Union Territory of 
offences notified under
Section 3
. Under
Section 5(1)
of DSPE Act the Central 
Government may by order extend to any area 
including Railway areas in a State, not being 
Union Territory, the powers and jurisdiction of 
the members of the DSPE for the investigation 
of any of the offences or classes of offences 
specified in a notification under
Section 3
, 
Under
Section 5(2)
, when by an order under 
Sub-section (1), the powers and jurisdiction of 
the members of the said police establishment 
are extended to any such area, a member 
thereof may, subject to any order which the 
Central Government may make in this behalf, 
discharge the functions of a police officer in 
that area and shall, while so discharging such 
functions, be deemed to be a member of a 
police Force of that area and be vested with the 
powers, functions and privileges and be 
subject to the liabilities of a police officer 
belonging to that police force.
23. It is quite evident that members of DSPE 
are members of special police force constituted 
under
Section 2
of DSPE Act by the Central 
Government. The question that arises for 
decision in this case is whether or not a 
member of DSPE, which is also a member of 
special police force constituted by the Central 
Government, even if authorised under
Section 
3
and
Section 5
of DSPE Act to investigate in 
respect of offences under FERA in a particular 
state other than the Union Territory, with the 
consent of such State Government, can 
investigate the offences for violation of FERA, 
more so, when the offence is alleged to have 
been committed outside indian Territory. It will 
be apposite at this stage to refer to the 
provisions of
Sections 3
,
4
and
5
of FERA:
"
Section 3
: Classes of Officers of 
Enforcement -
There shall be the following classes of 
officers of Enforcement, namely:
(a) Directors of Enforcement:
(b) Additional Directors of Enforcement;
(c) Deputy Directors of Enforcement;
(d) Assistant Directors of Enforcement;
(e) Such other class of officers of 
Enforcement as may be appointed for the 
purposes of this Act.
Section 4
- Appointment and powers of 
officers of enforcement:
(1) The Central Government may appoint 
such persons as it thinks fit to be officers 
of enforcement.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of 
Sub-section (1), the Central Government 
may authorise a Director of Enforcement 
or an Additional Director of Enforcement 
or a Deputy Director of Enforcement or 
an Assistant Director of Enforcement to 
appoint officers of Enforcement below the 
rank of an Assistant Director of 
Enforcement.
(3) Subject to such conditions and 
limitations as the Central Government 
may impose, an officer of Enforcement 
may exercise the powers and discharged 
the duties conferred or imposed on him 
under this Act.
Section 5
- Entrustment of functions of 
Director or other officer of Enforcement:
The Central Government may, by order 
and subject to such conditions and 
limitations as it thinks fit to impose, 
authorise any officer of customs or any 
Central Excise Officer or any police officer 
or any other officer of the Central 
Government or a State Government to 
exercise such of the powers and 
discharge such of the duties of the 
Director of Enforcement or any other 
officer of Enforcement under this Act as 
may be specified in the order.
27. In our view, such notifications under
Sections 3
and
5
of DSPE Act are necessary for 
the purpose of exercising powers by a member 
of DSPE in respect of offence or offences and in 
respect of areas outside the Union Territory. It 
may however be noted here that by a general 
notification, members of DSPE may be 
authorised to exercise power of investigation in 
respect of offence or offences and in areas as 
specified in the notification under
Sections 3
and
5
. As already indicated, although officers 
of Enforcement Directorate are clothed with 
the powers and duties to enforce 
implementation of the provisions of FERA, the 
Central Government has been authorised to 
impose on other officers including a police 
officer, power and authority to discharge such 
of the duties and functions as may be specified 
by it. It is nobody's case that any notification 
has been issued under FERA authorising the 
member of DSPE to discharge the duties and 
functions of an officer of Enforcement 
Directorate. In our view, in the absence of 
such notification under FERA, a member of 
DSPE, despite the aforesaid notifications 
under
Sections 3
and
5
of DSPE Act, cannot be 
held to be an officer under FERA and therefore 
is not competent to investigate into the 
offences under FERA."
Nearly four decades back the position was succinctly 
stated by this Court in
Major E.G. Barsay v. State of Bombay
(AIR 1961 SC 1762) at para 29 as follows:
"It was contended before the High Court and it 
was repeated before us that the consent 
should have been given to every individual 
member of the Special Police Establishment 
and that a general consent would not be good 
consent. We do not see any force in this 
argument. Under
s. 6
of the Delhi Special 
Police Establishment Act, no member of the 
said Establishment can exercise powers and 
jurisdiction in any area in a State without the 
consent of the Government of that State. That 
section does not lay down that every member 
of the said Establishment should be 
specifically authorized to exercise jurisdiction 
in that area, though the State Government can 
do so. When a State Government can authorize 
a single officer to exercise the said jurisdiction, 
we do not see any legal objection why it could 
not authorize the entire force operating in that 
area belonging to that Establishment to make 
such investigation. The authorization filed in 
this case sufficiently complies with the 
provisions of
s. 6
of the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment Act, 1946, and there are no 
merits in this contention."
Coming to the pivotal stand of respondent no.1, as has 
been rightly submitted by leaned counsel for the appellant, 
there is no notification revoking the earlier notification.  The 
letter on which great emphasis has been laid by the 
respondent no.1 and highlighted by the High Court, the 
authority to write the letter has not been indicated.  It has also 
not been established that the person was authorized to take a 
decision. In any event, the same does not meet requirements 
of
Article 166
of the Constitution. The letter is not even 
conceptually a notification. High Court was, therefore, not 
justified in holding that there was a notification rescinding 
earlier notification.
The High Court was not justified in quashing the 
proceedings instituted on the basis of the FIR lodged. The 
impugned judgment of the High Court is set aside.  The appeal 
is allowed.