[Cites
3
, Cited by
75
]
Supreme Court of India
U.P. State Road Transport Corporation, ... vs Suresh Pal on 22 September, 2006
Equivalent citations: AIR 2006 SUPREME COURT 3227, 2006 (8) SCC 108, 2006 AIR SCW 4903, 2006 (6) ALL LJ 242, 2006 (6) AIR KANT HCR 423, (2007) 2 SERVLJ 32, (2007) 1 JCR 30 (SC), 2006 (9) SCALE 481, (2006) 47 ALLINDCAS 487 (SC), 2006 (47) ALLINDCAS 487, 2006 LAB LR 1267, (2006) 9 SCALE 48(1), (2006) 3 LABLJ 967, (2006) 4 LAB LN 800, (2006) 4 SCT 450, (2006) 7 SCJ 332, (2006) 6 SERVLR 27, (2006) 7 SUPREME 408, (2006) 111 FACLR 851
Author:
A.K. Mathur
Bench:
G.P. Mathur
,
A.K. Mathur
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  4238 of 2006

PETITIONER:
U.P. State Road Transport Corporation, Dehradun

RESPONDENT:
Suresh Pal

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 22/09/2006

BENCH:
G.P. Mathur & A.K. Mathur

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

A.K. Mathur, J.
Leave granted.
This appeal is directed against an order passed by the learned Single Judge
of the Uttaranchal High Court at Nainital in Writ Petition No. 729(M/S) of
2001 whereby learned Single Judge by order dated 28.7.2005 has confirmed
the finding of the Tribunal holding the delinquent guilty of charges but
the punishment of dismissal is not commensurate to the charges leveled
against the respondent. The learned Single Judge has reduced the punishment
from that of dismissal to that of punishment of one censure entry and
stoppage of two increments with cumulative, effect. It is, however, held
that the respondent shall not be paid back wages but the continuity of the
service shall be given to him with cumulative effect. Hence, the present
appeal has been filed by U.P. State Road Transport Corporation, Dehradun.
Brief facts are that the respondent was appointed as a Conductor on
24.7.1988. While he was carrying the bus of U.P. State Road Transport
Corporation (hereinafter referred to as `the Corporation') on 28.7.1989
from Uttarkashi to Chamoli, the bus was suddenly checked and it was found
that twenty passengers were travelling without ticket in the bus. A
chargesheet was served to him for misconduct and after holding a domestic
enquiry, he was dismissed from service w.e.f. 5.1.1990. After dismissal
from service he raised an industrial dispute. A reference was made to the
Industrial Labour Court which reads as under:
"Whether the termination of the services of the applicant/workman Shri
Suresh Pal, s/o  Nathu Ram, Conductor by the employers from 5.1.1990 is
unjustified and/or illegal? if so, to which benefit/compensation the
applicant/workman is entitled and to what

extent?"
After receipt of the reference, the Labour Court issued notices to the
parties. The Labour Court after considering the domestic enquiry found the
charges proved against the respondent and upheld the dismissal.
Aggrieved against this order the respondent filed writ petition before the
High Court of Uttaranchal at Nainital. The learned Single Judge though
confirmed the findings of Labour Court against the delinquent but reduced
the punishment as aforesaid. Hence present Special Leave Petition by the
Corporation.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
Short question for our consideration in the present case is whether the
punishment which has been modified by the learned Single Judge is justified
or not? The learned Single Judge found that the punishment awarded in the
present case is disproportionate to the guilt of the delinquent. So far as,
the guilt of the petitioner is concerned, in the domestic enquiry it has
been found that the petitioner is guilty of not issuing tickets to the
twenty passengers and the same finding of the domestic enquiry has been
upheld by the Labour Court & High Court. The petitioner was a conductor and
holding the position of trust. If incumbent like the petitioner starts
misappropriating the money by not issuing a ticket and pocketing the money
thereby causing loss to the Corporation then this is a serious misconduct.
It is unfortunate that the petitioner was appointed in 1988 and in the
first year of senvice he started indulging in  practice then what can be
expected from him in the future. If this is the state of affair in the
first year of service and if such persons are allowed to let off to the
light punishment then this will be a wrong signal to the other persons
similarly situated. Therefore, in such cases the incumbent should be weeded
out as fast as possible and same has been upheld by the Labour Court. We
are firmly of the view that such instances should not be dealt with lightly
so as to pollute the atmosphere in the Corporation and other co-workers.
Normally, courts do not substitute the punishment unless they are shocking
disproportionate if the punishment is interfered or substituted lightly in
the punishment in exercise of their extraordinary jurisdiction then it will
amount to abuse of the process of court. If such kind of misconduct is
dealt with lightly and courts start substituting the lighter punishment in
exercising the jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution then it
will give a wrong signal in the Society. All the State Road Transport
Corporations in .the country have gone in red because of the misconduct of
such kind of incumbents, therefore, it is the time that misconduct should
be dealt with iron hands and not leniently.
Learned counsel for the appellant invited our attention to a decision of
this Court in the case of
Regional Manager, U.P. S.R.T.C., Etawah & Ors. v.
Hoti Lal & Anr.
, reported in [2003] 3 SCC 605 wherein, this Court has very
categorically held that a mere statement that it is disproportionate would
not suffice to substitute a lighter punishment. This Court held as under:
"The court or tribunal while dealing with the quantum of punishment has to
record reasons as to why it is felt that the punishment was not
commensurate with the proved charges. The scope for interference is very
limited and restricted to exceptional cases. In the impugned order of the
High Court no reasons whatsoever have been indicated as to why the
punishment was considered disproportionate. Failure to give reasons amounts
to denial of justice. A mere statement that it is disproportionate would
not suffice, it is not only the amount involved but the mental set-up, the
type of duty performed and similar relevant circumstances which go into the
decision-making process while considering whether the punishment is
proportionate or disproportionate. If the charged employee holds a position
of trust where honesty and integrity are inbuilt requirements of
functioning, it would not be proper to deal with the matter leniently.
Misconduct in such cases has to be dealt with iron hands. Where the person
deals with public money or is engaged in financial transactions or acts in
a fiduciary capacity, the highest degree of integrity and trustworthiness
is a must and unexceptionable. Judged in that background, conclusions of
the Division Bench of the High Court are not proper."
In view of the above observation made by this Court there remains nothing
more to be added.
Learned counsel tor the respondent has invited our attention to a decision
of this Court in the case of
U.P. S.R.T.C.. & Ors. v. Manesh Kumar Mishra &
Ors.
, reported in [2000] 3 SCC 450. In that case this Court in peculiar
facts took lenient view of the matter and upheld the order of the High
Court whereby the punishment of dismissal was found to be shockingly
disproportionate and justified in interfering with the quantum of
punishment and directing reinstatement as against dismissal. It was also a
case of U.P. State Road Transport Corporation. Be that as it may, each case
has its own peculiar facts but in the present case we are satisfied that
the petitioner has been found squarely guilty of misconduct of not issuing
tickets to the passengers as found in the domestic enquiry. The High Court
also found that the inquiry is correct and the petitioner has been rightly
found to be guilty but the learned Single Judge has substituted a lighter
punishment.
In view of the above discussion, we are of the opinion, that the view taken
by the learned Single Judge cannot be upheld and there is no reason worth
the name to award lighter punishment. Hence, we allow this appeal, set
aside the order of the learned Single Judge and confirm the order of
dismissal passed by the Corporation.
No order as to costs.