[Cites
19
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Garg Woollen Pvt.Ltd vs State Of U.P. & Ors on 19 July, 2012
Equivalent citations: 2012 AIR SCW 4243, 2012 (11) SCC 784, 2012 (5) ALL LJ 794, AIR 2012 SC (CIVIL) 2771, (2012) 5 ALLMR 948 (SC), (2012) 6 SCALE 549, (2012) 3 ICC 794, (2012) 117 ALLINDCAS 230 (SC), (2012) 94 ALL LR 235, (2012) 5 ALL WC 5074, (2013) 3 CAL HN 133
Bench:
Fakkir Mohamed Ibrahim Kalifulla
,
G.S.Singhvi
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                        CIVIL APPEAL No.5712 OF 2002

GARG WOOLLEN PVT.LTD.                             .......APPELLANT

                                   VERSUS

STATE OF U.P. & ORS                              ......RESPONDENTS





                               J U D G M E N T
1.          This appeal is directed against order dated 09.09.1997 by  which
the Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court dismissed the  writ  petition
filed by the appellant for quashing the acquisition of its land.
2.          The appellant purchased the land comprised in Khasra  No.262  of
village Central Hope Town, Tehsil and District Dehradun by  registered  sale
deed dated 19.10.1984 for setting up  an  industrial  unit.   Its  name  was
mutated in the revenue records on 25.01.1985.
3.          The  Government  of  Uttar  Pradesh  issued  notification  dated
8.5.1985 under Section 4(1) read with
Section 17(1)
of the Land  Acquisition
Act, 1894 (for short, 'the Act') for the acquisition of over 250 acres  land
including the land purchased by the appellant  for  planned  development  of
industrial area in District Dehradun through the  agency  of  Uttar  Pradesh
State Industrial Development Corporation  (UPSIDC).  The  declaration  under
Section 6
was issued on  09.05.1985.  Special  Land  Acquisition  Collector,
Dehradun passed award dated 22.11.1986.  He  took  cognizance  of  the  fact
that industries were existing on some portions of Khasra  Nos.  235  to  238
and 262 of which possession had not been taken and observed:
"On the date of  possession  on  dated  17.3.86,  the  factories
           Everest Gas Cylinders Pvt.Ltd. and Garg Wollen  Pvt.  Ltd.  were
           found constructed and in the initial  stage  of  production  and
           located on Khasra Numbers  235,  236,  237,  238  and  262  area
           respectively 0.56 acre, 0.63 acre, 0.38 acre, 0.65 acre and 3.65
           acres; that on the land of Khasra No.262, one tin  covered  room
           was found constructed for the Textile Mill  of  Babu  Lal  Jain.
           Since, the time and constructions of the construction  of  these
           factories was a matter of dispute on 17.3.86, an  area  of  5.47
           acre was reduced  from  the  total  area  of  251.38  acres  and
           possession was taken on the reduced area of 245-91 acres and was
           handed over to the acquiring body.  Notices were also issued  to
           the factory owners but they failed to report as to when  and  in
           what circumstances, their factories were constructed. It appears
           that the aforesaid factories were constructed after the issue of
Section 4
notification and in that eventuality, the compensation
           for the construction does  not  become  payable.   Because,  the
           construction of the factories would have been done after  proper
           sanction and after taking loans etc.; and more  so  since  heavy
           machinery has already been installed and the  production  is  in
           preliminary stage; and since in these proceedings the  acquiring
           body has also the same purpose of  developing  industrial  plots
           and leasing the same for establishing industrial units,  it  has
           been discussed with the acquiring body, such acquired land shall
           be leased to the owners of the constructed factories, absorb the
           factories in its regulated area and shall decide the dispute  of
           standing factories by  mutual  arrangement  at  its  own  level.
           Therefore,  after  leaving  aside  the  constructed  areas,  the
           compensation for the land of the areas 0.56,  0.63,  0.33,  0.25
           and 3.65, i.e. total 5.47 acres from Khasra  No.235,  236,  237,
           238 and 262 respectively, whose possession have not been  handed
           over to the acquiring department yet, will  be  payable  to  the
           land-owners."
(as contained in the paper book)


The appellant challenged the acquisition proceedings in  Writ  Petition  No.
2500/1988.  In paragraphs 4 to 6 and 12 to 17  of  the  writ  petition,  the
appellant averred as under:
“4.   That for constructing  the  said  factory  and  installing
            machines therein the petitioner had taken a loan  of  Rs.  21.70
            lakhs from U.P. Financial Corporation.  The  petitioner  started
            the construction of the aforesaid building in the year 1984 with
            the help of the aforesaid loan.
5.    That the Superintending Engineer, Dehradun  sanctioned  an
           electrical power connection of 70 horse power to the  petitioner
           on 29.3.1985.
6.    That by 26.1.1985 the petitioner had incurred expenses  to
           the tune of Rs. 2,29,888/- as is clear from the  report  of  the
           Chartered Accountant dated 30-1-1985  a  true  copy  whereof  is
           being filed herewith as Annexure-III.
12. That the aforesaid acquisition  proceedings  are  in  colourable
            exercise of power and wholly illegal as is clear from the  facts
            stated hereinafter.
13. That there was no urgency in the matter. There  was  nothing  to
            show that acquisition for the alleged  "planned  development  of
            Industrial area in District Dehradun"  was  of  such  an  urgent
            nature that proceedings under
section 5-A
of the Act should have
            been dispensed with.
It may be stated that the  proceedings  under  Section  5-A  are
            themselves summary in nature.Merely giving 30 days' time to file
            objection to the proposed acquisition would in any case have not
            interfered with the proposed planned development  of  industrial
            area. There was nothing to justify exclusion  of  inquiry  under
Section 5-A
of the Act.
14. That there was no material to justify existence of  any  urgency
            for acquisition of the petitioner's land.  The  opinion  of  the
            Governor  about  the  existence  of  urgency  mentioned  in  the
            impugned notifications is based on  non-existing  materials  and
            consequently the application of
Sections 17(1)
and
17(4)
of  the
            Act to the case is  illegal.
15.  That,  while  issuing  the  impugned  notifications  the  State
            Government has not at all considered  that  the  petitioner  was
            also  using  the  land  for  an  industrial  project  which  was
            prestigious for Dehradun,  that  the  petitioner's  factory  had
            already been constructed, that the petitioner had been  advanced
            a loan of Rs. 21.70 lakhs by  the  U.P.  Financial  Corporation,
            that the petitioner had incurred an  expenditure  of  more  than
            Rs.3.8 lakhs by August 1985 on the construction of  the  factory
            etc.
16.  That the petitioner has reasons to believe that had  the  State
            Government been apprised of the  aforesaid  facts  by  the  land
            acquisition  authorities  or  had  it  taken   the   same   into
            consideration, it would never have  applied  the  provisions  of
Section 17(4)
of the Act and would not have dispensed  with  the
            inquiry under
section 5-A
of the Act.
17.   That the Petitioner's factory over plots no.262 (area 1.92
            acre)cannot disturb the alleged purpose of  planned  development
            of  industrial  area  even  if  this  plot  was  excluded   from
            acquisition. Moreover,large patches open land  are  still  lying
            vacant in the neighbourhood and are available to the U.P.  State
            Industrial Development Corporation. These patches are contiguous
            to the land sought to be acquired. Had the petitioner been given
            opportunity to file objection under
section 5
~
A  of  the  Act
,it
            would have brought oil the  aforesaid  facts  along  with  other
            facts to the notice of the State Government .”


  In the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents,  it  was  not
disputed that the appellant had established an industrial unit on  the  land
purchased by it. However, the invoking of urgency clause  was  justified  in
the following words:
"Planned Development  Scheme  in  the  backward  hilly  area  is
           urgently needed to be implemented according  to  the  Government
           policy. In view cf  the  urgency  for  the  development  in  the
           backward hill area, the Govt. considered it necessary  that  the
           proceedings under
Section 5-A
of the Land Acquisition Act may be
           dispensed with so that the land may be  acquired  without  delay
           and the development according  to  the  planned  scheme  may  be
           implemented in the area. The Deputy General Manager of the  U.P.
           State Industrial Development Corporation Ltd.  Kanpur  submitted
           the application in the proforma prescribed  for  acquisition  of
           land at village Central Hope  Town  Pargana  Pachpadan  District
           Dehradun for planned development of Industrial area through U.P.
           State Industrial Development Corporation Ltd. on  23.10.84.  The
           proposed  acquisition  was  requested  to  be  made  immediately
           without any delay, otherwise there would be delay in setting  up
           the Industries for the planned development of the backward  hill
           area in the State.”


           “The Deputy General Manager, U.P. State  Industrial  Development
           Corporation,  Kanpur  prepared  the  scheme   for   setting   up
           industries in the backward hill area of Dehradun for the planned
           development according to the policy  of  the  State  Government.
           The Deputy General Manager  of  the  Corporation  submitted  the
           requisition application to  the  State  Government  through  the
           Collector for immediate steps  so  that  land  be  acquired  and
           industries according to the planned development in the  backward
           hill may be set up soon without any  delay.   He  had  forwarded
           necessary records and details of  the  plan  to  the  Government
           through the Collector.   The  Collector  endorsed  the  plea  of
           urgency of the implementation of the planned Development  Scheme
           which was duly considered by the State Govt. and the State Govt.
           was of the opinion that  the  backward  hill  area  of  Dehradun
           should be developed in planned way without  delay  according  to
           the Government policy and it was directed under
Sections  17(1)
and
17(4)
of the Land  Acquisition  Act  to  dispense  with  the
           proceedings under
Section 5-A
of the Land Acquisition Act.   The
           Government decided about the urgency  on  material  evidence  on
           record.  The allegations contrary in the paragraph  under  reply
           are baseless and imaginary which are denied."
6.          The Division Bench of  the  High  Court  did  not  consider  the
appellant's challenge to the invoking of urgency clause  and  dismissed  the
writ petition only on the ground that the appellant had  made  an  incorrect
statement about the construction of  the  factory  prior  to  the  issue  of
notification under
Section 4(1)
and had  made  an  attempt  to  mislead  the
Court.
7.          At this stage, we  may  mention  that  this  and  the  connected
appeal being C.A. No. 5713 of 2002 - Everest  Gas  Cylinders  Pvt.  Ltd.  v.
State  of  U.P.  and  others  were  disposed  of  on  15.04.2009  by  taking
cognizance of the statement made by learned  counsel  for  UPSIDC  that  the
Corporation is willing to give the acquired land to the appellants on  lease
at the specified rates and statement of the  appellants'  counsel  that  the
offer made by the Corporation was acceptable to their clients.  However,  in
view of some controversy relating to the price mentioned  in  the  affidavit
filed on behalf of UPSIDC, the order disposing of the appeals  was  recalled
on 15.07.2011.  On the same day, interlocutory  application  filed  by  M/s.
Tirupati LPG Industries Limited for its impleadment as party-respondent  was
allowed.
8.          We have heard learned counsel for the parties  and  perused  the
record.
9.          The question whether urgency clause embodied in
Section  17
can
be invoked for the acquisition of land for  planned  industrial  development
was recently considered in Radhy Shyam (Dead) through
L.Rs.  and  others  v.
State of U.P. and others
(2011) 5 SCC 553.  In that  case,  the  Government
of Uttar Pradesh had acquired 205.0288 hectares  land  of  village  Makaura,
Pargana  Dankaur,  Tehsil  and  District  Gautam  Budh  Nagar  for   planned
industrial development of the District.  Radhy Shyam and  others  challenged
the acquisition on the ground that there was no justification to invoke  the
urgency provisions and to  dispense  with  the  application  of  Section  5A
because planned industrial development of the  district  was  not  something
which could not wait  for  few  months'  time  within  which  inquiry  under
Section 5A could have been held.  Their writ petition was dismissed  by  the
High Court by observing  that  the  averments  contained  therein  were  not
sufficient to call upon the respondents to place before the  Court  material
to justify the exercise of power under
Section 17(1)
and
17(4)
of  the  Act.
This Court examined the scheme of the  Act,  referred  to  various  judicial
precedents including the judgments in
Narayan Govind  Gavate  vs.  State  of
Maharashtra
(1977) 1 SCC 133, Munshi Singh vs. Union of India (
1973)  2  SCC
337, State of Punjab vs. Gurdial Singh
(
1980) 2 SCC 471, Union of India  vs.
Mukesh Hans
(
2004) 8  SCC  14,  Hindustan  Petroleum  Corporation  Ltd.  vs.
Darius Shapur Chenai
(2005) 7 SCC  627 and Anand Singh  vs.  State  of  U.P.
(2010) 11 SCC 242 and laid down the following propositions:
"(i)  Eminent domain is a right inherent in every  sovereign  to
           take and appropriate property belonging to  citizens  for  public
           use. To put it differently, the sovereign is entitled to reassert
           its dominion over any portion of the soil of the State  including
           private property without its owner’s consent provided  that  such
           assertion is on account of public exigency and for public good. –
Dwarkadas Shrinivas v. Sholapur  Spg.  and  Wvg.  Co.  Ltd.
,
AIR
           (1954) SC 119, Chiranjit Lal Chowdhuri  v.  Union  of  India
AIR
           (1951) SC 41 and Jilubhai Nanbhai Khachar  v.  State  of  Gujarat
(1995) Supp. (1) SCC 596.
(ii)   The legislations which provide for compulsory  acquisition
           of private  property  by  the  State  fall  in  the  category  of
           expropriatory legislation and such legislation must be  construed
           strictly –
DLF Qutab Enclave Complex Educational Charitable Trust
           v. State of Haryana
(2003) 5 SCC 622;
State  of  Maharashtra  v.
           B.E. Billimoria
(2003) 7 SCC 336 and Dev Sharan v. State of  U.P.
           (2011) 4 SCC 769.
(iii)   Though, in exercise of the power of eminent  domain,  the
           Government can acquire the private property for  public  purpose,
           it must be remembered that compulsory taking of one’s property is
           a serious  matter.   If  the  property  belongs  to  economically
           disadvantaged segment of the society  or  people  suffering  from
           other handicaps, then the Court is not only entitled but is  duty
           bound to scrutinize the action/decision of the State with greater
           vigilance, care and circumspection keeping in view the fact  that
           the landowner is likely to become landless and  deprived  of  the
           only source of his livelihood and/or shelter.
(iv)   The property of a citizen cannot be acquired by the  State
           and/or its agencies/instrumentalities without complying with  the
           mandate of
Sections 4
,
5-A
and
6
of the Act.  A  public  purpose,
           however, laudable it may be does not entitle the State to  invoke
           the urgency provisions  because  the  same  have  the  effect  of
           depriving the owner of his right to property without being heard.
Only in a case of real urgency, the State can invoke the  urgency
           provisions and dispense with the requirement of hearing the  land
           owner or other interested persons.
(v)
Section   17(1)
read   with
Section   17(4)
confers
           extraordinary power upon the State to  acquire  private  property
           without  complying  with  the  mandate  of  Section  5-A.   These
           provisions can be invoked only when the  purpose  of  acquisition
           cannot brook the delay of even a few weeks or months.  Therefore,
           before excluding the application of Section  5-A,  the  authority
           concerned must be fully satisfied  that  time  of  few  weeks  or
           months likely to be taken in conducting inquiry under Section 5-A
           will, in all probability, frustrate the public purpose for  which
           land is proposed to be acquired.
(vi)   The satisfaction of the Government on the issue of urgency
           is subjective but is a condition precedent  to  the  exercise  of
           power under
Section 17(1)
and the same can be challenged  on  the
           ground that the purpose for which the private property is  sought
           to be acquired is not  a  public  purpose  at  all  or  that  the
           exercise of power is vitiated due  to  mala  fides  or  that  the
           authorities concerned did not apply their mind  to  the  relevant
           factors and the records.
(vii)   The exercise of power by  the  Government  under
Section
           17(1)
does not necessarily result in exclusion of
Section 5-A
of
           the Act in terms of which any person interested in land can  file
           objection  and  is  entitled  to  be  heard  in  support  of  his
           objection.  The use of word “may” in sub-section (4)  of
Section
           17
makes it clear that it merely enables the Government to direct
           that the provisions of Section 5-A would not apply to  the  cases
           covered under sub-section (1) or (2) of
Section  17
.   In  other
           words, invoking of
Section 17(4)
is not a  necessary  concomitant
           of the exercise of power under
Section 17(1)
.
(viii)  The acquisition  of  land  for  residential,  commercial,
           industrial  or  institutional  purposes  can  be  treated  as  an
           acquisition for public purposes within the meaning of
Section  4
but that, by itself, does not justify the exercise  of  power  by
           the Government under
Section 17(1)
and/or 17(4).  The  Court  can
           take judicial notice of the fact  that  planning,  execution  and
           implementation  of  the  schemes  relating  to   development   of
           residential,  commercial,  industrial  or   institutional   areas
           usually take few years.  Therefore, the private  property  cannot
           be acquired for such purpose by invoking  the  urgency  provision
           contained in
Section 17(1)
.  In any case, exclusion of  the  rule
           of audi alteram partem embodied in Sections 5-A (1)  and  (2)  is
           not at all warranted in such matters.
ix) If land is acquired for the benefit of private persons, the Court
           should view the invoking of
Sections  17(1)
and/or  17(4)  with
           suspicion and carefully scrutinize  the  relevant  record  before
           adjudicating upon the legality of such acquisition."
10.         In our view, proposition Nos.(v) to (ix)  of  the  judgment  in
Radhy Shyam's case are squarely attracted  in  the  present  case  and  the
acquisition of the appellant's land is liable to  be  quashed  because  the
respondents  have  not  produced  any  material  to  show  that  the  State
Government had formed a bonafide opinion on the issue of  invoking  of  the
provisions contained in
Section  17(1)
and
17(4)
of  the  Act.   Learned
counsel for the respondents could not show as to how this case is different
from the case of Radhy Shyam in which  the  acquisition  made  for  planned
industrial development of Gautam Budh Nagar was quashed on the ground  that
the acquisition of land for industrial purpose does not justify invoking of
the urgency provisions.
11.         In the result, the appeal is allowed, the impugned order is set
aside and the acquisition of  the  appellant's  land  is  quashed.  It  is,
however, made clear that this Court has not expressed any  opinion  on  the
rights of the impleaded respondent and if any other litigation is  pending,
then the same shall be adjudicated by the  competent  Court  without  being
influenced by the observations contained in this order.
................................J.
                                                              (G.S.SINGHVI)





................................J.
                                     (FAKKIR MOHAMED IBRAHIM KALIFULLA)

NEW DELHI;
JULY 19, 2012.
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                        CIVIL APPEAL No.5713 OF 2002


EVEREST CYLINDERS PVT.LTD.                         .......APPELLANT

                                   VERSUS

STATE OF U.P. & ORS                               ......RESPONDENTS



                              O   R   D   E   R

            This appeal is directed against order  dated  09.09.1997  passed
by the Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court whereby the writ  petition
filed  by  the  appellant  questioning  the  acquisition  of  its  land  was
dismissed.
Learned counsel for  the  parties  agree  that  the  main  issue
raised in this appeal is  identical  to  the  one  raised  in  Civil  Appeal
No.5712 of 2002.
By a separate judgment  passed  today,  we  have  allowed  Civil
Appeal No.5712 of 2002 and quashed the acquisition proceedings.
For the detailed reasons recorded  in  the  aforesaid  judgment,
which shall be read as part of this order, the appeal is allowed, the  order
passed  by  the  High  Court  is  set  aside  and  the  acquisition  of  the
appellant's land is quashed.
................................J.
                                                              (G.S.SINGHVI)





................................J.
                                     (FAKKIR MOHAMED IBRAHIM KALIFULLA)
NEW DELHI;
JULY 19, 2012.