[Cites
72
, Cited by
38
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
The Additional Commissioner Of ... vs Vinayaka Cinema, Nellore on 10 August, 1977
Equivalent citations: [1977]110ITR468(AP), AIR 1978 ANDHRA PRADESH 51, 1978 TAX. L. R. 133
JUDGMENT
 

Divan, C.J.
1. These two matters have been placed before a Full Bench of five Judges in 
view of the order of reference made by a Division Bench of which one of us 
(Divan C. J.) was a member on December 1, 1976. Those two matters were 
referred to a larger Bench in view of the conflicting decisions of the different High 
Courts on the point which is involved in both these matters.
2.  The question that has to be decided is whether the provisions of
S. 187
of the Income-tax Act , 1961 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act') can be invoked 
by the Income-tax authorities, when a partnership firm is dissolved; and after the 
dissolution of the partnership firm, the business of the firm is continued by 
another partnership firm in which one or more of the partners of the dissolved 
firm have also joined and there are thus common partners between the dissolved 
firm and the new firm which continues the business of the old firm.
3.  In order to appreciate the controversies arising in both these matters, 
we will first refer to the facts in R. C. No. 22 of 1975. We are concerned in this 
case with assessment year 1969-70. The relevant accounting year is financial 
year 1968-69. The assessee is a registered firm carrying on business of running 
a cinema theatre under the name and style of "Sri Vinayaka Cinema" at Nellore. 
The partnership was constituted by a partnership deed dated April 29, 1967. This 
partnership was duly registered under the provisions of the
Income-tax Act
. 
Amongst 9 partners of the firm, Srinivasulu and his son, Kamalakara Rao were 
also partners. Kamalakara Rao was a major at the relevant time and was the 
managing partner of the firm. Srinivasulu had gifted away four out of the twelve 
shares that he held in the firm to his daughter Smt. Y.V. Ramani and had formed 
a sub-partnership with her in the firm. The sub-partnership was recognised by the 
Income-tax Department and assessments were made separately on the father 
and daughter in respect of their respective share incomes. Srinivasulu, died on 
August 17, 1968 and on that very day another partner, Subbarama Reddy, 
retired from the firm after gifting away his interest in the firm's business to one K. 
Penchala Lakshmamma. There was no clause in the partnership deed dated 
April 29, 1967 providing that, in the event of the death of one of the partners, the 
firm was not to be dissolved. Hence, as a result of the death of Srinivasulu, the 
old partnership firm stood dissolved under the provisions of the
Partnership Act
. 
By a deed dated August 19, 1968, a new partnership firm was constituted and 
under the new partnership deed, seven of the partners of the old firm together 
with two new partners, viz., Y. V. Ramani and k. Penchala Lakshmamma, started 
a new partnership firm. This new  firm was also registered under the
Income-tax 
Act
. For the assessment year 1969-70, two separate returns were filed, one for 
the period 1-4-1968 to 17-8-1968 and the other for the period 18-8-1968 to 31-3-
1969. It may be mentioned that the business of the old firm was taken over and 
continued by the new firm that came into existence under the partnership deed 
dated August 19, 1968. An application for renewal of registration was sent along 
with the return for the first period while for the second period, a fresh application 
in form 11 was filed.
4.  On those facts, the Income-tax Officer held that there was only a 
change in the constitution of the firm as contemplated by
S. 187 (2)
of the Act 
and he accordingly clubbed the incomes of the two periods and made a single 
assessment. He however granted registration to the firm that came into existence 
under the partnership deed of August 19, 1968 and allocated the profits among 
the respective partners who constituted the firm in the two different periods. 
Against this decision of the Income Tax officer, the matter was taken in appeal to 
the Appellate Assistant Commissioner. The contention of the assessee was 
accepted by the Assistant Commissioner observing that, in the absence of any 
provision in the partnership deed to continue the firm even after the death of a 
partner, the firm stood dissolved on August 17, 1968 when Srinivasalu died and 
the firm, which came into existence on August 18, 1968 was a new firm. The 
matter was taken in appeal to the Tribunal by the Revenue. The Tribunal held 
that the Appellate Assistant Commissioner was right in directing that there should 
be two separate assessments, one for the period 1-4-1968 to 17-8-1968 and the 
other 18-8-1968 to 31-3-1969. On these facts ultimately, at the instance of the 
Revenue, the following questions came to be referred to this Court for its opinion 
:
"Whether , on the facts and in the circumstances of the case 
and in view of
S. 187 (2) (e)
of the Income tax Act, 1961, a single assessment 
could not be made on the aggregate of the incomes for the two periods and the 
tax charged on such aggregate income?"
5.  In R. C. No. 67 of 1975, the facts are as follows : The assessment year 
under consideration is 1971-72. The accounting year is the financial year from 
April 1, 1970 to March 31, 1971. There were originally two partners in the firm, 
M/s Prasad Motors and Electricals. They were Ch. Suryanarayana and K. 
Sanyasiraju. Each of these two partners represented his Hindu undivided family 
in the business of the partnership firm. During the course of the financial year 
1970-71 which is the accounting year for this firm, a partition took lace in the 
family of Ch. Suryanarayana and after the partition, he retired from the 
partnership with effect from October 1, 1970. As a result of the retirement of 
Suryanarayana, it is obvious that the firm stood dissolved because the only 
partner left thereafter was K. Sanyasi Raju. A new partnership deed was 
executed on October 26, 1970, and under this deed, a new partnership firm was 
brought into existence with effect from October 1, 1970. Under this new 
partnership deed, five minors some of whom belonged to the family of 
Suryanarayana, were admitted to the benefits of the partnership and two 
strangers were taken as partners. On these facts, two returns were filed, one for 
the period 1-4-1970 to 30-9-1970 and the other for the period 1-10-1970 to 31-3-
1971. The Income-tax Officer held that there was only a change in the 
constitution of the firm with effect from October 1, 1970 and he accordingly 
clubbed the incomes of the two periods and made a single assessment on the 
income of the entire period from April 1, 1970 to March 31, 1971 under
S. 187 (2)
of the Act. The assessee took the matter in appeal and the Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner confirmed the order of the Income-tax Officer. The assessee 
carried the matter in further appeal to the Tribunal and the Tribunal held that, on 
the retirement of Suryanarayana, the firm which existed till then between 
Suryanarayana and Sanyasi Raju was dissolved and what was brought into 
existence on October 1, 1970 was entirely a new firm and hence the provisions 
of
S. 187 (2)
were not applicable. The Tribunal directed that there should be two 
separate assessments on the two firms, one on the old firm from April 1, 1970 to 
September 30, 1970 and the other on the new firm, which came into existence 
under the partnership deed of October 26, 1970, for the period October 1, 1970 
to March 31, 1971. Thereafter, at the instance of the Revenue, the following 
question has been referred to this Court for its opinion:
"Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, 
there was a change in the constitution of the earlier firm on 1-10-1970 in terms of
S. 187 (2)
of the Income-tax Act, 1961, or whether the firm that came into 
existence on that date under the deed dated 26-10-1970 was a new firm which 
succeeded the earlier firm in terms of
S. 188
of the Act." It is obvious from the 
narration of facts set out hereinabove that the main question that we have to 
consider is the effect of the provisions of
S. 187 (2)
of the Income-tax Act when, 
under the provisions of the
Partnership Act
, a firm is dissolved.
6.  In order to appreciate the controversy that has arisen, it will be 
necessary to refer to some of the provisions of the
Income-tax Act
. Sub-sec. (23) 
of
S. 2
says that the words 'firm,' 'partner' and 'partnership' have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in the
Indian Partnership Act, 1932
(9 of 1932); but 
the expression 'partner' shall also include any person who, being a minor has 
been admitted to the benefits of partnership. It is thus clear that a departure to 
this limited extent from the provisions of the
Partnership Act
has been made by 
the
Income-tax Act
, because under the provisions of the
Partnership Act
, a minor 
can only be admitted to the benefits of the partnership, but cannot be a partner 
because partnership requires an agreement between the partners and the minor 
cannot enter into a contract because of the provisions of
S. 11
of the Contract 
Act. Under that section of the
Contract Act
, a contract by the minor would be void 
and hence the
Partnership Act
provides that a minor can only be admitted to the 
benefits of the partnership; but he cannot become a partner. For the purpose of 
the
Income-tax Act
, however a minor admitted to the benefits of the partnership 
is also a partner.
7.  Under
S. 2 (31)
, 'person' includes by cl. (Iv) a firm and
S. 4
of the Act, 
which is the charging section, provides that, where any Central Act enacts that 
income-tax shall be charged for any assessment year at any rate or rates, 
income-tax at that rate or those rates shall be charged for that year in 
accordance with and subject to the provisions of the Act in respect of the total 
income of the previous year or previous years as the case may be, of every 
person. By virtue of the definition of the word 'person' it is obvious that a firm, as 
distinguished from the partners constituting the firm is an assessable entity and 
can be assessed as such.
Chapter XVI of the Act
contains special provisions 
applicable to firms. This chapter consists of Ss. 182 to 189 (both inclusive).
Section 182
provides for assessment of registered firms and
Section 183
provides for assessment of unregistered firms.
Section 184
provides for 
application for registration of firms.
Section 185
deals with the procedure on 
receipt of application for registration or renewal of registration and
S. 186
deals 
with cancellation of registration.
Sections 187
,
188
and
189
are in the part of 
Chap. XVI, which is designated as Part-C with the heading "Changes in 
constitution, succession and dissolution."
Section 187 (1)
is in these terms:
"187  (1) Where at the time of making an assessment under
S. 143
or
S. 144
it is found that a change has occurred in the constitution of a 
firm, the assessment shall be made on the firm as constituted at the time of 
making the assessment:
Provided that
(i)  the income of the previous year shall, for the purposes of 
inclusion in the total incomes of the partners, be apportioned between the 
partners who, in such previous year, were entitled to receive the same; and
(ii)  when the tax assessed upon a partner cannot be recovered from him, 
it shall be recovered from the firm as constituted at the time of making the 
assessment."
Section 188
provides for succession of one firm by another firm. It may be 
pointed out that
S. 170
of the Act provides for succession to business otherwise 
than on death and it deals with all persons and not merely with succession of one 
firm by another. Under
S. 188
, where a firm carrying on a business or profession 
is succeeded by another firm, and the case is not one covered by
S. 187
, 
separate assessments shall be made on the predecessor firm and the successor 
firm in accordance with the provisions of
S. 170
. Therefore, it is obvious that
S. 
188
is a specific provision which has to be applied when there is a succession of 
one firm by another as distinguished from a change in the constitution of the firm 
and  the case is not one covered by
S. 187
.
Section 189
deals with a situation 
when the firm is dissolved or the business of a firm has been discontinued and 
under sub-s. (1), where any business or profession carried on by a firm has been 
discontinued or where a firm is dissolved, the Income-tax Officer shall make an 
assessment of the total income of the firm as if no such discontinuance or 
dissolution had taken place, and all the provisions of the Act including the 
provisions relating to the levy of a penalty or any other sum chargeable under 
any provisions of the Act shall apply, so far as may be, to such assessment.
8.  At this stage, it will be relevant to refer to some of the provisions of the
Indian Partnership Act, 1932
.
Section 4
provides that  "partnership" is the relation 
between persons who have agreed to share the profits of a business carried on 
by all or any or them acting for all Persons who have agreed to share the profits 
of a business carried on by all or any or them acting for all Persons who have 
entered into partnership with one another are called 'individually 'partners' and 
collectively 'a firm' and the name under which their business is carried on is 
called the 'firm name'.
Chapter V of the Partnership Act
deals with incoming and 
outgoing partners.
Section 31
deals with introduction of a partner and it says that, 
subject to contract between the partners and to the provisions of
S. 30
, no 
person shall be introduced as a partner into a firm without the consent of all the 
existing partners. Under
S. 32 (1)
, a partner may retire with the consent of all the 
other partners, in accordance with an express agreement by the partners or 
where  the partnership is at will, by giving notice in writing to all the other partners 
of his intention to retire.
Section 33
provides for expulsion of a partner.
Section 
34 (1)
provides that, where under a contract between the partners the firm is not 
dissolved by the adjudication of a partner as an insolvent, the estate of a partner 
so adjudicated is not liable for any act of the firm and the firm is not liable for any 
act of the insolvent, done after the date on which the order of adjudication is 
made.
Section 35
provides that, where under a contract between the partners the 
firm is not dissolved by the death of a partner, the estate of a deceased partner is 
not liable for any act of the firm done after his death.
Chapter VI of the 
Partnership Act
provides for dissolution of a firm and under
S. 39
, the dissolution 
of partnership between all the partners of a firm is called the 'dissolution of the 
firm'.
Section 42
provides:
"Subject to contract between the partners a firm is dissolved-
(a) if constituted for a fixed term, by the expiry of that 
term;
(b) if constituted to carry out one or more adventures or undertakings, by 
the completion thereof;
(c) by the death of a partner; and
(d) by the adjudication of a partner as an insolvent."
It is therefore clear that, subject to contract between the partners, a firm is 
dissolved by the death of a partner or by the adjudication of a partner as an 
insolvent. If, under the partnership deed or any other agreement entered into 
between the partners before the date of the death of one of the partners or 
before the date of the adjudication of one of the partners as an insolvent, it is 
agreed between the partners inter se that the firm shall not be dissolved on the 
death or on the adjudication of one of the partners as an insolvent, the firm would 
continue.
9. Mr. Rama Rao, the learned counsel for the Revenue has emphasised 
before us that the words "cease to be partners" which occur in
S. 187 (2) (a)
of 
the Income-tax Act, are also to be found in the
Partnership Act
, because it is 
obvious that, if one or more of the partners cease to be partners or one or more 
new partners are admitted in a firm which exists and continues both under the
Partnership Act
as well as under the
Income-tax Act
, there is a mere change in 
the constitution of the firm and there is no new firm which comes into existence. 
In this case, we cannot do better than refer to the observations of Sir John 
Beaumont delivering the opinion of their Lordships of the Privy Council in 
Bhagavanji v.  Alembic Works, AIR P. C. 100. In para 10 at P. 101 of the report, it 
was observed:
"Before the Board it was argued that under the
Indian 
Partnership Act, 1932
, a firm is recognised as an entity apart from the persons 
constituting it, and that the entity continues so long as the firm exists and 
continues to carry on its business. It is true that the
Indian Partnership Act
goes 
further than the English Partnership Act, 1890 in recognising that a firm may 
possess a personality distinct from the persons constituting it, the law in India in 
that respect being more in accordance with the law of Scotland, than with that of 
England. But the fact that a firm possesses a distinct personality does not involve 
that the personality continues unchanged so long as the business of the firm 
continues. The Indian Act, like the
English Act
, avoids making a firm a corporate 
body enjoying the right of perpetual succession."
To the same effect are the observations of the Supreme Court in
Commr. 
of Income-tax v. A. W. Figgies and Co.  Mahajan J. (As
he then was) speaking for the Supreme Court, 
observed:
"It is true that under the law of partnership a firm has no legal 
existence apart from its partners and it is merely a compendious name to 
describe its partners but it is also equally true that under that law there is no 
dissolution of the firm by the mere incoming or outgoing of partners. A partner 
can retire with the consent of the other partners and a person can be introduced 
in the partnership by the consent of the other partners. The reconstituted firm can 
carry on its business in the same firm's name till dissolution. The law with respect 
to retiring partners as enacted in the
Partnership Act
is to a certain extent a 
compromise between the strict doctrine of English Common Law which refuses 
to see anything in the firm but a collective name for individuals carrying on 
business in partnership and the mercantile usage which recognises the firm as a 
distinct person or quasi Corporation."
Mr. Rama Rao drew our attention to Black's Law Dictionary, Fourth 
Edition, page 282 where the word "cease" has been defined to mean to stop, to 
become extinct, to pass away, to come to an end. Similarly in Webster's 
International Dictionary the word 'cease' had been defined to mean a 
discontinuance or a temporary or final ceasing. In Corpus Juris Secundum, 
volume 14, at page 58, the word 'cease' has been defined to mean to become 
extinct or pass away, to come to an end, or stop. Mr. Rama Rao also drew our 
attention to the fact that
S. 37
of the Partnership Act mentions the words 'ceased 
to be a partner.'
Section 45 (1)
of the Partnership Act provides for liability for acts 
of partners done after dissolution, and it says:
"45.  (1) Notwithstanding the dissolution of a firm, the 
partners continue to be liable as such to third parties for any act done by any of 
them which would have been an act of the firm if one before the dissolution, until 
public notice is given of the dissolution.
Provided that the estate of a partner who dies, or who is adjudicated an 
insolvent or of a partner who, not having been known to the person dealing with 
the firm to be a partner, retires from the firm, is not liable under this section for 
acts done after the date on which he ceases to be a partner."
It is true that, in the limited context of
S. 45 (1)
of the Partnership Act, even 
on dissolution of Partnership because of the other provisions of the
Partnership 
Act
, the partner, who died, can be said to have ceased to be a partner. Such 
cessasion may either be because of the death of a partner or because of 
adjudication of a partner as an insolvent or because of retirement of a partner. In 
the context of
S. 45 (1)
the words "ceased to be a partner" are undoubtedly used 
to cover all these three contingencies.
10. At this stage, before starting discussion on the different authorities to 
which our attention has been drawn, it is necessary to refer to the analogous 
provisions of the
Income-tax Act, 1922
(hereinafter referred to as '1922 Act').
Under
S. 26  (1)
.
"Where, at the time of making an assessment under
S. 23
, it 
is found that a change has occurred in the constitution of a firm or that a firm has 
been newly constituted, the assessment shall be made on the firm as constituted 
at the time of making the assessment."
The two provisos to sub-sec. (2) of
S. 26
provided for succession of a 
business and it says that, where a person carrying on any business, profession 
or vocation has been succeeded in such capacity by another person, such 
person and such other person shall, subject to the provisions of sub-sec. (4) of
S. 
25
, each be assessed in respect of his actual share, if any, of the income, profits 
and gains of the previous year. It is obvious from what we have stated above that 
the provisions of
S. 26 (1)
of 1922 Act had been re-enacted as S. 187 (1) of 1961 
Act and an important change is that, whereas
Section 26 (1)
spoke of a change 
in the constitution of the firm and also of the firm being newly constituted under 
1961 Act, provision is made only for a change in the constitution of the firm and it 
does not deal with the eventuality of a firm being newly constituted. This change 
as between the provisions of 1922 Act and 1961 Act is very material, because if 
the provisions of
S. 26 (1)
of 1922 Act are borne in mind, the distinction between
S. 26 (1)
of the 1922 Act and S. 187 (1) of 1961 Act will clearly remain in the 
forefront.
11. To deal in a chronological order with the authorities under the Income-
tax Act, we will refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in Commr. of Income-
tax v.
A. W. Figgies and Co.
(supra). The Court there was 
concerned with succession under
S. 26 (1)
and the question was one of the 
applicability of
S. 25 (4)
and
S. 26 (1)
of the 1922 Act, Mahajan, J., (as he then 
was) speaking for the Supreme Court, observed at page 409 of the report; AIR 1953 SC 456:
"But under the
Income-tax Act
, the position is somewhat 
different. A firm can be charged as a distinct assessable entity as distinct from its 
partners who can also be assessed individually."
After referring to the charging
S. 3
of 1922 Act analogous to the charging
S. 
4
of 1961 Act, Mahajan J. Observed (at p.456 of AIR):
"The partners of the firm are distinct assessable entities, 
while the firm as such is a separate and distinct unit for purposes of assessment.
Sections 26
,
48
and
55
of the Act fully bear out this position. These provisions of 
the Act go to show that the technical view of the nature of a partnership under 
English law or Indian law, cannot be taken in applying the law of income tax. The 
true question to decide is one of identity of the unit assessed under the Income-
tax Act. 1918 which paid double tax in the year 1939, with the unit to whose 
business the private limited company succeeded in the year 1947."
12.
In
Shivram Poddar v. Income-tax Officer
,  the Supreme Court was concerned with the discontinuance of business of a 
firm and the provisions of
S. 26 (1)
and other connected provisions of 1922 Act. 
Shah, J. (As he then was ) speaking for the Supreme Court, observed at p. 827 
of the report (51 ITR): (at p. 1098 of AIR):
"Discontinuance of business has the same connotation in
S. 
44
as it has in
S. 25
of the Act; it does not cover mere change in ownership or in 
the constitution of the unit of assessment.
Section 44
is, therefore, attracted only 
when the business of a firm is discontinued. i.e. when there is complete 
cessation of the business and not when there is a change in the ownership of the 
firm, or in its constitution, because by reconstitution of the firm no change is 
brought in the personality of the firm, and succession to the business and not 
discontinuance of the business results. Under the ordinary law governing 
partnerships, modification in the constitution of the firm in the absence of a 
special agreement to the contrary amounts to dissolution of the firm and 
reconstitution thereof, a firm at common law being a group of individuals who 
have agreed to share the profits of a business carried on by all or any of them 
acting for all , and supersession of the agreement brings about an end of the 
relation.
But the Income-tax Act
recognises a firm for purposes of assessment as 
a unit independent of the partners constituting it; it invests the firm with a 
personality which survives reconstitution. A firm discontinuing its business may 
be assessed in the manner provided by
Section 25 (1)
in the year of account in 
which it discontinues its business; it may also be assessed in the year of 
assessment. In either case, it is the assessment of the income of the firm. Where 
the firm is dissolved, but the business is not discontinued, there being change in 
the constitution of the firm, assessment has to be made under
S. 26 (1)
, and if 
there be succession to the business, assessment has to be made under
S. 26
92). The provisions relating to assessment on reconstituted or newly constituted 
firms,and on succession to the business are obligatory. Therefore, even when 
there is change in the ownership of the business carried on by a firm on 
reconstitution or because of a new constitution, assessment must still be made 
upon the firm."
13. Mr. Rama Rao for the Revenue has very strongly relied upon the 
particular words in the above passage,which we have underlined; but it must not 
be forgotten that it was while dealing with the provisions of
S. 26 (1)
which dealt 
with both changes occurring in the constitution of the firm and a newly-
constituted firm that those observations were made. Assessment undoubtedly 
had to be made under
S. 26 (1)
when there was a change in the constitution of 
the firm and when a firm was newly constituted. If a partnership firm was 
dissolved and the business of the firm was continued by another firm under the 
provisions of 1922 Act, since there would be a newly constituted firm as 
distinguished from a change of the constitution of the firm, the provisions of
S. 26 
(1)
of 1922 Act had to be invoked. But the question is whether, with the change in 
the provisions of
S. 26 (1)
by the dropping of the reference "a newly-constituted 
firm" occurring in
S. 26 (1)
, the above observations of the Supreme Court have 
any force to the provisions of S. 187 (1) of 1961 Act. We are unable to accept the 
contention of Mr. Rama Rao that S. 187 (1) would cover the case of a firm which 
is dissolved, but its business has been continued by a new firm, though some of 
the partners of the new firm may be common to the old firm as well.  We see no 
reason to apply the above observations of the Supreme Court, particularly the 
underlined words to the language of S. 187 (1) of 1961 Act. Those observations 
were made in the context of the language of
S. 26 (1)
of 1922 Act where the 
language and scheme of the section were entirely different.
14. The decision in
Shivram Poddar
's case  was 
followed by the Supreme Court in
Commr. of Income-tax v. Kirkend Coal Co.,  Shah, J.
, (as he then was) speaking for the Supreme Court quoted 
extensively from the decision in
Shivram Poddar
's case supra and the passages 
which we have extracted from that decision were also extracted by Shah, J., in
Commr. of Income-tax v. Kirkend Coal Co.
.
For 
the reasons which we have set out hereinabove, the decision in
Commr. of 
Income-tax  v. Kirkend Coal Co.
which was 
delivered in the context of the provisions of
Section 26 (1)
and
Section 44
of the 
1922 Act., cannot entirely help us in interpreting the provisions of S. 187 (1) 
which depart from the provisions of
S. 26 (1)
of 1922 Act in very material 
particulars, as we have pointed out above.
15. We may however refer to another decision of the Supreme Court in
Commr. of Income-tax v. K. H. Chambers
. The 
question was what was meant by succession in the context of the
Income-tax 
Act
.
Subba Rao, J. (As he then was) quoted with approval, at page 680 of the 
report, (of 55 ITR); (at pp. 973, 974 of AIR 1965 SC) from the decision of Finlay 
J. in Malayalam Plantations Ltd. v. Clark (1935) 19 Tax Cas 314. The passage 
from the decision of Finlay, J., is in these terms:
"The substance of what was done, I think clearly was this. 
The thing was taken over as a going concern, taken over with the things growing 
on it, and with the coolies employed to work the estate. I am not going into it any 
further because it is essentially a question of fact, but I cannot avoid the view that 
there was material upon which commissioners might arrive at the conclusion that 
there was a succession."
16. Commenting upon this observation of Finlay, J., Subba Rao, J. (As he 
then was ) observed:-
"This is an authority for the position that if a business was 
taken over as a going concern the mere fact that some assets, which were not 
required by the successor for the carrying on of the business, were not 
transferred to him would not make it any the less a succession in law. It is not 
necessary to multiply decisions. Succession involves change of ownership; that 
is, the transferor goes out and the transferee comes in; it connotes that the whole 
business is transferred; it also implies that substantially the identity and the 
continuity of the business are preserved. If there is a transfer of a business, any 
arrangement between the transferor and the transferee in respect of some of the 
assets and liabilities not with a view to enable the transferor to run a part of the 
business transferred out to enable the transferee to run the business 
unhampered by the load of debts or for any other appropriate collateral purpose 
cannot detract from the totality of succession."
This decision of the Supreme Court points out that, if there is any change 
of ownership in the sense of the transferor going out and the transferee coming 
in and at the same time substantially the identity and the continuity of the 
business have been preserved, there would be a succession as distinguished 
from mere continuance of the firm if the transferor and the transferee are 
partnership firms.
17. We may point out that, apart from these decisions of the Supreme 
Court which we have just now noted, under
S. 26 (1)
of the 1922 Act, there has 
been no decision of the Supreme Court regarding the provisions of S. 187 (1) of 
the 1961 Act and hence we will first notice the provisions of Ss. 187, 188 and 189 
in the context in which they occur in 1961 Act and then consider how the High 
Courts including this Court have dealt with this aspect of the law.
18. Section 187 which we have set out hereinabove deals with change in 
constitution of a firm. The very concept of change in the constitution of a firm 
envisages that the same identical firm continues as before, but there is a change 
in the composition of the firm or as Section 184 (7) and S. 187 (2) (b) point out, 
there  may be an alteration in the shares inter se of the partners of the firm. The 
change in the constitution of the firm in the sense of continuity being maintained 
and the identity of the firm being maintained is contemplated by the provisions of 
Ss. 31 to 35 of the partnership Act. The firm does not get dissolved as a result of 
the change in the constitution of the firm. There may be the introduction of a new 
partner or there may be the retirement of a partner or there may be expulsion of 
a partner or where there is a contract to the contrary, the partnership does not 
get dissolved even on the death of a partner. Similarly, if a partner is adjudicated 
an insolvent, and there is a provision to the contrary between the partners that 
the insolvency of one of the partners is not to bring about a dissolution of the 
firm, such adjudication of one of the partners as an insolvent may also bring 
about a change in the constitution of the firm because the insolvent ceases to be 
a partner of the firm; but the firm will not be dissolved. The very basic concept 
underlying S. 187 (i) is that one and the same firm must be continuing throughout 
the assessment year under consideration. But there is a change in the 
constitution of the firm, though the firm, as an entity, continues as one and single 
entity throughout the period. If the firm ceases to exist, the relationship of 
partners inter se comes to an end and therefore the firm can no longer be said to 
continue as before. Since the continuance or the existence of the firm is the basic 
concept underlying S. 187 (10 which speaks of a change in the constitution of the 
firm, it is obvious that the provisions of S. 187 (2), which defines "for the 
purposes of this section" what is meant by change in the constitution of the firm, 
cannot go contrary to the basic concept underlying S. 187 (1). Clause (a) of 
Section 187 (2) provides that, for the purposes of this section, there is a change 
in the constitution of the firm if one or more of the partners cease to be partners 
or one or more new partners are admitted. In such circumstances, one or more of 
the persons who were partners of the firm before the change continue as partner 
or partners after the change. Similarly, where all the partners continued with a 
change in their respective shares or in the shares of some of them, there is a 
mere change in the constitution of the firm. It is obvious that, if the words "if one 
or more of the partners cease to be partners" are understood in the sense of the 
provisions of the
Sections in Chapter V of the Partnership Act
without doing 
violence to the underlying concept of S. 187 (1) the notions of the Partnership Act 
and the Income-tax Act can be reconciled. There is nothing in the
Income-tax Act
which compels us to take a different view and which compels us to hold that the 
scheme of these sections and the basic concept under the
Partnership Act
are 
departed from when the legislature enacted S. 187 (1). The words "for the 
purposes of this Section" occurring at the commencement of S. 187 (2) cannot 
serve the purpose of a non obstante clause, as has been contended by Mr. 
Rama Rao. There is no provision in the
Partnership Act
which contemplates that, 
by a mere change in the constitution of the firm by virtue of the provisions of the
Partnership Act
, a firm can be said to be continued, as the two concepts are 
diametrically opposed to each other. If there is a dissolution, the firm comes to an 
end and if a firm comes to an end, there cannot be a continuity of the firm as it 
stood prior to its dissolution and therefore, after the dissolution, there cannot be 
said to be a mere change in the constitution of a firm.
19. It may be pointed out that S. 189 (1) deals  with a situation where any 
business or profession carried on by a firm has been discontinued or where a 
firm is dissolved and the liabilities of the firm which has been dissolved or the 
liabilities of the firm which has discontinued its business or the income of the firm 
which has been dissolved or the income of the firm which has been dissolved or 
the income of the firm which has discontinued its business are to be adjusted in 
the light of S. 189 (1). It is, therefore, difficult to accept the contention urged on 
behalf of the Revenue that S. 187 also contemplates a situation where a firm has 
been dissolved because of the provisions of the
Partnership Act
. It may be 
pointed out that, once a firm is dissolved under sub-sec. (8) of S. 184, a fresh 
registration will have to be applied for. Even if there is a change in the 
constitution of the firm, the firm has to apply for fresh registration. We are merely 
referring to the provisions of S. 184 with a view to point out that the notions and 
concepts in the
Partnership Act
are not totally to be overlooked when considering 
the provisions of the 1961 Act. Moreover,
S. 2 (23)
requires the words 'firm,' 
'partner' and 'partnership to be interpreted in the same manner as has been done 
in the
Partnership Act
. Once a firm is dissolved in view of the provisions of the
Partnership Act
, it is obvious that that firm comes to an end and there cannot be 
said to be a change in the constitution of such a firm just because after the 
dissolution of the firm, by virtue of a new agreement between some of the 
partners of the dissolved firm, the business of the firm is continued and the new 
firm takes over the business of the old firm.
It is possible to urge that, in the event 
of a firm being dissolved under the provisions of the
Partnership Act
, if some o 
the partners of the dissolved firm agree to restart the business by virtue of a new 
agreement, there is a newly-constituted firm but the words 'a newly-constituted 
firm" which were present in
S. 26 (1)
of the 1922 Act are absent from S. 187 (1) 
of the 1961 Act. Under these circumstances, by a mere process of interpretation, 
it obviously follows that the basic concept underlying S. 187 is a continuity of a 
firm as an entity. Once dissolution comes about, the provisions of S. 187 can 
never apply. Therefore, the decision in
Shivram Poddar v. Income-tax Officer
supra and
Commr. of Income-tax v. Kirkend Coal Co.
supra both decided by the Supreme Court, cannot help the 
Income-tax authorities in such an eventuality.
20. We may point out that the Madras High Court in Kaithari Lungi Stores 
v. Cjommr. of Income-tax 104 ITR 160: (1977 Tax LR 354 (Mad)) dealt with the 
provisions of S. 187 and Ramaswami J. speaking for the Division Bench of the 
Madras High Court, observed at page 164 of the report (104 ITR) : (at p. 356 of 
1977 Tax LR) :
"A change in the constitution of a firm must be distinguished 
from the dissolution of the firm. The distinction was clearly brought out by this 
Court in
Tyresoles (India) Calcutta v. Commr. of Income-tax
, (1963) 49 ITR 515 
(Mad) and the following passage in that Judgement is worth quoting:
"The dissolution and reconstitution of a partnership are two 
different legal concepts. The dissolution puts an end to the partnership, but 
reconstitution keeps it subsisting, though in another form. A dissolution followed 
by some of the erstwhile partners taking over the assets and liabilities of the 
dissolved Partnership and forming themselves into a Partnership is not 
reconstitution of the original Partnership. The Partnership formed after the 
dissolution is a new Partnership and not a continuation of the old Partnership for 
it would be contradiction in terms to say that what ceased to exist was continued 
A reconstitution of a firm or Partnership necessarily implies that the firm never 
became extinct. What it denotes is a structural alteration of the membership of 
the firm, by addition or reduction of members, and an incidental redistribution of 
the shares of the partners."
21. Ramaswami, J. Further observed:
"In our opinion, the words "ceasing to be partners" in S. 187 
(2) would also include a case of death of a partner when such death, by reason 
of a contract to the contrary or by reason of any law, did not bring about the 
dissolution of the Partnership."
The learned Judges of the Madras High Court declined to accept the view 
propounded by Seth, J. in
Dahi Laxmi Dal Factory v. Income-tax Officer
103 ITR 
517: (1975 Tax LR 132) (All) (FB). We respectfully agree with the conclusions of 
the learned Judges of the madras High Court because, on our own analysis of 
the wording of the Sections, we have come to the same conclusions.
22. We will now examine in chronological order the decisions of the 
different High Courts delivered in the context of S. 187.
In
Dharam Pal Sat Dev v. 
Commr. of Income-tax
a Division Bench of the Punjab 
and Haryana High Court dealt with a situation where three partners were carrying 
on the Partnership business and one of the partners died. The remaining two 
partners and the son of the deceased entered into Partnership after the death of 
the deceased partner and they carried on the same business as previous 
Partnership. There was no clause in the Partnership deed before the death of the 
partner providing for non-dissolution of the firm in the event of the death of one of 
the partners. On these facts, the Division Bench held that the provisions of the
Partnership Act
can be referred to only if it is found that a particular situation is 
not covered by the provisions of the
Income-tax Act
. A particular case can be 
covered by
S. 188
of the Act only when it is a succession of one firm by another, 
meaning thereby that there is a complete change and no one of the partners in 
the previous firm continued to be a partner in the latter firm, which was not the 
case before the Division Bench.
Bhopinder Singh Dhillon, J. delivering the 
judgement of the Division Bench, referred to the decisions of the Supreme Court 
in
Commr. of Income-tax v. Kirkend Coal Co.
supra and 
Shivram Poddar v. Income-tax Officer (AIR 1954 SC 1075) supra and it appears 
from the decision of the Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court, 
that the learned Judges did not distinguish between
S. 26 (1)
of the 1922 Act and 
S. 187 (1) of the 1961 Act and reproduced the observations of the Supreme 
Court in
Shivaram Poddar
's case (at p. 1098 of Air) supra :
"Where the firm is dissolved, but the business is not 
discontinued, there being a change in the constitution of the firm, assessment 
has to be made under
S. 26 (1)
, and if there be succession to the business, 
assessment has to be made under
S. 26 (2)
."
We have already pointed out that those observations in
Shivram Poddar
's 
case supra cannot apply to cases arising under S. 187 (1) of the 1961 Act. With 
great respect to the learned Judge of the Punjab and Haryana High Court, we 
are unable to accept their reasoning regarding S. 187 (1).
23. The next decision in point of time is the majority decision of the Full 
Bench of the Allahabad High Court in
Dahi Laxmi Dal Factory v. Income-tax 
Officer
1975
Tax LR 132 (All) (FB
) supra. The majority of the learned Judges 
there held that
S. 187
of the Income-tax Act 1961 applies only where a firm is 
reconstituted in accordance with Ss. 31 and 32 of the
Indian Partnership Act
, 
namely, when a new partner if taken in or an existing partner retires with the 
consent of all the partners or without their consent if the contract of Partnership 
so provides. But where a firm is dissolved either by agreement of the partners or 
by operation of law and another firm takes over the business, that will be a case 
of succession governed by
Section 188
of the Act, even though some of the 
partners of the two firms are common. In the case before the Full Bench of the 
Allahabad High Court, the old firm was constituted by two partners. One of them 
died and there was no stipulation in the partnership deed that the firm shall not 
stand dissolved on the death of a partner. Even if there had been such a 
stipulation, the firm could not have been saved from dissolution, because after 
the death of one of the partners, only one partner was left and one man cannot 
constitute a firm. The firm automatically came to an end. Since the erstwhile firm 
stood dissolved on the death of one of the partners, the new firm which took over 
the same business could be assessed only in accordance with S. 188 and a 
single assessment for the whole year was not valid. With respect, we agree with 
the learned Judges who delivered the majority decision of the Full Bench of the 
Allahabad High Court, but we differ from them only to the limited extent that the 
reconstitution of the firm is covered not only by Ss. 31 and 32 of the
Partnership 
Act
but also by the other provisions of
Chapter V of the Partnership Act
under 
which because of a contract to the contrary a firm is not dissolved even on the 
death of one of the partners of the firm or on the adjudication of a partner as an 
insolvent.
We agree with the comment of the learned Judges of the madras High 
Court in
Kaithari Lungi Stores v. Commr. of Income-tax
(1977
Tax 354 (mad
)) 
(supra) about this majority decision of the Full Bench of the Allahabad High 
Court; but barring this divergence of views between ourselves and the majority of 
the learned Judges of the Allahabad High Court as to when there can be said to 
be a change in the constitution of a firm viz., whether only under the provisions of 
Ss. 31 and 32 of the
Partnership Act
or whether under the other provisions of
Chapter V of the Partnership Act
as well, we agree with the conclusions of the 
learned Judges of the Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court.
24. In Addl.
Commr. of Income-tax Gujarat v. Harjivandas Hathibhai
, 1976 
Tax LR 1107 (Guj) a Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court to which one of us 
(Divan C. J. ) was a party, the provisions of S. 187 were considered, and it was 
held (at p. 1112 Para 7) :
"Even though a partner retires, the firm continues as before. 
What is meant by a change in the constitution of the firm is coming in of a new 
partner with the consent of all the existing partners or by the retirement of a 
partner with the consent of all the partners. In such cases there is a mere change 
in the constitution of the firm and nothing more. The same firm continues as 
before. The question of dissolution of the firm either by operation of law or by act 
of parties is a different thing altogether. When a firm is dissolved, the old 
relationship comes to and end and a new relationship comes into existence and if 
the succeeding Partnership firm continues the old business, then there is 
succession of one firm by another as contemplated by Section 188. Sub-sec. (2) 
of S. 187 merely specifies two kinds of changes in the constitution of the firm. 
Clause (a) of sub-sec. (2) of S. 187 refers to the continuance of the firm on one 
or more of the partners ceasing to be partners or one or more new partners being 
admitted. It deals with cases of retirement of partners and introduction of new 
partners but the firm would continue in such a case. Therefore, all that sub-sec 
(2) of S. 187 points out is that with the retirement of one or more of the partners 
so long as one of the old partners continues and with the introduction of new 
partners there is a mere change in the constitution of the firm."
25. At page 1112 of the report, the Division Bench of the Gujarat High 
Court pointed out:
"Even apart from the decision of the learned Judges of the 
Allahabad High Court in the Full Bench decision
referred to above
(
Dahi Laxmi 
Dal Factory
's case (1975 Tax LR 132 (All)) (FB) it is obvious on general 
principles that unless the words of the
Income-tax Act
compel us to do so, it 
would not be correct to depart from the well-known principles of Partnership law. 
The Partnership law contemplates retirement of a partner and even though a 
partner retires the firm continues as before. What is meant by a change in the 
constitution of the firm is coming in of a new partner with the consent of all the 
existing partners or by the retirement of a partner with the consent of all the 
partners; in such cases there is a mere change in the constitution of the firm and 
nothing more. The same firm continues as before."
26. We are in agreement with this conclusion of the learned Judges of the 
Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court.
27. In Addl.
Commr. of Income-tax v. Visakha Flour Mills
(ii) 1977 Tax LR 
41 (Andh Pra) a Full Bench of this Court consisting of one of us (Raghuvir J.) 
Kondaiah and Gangadhara Rao, JJ. held (at p. 47):
"A change in the constitution of a firm within the meaning of 
S. 187 would occur where (i) one of the partners voluntarily retires or is expelled 
leaving the remaining partners to continue the business, or (ii) a new partner is 
introduced with the consent of the existing partners or (iii) all the partners 
continue as before but with re-adjustment or reallocation of shares of one or 
more or all of them, or (iv) one of the partners dies. Under
S. 42 (6)
of the 
Partnership Act, the firm gets dissolved if any one of the partners dies when 
there is no specific agreement in the deed of partnership to the effect that 
notwithstanding the death of any one of the partners, the firm continues to do its 
business with the remaining partners."
It was further held by the Full Bench:
"If there is conflict between the provisions of the
Income-tax 
Act
and those under the
Partnership Act
, the provisions of the
Income-tax Act
would prevail over those of the
Partnership Act
."
Pausing here we are in agreement with this proposition of law; but as 
pointed out earlier, in fact, there is no conflict between the provisions of
S. 187 
(1)
of the Income-tax Act and the provisions of the
Partnership Act
, when one 
bears in mind the basic concept underlying the provisions of S. 187, viz. the 
continuity of the firm as an entity in the eye of law. The Full Bench further 
observed:
"A close and combined reading of Ss. 187 and 188 does not 
warrant or justify the assumption that S. 187 is not applicable to a case of 
dissolution of a firm. Where therefore, a firm is dissolved on account of the death 
of a partner by virtue of the provisions of
S. 42 (c)
of the Partnership Act and the 
business is continued by the remaining partners of by the remaining partners and 
another in the place of the deceased partner, there being only a change in the 
constitution of the firm within the meaning of S. 187 (2) (a) the assessment of the 
firm for the previous year or years must invariably be made under S. 187 and if 
there be succession to the business by another separate entity owned by 
altogether different partners, assessment has to be made under S. 188 as it 
would squarely fall under S. 188 as it would squarely fall under 
S.188."
The Full
Bench further held
:
"However, if there are one or more of the partners continuing 
as partners in the second firm, it must be construed to be only a change in the 
constitution of the firm within the meaning of S. 187 but not a case of succession 
as contemplated by S. 188."
With great respect to the learned Judges of the Full Bench of this Court, we 
are unable to agree with their interpretation of Ss. 187 and 188 of the
Income-tax 
Act, 1961
.
28. Sections 187, 188 and 189 deal with three different situations. Section 
187 deals with a case where the firm continues to be the same as before in the 
eye of law, but there is a change in the constitution either because of a partner 
coming into or another partner going out and so long as one partner is common 
there is said to be a mere change in the constitution of the firm. Section 188 
deals with situation where there is a succession of one firm by another firm and 
in such a situation, the assessment has to be made in the light of S. 170. Section 
189 deals with a situation where a partnership firm is dissolved or its business 
discontinued. Just because some of the partners of the dissolved firm constitute 
a new partnership firm by a new agreement arrived at among themselves it 
cannot be said that the old firm continues with a mere change in the constitution. 
It is altogether a new firm and the learned Judges of the Madras High Court have 
rightly pointed out in
Katthari Lungi Stores v. Commr. of Income-tax
(1977
Tax 
LR 354 (Mad
)) (supra) that a change in the constitution of the firm must be 
distinguished from the dissolution of the firm. Under these circumstances, we are 
unable to accept the reasoning or conclusions of the learned Judges of the Full 
Bench of this Court in Addl.
Commr. of  Income-tax v. Visakha Flour Mills
.
1977
Tax LR 41 (Andh Para) (FB
) (supra), as regards the interpretation of S. 187 in 
the context of dissolution of a firm by virtue of the provisions of the
Partnership 
Act
.
29. Mr. Rama Rao for the Revenue drew our attention to a decision of a 
Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court in
R. B. Jessa Ram Fateh Chand v. 
Commr. of Income-tax
, .
But  this decision was overruled 
by the majority of the learned Judges of the Full Bench of the Allahabad High 
Court in
Dahi Laxmi Dal Factory v. Income-tax Officer
, (1975
Tax LR 132 (All) 
(FB
)) (supra), and since we substantially agree with the conclusions of the 
majority of the learned Judges of the Full Bench in
Dahi Laxmi Dal Factory v. 
Income-tax Officer
(supra), it is not necessary for us to deal with this 
decision.
30.
In
Commr. of Income-tax v. Kelukutty
, 85 ITR 102: (1972 Tax LR 72 
(Ker)), a Division Bench of the Kerala High Court dealt with a situation where, 
because of cl. 7 of the partnership deed, the firm was not to be dissolved in the 
event of the death of one of the partners and since the firm was not dissolved, 
the case would squarely fall under the provisions of
S. 187 (1)
of the Income-tax 
Act.
31.
In
Hoshiarpur Electric Supply Co. v. Commr. of Income-tax
, , after setting out the passage from the decision of the Supreme 
Court in
Commr. of  I.-T. v. A. W. Figgies & Co.
,  (supra), the 
learned Judges of the Punjab and Haryana High Court Observed:
These observations quite precisely apply to the present 
case, because their Lordships definitely decided that technically the law of 
partnership does not apply to a case like the present which is to be considered 
by applying the law of income-tax. In the present case also the business of the 
firm originally constituted continued as the electrical undertaking at Hoshiarpur 
from the very beginning right down to its purchase by the Punjab Government, 
and it continued to be the same unit throughout, carrying on the same business 
of supply of electricity, the same place and there was no cesser of that business 
or any change in the unit"
32. The question which we have to consider in the present case did not 
arise strictly for the decision in that particular case and it is not necessary for us 
to deal with that particular case in greater detail.
33.
In
Sandersons & Morgans v. Income-tax Officer
, 87 ITR 270 : (1973 
Tax LR 614 (Cal) ), Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. of the Calcutta High Court, sitting 
single, dealt with a situation where there was a contract to the contrary providing 
that, in the event of death of one of the partners, the partnership firm was not to 
be dissolved. Thus it is obvious that the case would clearly fall under the 
provisions of
S. 187
of the Income-tax Act, 1961. At page 281 of the report (87 
ITR) : (at p. 620 of Tax LR), Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. Observed:
"Therefore, the expression "change in the constitution of the 
firm" must be construed in the light of the ordinary meaning unless the language 
of the section or the purpose of the Act compels one to hold otherwise. "Change 
in the constitution of the firm" normally and ordinarily would mean every alteration 
in the set-up of the firm viz. death, retirement, incapacity of partners, alteration of 
the shares of the partners in the firm etc. Whether any particular alteration would 
amount to a change in the constitution of the firm would depend upon the context 
of the use of that expression. Partnership is the relationship between persons 
who have agreed to share the profits of a business carried on by all or any of 
them acting for all, according to the definition of the
Partnership Act
. Therefore, 
constitution of the firm is a matter of agreement between the parties, subject, 
however, to the fact that the parties cannot contract out of the legal 
obligations."
34. Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. further observed:
"...................I must construe the expression "Constitution of 
the firm" by its ordinary connotation and construe by that connotation that death 
would certainly indicate a 'change in the constitution of the firm'."
With respect, we are unable to agree with the later part of the reasoning of 
the learned single Judge of the Calcutta High Court.
35.
In
Commr. of Income-tax v. T. Veera Raghavulu Chetty & Sons
, 100 
ITR 723 : (1976 Tax LR 460 (Andh Pra) ), a Division Bench of this Court 
consisting of Obul Reddi, C. J. and Sriramulu, J., dealt with a situation where 
there was introduction of new partners in the midst of the accounting year. They 
were not dealing with a situation where a firm was dissolved because of the 
provisions of the
Partnership Act
, and it was held that the entire income of the 
firm for the whole year was to be assessed instead of two separate assessments 
and the conclusion of the learned Judges of the Division Bench is correct in the 
light of the fact that the case was clearly governed by the provisions of S. 187 (10 
as interpreted by us. These are all the different decisions which have a bearing 
on this case.
36. It is  true, as pointed out by the Gujarat High Court in Addl.
Commr. of 
Income-tax, Gujarat v. Harjivandas
hathibhai, (1976
Tax LR 1107 (Guj
) ) (supra), 
in para 10 of its judgement that contract to the contrary can be spelled out from 
the conduct of the parties: but such conduct must be of the partners who 
constituted the firm before the dissolution took place under the provisions of the
Partnership Act
. It cannot be said that the conduct of the surviving partners, after 
the dissolution of the firm, is any indication regarding the existence of the 
contract to the contrary before the death of the deceased person, which brings 
about the dissolution of the firm. Even the subsequent conduct of the surviving 
partners may indicate under certain circumstances that there must have been a 
contract to the contrary between the surviving partners and the deceased partner 
during the lifetime of the deceased partner. But as we have stated above, it is a 
mere question of inference from the facts.
The decision of the Gujarat High Curt 
in
Ramprasad Firm v. Bai Reva
,  which was relied upon by Mr. 
Rama Rao in support of his argument, merely lays down the same proposition 
and it does not advance the case of the Revenue any further. These are all the 
decisions which have been cited before us at the Bar and on a perusal  and 
consideration of these different decisions and in the light of the provisions of S. 
187 as interpreted by us, it must be held that S. 187 does not apply to a situation 
where a firm is dissolved by the operation of one or the other provisions of the
Partnership Act
and after dissolution, one or more of the partners of the dissolved 
firm continue the same business as before by a fresh agreement with one or 
more new partners.
37. In the light of the above conclusion, it is not strictly necessary for us to 
deal with the contention urged by Mr. Swamy who appears for the assessee in R. 
C. No. 67 of 1975 that, even if the case falls under S. 187, there should be two 
assessments. It is not possible for us to accept that contention because under 
the scheme of the Act, once the case falls under S. 187, there must be a single 
assessment because there is only one assessee viz. the firm as it stood 
constituted at the end of the assessment year and there can be only one 
assessment in respect of a single assessee. This argument which appealed to 
the dissenting Judge. H. N. Seth J. of the Allahabad High Court in
Dahi Laxmi 
Dal Factory v. Income-tax Officer
, (1975
Tax LR 132 (All) ) (FB
) (supra), 
therefore, cannot be sustained.
38. In view of our conclusion as above, it necessarily follows that, in R. C. 
No. 22/75, because of the death of Srinivasulu on August, 17, 1968, the old firm 
was dissolved and there was succession to that firm by another firm within the 
meaning of S. 188 when under a new agreement seven of the old partners 
together with two new partners continued the old business as before. Therefore, 
the case was not covered by S. 187 and hence it is obligatory on the part of the 
Income-tax Officer to make two separate assessments, one on the dissolved firm 
and the other on the new partnership firm. We therefore answer the question in 
R. C. No. 22 of 1975 in the affirmation i.e. in favour of the assessee and against 
the Revenue. In R. C. No. 67/75 on the retirement of Ch. Suryanarayana with 
effect from September 30, 1970, the old firm, which was in existence till then, 
came to an end because there were only two partners and one partner, Ch. 
Suryanarayana retired and the other partner, K. Sanyasiraju could not continue 
the business of the firm. Because of hat dissolution, though the business of the 
partnership was carried on by another firm and was continued, there was a mere 
succession within the meaning of S. 188 and the case was not covered by the 
provisions of S. 187. Under these circumstances, we answer the question 
referred to us in r. C. No. 67/75 in the negative as to the first part and in the 
affirmative as to the second part i.e. in favour of the assessee as to both parts of 
the question. The Commissioner will pay the costs of the reference to the 
assessees in each of these two matters. Advocate's fee Rs. 250/- in each.
Lakshmaiah, J.
39. The point that arises for determination in this reference pertains to the 
interpretation of
S. 187
of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
39-A. "The main question" that we have to consider on the facts of the two 
cases referred, as formulated by My Lord Chief Justice, is "the effect of the 
provisions of
s. 187 (2)
of the Income-tax Act, when under the provisions of the
Partnership Act
, a firm is dissolved."
40. But the crucial problem that requires solution into this reference is 
whether it can be said that "a change had occurred in the constitution of a firm", 
within the meaning of that expression as occurring in
S. 187
of the Income-tax 
Act, 1961 when a partner dies, "in such circumstances that one or more of the 
persons who were partners of the firm before the change continue as partner or 
partners after the change."
41. In other words, to put it differently the question is whether, if a partner 
dies, he does not cease to be a partner under
S. 187 (2)
of the Income-tax 
Act.
42. The problem of interpretation can be approached both textually as well 
as contextually.
1. TEXTUAL APPROACH:
"A Statute is the will of the legislature, and the fundamental 
rule of interpretation to which all others are subordinate, is that a statute is to be 
expounded 'according to the intent of them that made it.' If the words of the 
statute are in themselves precise and unambiguous no more is necessary than to 
expound those words themselves in such case best declaring the intention of the 
legislature. The object of all interpretation of a statute is to determine what 
intention is conveyed, either expressly or impliedly, by the language used, so far 
as is necessary for determining whether the particular case or state of facts 
presented to the interpreter falls within it.............................The safer and more 
correct course of dealing with a question of construction is to take the words 
themselves and arrive, if possible, at their meaning without, in the first place, 
reference to cases..........................
When the language is not only plain but admits of but one meaning, the 
task of interpretation can hardly be said to arise. It is not allowable, says Vattel, 
to interpret what has no need of interpretation. Absoluta Sententia Expositore 
non Indiget. Such language best declares, without more, the intention of the law 
giver, and is decisive of it. The rule of construction is 'to intend the legislature to 
have meant what they have actually expressed." (Maxwell on The Interpretation 
of Statutes - Eleventh Edition, pages 1 to 4).
43.
Section 187
of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (referred to hereinafter as the 
Act) reads:
"187. Change in constitution of a Firm.-
(1) Where at the time of making an assessment under S. 
143 or S. 144 it is found that a change has occurred in the constitution of a firm, 
the assessment shall be made on the firm as constituted at the time of making 
the assessment :
Provided that
(i) the income of the previous year shall, for the purposes of 
inclusion in the total incomes of the partners, be apportioned between the 
partners, who, in such previous year, were entitled to receive the same; and
(ii) when the tax assessed upon a partner cannot be recovered from him, it 
shall be recovered from the firm as constituted at the time of making the 
assessment.
2. For the purposes of this section, there is a change in the constitution of  
the firm....................
(a) if one or more of the partners cease to be partners or one 
or more new partners are admitted, in such circumstances that one or more of 
the parsons who were partners of the firm before the change continue as partner 
or partners after the change; or
(b) where all the partners continue with a change in their respective 
shares or in the shares of some of them."
44.
Chapter XVI of the Act
wherein the above section occurs deals with 
"special provision applicable to firms" with regard to assessment. Section 182 
provides for assessment of registered firms and S. 183, for assessment of 
unregistered firms. Sections 184 to 186 deal with "registration of firms."
45. Of the remaining other three sections in that Chapter, S. 187 deals 
with "Change in constitution of a firm," S. 188, with "succession of one firm by 
another firm", and S. 189, with "firm dissolved or business discontinued."
46. Chapter IV deals with the general 'procedure for assessment.' Section 
139, the first section under that Chapter provides for the return of total income by 
an assessee.
47. Where a return has been made under S. 139, S. 143 provides for the 
making of an assessment of the assessee by the Income-tax Officer.
48. Where there is failure on the part of the assessee to make the return 
under s. 139, or to comply with some or all of the requirements of Ss. 142 & 143, 
s. 144 provides for the making of a best judgement assessment by the Income-
tax Officer.
49. Where at the time of making an assessment under S. 143 or S. 144, it 
is found that a change has occurred in the constitution of a firm the assessment 
shall have to be made under S. 187 on the firm as constituted at the time of 
making the assessment.
50. As to when such a change in the constitution of the firm takes place, 
sub- sec. (2) of S. 187 provides by saying, leaving the immaterial portion,  

   "For the purposes of this section, there is a change in the 
constitution of the firm - if one......of the partners cease to be partners................in 
such circumstances that one or more of the persons who were partners of the 
firm before the change continue as partner or partners after the 
change."
51. Assuming that  "such circumstances" as mentioned in sub-s. (2) exist, 
the question is whether there can be a change in the constitution of the firm, if 
one of the partners dies and whether on account of the death of such a partner, 
he does not cease to be a partner.
52. The statutory expression needing explanation is 'if one...........of the 
partners cease to be partners'. When does a partner cease to be a partner ? 
Whether a partner does not cease to be a partner on account of his death,  are 
the questions to be answered. Put that way, not much dialectical dexterity, nor 
any interpretative ingenuity is needed to reach the conclusion that a partner 
ceases to be a partner on account of his death as a partner cannot be said to 
continue as a partner after his death excepting it be when the legislature so 
provides by any fiction, and it is nobody's case that the legislature so 
provided.
53. The aforesaid statutory expression as to when "a partner ceases to be 
a partner" and whether a partner does not cease to be a partner after his death, 
do not admit any dubity or ambiguity as to justify a need to have resort to any 
extrinsic material such as what is contained in the
Partnership Act
.
54. The words of the statute are in themselves precise and unambiguous. 
No more is necessary than to expound those words in their natural and original 
sense, as the words themselves best declare the intention of the legislature. The 
safer and correct course of dealing with a question of construction is to take the 
words themselves and arrive at their meaning, without in the first place, reference 
to cases and other extrinsic material. When the language is not only plain but 
admits of one meaning, the task of interpretation can hardly be said to arise. It is 
not allowable to interpret what has no need of interpretation.
55. I am therefore of the opinion that when a partner of a firm dies, such a 
partner ceases to be a partner and as such there will be "a change in the 
constitution of the firm" under sub-sec. (2) of
s. 187
of the Act provided that one 
or more of the persons who were partners of the firm before the change continue 
as partner or partners after the change.
56. The contextual theory of interpretation of the
S. 187
of the Act to which 
we now propose to advert does not in any way militate against the aforesaid 
view.
57. How far reference to and reliance upon the concepts of
Partnership 
Act
militate against the aforesaid interpretation of
S. 187
of the Act is a question 
proposed to be answered under the contextual theory of interpretation.
CONTEXTUAL APPROACH:
58. Consolidating  Act - Principles and Presumptions of Interpretation:
The Income-tax Act, 1961
as its preamble discloses, is an 
Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to income-tax and super-tax.
This 
Act
by S. 297 repealed the
Indian Income-tax Act, 1922
which also contained the 
same preamble.
59. In Ravulu Subba Rao v. Commr. of Income-tax,  
 Justice Venkatarama Ayyar speaking for the Supreme Court 
observed, referring to the
Indian Income-tax Act, 1922
:
"
The Act
is, as stated in the preamble, one to consolidate 
and amend the law relating to income-tax."
After referring to the rule of construction to be applied to such a statute as 
stated by Lord Herschell in Bank of England v. Vagliano Bros., (1891 AC 107) 
the learned Judge stated at page 170 of the report thus:-
"We must therefore construe the provisions of the
Indian 
Income-tax Act
as forming a  Code complete in itself and exhaustive of the 
matters dealt with therein, and ascertain what their true scope is." (Emphasis 
supplied).
60. The House of Lords decision in Bank of England v. Vagliano Bros., 
(1891) A C P 107 at pp. 144 and 145 concerned with the interpretation of the
Bills of Exchange Act, 1882
which codified the law relating to Negotiable 
Instruments. Lord Herschell laid down the proper rule of construction thus:
"I cannot bring myself to think that this is the proper way to 
deal with such a statute as the
Bills of Exchange Act
, which was intended to be a 
code of the law relating to negotiable instruments. I think the proper course is in 
the first instance to examine the language of the statute and to ask what is its 
natural meaning, uninfluenced by any considerations derived from the previous 
state of the law, and not to start with inquiring how the law previously stood, and 
then, assuming that it was probably intended to leave it unaltered, to see if the 
words of the enactment will bear an interpretation in conformity with this 
view.
If a statute, intended to embody in a code a particular branch of the law, is 
to be treated in this fashion, it appears to me that its utility will be almost entirely 
destroyed, and the very object with which it was enacted will be frustrated. The 
purpose of such a statute surely was that on any point specifically dealt with by it 
the law should be ascertained by interpreting the language used instead of as 
before, by roaming over a vast number of authorities in order to discover what 
the law was, extracting it by a minute critical examination of the prior 
decisions."
61.
In
Rogers Pratt Co. v.  Secretary of State
(AIR 1925 Cal 34 at p. 
41 (FB) ). A full Bench of the Calcutta High Court considered the principles of 
interpretation applicable to the interpretation of Income-tax Act, 1918, Mukerji, J. 
observed at page 41 of the report:
"A perusal of the several enactments makes it clear that the
Income-tax Act
of 1918 (Act VII of 1918) effected a radical change in the scheme 
and scope of operation of this branch of law.
The Act
of 1918 professes to be a 
consolidating and amending statute; on any point specifically dealt with in the Act 
the law is to be ascertained by interpreting the language used in the statute in its 
natural meaning, uninfluenced by considerations derived from the previous state 
of the law; Administrator General v. Premlal ( (1895) ILR 22 Cal 788 (PC) ). 
Norendra v. Kamalbasini ( (1896) ILR 23 Cal 563 (PC) ) and Ramdas v. 
Amarchand & Co. (1916) ILR 40 Bom 630 : (AIR 1916 PC 7). Reference to the 
previous state of the law would be permissible for the purpose of aiding in the 
construction of a new statute if any provision therein is of doubtful import: Bank of 
England v. Vagliano bros (1891 AC 107) Robinson v. Canadian Pacific Rly. Co. 
(1892 AC 481) and Morsey Docks v. Cameron (1864) 11 HLC 443."
"The purpose of a consolidating statute is to present the whole body of the 
statutory law on a subject in complete form, repealing the former statutes."
(Halsbury's Laws of England, Third Edition Vol. 36 Para 538 at Page
366).
62. The following passages on consolidating statute and their 
interpretation from Maxwell on The Interpretation of Statutes, Twelfth Edition are 
very instructive.
"Consolidating Statutes.
A consolidating statute is one which collects the statutory provisions 
relating to a particular topic, and embodies them in a single Act of Parliament, 
making only minor amendments and improvements.
In the construction of a consolidation Act, the presumption that Parliament 
does not intend to alter the existing law applies with particular force. For the 
object of the Act was merely to 'reproduce the law as it stood before," (at pp. 20,
21) 

   xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
  

 

  In interpreting a consolidating Act, account is taken of judicial decisions on 
provisions contained in the statutes now codified. 'One has to remember', said 
Lord Evershed M. R., that Parliament must be taken to have been aware of the 
decisions of their courts in the meantime." (at. Page 24) 

   xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
  

 

  In the case of a consolidating Act there is a particularly strong 
presumption that it does not alter the law contained in the statutes which it 
replaces. The reason is that it is the invariable practice of Parliament to require 
from those who have preferred a consolidation Bill an assurance that it will make 
no substantial change in the law and to have that checked by a committee." (at 
pp. 116, 117).
"The statutes dealing with a particular subject may constitute 
a special code in regard thereto. Among the objects intended to be attained by 
the codification of laws are the collection and embodiment in one statute of all the 
laws and parts of laws on the same subject, which had previously been enacted 
and which it is intended to continue in force." (page 59).
Xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
 

 

  "Codes, Compilations, and Revisions.- It has generally been held that 
codes and compiled or revised statutes intended to express either the whole of 
the general laws of a state, or of some great sub-division of such laws, may be 
adopted by one act under a general title without violating a constitutional 
provision prohibiting the enactment of any bill containing more than one subject 
and requiring that subject to be expressed in the title. In this respect, it has been 
declared that any construction of these with the very commendable policy of 
incorporating the entire body of statutory law on one general subject in a single 
act, instead of dividing it into a number of separate acts, would not only be 
contrary to its spirit but also seriously embarrassing to honest legislation" (p.
184).
(From 'American Jurisprudence' Vol 50) "Consolidation is the reduction 
into a systematic form of the whole of the statute law relating to a given  subject, 
as illustrated or explained by judicial decisions. 'The very object of consolidation 
is to collect the statutory law bearing upon a particular subject, and to bring it 
down to date, in order that it may form a useful code applicable to the 
circumstances existing when the consolidating Act was passed. 'Referring to S. 
192 of the Supreme Court of Judicature (Consolidation ) Act, 1925, Lord 
Hanworth M. R. Said: 'the object therefore of  the Act was to consolidate and 
reproduce the law as it stood before the passing of that Act., " (at pp. 361.,
362).
Xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
 

 

  "One has to begin" (said Evershed M. R. In 1958) "by the consideration 
that the Judicature Act is a consolidating Ac t and one does not look for 
substantial changes in the law..................in a consolidating Act."
And of the Trustee Act
1925 Romer L. J. Said: "It is a consolidation Act......It 
is therefore, extremely unlikely, to say the least of it, that it effected any 
substantial change in the pre-existing law." In Galloway v. Galloway Lord 
Radcliffe said: "This is a consolidation Act, the function of which is to repeat but 
not to amend the existing statute law." (Pp. 363 & 364) (Craies on Statute-law 
Seventh Edition). Law Commission of India-Twelfth Report on Income-tax Act, 
1922.
63.
The Income-tax Act, 1961
came into force on April, 1 1962,. It is based 
on the recommendations contained in the law Commission's 12th Report, 
1958.
64.  In this connection, it is very interesting and instructive to notice what 
the Law Commission has said in their report about
Chapter XVI of the Act
which 
deals with the special provisions applicable to Firms (wherein Ss. 187 to 189 
occur) in para 65 at page 22 of their report:
"65. Chapter XVI Special Provisions of the Act applicable to 
firms have been gathered together in this chapter. This will enable the partners 
and others to ascertain the law from one Chapter instead of searching for 
provisions, dispersed all over the Act.
The principal changes made in this Chapter are given below:
(1) The provisions contained at present in the Rules 
regarding the registration and cancellation of registration of firms, have been 
incorporated in the Act.
(2) The provision for fresh application for registration every year has been 
deleted, as it entails hardship. A declaration that there has been no change in the 
constitution of the firm will suffice.
(3) There was some difficulty in the determining when there is a change in 
the constitution of a firm and when there is a succession. The specific 
circumstances which result in a change in the constitution of a firm have now 
been defined".
MACHINERY PROVISIONS- PRESUMPTIONS:-
65. Sections 187 to 189 in chapter XVI of the Act relate to assessment of 
firms. They are not changing sections. They are only machinery provisions.
66. Lord Normand speaking for the Judicial Committee of the Privy 
Council, while interpreting
S. 34
of the Indian Income -Tax Act, 1922 in Commr.
Of Income-tax Bengal v. Mahalingam Ramjidas
(1940) 8 ITR 442 at p. 448 : (AIR 
1940 PC 124 at pp. 126, 127 ) observed:
"The section, although it is part of the taxing Act, imposes no 
changes on the subject and deals merely with the machinery of assessment . In 
interpreting provisions of this kind the rule is that that construction should be 
preferred which makes the machinery workable, Ut Res Valeat Potius Quam 
Pereat." (At p. 448)
67. Justice Sarkar (as he then was) laid down the following rule of 
construction for machinery provisions in a taxing statute in
Gusahai Saigal v. 
Commr. of Income
-tax, Punjab .
" Now it is well recognised that the rule of construction on 
which the assessee relies applies only to a taxing provision and has no 
application to all provisions in a taxing statute. It does not, for example, apply to a 
provision not, for example, apply to a provision not creating a charge for the tax 
but laying down the machinery for its calculation or procedure for its collection. 
The provisions in a taxing statute dealing with machinery for assessment have to 
be construed by the ordinary rules of construction,  that is to say, in accordance 
with the clear intentions of the legislature which is to make a charge levied 
effective. Reference may be made to a few cases laying down this distinction. In 
Commr. of Income -tax v. Mahalingam Ramjidas, (AIR 1940 PC 124) it was said 
:-
" The section , although it is part of a taxing Act, impose no 
charge on the subject, and deals merely with the machinery of assessment. In 
interpreting provisions of this kind the rule is that that construction should be 
preferred which makes the machinery workable. Ut Res Vleat Quam Pereat.
In
India United Mills Ltd. v. Commr. of Excess Profits Tax  This
court observed :-
" That section is, it should be emphasised, not a changing 
section, but a machinery section and a machinery section should be so 
construed as to effectuate the changing sections".
68-69.  The aforesaid rule of construction
laid down by
Sarkar, J. (As he 
then was ) was referred  to with approval by Justice Subbarao (as he then was ) 
in a latter case
Banarasi Devi v. Income-tax Officer
.
CONTEXTUAL THEORY OF CONSTRUCTION:
70.  The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Canada Sugar 
Refining Co. V. Reg.  (1898) AC 735 speaking through Lord Davey Observed at 
p. 741 of the report:-
" Every clause of a statute should be construed with 
reference to the context and the other clauses of the Act, so as, so far as 
possible, to make a consistent enactment of the whole statute or series of 
statutes relating to the subject-matter".
71.  The following passages on principles of interpretation from Halsbury's 
Laws of England Third Edition Volume 36 may be usefully referred:-
" The dominant purpose in construing a statute is to 
ascertain the intention of the legislature as so expressed. This intention, and 
therefore the meaning of the statute, is primarily to be sought in the words used 
in the statue itself  , which must, if they are plain and unambiguous, be applied as 
they stand, ...............
If the words of a statute are clear and unambiguous, they themselves 
indicate what must be taken to have been the intention of Parliament and there is 
no need to look elsewhere to discover their intention or their meaning. (pp. 337,
338) 

   xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
 

 

  Although the words of a statute are normally to be construed in their 
ordinary meaning, due regard must be had to their subject matter and object, and 
to the occasion on which and the circumstances with reference to which they are 
used, and they should be construed in the light of their context rather than in 
what may be either their strict etymological sense or their popular meaning apart 
from that context." (At p. 394).
REFERENTIAL LEGISLATION INCORPORATING THE PROVISIONS OF 
PARTNERSHIP ACT INTO INCOME-TAX ACT - LIMITS AND EXTENT:
72. Unless the context otherwise requires, the
Income-tax Act, 1961
provides in the definition clause by
S. 2
(230 that "firm", "partner" and 
"partnership" have the meaning respectively assigned to them in the Indian 
partnership Act, 1932; but the expression 'partner' shall also include 'any person 
who, being a minor, has been admitted to the benefits of partnership"
73. The clue to the proper appreciation of the impact of Partnership Act on 
the Income-tax Act, particularly on Section 187 thereof, is to be found only in a 
correct appraisal of what is called the theory of "Referential Legislation."
74. The earliest case recognising this principle was R. v. Merionethshire 
Inhabitants (1844) 6 QB 343. There, statute 43 G 3 E. 59 applied statute 13 G. C. 
78 "as fully and effectually as if the same and every part thereof were hereinafter 
repealed and re-enacted."
75. The classic exposition of the subject by Lord Esher, Master of Rolls in 
the year 1866 in Re Wood's Estate; Exparte Her Majesty's Commrs. of Works & 
Buildings (1886) 31 Ch. D 607 was followed in subsequent decisions, here, 
there, everywhere, set the trend in this branch of law.
76. In that case, Act 18 and 19 Victoria Ch. 95 was passed in 1855, after 
the passing of the 'lands
Clauses Act
.' The material Sections of the Act of 1855 
are 9th and 11th. By the 9th section, certain Sections of the Act of 1840 are 
incorporated into the Act of 1855.
The Act
of 1840 was passed before the Lands 
Clauses Act. Considering the legal effect of the 9th Section of the Act of 1855 
which brings into that Act those sections of the former Act. Lord Esher, M. R. 
Said:
"..................It is to put them into the Act of 1855 just as if 
they had been written into it for the first time. If a subsequent Act brings into itself 
by reference some of the clauses of a former Act, the legal effect of that, as has 
often been held, is to write those sections into the new Act just as if they had 
been actually written in it with the pen, or printed in it, and, the moment you have 
those clauses in the later Act, you have no occasion to refer to the former Act at 
all. For all practical purposes, therefore, those sections of the Act of 1840 are to 
be dealt with as if they were actually in the Act of 1855." (Pp. 615,
616).
77. Speaking about the Legislative practice to incorporate by reference, 
the Supreme Court of India said in A. T. Corporation v. Asstt. Collector, Customs 
:
"It is a well accepted Legislative practice to incorporate by 
reference, if the Legislature so chooses, the provisions of some other Act in so 
far as they are relevant for the purposes of and in furtherance of the scheme and 
object of that Act ....................."
78. The same practice has been obtaining in the United States of America, 
Mr. Justice Sanford delivering the opinion of the Supreme Court of America said 
in Engel v. Devenport (1925) 70 Law Ed. 813 at p. 817 :
"The adoption of an earlier statute by reference makes it as 
much as part of the later act as though it had been incorporated at full length. 
Kendall v. United States, (1838) 12 Pet. 524 at p. 625: 9 Law ed. 1181, 1221; re 
Heath, 144 U.S. at pp. 92, 94 : 36 Law ed. 358 at p. 359: 12 Sup Ct. Rep. 615; 
Interstate Concol. Street R. Co. v. Massachusetts, (1907) 207 U. S. 79, 85: 52 
Law ed. 111, 114 : 28 Sup Ct. Rep. 26 : 12 Ann. Cas. 555: It brings into the later 
act "all that is fairly covered by the reference" (Panama R. Co. Case, (1923) 264 
U. S. 375 (392) : 68 Law ed. 748 (755) : 44 Sup. Ct. Rep. 391); that is to say all 
the provisions of the former act which, from the nature of the subject matter, are 
applicable to the later act."
"The  adoption of an earlier statute by reference makes it as much part of 
the later Act as though it has been incorporated at Full length." (American 
Jurisprudence Vol. 50 at p. 58).
"Where a statute incorporates by reference the whole or any part of an 
earlier statute, the provisions so incorporated are in general to be construed as 
they would be if set out in full in the later statute." (Halsbury's Laws of England-
Third Edition Volume 36 at p. 404).
"The effect of incorporating one Act with another is presumably to make 
them parts of the same Code." (Craies on Statute Law-Seventh Edition at p.
360).
LEGAL PERSONALITY OF A FIRM:
Text Books:
79. Speaking about the legal conception of personality Sir John Salmond 
said in his 'Jurisprudence' Twelfth Edition in paragraph 61 at page 299:
"So far as legal theory is concerned, a person is any being 
whom the law regards as capable of rights or duties. Any being that is so capable 
is a person, even though he be a man. Persons are the substances of which 
rights and duties are the attributes. It is only in this respect that persons possess 
judicial significance, and this is the exclusive point of view from which personality 
receives legal recognition.
Persons as so defined are of two kinds, distinguishable as natural and 
legal. A natural person is a human being. Legal persons are beings, real or 
imaginary, who for the purpose of legal reasoning are treated in greater or less 
degree in the same way as human beings."
80. G. W. Paton in his Text Book of 'Jurisprudence' Third Edition at page 
247 said :
"................Most of the matters ............... involve not tangible 
things which exist in the world around us independently of man, but intangible 
things created in one way or another by man for his purposes as a social animal. 
Notions and concepts like rights and duties, juristic acts, remedial rights, 
property, or possession, although they may be concerned with tangible things in 
one way or another, are not themselves tangible things but represent or stand for 
or serve or describe certain relationships."
Xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
 

 

  "It is difficult to conceive of rights or duties except as going to the 
relationships between persons."
"If  by persons we meant always human beings that perhaps there would 
not need to be much discussion about legal personality. It is clear, however, that 
the law creates not only its own rules for determining the relationships between 
persons but its own rules for determining what entitles shall be recognised as 
persons for the purposes of the law. For the purposes of the law an idol, a trade 
union, or a 'one man' commercial company may be recognised as persons for 
the purposes of legal relationships, distinct from any human beings connected 
with them."
81. Hans Kolson in his "General Theory of Law & State" under the heading  
"The Legal Person" said at page 93 :
"The concept of a legal person is another general concept 
used in the presentation of positive law and closely related to the concepts of 
legal duty and legal right. The concept of the legal person - who, by definition, is 
the subject of legal duties and legal rights-answers the need of imagining a 
bearer of the rights and duties. Juristic thinking is not satisfied with the insight 
that a certain human action or omission forms the contents of a duty or a right. 
There must exist something, that 'has' the duty or the right. In this idea, a general 
trend of human thought is manifested. Empirically observable qualities, too, are 
interpreted as qualities of an object or a substance, and grammatically they are 
represented as predicates of a subject. This substance is not an additional entity. 
The grammatical subject denoting it is only a symbol of the fact that the qualities 
form a unity."
Xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
 

 

  "This duplication of the object of knowledge is characteristic of the 
primitive mythological thinking which is called animism. According to the animistic 
interpretation of nature, every object of the perceptual world is believed to be the 
abode of an invisible spirit who is the master of the object, who "has" the object in 
the same way as the substance has its qualities, the grammatical subject its 
predicates. This the legal person, as ordinarily understood, also "has" its legal 
duties and rights in this same sense. The legal person is the legal substance to 
which duties and rights belong as legal qualities. The idea that "the person has"
duties and rights involves the relation of substance and quality.
In reality, however, the legal person is not a separate entity besides 'its' 
duties and rights, but only their personified unity or  - since duties and rights are 
legal norms - the personified unity of a set of legal norms."
82. Ernest Barker in his introduction to 'Natural Law and the Theory of 
Society" by Otto Gireke said at page IXIII.
"Legal personality, as distinct from Psychological and ethical 
personality, is a power or capacity for legal action - a capacity recognised by law 
(and only existing when recognised by law) for originating such action as belongs 
to the scheme of law. From this point of view the existence of legal personality 
not only presupposes, as that of moral personality does the presence of human 
society; it also presupposes the presence of an organised legal association. It is 
a thing bound up with rights; in fact it is a capacity for rights; and rights, in the full 
sense of the word, are only possible in such an association. Now rights may 
belong, and obviously do belong, to groups as well as to individuals. In the field 
of the organised legal association we must therefore assign legal personality to 
groups as well as to individuals, and here we have to admit that there are Group-
persons as well as individual persons.
Xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
 

 

  "Similarly many of the groups contained in the State are legal persons. 
They have a capacity for rights; and a capacity for rights means a legal 
personality."
83. L. C. B. Gower in his book "The Principles of Modern company Law"
Third Edition said at page 67 :-
"...................Statutes of the early nineteenth century enabled 
the Crown by letters patent to confer all or any of the advantages of incorporation 
without actually granting corporate personality, and similarly as statute may 
confer many of these privileges without actual incorporation. In fact, this has 
been done in several cases, with the result that between the two extremes of an 
unincorporated club or society and the corporation there are many hybrids, which 
though formally unincorporated, possess a greater or lesser number of the 
attributes of a corporation. Among these hybrids even partnership ought perhaps 
to be included for the partners can now sue or be sued in the firm's 
name."
Case Law :
84. Bonsor v. Musicians' Union, (1956 AC 104) is a case decided by 
House of Lords where Lord Keith of Avanthilam referring with approval the 
decision of Farwell, J. in Taff Vale Rly. case, (1901 AC 426) observed at page 
150 about the conception of legal entity thus:
"The view which I have endeavoured to formulate is, I think, 
entirely consistent with the decisions and dicta in earlier trade union cases which 
have come before this House. In the Taff Vale Rly, case Farwell J. whose 
judgment was upheld by this House, does not describe a registered trade union 
as a legal entity, though he does so in another case to which I refer later. He 
uses language, however, from which I think the conception of such a union as a 
legal entity arose. For instance, he says : Now although a corporation and an 
individual or individuals may be the only entity known to the common law who 
can sue or be sued, it is competent to the legislature to give to an association of 
individual which is neither a corporation nor a partnership nor an individual a 
capacity for owning property and acting by agents, and such capacity in the 
absence of express enactment to the contrary involves the necessary correlative 
of liability to the extent of such property for the acts and defaults of such agents. 
It is beside the mark to say of such an association that is unknown to the 
common law. The legislature has legalised it, and it must be dealt with by the 
courts according to the intention of the legislature." In other places he refers to it 
as a creature of statute. In this House Lord Halsbury L. C. Expressly adopted the 
judgment of Farwell J. and in a short sentence referred to such a trade union as 
a thing created by the legislature, Lord MacNaghten, Lord Shand and Lord 
Brampton also accepted the judgment of Farwell, J."
85. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council observed about the 'legal 
personality' thus in
Bhagwanji v. Alembic Chemical
works, (AIR 1948 PC 100) at 
page 101. Sir John Beaumont observed :
"It is true that the
Indian Partnership Act
goes further than 
the English Partnership Act, 1890, in recognising that a firm may possess a 
personality distinct from the persons constituting it; the law in India in that respect 
being more in accordance with the law of Scotland, than with that of England. But 
the fact that a firm possesses a distinct personality does not involve that the 
personality continues unchanged so long as the business of the firm continues. 
The Indian Act, like the
English Act
, avoids making a firm a corporate body 
enjoying the right of perpetual succession."
86. Chief Justice Subba Rao of Andhra Pradesh High Court (as he then 
was) observed in
T. Jalayya v. N. Venkateswara Rao
. (AIR 1957 Andh Pra 658) 
at pages 660 and 661 thus :-
"At the outset it is necessary to ascertain the legal 
characteristics of a firm. It is settled law that a firm is not legal entity but only 
consists of the individual partners for the time being. The essential characteristic 
of a firm is that each partner is a representative of the other partners. Each of the 
partners is an agent and a principal. He is an agent in so far as he can bind the 
other partners by his acts within the scope of the partnership business and he is 
a principal to the extent that he is bound by the acts of the other partners. The 
liabilities of the firm can be enforced against each of the partners personally. The 
aforesaid legal concept is the foundation of the decision of the Judicial 
Committee in the matter of Stuart Samual, (1913) AC 514."
87. Our Supreme Court speaking through Justice Mahajan (as he then 
was) in
Commr. of Income-tax v. A. W Giggies & Co.
,   thus :
"It is true that under the law of partnership a firm has no legal 
existence apart from its partners and it is merely a compendious name to 
describe its partners but it is also equally true that under that law there is no 
dissolution of the firm by the mere incoming or outgoing of partners. A partner 
can retire with the consent of the other partners and a person can be introduced 
in the partnership by the consent of the other partners. The reconstituted firm can 
carry on its business in the same firm's name till dissolution. The law with respect 
to retiring partners as enacted in the
Partnership Act
is to a certain extent a 
compromise between the strict doctrine of English Common Law which refuses 
to see anything in the firm but a collective name for individuals carrying on 
business in partnership and the mercantile usage which recognises the firm as a 
distinct person or quasi-corporation. But under the
Income-tax Act
the position is 
somewhat different. A firm can be charged as a distinct assessable entity as 
distinct from its partners who can also be assessed individually."
88. After quoting
S. 3
of the Income-tax Act, 1922 the learned Judge 
proceeded to state thus:
"The partners of the firm are distinct assessable entities, 
while the firm as such is a separate and distinct unit for purposes of assessment.
Sections 26
,
48
and
55
of the Act fully bear out this position. These provisions of 
the Act go to show that the technical view of the nature of a partnership, under 
English law or Indian Law, cannot be taken in applying the law of Income-
tax."
89. Yet on another occasion the Supreme Court of India in
Shivram 
Poddar v. Income-tax Officer
,  
speaking through Shah, J. (As he then was) observed (at p. 1097 of AIR) :
"A firm whether registered or unregistered is recognised 
under the Act as a unit of assessment (Ss. 3 and 2 (2) and its income computed 
under cls. (3) and (4) of
S. 23
as the income of any other unit."
X  x  x  x  x  x 
 

 

  "Under the ordinary law governing partnership modification in the 
constitution of the firm in the absence of a special agreement to the contrary 
amounts to dissolution of the firm and reconstitution thereof, a firm at common 
law being a group of individuals who have agreed to share the profits of a 
business carried on by all or any of them acting for all, and suppression of the 
agreement brings about an end of the relation.
But the Income-tax Act
recognises a firm for purposes of assessment as a unit independent of the 
partners constituting it; it invests the firm with a personality which survives 
reconstitution."
90. Dias in his 'Jurisprudence' Fourth Edition at page 340 said :
"A human being ceases to be a person, in law as in fact, at 
death". ".........A statute can always abrogate the effect of a judicial decision, and 
the courts regard themselves as bound to give effect to legislation............." (at p.
164).
(Rupert Cross in his 'Precedent in English Law').
"A statute is abrogative and can sweep away inconvenient 
rules." (At p. 211) (Paton on 'Jurisprudence' third Edition).
91. We shall now proceed to discuss the problem raised in the aforesaid 
background.
92.
The Income-tax Act, 1961
as its preamble discloses, is an Act to 
consolidate and amend the law relating to income-tax and super-tax.
That Act
by 
S. 297 repealed the
Indian Income-tax Act, 1922
. The purpose of consolidating a 
statute is to present the whole body of the statutory law on a subject in a 
complete form repealing the former statutes. There is a strong presumption that 
the consolidating Act does not alter the law contained in the statutes it replaces. 
We must construe the provisions of a consolidating Act as forming a code 
complete in itself and exhaustive of the matters dealt with therein and ascertain 
what their true scope is, as otherwise its utility as a consolidating Act will be 
almost entirely destroyed and the very object with  which it was enacted will be 
frustrated.
93. Unless the context otherwise requires, the Act provides in the 
definition clause by
S. 2
(230 that 'firm', 'partner' and 'partnership' have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in the
Indian Partnership Act, 1932
, but 
the expression 'Partner' shall also include 'any person who being a minor, has 
been admitted to the benefits of partnership."
94.
The Partnership Act
defines by
S. 4
the aforesaid expressions.
"Partnership" is the relation between persons who have agreed to share the 
profits of a business carried on by all or any of them acting for all." Persons who 
have entered into partnership with one another are called individually 'Partners' 
and collectively 'a firm' and the name under which their business is carried on is 
called the 'Firm name'. The expression 'Partnership' does not occur in S. 187 
and the expression 'Partner' was assigned in the Act an extended meaning. We 
are not now concerned with these two expressions for construing S. 187. The 
expression 'Firm' contained therein needs explanation and interpretation.
95.
When the Income-tax Act
defines 'Firm' to have the same meaning 
assigned to it by the
Partnership Act
, the legal effect of that is to write
Partnership Act
definition of firm into the
Income-tax Act
just as if it has been 
actually written in it with the pen or printed in it and the moment you have that in 
the
Income-tax Act
, you have no occasion to refer to the
Partnership Act
at 
all.
96. Such of those provisions of
Partnership Act
which were adopted by or 
incorporated into the
Income-tax Act
through the well-recognised and established 
device or referential legislation, must be dealt with as if they were actually in the
Income-tax Act
, with the judicial Interpretation placed upon those adopted or 
incorporated concepts. There is thus no occasion to spell out any conflict, 
apparent or real, between the two Acts as the one was integrated into or 
interwoven into the warp and woof of the other later Act. For all practical 
purposes, it is the later
Income-tax Act
alone that has got to be looked into.
97. Under the law of Partnership, a firm has no legal existence apart from 
its partners and it is merely compendious name to describe its partners. But 
under the
Income-tax Act
, the position is somewhat different. A firm can be 
charged as a distinct assessable entity as distinct from its partners who can also 
be assessed individually. Provisions contained in
S. 26
of Act of 1922 
corresponding to
S. 187
of the Act go to show that the technical view of the 
nature of a partnership cannot be taken in applying the law of Income-tax. A firm, 
whether registered or unregistered, is recognised under the
Income-tax Act
as a 
unit of assessment and its income computed as the income of any other unit. 
Legal personality is the gift of law, be it common law or statutory law. With its 
abrogative force, the legislature can confer legal personality on any entity 
absolutely or qualifiedly.
The Income-tax Act
invests a firm with a personality 
which survives its reconstitution.
98. Section 187 occurs in Chap. XVI of the Act which deals with special 
provisions applicable to firms.
The Income-tax Act, 1961
is based on the 
recommendations contained in the law Commission's Twelfth Report, 1958. As 
per that report, the provisions pertaining to firms, whereever they are contained 
in the Act or the Rules made thereunder, were all collected together in that 
chapter. As there was some difficulty in determining when there is a change in 
the constitution of a firm and where there is suggestion, specific circumstances 
which result in a change in the constitution, of a firm have been defined in
S. 187 
(2)
of the Act. This repealing Act does not thus purport to alter the effect of the 
provisions of the repealed Act. It is, as it should be, having regard to the 
consolidating and amendatory nature of the Act.
99.
Chapter XVI of the Act
containing Ss. 187 to 189 relate to assessment 
of firms. They are not charging sections. They are only machinery provisions. 
The principles and presumptions of interpretation of charging provisions are not 
applicable to machinery provisions though contained in the taxing statute. They 
are to be interpreted just like any other provision of law.
100. With the aforesaid background, we shall now interpret
S. 187
of the 
Act.
101. Where at the time of making an assessment under s. 143 or S. 144, it 
is found that a change has occurred in the constitution of a firm, the assessment 
shall have to be made under S. 187 on the firm as constituted at the time of 
making the assessment. As to when such a change takes place, s. 187 (2) 
provides by saying that, "for the purpose of this section, there is a change in the 
constitution of the firm, if one of the partners ceases to be partners, in such 
circumstances that one or more of the persons who were partners of the firm 
before the change continue as partner or partners after the change."
102. "A human being ceases to be a person in law, as in fact, at death". A 
partner of a firm ceases to be a partner on his death. Therefore, whenever a 
partner of a firm dies, such a partner ceases to be a partner and as such there 
will be "change in the constitution of the firm" under sub-s (2) of
S. 187
of the Act, 
provided that one or more of the persons who were partners of the firm before 
the change continue as partner or partners after the change.
103. I am fortified in this view of mine by the decisions of the Supreme 
Court rendered while interpreting
S. 26
of Act of 1922 also which corresponds to
S. 187
of the Act excepting it be in some particular matter to which we shall 
advert to during the course of this judgment. The facts of these cases are given 
in the judgment of My Lord the Chief Justice.
104. In commr. of Income-tax v. A. W. Figgies & Co.
(supra) the following observations of Mahajan, J. (As he then was) while 
interpreting
S. 25 (4)
of 1922 Act are relevant (at page 456) :
"The Section does not regard a mere change in the 
personnel of the partners as amounting to succession and disregards such a 
change. It follows from the provisions of the section that a mere change in the 
constitution of the partnership does not necessarily bring into existence a new 
assessable unit or a distinct assessable entity and in such a case there is no 
devolution of the business as a whole."
105. Adverting to the substratum of the business the firm was carrying on, 
the learned Judge proceeded to observe (at p. 456 of AIR) :
"The true question to decide is one of identity of the unit 
assessed under the Income-tax Act, 1918, which paid double tax in the year 
1939, with the unit to whose business the private limited company succeeded in 
the year 1947. We have no doubt that the Tribunal and the High Court were right 
in holding that in spite of the mere changes in the constitution of the firm the 
business of the firm as originally constituted continued as tea brokers right from 
its inception till the time it was succeeded by the limited company and that it was 
the same unit all through, carrying on the same business, at the same place and 
there was no cesser of that business or any change in the unit."
X  x  x  x  x  x 
 

 

  "To all intents and purposes the firm as reconstituted was not a different 
unit but it remained the same unit in spite of the change in its constitution."
106. It is pertinent to note that the definition of 'partnership' in
S. 4
of the 
Partnership Act lays particular stress upon the 'business being carried on by all 
the partners or any of them acting or all' with which aspect alone the
Income-tax 
Act
is primarily concerned and that aspect of the definition was not allowed to 
undergo any transformation in the Act though such transformation took place in 
the definition of 'partner' and 'firm' either statutorily or judicially.
107.
In
Shivram Poddar v. Income-tax Officer
,  
(supra) the Supreme Court was considering
S. 26 (1)
and (2) of
Income-tax Act, 
1922
. Justice Shah (as he then was) observed at page 827 of the report (51 ITR) 
: (At page 1098 of AIR SC) :
"
Section 44
is, therefore, attracted only when the business of a 
firm is discontinued i.e. when there is complete cessation of the business and not 
when there is a change in the ownership of the firm, or in its constitution, 
because by reconstitution of the firm, no change is brought in the personality of 
the firm, and succession to the business and not discontinuance of the business 
results."
The learned Judge proceeded further to observe at p. 828 (of ITR) : (at page 
1098 of AIR SC) :
"Where the firm is dissolved, but the business is not 
discontinued, there being change in the constitution of the firm, assessment has 
to be made under
S. 26 (1)
and if there be succession to the business, 
assessment has to be made under
S. 26 (2)
. The provisions relating to 
assessment on reconstituted or newly constituted firms, and on succession to the 
business are obligatory."
108.
In
Commr. of Income-tax v. Kirkend Coal Co.
, .
Justice Shah ( as he then was ) referred to his own judgement in
Shivram Poddar
case,  after referring to the same in 
extenso.
109. But it is submitted that these decisions were rendered in the context 
of
S. 26 (1)
of the Income-tax Act, 1922, the language in which differs in a 
material particular from the language employed in S. 187. We have already 
extracted S. 187. We shall read
S. 26 (1)
of 1922 Act :
"26. Change in constitution of a firm : 91) Where at the time 
of making an assessment under
S. 23
, it is found that a change has occurred in 
the constitution of a firm or that a firm has been newly constituted, the 
assessment shall be made on the firm as constituted at the time of making the 
assessment:
Provided that the income, profits and gains of the previous 
year shall, for the purpose of inclusion in the total incomes of the partners, be 
apportioned between the partners who in such previous year were entitled to 
receive the same :
Provided further that when the tax assessed upon a partner 
cannot be recovered from him it shall be recovered from the firm as constituted at 
the time of making the assessment."
110. "Change in constitution of a firm" is the marginal heading, same in 
both the sections. The assessment shall have to be made in both the sections 
"on the firm as constituted at the time of making the assessment." Whereas the 
expression "as constituted" under S. 187 refers to a case where "a change has 
occurred in the constitution of the firm", that expression in
S. 26 (1)
refers to that 
and another case also where "a firm has been newly constituted."
111. The expressions "a change in the constitution of a firm" as well as "a 
firm has been newly constituted" under
S. 26
(10 exhaust between themselves all 
the cases provided for under the rubric of "a change in the constitution of a firm"
as defined for the purpose of  S.187 under cls. (A) and (b) of sub-s. (2) thereof as 
not to suggest any materiality of change between the old and the corresponding 
new section.
112. The consolidating Act, 1961 does not purport to bring any material 
change in the law relating to the assessment of firms. The only change sought to 
be brought about in 1961 Act as per the Law Commission's Report is to collect all 
provisions of law contained in the Act and the Rules made thereunder pertaining 
to the firms at one place in Chap. XVI and to define the conception of "change in 
the constitution of the firm" as was done under sub-s. (2) of S. 187.
113. There is no case brought to our notice to show that having regard to 
the subject-matter to  which the concept of  "a firm has been newly constituted"
refers to, it falls under the category of "succession of one firm by another firm"
under S. 188 of 1961 Act or under
Section 26 (2)
of 1922 Act. Besides that, what 
falls within S. 187 falls outside S. 188. There is that declaration of statutory 
exclusion of cases falling under S. 187 from out of the purview of S. 188.
114. Firms whether reconstituted or newly constituted or dissolved with 
their business not being discontinued, fall under
s. 26 (1)
of the repealed act of 
1922. We may remind ourselves once again of the observations of Justice Shah 
(as he then was) in
Shivram Poddar
's case  that "where the 
firm is dissolved but the business is not discontinued, there being change in the 
constitution of the firm, assessment has to be made under
S. 26 (1)
."
115. Therefore, the Supreme Court decisions are applicable to the 
interpretation of S. 187 and govern the cases arising thereunder.
116. The framers of the consolidating Act, 1961 grouped together under 
sub-heading (c0 in Chap. XVI, S. 187 dealing with "change in the constitution of a 
firm", S. 188 with "succession of one firm by another firm" and S. 189 which deals 
with "firms dissolved or business discontinued" together. Therefore, cases where 
firm is dissolved and business discontinued fall under S. 189. But cases where 
there is a dissolution but the business was not discontinued, fall under S. 187 
provided the other conditions mentioned therein are fulfilled.
117. For one thing, the expression "dissolution" does not appear in S. 187. 
There is no justification grammatically, linguistically or otherwise to read into it by 
implication conceptions pertaining to dissolution, as the latter cases are already 
provided for under s. 189 as not to have any need to have recourse to s. 187. 
The nature of the Act consolidating and amending and the presumptions of 
interpretation negative such an interpretation.
118. The consequences that may flow or follow from out of dissolution 
under
Partnership Act
such as winding up of the affairs of the firm after 
dissolution are not envisaged in a case of dissolution followed by reconstitution 
under S. 187 though such a case may fall under S. 189.
119. Nor the tests of succession as
laid down by
Justice Suba Rao (as he 
then was) in
Commr. of Income-tax v. K. H. Chambers
,  as referred to by My Lord the Chief Justice are satisfied in 
the cases under reference.
120. For the reasons given above, I agree with the conclusion reached by 
Kondaiah, J. speaking for the Full Bench in Addl.
Income-tax Commr., A.  P. v. 
Visakha  Flour Mills
, (1977 Tax LR 41 (Andh Pra) (FB) that where a firm is 
dissolved on account of the death of a partner and the business is continued by 
the remaining partners and another in the place of the deceased partner, there is 
only a change in the constitution of the firm within the meaning of
S. 187 (2)
of 
the Act. I agree with the conclusion of My Lord the Chief Justice and Kondaiah, J.
in
the above case
that when a case falls under S. 187, there must be a single 
assessment.
I agree with the conclusion of my learned brother, Raghuvir, J.
Raghuvir, J.
121. In the Full bench judgment of Visakha Flour Mills case (1977 Tax LR
41) (Andh Pra) (FB) this court considering an identical reference reviewed all the 
cases which have been cited now before us. Kondaiah, J. speaking for the Full 
Court dealt with all aspects of the question and the divergent views expressed in 
this regard by other High Courts in the country. The fact that two of us for the 
second time affirm and reiterate the views expressed earlier shows the "question 
is open" (Chunilal V. Mehta & Sons, Ltd v. Century Spg. & Mfg. Co Ltd.,  and the subject is capable of discussion as 
possible "alternative views".
There is no case in this court in which the view taken 
in
Visakha Flour Mills
case 1977 Tax LR 41 (Andh Pra) (FB) is doubted.
122. The facts necessitating the references in R. C. No. 22 of 1975 and in 
R. C. No. 67 of 1975 have been fully stated in the opinion of the Chief 
Justice.
123. Following the reasoning stated in the
Visakha Flour Mills
case (1977
Tax LR 41 (Andh Pra) (FB
) (supra) in R. C. No. 22 of 1975 I answer the question 
that single assessment could be made. The answer is against the assessee and 
in favour of the Revenue. In R. C. No. 67 of 1975 the firm constituted in the deed 
on 26-10-1970 has not "succeeded" the earlier firm constituted by the deed on 1-
10-1970 with in the meaning of
S. 188
of the Act but was a "change"  under
S. 
187 (2)
of the Act. The answer is in favour of the Revenue and against the 
assessee.
124. 
Answered against  the Revenue.