[Cites
15
, Cited by
111
]
Supreme Court of India
Ibrahim vs Raju & Ors on 31 October, 2011
Equivalent citations: AIR 2012 SUPREME COURT 534, 2011 (10) SCC 634, 2012 AIR SCW 413, 2012 AAC 415 (SC), 2012 (2) AIR JHAR R 317, (2012) 1 ALLMR 916 (SC), 2011 (12) SCALE 297, (2012) 113 ALLINDCAS 19 (SC), 2012 (1) ALL MR 916, 2012 (1) SCC(CRI) 120, 2012 (113) ALLINDCAS 19, AIR 2012 SC (CIVIL) 427, (2012) 3 ANDHLD 60, (2011) 12 SCALE 297, (2011) 4 ACJ 2845, (2011) 4 CURCC 199, (2011) 4 ACC 678, (2012) 2 MAD LJ 250, (2011) 50 OCR 943, (2012) 3 PUN LR 102, (2012) 1 TAC 22, (2011) 4 RECCIVR 863, (2012) 92 ALL LR 469, (2012) 1 ALL WC 213, (2012) 3 CIVLJ 102
Author:
G.S. Singhvi
Bench:
Asok Kumar Ganguly
,
G.S. Singhvi
NON-REPORTABLE




                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                       CIVIL APPEAL No.8943 OF 2011

                  (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No.25372 of 2005)


Ibrahim                                                                 .......Appellant

                                          Versus


Raju and others                                                        .......Respondents 





                                  J U D G M E N T
G.S. Singhvi, J.
1.      Delay condoned.
2.      Leave granted.
3.      Feeling   dissatisfied   with   the   enhancement   granted   by   the   High 


Court  in the  amount  of compensation   awarded by  2nd  Additional Motor 


Accident   Claims   Tribunal,   Karwar   (for   short,   `the   Tribunal'),   the 


appellant has filed this appeal.
4.      The appellant sustained serious injuries on the head, nose, back and 


lower region of abdomen including the pelvic region when the tempo in 


which he was travelling met with an accident on 23.4.2000.  He was taken 


to   Vijayashree   Orthopaedic   Centre   for   first   aid   and   was   then   shifted   to
2
Kasturba   Hospital,   Manipal.     He   remained   in   the   hospital   from 


23.04.2000 to 05.06.2000.
5.     The   appellant   filed   a   petition   under
Section   166
of   the   Motor 


Vehicles   Act,   1988   (for   short,   `the   Act')   and   claimed   compensation   of 


Rs.3,00,000/-   with   interest   and   cost.     He   pleaded   that   the   accident   was 


caused due to rash and negligent driving of the tempo by its driver Shri 


Raju;   that   he   had   suffered   serious   injuries   in   the   accident;   that   he 


remained in the hospital for almost one month and a half and had to spend 


more   than   Rs.80,000/-   towards   medical   treatment,   conveyance   and 


expenses of the attendants; that at the time of accident he was a student of 


Class 8 and on account of the injuries he was not in a position to continue 


his studies.
6.     The   owner   and   the   driver   of   the   offending   vehicle,   who   were 


impleaded as non-petitioners No.1 and 2 did not contest the claim of the 


appellant.     However,   the   National   Insurance   Company,   which   was 


impleaded as non-petitioner No.3 contested the claim by asserting that the 


accident was not caused due to rash and negligent driving of the tempo 


and that the appellant was himself responsible for the accident.
7.     Two   of  the   four   issues   framed   by   the   Tribunal   were   whether   the 


accident was caused due to rash and negligent driving of the tempo and
3
whether the appellant was entitled to compensation.   After analysing the 


evidence produced by the parties, the Tribunal held that the accident was 


caused due to rash and negligent driving of the tempo.  The Tribunal then 


referred   to   the   statements   of   Dr.   Anil   K.   Bhat,   Assistant   Professor   of 


Orthopaedics,   who   issued   disability   certificate   Exhibit   P-140   and   Dr. 


Joseph   Thomas,   Professor   of   Urology,   who   issued   treatment   certificate 


Exhibit   P-141   (both   the   doctors   were   working   in   Kasturba   Medical 


College   and   Hospital,   Manipal)   and   awarded   compensation   to   the 


appellant under the following heads:
1.        Pain and suffering                                  Rs.25,000/-
2.        Medical expenses                                    Rs.20,340/-
3         Transportation                                          Rs.
1,900/-
4.        Diet and attendant charges                          Rs.30,600/-
5.        Loss   of   future   earning   on                   Rs.21,600/-
account of disability
6.        Decline in the prospects of                   Rs.50,000/

                             marriage                              -
___________

                                                        Total                  Rs.1,49,440/-
8.     The   High   Court   partly   allowed   the   appeal   filed   by   the   appellant 


under
Section 173
of the Act and enhanced the amount of compensation 


by a sum of Rs.40,000/-.
4
9.      The appellant has questioned the impugned judgment mainly on the 


ground that while determining the amount of compensation, the Tribunal 


and the learned Single Judge of the High Court overlooked the parameters 


and principles laid down by this Court and did not take into consideration  


the expenses likely to be incurred by him for future treatment and the loss 


of amenities and enjoyment of life.
10.     We have heard learned counsel for the parties and carefully perused 


the record.   The sufferings of the dependents of those who are killed in 


motor accidents and the survivors who are disabled are manifold.   Some 


time these can be measured in terms of money but most of the times it is 


not   possible   to   do   so.     If   an   individual   is   disabled   as   a   result   of   road 


accident, the cost of treatment, care and rehabilitation is likely to be very 


high.     A   very   large   number   of   people   involved   in   motor   accidents   are 


pedestrians,   children   and   women   and,   on   account   of   sheer   ignorance, 


poverty   and   other   disabilities,   majority   of   them   are   unable   to   engage 


competent   lawyers   for   putting   their   cause   before   the   Tribunals   and   the 


Courts.     The  insurance  companies,  with  whom the  vehicles involved  in 


accidents are insured always have the advantage of assistance of legally 


trained   mind   (law   officers   and   panel   lawyers).     They   contest   the   claim 


petitions by raising all possible technical objections for ensuring that their 


clients are either completely absolved or their liability is minimized and
5
in the process, adjudication of the claims filed by the victims and/or their 


legal representatives is delayed for years together.  At times, the delay in  


disposal   of   the   claim   cases   and   litigation   expenses   make   the   award   of 


compensation meaningless for survivors of the accidents and/or families 


of   the   victims.     This   Court   has   time   and   again   emphasized   that   the 


officers, who preside over the Tribunals adopt a proactive approach and 


ensure that the claims filed under the Act are disposed of with required 


urgency   and   compensation   is   awarded   to   the   victims   of   the   accident 


and/or their legal representatives in adequate measure keeping in view the 


relevant factors.   Unfortunately, despite repeated pronouncements of this 


Court in which guiding principles have been laid down for determination 


of the compensation payable to the victims of road accidents and/or their 


families,   the   Tribunals   and   even   the   High   Courts   do   not   pay   serious 


attention   to   the   imperative   of   awarding   just   compensation   to   the 


claimants.
11.    In Ward v. James (1965) 1 All ER 563, the Court of Appeal, while  


dealing   with   a   case   under   Section   6   of   the   Administration   of   Justice 


(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1933 made some important observations, 


which are extracted below:
"Although you cannot give a man  so gravely injured much  for his `lost  

years',   you   can,   however,   compensate   him   for   his   loss   during   his 

shortened span, that is, during his expected `years of survival'. You can
6
compensate him for his loss of earnings during that time, and for the cost 

of treatment, nursing and attendance. But how can you compensate him 

for being rendered a helpless invalid? He may, owing to brain injury, be 

rendered unconscious for the rest of his days, or, owing to a back injury, 

be   unable   to   rise   from   his   bed.   He   has   lost   everything   that   makes   life 

worthwhile. Money is no good to him. Yet judges and juries have to do 

the best they can and give him what they think is fair. No wonder they 

find   it   well   nigh   insoluble.   They   are   being   asked   to   calculate   the 

incalculable. The figure is bound to be for the most part a conventional 

sum. The judges have worked out a pattern, and they keep it in line with 

the changes in the value of money."
12.
In
R.D.   Hattangadi   v.   Pest   Control   (India)   Pvt.   Ltd.   and   others
(1995) 1 SCC 551, this Court while dealing with a case involving claim 


of   compensation   under   the
Motor   Vehicles   Act,   1939
,   referred   to   the 


judgment in Ward v. James (supra), Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th edn., 


vol. 12 (page 446) and observed:
"Broadly speaking while fixing an amount of compensation payable to a 

victim   of   an   accident,   the   damages   have   to   be   assessed   separately   as 

pecuniary   damages   and   special   damages.   Pecuniary   damages   are   those 

which   the   victim   has   actually   incurred   and   which   are   capable   of   being 

calculated in terms of money; whereas non-pecuniary damages are those 

which   are   incapable   of   being   assessed   by   arithmetical   calculations.   In 

order   to   appreciate   two   concepts   pecuniary   damages   may   include 

expenses   incurred   by   the   claimant:   (i)   medical   attendance;   (ii)   loss   of 

earning   of  profit   up   to  the   date  of   trial;  (iii)  other  material   loss.   So  far 

non-pecuniary damages are concerned, they may include (i) damages for 

mental and physical shock, pain and suffering, already suffered or likely 

to   be   suffered   in   future;   (ii)   damages   to   compensate   for   the   loss   of 

amenities of life which may include a variety of matters i.e. on account of 

injury the claimant may not be able to walk, run or sit; (iii) damages for 

the   loss   of   expectation   of   life,   i.e.,   on   account   of   injury   the   normal 

longevity   of   the   person   concerned   is   shortened;   (iv)   inconvenience, 

hardship,   discomfort,   disappointment,   frustration   and   mental   stress   in 

life."
In the same case, the Court further observed:
7
"In  its very  nature  whenever  a tribunal or a  court is required  to fix  the 

amount   of   compensation   in   cases   of   accident,   it   involves   some 

guesswork,   some   hypothetical consideration,  some  amount   of  sympathy 

linked   with   the   nature   of   the   disability   caused.   But   all   the   aforesaid 

elements have to be viewed with objective standards."
13.
In
Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences v. Prasanth S. Dhananka
(2009) 6 SCC 1,   the three-Judge Bench was dealing with a case arising 


out   of   the   complaint   filed   under   the
Consumer   Protection   Act,   1986
.
While   enhancing   the   compensation   awarded   by   the   National   Consumer 


Disputes   Redressal   Commission   from   Rs.15   lakhs   to   Rs.1   crore,   the 


Bench   made   the   following   observations   which   can   appropriately   be 


applied for deciding the petitions filed under
Section 166
of the Act:
"We   must   emphasise  that  the  court  has  to  strike  a  balance  between   the 

inflated and unreasonable demands of a victim and the equally untenable 

claim of the opposite party saying that nothing is payable. Sympathy for 

the victim does not, and should not, come in the way of making a correct  

assessment,   but   if   a   case   is   made   out,   the   court   must   not   be   chary   of 

awarding adequate compensation. The "adequate compensation" that we 

speak   of,   must   to   some   extent,   be   a   rule   of   thumb   measure,   and   as   a 

balance   has   to   be   struck,   it   would   be   difficult   to   satisfy   all   the   parties 

concerned.
At the same time we often find that a person injured in an accident leaves 

his family in greater distress vis-`-vis a family in a case of death. In the 

latter   case,   the   initial   shock   gives   way   to   a   feeling   of   resignation   and 

acceptance, and in time, compels the family to move on. The case of an 

injured and disabled person is, however, more pitiable and the feeling of 

hurt,   helplessness,   despair   and   often   destitution   enures   every   day.   The 

support   that   is   needed   by   a   severely   handicapped   person   comes   at   an 

enormous price, physical, financial and emotional, not only on the victim 

but even more  so on his family  and attendants and the stress saps their  

energy and destroys their equanimity."
(emphasis supplied)
8
14.
In
Reshma   Kumari   and   others   vs.   Madan   Mohan   and   another
(2009) 13 SCC 422, this Court reiterated that the compensation awarded 


under the Act should be just and also identified the factors which should 


be   kept   in   mind   while   determining   the   amount   of   compensation.     The 


relevant portions of the judgment are extracted below:
"The   compensation   which   is   required   to   be   determined   must   be   just. 

While the claimants are required to be compensated for the loss of their 

dependency, the same should not be considered to be a windfall. Unjust 

enrichment   should  be discouraged.  This  Court cannot  also  lose  sight  of 

the   fact   that   in   given   cases,   as   for   example   death   of   the   only   son   to   a 

mother, she can never be compensated in monetary terms.



The   question   as   to   the   methodology   required   to   be   applied   for 

determination   of   compensation   as   regards   prospective   loss   of   future 

earnings,   however,   as   far   as   possible   should   be   based   on   certain 

principles.   A   person   may   have   a   bright   future   prospect;   he   might   have 

become   eligible   to   promotion   immediately;   there   might   have   been 

chances of an immediate pay revision, whereas in another (sic  situation) 

the nature of employment was such that he might not have continued in 

service;   his   chance   of   promotion,   having   regard   to   the   nature   of 

employment   may   be   distant   or   remote.   It   is,   therefore,   difficult   for   any 

court   to   lay   down   rigid   tests   which   should   be   applied   in   all   situations. 

There are divergent views. In some cases it has been suggested that some 

sort of hypotheses or guess work may be inevitable. That may be so.



In   the   Indian   context   several   other   factors   should   be   taken   into 

consideration including education of the dependants and the nature of job. 

In   the   wake   of   changed   societal   conditions   and   global   scenario,   future 

prospects may have to be taken into consideration not only having regard 

to   the   status   of   the   employee,   his   educational   qualification;   his   past 

performance   but   also   other   relevant   factors,   namely,   the   higher   salaries 

and perks which are being offered by the private companies these days.
In 

f
  act while determining the multiplicand this Court in   O
                                                                            riental Insurance   

C
  o.
Ltd.    v.   Jas
huben    held  that even  dearness  allowance  and  perks with  

regard   thereto   from   which   the   family   would   have   derived   monthly 

benefit, must be taken into consideration.
9
One of the incidental issues which has also to be taken into consideration 

is  inflation.  Is the  practice  of  taking  inflation  into  consideration   wholly 

incorrect? Unfortunately, unlike other developed countries in India there 

has been no scientific study. It is expected that with the rising inflation 

the rate of interest would go up. In India it does not happen. It, therefore,  

may   be   a   relevant   factor   which   may   be   taken   into   consideration   for 

determining   the   actual   ground   reality.   No   hard-and-fast   rule,   however, 

can be laid down therefor."
(emphasis supplied)
15.
In
Arvind   Kumar   Mishra   v.   New   India   Assurance   Company 


Limited  and another
(2010) 10 SCC 254, the Court considered the plea 


for   enhancement   of   compensation   made   by   the   appellant,   who   was   a 


student of final year of engineering and had suffered 70% disablement in 


a motor accident.  After noticing the factual matrix of the case, the Court 


observed:
"We   do   not   intend   to   review   in   detail   state   of   authorities   in   relation   to 

assessment  of all damages for personal injury. Suffice  it to say that the 

basis of assessment  of all damages for personal injury is compensation. 

The   whole   idea   is   to   put   the   claimant   in   the   same   position   as   he   was 

insofar as money can. Perfect compensation is hardly possible but one has 

to keep in mind that the victim has done no wrong; he has suffered at the 

hands of the wrongdoer and the court must take care to give him full and  

fair compensation for that he had suffered."
(emphasis supplied)
16.
In
Raj Kumar vs. Ajay Kumar and another
(2011) 1 SCC 343, the 


Court considered some of the precedents and held:
"The   provision   of   the
Motor   Vehicles   Act,   1988
("the   Act",   for   short) 

makes   it   clear   that   the   award   must   be   just,   which   means   that 

compensation should, to the extent possible, fully and adequately restore 

the claimant to the position prior to the accident. The object of awarding
10
damages is to make good the loss suffered as a result of wrong done as far 

as money can do so, in a fair, reasonable and equitable manner. The court 

or the Tribunal shall have to assess the damages objectively and exclude 

from consideration any speculation or fancy, though some conjecture with 

reference to the nature of disability and its consequences, is inevitable. A 

person is not only to be compensated for the physical injury, but also for 

the loss which he suffered as a result of such injury. This means that he is 

to be compensated for his inability to lead a full life, his inability to enjoy 

those normal amenities which he would have enjoyed but for the injuries, 

and his inability to earn as much as he used to earn or could have earned. 



The heads under which compensation is awarded in personal injury cases 

are the following:
Pecuniary damages (Special damages)
(i)   Expenses   relating   to   treatment,   hospitalisation,   medicines, 

transportation, nourishing food, and miscellaneous expenditure.
(ii) Loss of earnings (and other gains) which the injured would have made 

had he not been injured, comprising:
(a) Loss of earning during the period of treatment;
(b) Loss of future earnings on account of permanent disability.
(iii) Future medical expenses.
Non-pecuniary damages (General damages)
(iv)   Damages   for   pain,   suffering   and   trauma   as   a   consequence   of   the 

injuries.
(v) Loss of amenities (and/or loss of prospects of marriage).
(vi) Loss of expectation of life (shortening of normal longevity).
In   routine   personal   injury   cases,   compensation   will   be   awarded   only 

under heads (i), (ii)(a) and (iv). It is only in serious cases of injury, where 

there   is   specific   medical   evidence   corroborating   the   evidence   of   the 

claimant, that compensation will be granted under any of the heads (ii)(b),
(iii),   (v)   and   (vi)   relating   to   loss   of   future   earnings   on   account   of 

permanent  disability, future medical  expenses,  loss of amenities (and/or 

loss of prospects of marriage) and loss of expectation of life."
(emphasis supplied)
17.     In   the   light   of   the   above,   we   shall   now   consider   whether   the 


compensation   awarded   to   the   appellant   is   just   and   reasonable   or   the
11
Tribunal   and   the   High   Court   committed   an   error   by   not   awarding 


compensation   for   the   future   treatment,   deprivation   of   opportunity   to 


undertake further studies and consequential loss of earning/income which 


he   would   have   derived   by   taking   up   appropriate   job   or   doing   some 


business as also diminution of the marriage prospects.
18.     A   perusal   of   the   record   shows   that   the   appellant   had   produced 


substantive evidence to prove that as a result of accident he had suffered 8 


grievous injuries including fracture of pelvis and he had to remain in the 


hospital for one month and a half; that he was treated by Dr. Anil K. Bhat, 


Assistant   Professor,   Orthopaedics   and   Dr.   Joseph   Thomas,   Professor   of 


Urology   and   that   on   account   of   grievous   injuries   he   was   unable   to 


continue his studies.   In his deposition, Dr. Joseph Thomas categorically 


stated   that   the   appellant   will   have   to   undertake   life   long   treatment   for 


recurrence   of   urethral   strictures   and   consequential   dysfunction   due   to 


fracture of pelvis.  Unfortunately, neither the Tribunal nor the High Court 


adverted to this part of the evidence and omitted to award compensation 


for   the   expenses   likely   to   be   incurred   by   the   appellant   for   future 


treatment.  One can reasonably expect that the appellant who was only 18 


years old at the time of accident would live for at least next 50 years.  The 


Tribunal awarded Rs.20,340/- for expenses incurred by the appellant for 


treatment   taken  by   him  in   the   hospital.     Although,   Dr.  Thomas   did  not
12
indicate   the   approximate   expenditure   likely   to   be   incurred   by   the 


appellant and his family for future treatment, keeping in view the nature 


of   injuries   and   the   fact   that   he   will   have   to   take   treatment   for   the 


remaining   life,   it  will  be  reasonable  to  infer  that  he  will  be  required  to  


spend   a   minimum   of   Rs.1,000/-   per   month   for   future   treatment,   which 


would necessarily include fees of the doctors, medicines, transportation, 


etc.     In   the   absence   of   concrete   evidence   about   the   anticipated 


expenditure, we think that ends of justice will be met if the appellant is 


awarded a sum of Rs.2 lacs which, if deposited in a fixed deposit, would 


earn an interest of Rs.14,000/- to 16,000/- per annum.
19.     On   account   of   the   injuries   suffered   by   him,   the   prospects   of   the 


appellant's   marriage   have   considerably   reduced.     Rather,   they   are 


extremely bleak.  In any case, on account of the fracture of pelvis, he will  


not   be   able   to   enjoy   the   matrimonial   life.       Therefore,   the   award   of 


Rs.50,000/- under this head must be treated as wholly inadequate.  In the 


facts and circumstances of the case, we feel that a sum of Rs.2 lacs should 


be awarded to the appellant for loss of marriage prospects and enjoyment 


of life.
20.     The compensation awarded for loss of future earning on account of 


permanent partial disablement is ex facie unreasonable.  Respondent No.3
13
did not produce any evidence to controvert the appellant's assertion that 


on account of the injuries suffered in the accident, he had to abandon his 


studies.     The   consequences   which   followed   were   extremely   grave 


inasmuch as he lost all opportunities for making a career in future.   The 


prospects of the appellant's marriage are extremely bleak.   Therefore, a 


sum of Rs.2 lacs deserves to be awarded under these heads.
21.    We are conscious of the fact that in the petition filed by him, the 


appellant had claimed  compensation  of Rs.3 lacs only with interest and 


cost.  It will be reasonable to presume that due to financial incapacity the 


appellant   and   his   family   could   not   avail   the   services   of   a   competent 


lawyer   and   make   a   claim   for   adequate   compensation.   However,   as   the 


Tribunal and the High Court and for that reason this Court are duty bound 


to   award   just   compensation,   we   deem   it   proper   to   enhance   the 


compensation from Rs.1,89,440/- to Rs.6 lacs.    This approach is in tune 


with the judgment in
Nagappa v. Gurudayal Singh
(2003) 2 SCC 274.
In 


that case, the Court considered a similar issue, referred to the judgments 


of the Bombay High Court in Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay 


v. Kisan Gangaram Hire 1987 ACJ 311 (Bombay), Orissa High Court in 


Mulla  Mod.
Abdul Wahid  v. Abdul Rahim
1994 ACJ 348 (Orissa)  and 


Punjab   and   Haryana   High   Court   in
Devki   Nandan   Bangur   v.   State   of 


Haryana
1995 ACJ 1288 (P&H) and observed:
14
"For the reasons discussed above, in our view, under the
MV Act
, there is 

no restriction that the Tribunal/court cannot award compensation amount 

exceeding   the  claimed  amount.  The  function  of  the  Tribunal/court  is to 

award "just" compensation which is reasonable on the basis of evidence 

produced on record. Further, in such cases there is no question of claim 

becoming   time-barred   or   it   cannot   be   contended   that   by   enhancing   the 

claim there would be change of cause of action. It is also to be stated that  

as   provided   under   sub-section   (4)   to
Section   166
,   even   the   report 

submitted to the Claims Tribunal under sub-section (6) of
Section 158
can 

be   treated   as   an   application   for   compensation   under   the
MV   Act
.   If 

required,   in   appropriate   cases,   the   court   may   permit   amendment   to   the 

claim petition."
22.     In   the   result,   the   appeal   is   allowed.     The   impugned   judgment   is 


modified   and   it   is   declared   that   the   appellant   shall   be   entitled   to   total 


compensation of Rs.6 lacs with interest at the rate of 6% per annum from 


the date of filing the claim petition.  If respondent No.3 has already paid 


the compensation in terms of the award of the Tribunal and the impugned 


judgment, then it shall pay the balance amount with interest at the rate of 


6% per annum on the enhanced amount of compensation within a period 


of 3 months.  If the amount awarded by the Tribunal and the High Court 


has not been paid so far, then respondent No.3 shall pay the total amount 


of   Rs.6   lacs   to   the   appellant   with   interest   at   the   rate   of   6%   per   annum 


within the said period of 3 months.
....................................J.

                                                            (G.S. Singhvi)
15
....................................J.

                        (Asok Kumar Ganguly)

New Delhi,

October 31, 2011.