[Cites
5
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Sampurna Behrua vs Union Of India & Ors on 12 October, 2011
Bench:
A. K. Patnaik
,
R. V. Raveendran
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA



                  CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 473 OF 2005


Sampurna Behura                                               .....Petitioner



                                  Versus



Union of India and Others                                .....Respondents 





                               O R D E R
In   this   Writ   Petition   under
Article   32
of   the 



Constitution,   the   Court   has   been   monitoring   the 



implementation of the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection 



of   Children)   Act,  2000
(for   short   `the   Act').    The  Court   has  



already   passed   several   orders   for   constitution   of   Juvenile 



Justice Boards under
Section 4
of the Act and Child Welfare 



Committees under
Section 29
of the Act in different States 



and   Union   Territories   and   most   of   the   States   and   Union 



Territories   have   taken   steps   to   constitute   the   Juvenile 



Justice Boards and the Child Welfare Committees.  As there 



were   complaints   that   in   many   districts   Child   Welfare 



Committees   were   not   operational   or   functional   and   even
2
Juvenile   Justice   Boards   had   not   been   constituted   in   the 



manner provided in the Act, in our order dated 19.08.2011 



we   have   requested   the   State   Legal   Services   Authorities   to 



coordinate with the respective Child Welfare Department of 



the   States   to   ensure   that   the   Juvenile   Justice   Boards   and 



Child   Welfare   Committees   are   established   and   are 



functional with the required facilities.
2.    We   think   that   we   must   now   monitor   the 



implementation   of   the   provisions   of   the   Act   relating   to 



Special Juvenile Police Unit.
Section 63
of the Act is quoted 



hereinbelow:
"63. Special juvenile police unit.- (1) In order 

        to   enable   the   police   officers   who   frequently   or 

        exclusively   deal   with   juveniles   or   are   primarily 

        engaged   in   the   prevention   of   juvenile   crime   or 

        handling of the juveniles or children under this 

        Act   to   perform   their   functions   more   effectively, 

        they shall be specially instructed and trained. 

        (2)   In   every   police   station   at   least   one   officer 

        with   aptitude   and   appropriate   training   and 

        orientation may be designated as the 'juvenile or 

        the   child   welfare   officer'   who   will   handle   the 

        juvenile   or   the   child   in   co-ordination   with   the 

        police.
(3)   Special   juvenile   police   unit,   of   which   all 

        police   officers   designated   as   above,   to   handle 

        juveniles   or   children   will   be   members,   may   be 

        created in  every district and  city  to  co-ordinate 

        and   to   upgrade   the   police   treatment   of   the 

        juveniles and the children."
3
3.    The   Home   Departments   and   the   Director   Generals   of 



Police   of   the   States/Union   Territories   will   ensure   that   at 



least one police officer in every police station  with aptitude 



is given appropriate training and orientation and designated 



as   Juvenile   or   Child   Welfare   Officer,   who   will   handle   the 



juvenile or child in coordination with the police as provided 



under sub-section (2) of
Section 63
of the Act.  The required 



training   will   be   provided   by   the   District   Legal   Services 



Authorities   under   the   guidance   of   the   State   Legal   Services 



Authorities   and   Secretary,   National   Legal   Services 



Authoritiy   will   issue   appropriate   guidelines   to   the   State 



Legal   Services   Authorities   for   training   and   orientation   of 



police officers, who are designated as the Juvenile or Child 



Welfare Officers.   The training and orientation may be done 



in phases over a period of six months  to one year in every 



State and Union Territory.
4.    The   Home   Departments   and   the   Director   Generals   of 



Police   of   the   States/Union   Territories   will   also   ensure   that 



Special Juvenile Police Unit comprising of all police officers  



designated as Juvenile or Child Welfare Officer be created in 



every   district   and   city   to   coordinate   and   to   upgrade   the
4
police treatment to juveniles and the children as provided in 



sub-section (3) of
Section 63
of the Act.
5.     The matter be listed in the first week of January, 2012 



when the State Governments and the Union Territories will 



file an affidavit stating steps taken by them pursuant to this  



order.
..................................J.

                                                                (R. V. Raveendran)





                                                  ..................................J.

                                                               (A. K. Patnaik)

New Delhi,

October 12, 2011.