[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S National Insurance Company Ltd vs Neeru Devi on 15 December, 2025
2025 INSC 1430
                                                                      Non-Reportable

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        Civil Appeal No.           of 2025
                                  (@ Special Leave Petition (C) No.19462 of 2025)
                            M/s National Insurance Co. Ltd.
                                                                           ...Appellant
                                                            Versus

                            Neeru Devi & Ors.
                                                                       ...Respondents
                                                       JUDGMENT
K. VINOD CHANDRAN, J.
Leave granted.
2.     The Insurance Company has in the above case raised

                            only the question of the exorbitant award made on an

                            unconscionable computation of the income of the deceased.

                            The undisputed facts are that the deceased, whose legal

                            representatives were the claimants, wife and three children,

                            died in a motor accident on 29.08.2017. The deceased was

                            driving a vehicle which was hit by another vehicle driven by
Signature Not Verified
the fifth respondent at a very high speed and in a rash and
Digitally signed by
VARSHA MENDIRATTA
negligent manner. The Tribunal framed two issues;
   Date: 2025.12.15
   15:01:27 IST
   Reason:
whether, the death was caused by the fatal injuries caused
Page 1 of 7
CA @ SLP (C) No.19462 of 2025
in the road traffic accident and the quantum of compensation

entitled to the legal representatives. On the issue of death

caused in the road traffic accident, there is no dispute raised

and the dispute is only on the computation of monthly

income.
3.     The      learned         counsel   appearing   for     the

appellant/Insurance Company would point out that the

computation of Rs.95,000/- (Rupees Ninety-five Thousand

only) as monthly income of the claimant is without any basis.

A person who had an income of Rs.95,000/- (Rupees Ninety-

five Thousand only) per month would definitely be liable to

pay income tax. There were no income tax returns

produced by the claimants. The contention raised based on

the loan account produced was that the deceased was

paying EMI to the extent of almost Rs.42,500/- (Rupees

Forty-two Thousand Five Hundred only) per month, for the

two trucks he owned, in which event his income would have

been double the EMI paid. There is no basis for such an

assumption, and the computation of annual income is on

mere surmises and conjectures, argues the learned Counsel
Page 2 of 7
CA @ SLP (C) No.19462 of 2025
for the insurer. It is also submitted that a perusal of the

accounts produced by the claimants itself would indicate

that there were 15 defaults committed by the deceased

which would clearly indicate that he was not getting a

regular income to even pay up the EMIs in time.
4.        Learned counsel for the respondents/claimants,

however, would point out that the accounts show a different

picture and evidence due satisfaction of EMIs. In any event,

if there was continuous default, the bank would have

proceeded against the defaulter. It is argued that there was

just compensation awarded by the Tribunal as confirmed by

the High Court especially looking at the reasoning in
Gurpreet Kaur v. United India Insurance Company Ltd.1
.
5.        Looking at Gurpreet Kaur, we are not convinced that

the reasoning on the facts therein has any application to the

present case. Therein, the deceased was stated to be

working as a contractor for lifting of earth, for which

purpose, he had also purchased a tractor. The tractor was

purchased on a loan, which had an EMI of Rs.11,550/-
1
2022 SCC Online SC 1778
Page 3 of 7
CA @ SLP (C) No.19462 of 2025
(Rupees Eleven Thousand Five Hundred Fifty only) and

which loan was paid up within a year also. It is on that basis

that the computation of monthly income at Rs.25,000/-

(Rupees Twenty-five Thousand only) was determined by the

Tribunal and accepted by this Court, setting aside the order

of the High Court determining the income on the basis of the

minimum wages at the relevant time.
6.     In the present case, the claim petition itself spoke of

the deceased having been a reputed transporter and the

owner of two trucks. This was reiterated by the wife of the

deceased who was examined as PW1 who also stated that

the deceased had also been driving the truck of others for

additional income. The said contention was not at all

established by way of any evidence and pertinently as

noticed by the Tribunal itself, no income tax returns were

filed, which assumes much relevance insofar as the claim of

income exceeding the taxable limit as per the
Income Tax

Act
.
7.
In
Gurpreet Kaur
(supra), the contention was that the

deceased was an earth-moving contractor for which
Page 4 of 7
CA @ SLP (C) No.19462 of 2025
purpose he was using the tractor, which he had purchased

availing a loan, which also stood cleared by due deposit of

EMIs. The deceased was a 24-year-old whose death would

have deprived the family of the earnings from his avocation

of a contractor. However, in the present case, the deceased

was admittedly a reputed transport contractor and there

would be no difficulty in continuing the business after his

death. The deposition of PW 1 that the trucks were parked

idly cannot at all be accepted. In the very circumstance of

the deceased having owned two trucks, he would have been

engaging a driver to run at least one of them. The death of

the victim in our opinion would not have put a stop to the

income that could be generated from his business;

especially from the two trucks he owned.
8.         As has been noticed by the Tribunal at the very

commencement of the award, the Constitution Bench in
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Pranay Sethi2
categorically

found that the legal representatives of the deceased in a

motor vehicle accident cannot expect a windfall from a
2
(2017) 16 SCC 680
Page 5 of 7
CA @ SLP (C) No.19462 of 2025
tragedy, nor can the amounts granted be a mere pittance,

an apology for compensation. Keeping the said principle in

mind, we are of the opinion that the amount of Rs.50,00,000/-

(Rupees Fifty Lakhs only) now deposited, on directions

issued by this Court would suffice as compensation for loss

of dependency, which works out to half of the total loss of

dependency as computed by the Tribunal. However,

interest at the rate of 9% per annum would definitely be

entitled to the claimants, which the Insurance Company

would be liable to pay.
9.         Additionally, the claimants would be entitled to

compensation for loss of consortium, loss of estate and

funeral expenses as awarded. Further, as has been held in
Magma General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Nanu Ram & Ors.3
not only the wife, the children are also entitled to loss of filial

consortium. The claimants would be entitled to a total of

Rs.1,60,000/- (Rupees One Lakh Sixty Thousand only) over

and above the amount deposited. The additional amounts

with the interest due shall also be deposited/paid by the
3
(2018) 18 SCC 130
Page 6 of 7
CA @ SLP (C) No.19462 of 2025
Insurance Company. The total award amount shall carry

interest at the rate of 9% per annum from the date of claim

petition. The balance amount shall be paid by the Insurance

Company to the claimants within a period of one month from

the receipt of this Judgment.
10.    The appeal shall stand allowed.
11.    Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
……...…….……………………. J.
(AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH)




                                ...………….……………………. J.
(K. VINOD CHANDRAN)

NEW DELHI
DECEMBER 15, 2025.
Page 7 of 7
CA @ SLP (C) No.19462 of 2025