[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Cement Corporation Of India vs Icici Lombard General Insurance ... on 16 December, 2025
Author:
J.K. Maheshwari
Bench:
J.K. Maheshwari
1


2025 INSC 1444                                                       REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2052 OF 2016




             CEMENT CORPORATION OF INDIA                         …APPELLANT (S)


                                                 VERSUS


             ICICI LOMBARD GENERAL
             INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED                         …RESPONDENT (S)




                                              JUDGMENT
VIJAY BISHNOI, J.
1.                   This appeal has been preferred by the Appellant challenging

                         the Judgment dated 16.07.2015 (hereinafter referred to as

                         “impugned judgment”) passed in CASE NO.210/2009 by the

                         National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, New

                         Delhi (hereinafter referred to as “NCDRC”). The NCDRC,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
thereby dismissed the complaint preferred by the Appellant-
   NIDHI AHUJA
   Date: 2025.12.16
   18:25:40 IST
   Reason:
Insured   herein,   thus   denying   the   Appellant   any
2
reimbursement/claim     from    the   Respondent-Insurance

     Company herein.
BRIEF FACTS
2.   The brief facts giving rise to the controversy are that the

     Appellant, a Government company, invited tender for

     insurance for its various Units/Dumps/Offices etc., in June

     2005. Pursuant to the said tender, on 16.06.2005 the

     Respondent herein submitted its quote for centralized

     insurance policy and consequently, on being declared as the

     successful bidder, the Respondent was awarded the contract

     for Centralised Insurance coverage at the CO Unit and Zonal

     Units. Accordingly, a contract dated 21.07.2006, was entered

     between the Appellant and the Respondent herein and a

     Standard Fire and Special Perils Policy (Material Damage)

     (hereinafter referred to as “the policy”) was issued by the

     Respondent herein for the Appellant’s unit, Mandhar Cement

     Factory, Cement Corporation of India, P.O. Mandhar, Rampur

     District, Chhattisgarh 243111 (hereinafter referred to as

     “factory”).
3
3.   On the early morning of 01.11.2006, a theft and fire incident

     occurred at the factory of the Appellant where some petty

     thieves entered the premises of the Appellant company with a

     blow torch and portable gas cutter-like apparatus. Although

     the thieves intended to steal winding copper and transformer

     oil, using bolt cutters and blow torch, which triggered a fire in

     the transformer and resulted in a fire in the factory premises.

     Following this, the Appellant formally notified the Respondent

     about the incident through a letter dated 01/02.11.2006 and

     also got registered an FIR bearing No. 106/2006 dated

     01.11.2006 with the concerned police station.
4.   On 30.01.2007, the Appellant calculated the loss and lodged

     a claim of Rs. 2,20,14,190 with the Respondent. The

     Respondent, vide letter dated 15.05.2007, acknowledged the

     receipt of the claim and requested the Appellant to submit the

     documents as required by the panel adjuster/Surveyor.
5.   On 12.10.2007, the Final Survey Report was submitted by the

     Surveyor. In the said survey report, circumstances of loss and

     cause of fire have been reported as under:
4
“..........
Circumstances   As reported, at around 7 a.m. on 1st November
           of Loss         2007, a fire incident took place inside the plant
                           premises, in the Transformer SI. No. 24994,
                           which had no electrical input / output power
                           for the last several years. The Fire Brigade on
                           receipt of the Call of Duty from the Insured's
                           staff, reached there and extinguished the fire,
                           which was of a light nature due to the absence
                           of combustibles, viz. very little transformer oil
                           was inside.
From local enquiries it was learnt that being a
                           silent Risk, there were a past history of theft of
                           transformer oil and copper windings by local
                           petty thieves and miscreants on several
                           occasions, being a desolate place with thick
                           bushy growth all around.
This fire incident was a result of attempted
                           theft, by blow lamp / portable gas cutters, who
                           had on the previous night stole oil from another
                           similar Transformer, SI. No. 24993, which was
                           not affected by the fire.
Cause           Transformer, SI. No. 24994 was reported to
                           have been set on fire while some unknown
                           miscreants / thieves were attempting to take
                           away the copper windings with the help of
                           blow torch or such type of flame cutters.
…..”

     Based on this the Surveyor thus opined that in this situation

     insurer’s liability would not attach as the cause falls under

     the exclusion sub-clause (d) of Clause V in the Policy.
6.   Relying upon the said survey report, the Respondent vide

     letter dated 04.01.2008 repudiated and rejected the claim of

     the Appellant on the grounds that the peril was not covered

     under the Policy as the cause of the loss was covered under

     the exclusion clause of Riots Strike, Malicious and Damage
5
(“hereinafter referred to as RSMD”). The contents of the

     Repudiation letter are reproduced hereunder:
“ …our surveyor was in contact with you and as per the
          report submitted by them the proximate cause of loss was
          Burglary.
Kindly note that this policy is a named peril policy and this
          peril is not covered under the policy (RSMD Exclusion
          Clause-D).
In the light of the above facts, we are treating the case as
          ‘No claim’ and accordingly closing the same as ‘Nil Liability’
          case.”
7.   Being aggrieved by the repudiation of the claim by the

     Respondent, the Appellant filed Complaint No. 210 of 2009

     before the NCDRC, inter alia praying that the Respondent be

     directed to pay the Appellant a sum of Rs. 2,99,39,298.40

     along with interest @18% p.a. till date.
8.   The Respondent filed their written submissions before the

     NCDRC inter alia stating that the theft which took place on

     the premises in the factory preceded the fire, and thus, the

     incident of theft was the proximate cause of damage. Since

     theft was not a named peril in the policy, the Respondent was

     not liable to reimburse the damage claim of the Appellant.
9.   The NCDRC vide the impugned judgment dismissed the

     complaint on grounds that the proximate cause of the loss to
6
the Appellant was burglary and the insurance policy taken by

    the Appellant did not cover the loss on account of theft/

    burglary.   Therefore,    the   Respondent      is   not   liable   to

    compensate the loss to the Appellant. While arriving at this

    conclusion, the NCDRC has placed reliance on the judgment

    of this Court in
New India Insurance Company Limited Vs.

    Zuari Industries Limited & Others
(2009) 9 SCC 70,

    holding that the proximate cause means “active and efficient

    cause” and not merely the event closest in time.
10. Aggrieved by the impugned judgment, the Appellant filed the

    instant civil appeal.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES
11. The learned counsel for the Appellant contended that a fire

    insurance policy is intended to protect against loss caused by

    fire, and it is trite to say that the cause of the fire is irrelevant

    unless it stems from a peril expressly excluded in the policy.

    It is pertinent that under the “Fire” peril, the policy excludes

    merely the damage caused to the property either by (i) its own

    fermentation, natural heating or spontaneous combustion or

    undergoing any heating or drying process; and (ii) burning of
7
property insured by order of any Public Authority. It is further

     submitted that apart from this, the policy had a general

     exclusion   clause    which   provides    that   terrorism   and

     earthquake would be considered as an exclusion under the

     policy and the theft during or after the incident but not in case

     where it precedes the incident.
12. It is thus submitted that the cause of damage in the instant

     case was fire. The damage was caused by the ensuing fire

     itself, and not by theft/ burglary. Since the policy does not list

     any further caveat or exclusion regarding the cause of a fire,

     the insurer cannot repudiate the claim by citing theft/

     burglary as the proximate cause. The cause of the fire

     becomes irrelevant in the absence of a specific exclusion.
13. It is further submitted that the test of proximate cause is

     applied to see whether the loss was due to a specified peril.

     However, in the present case, the damage was due to an

     insured peril, i.e., fire which does not categorize theft/

     burglary as an exclusion. The test of proximate cause becomes

     irrelevant in the instant case as the damage results from

     separate perils and the one causing the loss (fire) is expressly

     covered and not excluded.
8
14. It is further argued that the policy does not list burglary/ theft

     as an exclusion in the case of fire. Thus, there is no reason for

     the Respondent to repudiate the claim of the Appellant on the

     ground that the theft precedes the fire and therefore, the

     cause of the loss was covered under the exclusion clause of

     “RSMD”. It is further argued that the “RSMD” clause has no

     application in the facts and circumstances of the case because

     the damage to the insured property was caused due to fire and

     not by any of the exclusion made under the “RSMD” clause.
15. Per contra, learned counsel for the Respondent submitted that

     the policy is a “named peril” policy as opposed to a general all-

     risks policy and the policy contained a specific exclusion

     under Clause V(d) which excluded loss from “Burglary,

     housebreaking, theft…….. in any malicious act.”. Further, the

     policy also excluded loss by theft during or after the

     occurrence of any insured peril except as provided under the

     RSMD cover.
16. It is argued that the cause of the fire is undisputed that it

     originated   from    an    attempted    theft/burglary    where

     miscreants used blow lamps or portable gas cutters to steal
9
copper windings from a transformer. The cause of fire was also

    confirmed by the Fire Department Report and the Final Survey

    Report. Thus, the proximate cause of loss is burglary and not

    fire. The Appellant chose not to take a separate theft policy for

    its factory and therefore, on the said basis, their claim was

    repudiated.
17. The learned counsel also relied upon the judgment of this

    Court in
Zuari Industries
(supra) wherein it was established

    that the proximate cause of the loss would be “the active and

    efficient cause that sets in motion a train or chain of events

    which brings about the ultimate result without the intervention

    of any other force working from an independent source”. It is

    submitted that when this reasoning is applied in the instant

    case, burglary/ theft was to be considered as the active and

    efficient cause as, had the theft not occurred, there would

    have been no fire, and the damage would not have happened.

    Since the theft/burglary comes under the exclusion of RSMD

    clause, the claim of the appellant has rightly been repudiated.
18. The learned counsel for the Respondent further contended

    that even if theft and fire are considered to be the two

    concurrent proximate cause of the damage, no payments
10
could be made to the Appellant as an exclusion clause of theft

     was acting under the policy and hence, the damage would be

     excluded from the ambit of the policy.
19. We have heard the parties and have perused the materials on

     record.
ANALYSIS
20. It is not in dispute that when the incident of fire took place,

     which resulted in loss to the property insured, the Appellant

     holds a “Standard Fire and Special Perils Insurance Policy”

     which was issued by the Respondent. The opening paragraph

     reads as under:
“… In consideration of the insured named in the Schedule
          hereto having paid to ICICI Lombard General Insurance
          Company Limited (hereinafter called the Company) the full
          premium mentioned in the said schedule, the Company
          agrees, (Subject to the Conditions and Exclusions contained
          herein or endorsed or otherwise expressed hereon) that if,
          after payment of the premium, the Property insured
          described in the said Schedule or any part of such Property
          be destroyed or damaged by any of the perils specified
          hereunder, during the period of insurance named in the said
          schedule or of any subsequent period, in respect of which
          the insured shall have paid and the Company shall have
          accepted the premium required for the renewal of the Policy,
          the Company shall pay to the insured the value of the
          Property at the time of the happening of its destruction or
          the amount of such damage or at its option reinstate or
          replace such property or any part thereof…“
                                               (Emphasis Supplied)
11
From the bare reading of the opening paragraph of the policy,

it is clear that the Respondent had assured to indemnify the

loss to the insured by any of the perils specified in the policy.
The Perils which are specified in the policy are as follows: -
I.Fire
        II.Lightning
       III.Explosion/Implosion
       IV. Aircraft Damage
        V. Riot, Strike, Malicious and Damage
       VI. Storm,     Cyclone,    Typhoon,  Tempest,
           Hurricane, Tornado, Flood, and Inundation
     VII. Impact Damage
     VIII. Subsidence      and    Landslide including
           Rockslide
      IX. Bursting and/or overflowing of water-tanks,
           apparatus, and pipes
       X. Missile Testing Operation
      XI. Leakage       from     automatic   sprinkler
           installations
     XII. Bush Fire


 In each of the specified perils, certain exclusions are

 provided. For the present controversy, the specified peril

 “Fire” is relevant wherein the exclusions have been provided

 which are as under: -
“…1. Fire:
Excluding destruction or damage caused to the property
     insured by
(a) i) its own fermentation, natural heating or spontaneous
     combustion.
ii) its undergoing any heating or drying process.
(b) Burning of property insured by order of any Public
     Authority…”
12
From the above, it is clear that burglary/theft are not included

    in the exclusion given in the specified peril “Fire.” The opening

    part of the policy specifically says that the insurance company

    will indemnify the loss by any of the perils specified in the

    policy. Once it is not disputed that the loss is caused by fire,

    then the cause igniting the fire becomes immaterial. The

    insurer cannot refuse to indemnify the damage caused by fire,

    which is a specified peril, on the ground that the proximate

    cause of fire was burglary/theft (which is excluded under the

    RSMD clause), particularly when no such exclusion is

    provided in the specified peril “Fire”. Further, if we look into

    the general exclusion in the policy, loss by theft is excluded

    during or after the occurrence of the insured peril except as

    provided under the RSMD clause. Nonetheless, the policy is

    silent on the aspect of whether the burglary/ theft which

    precedes the insured peril is excluded or not.
21. The Respondent has repudiated the claim of the Appellant on

    the ground that since the theft preceded the fire, the claim for

    loss by the Appellant is not maintainable because under the

    RSMD clause, burglary/theft is an exclusion. The NCDRC had

    also upheld the said stand of the Respondent, however, in our
13
considered view, the reason for repudiation of the claim of the

     Appellant is not justified.
22. In Avtar Singh’s Law of Insurance, 2nd Edition 2010, pp. 89, it

     was observed that the law need not go into the cause of the

     causes in case of fire as it may result in an infinite process.

     Therein it is stated as under:
“...Fire means actual ignition and not merely generation
           of heat………… BYLES J said:
“The expression in the policy which we have to construe is,
           ‘loss or damage occasioned by fire’. Those words are to be
           construed as ordinary people would construe them. They
           mean loss or damage either by ignition of the article
           consumed, or by ignition of part of the premises where the
           article is in the one case there is a loss, in the other a
           damage, occasioned by fire. LORD BACON says: 'It were
           infinite for the law to judge the causes of causes, and their
           impulsions one of another, therefore it contenteth itself with
           the immediate cause, and judgeth of acts by that, without
           looking to any further degree.' If that were not so, a ship in
           the neighbourhood of Mount Etna or Vesuvius during an
           eruption, and receiving damage from substances projected
           therefrom, might be said to be damaged by fire. So, a shot
           falling amongst crockeryware might in one sense be said to
           occasion a loss by fire. But neither of these cases would fall
           within these words, which must be understood in their plain
           and ordinary sense…"
(Emphasis Supplied)
23. A fire insurance policy is essentially a contract entered

     between the insurer and the insured for indemnification of the

     loss caused to the insured goods by fire. The High Court of

     Madras in its judgment in
Sri. Balaji Traders vs. United

     India Insurance Co. Ltd.
reported in 2005 (1) CTC 267,
14
which was later confirmed by this Court, while dealing with a

case where a fire took place in a godown which resulted in loss

of stock to the petitioner, held that, the cause of fire is

immaterial unless it is specifically pleaded that the fire was

occasioned by the wilful act of foul play or fraud by the insured

himself. The relevant paragraphs from the judgment of the

High Court are reproduced below:
“…24. The learned counsel for the appellant relying upon
     certain passage in “Fire and Motor Insurance” by E.R.
     Hardy Ivamy, (1973 Edition), submitted that the cause of
     fire in this case may not weigh the quantum of evidence or
     it may not be the cause for rejecting the claim, since the
     contract is to provide for the payment of money, upon the
     happening of a fire. In the said book, it is observed under
     the heading ‘Immateriality of Cause of the Fire’ as follows:
“The object of the contract is to provide for the payment of a
     sum of money, or for some corresponding benefit, to meet a
     loss or detriment which may be suffered by
     the     insured    upon    the     happening     of   a   fire.
To carry the investigation, therefore, beyond the cause of
     the loss, and to cast upon the insured the burden of
     establishing that the cause of the fire itself was covered by
     his contract, would largely defeat this object.
     When it is one established that the loss is due to fire within
     the meaning of the contract, the cause of the fire is, as a
     general rule, immaterial.
The fact that the fire was occasioned by negligence does not
     exempt the insurers from liability, for one of the objects of
     the contract of fire insurance is to provide against the
     consequence of negligence. It is therefore immaterial
     whether a fire which causes a loss is lighted improperly, or,
     after being properly lighted, is negligently attended, since
     the insured is in both cases entitled to recover.
     It is equally immaterial whether the fire is caused by the
     negligence of servants or strangers, or even by the
     negligence of the insured himself.”
     It is also observed in the above cited book that,
     “Where the act is committed without his privity, the insured,
     being guilty of no misconduct himself, does not commit a
     breach of good faith in making a claim in respect of his loss,
     and is therefore not precluded from recovery.”
15
25. From the above observation, which was deduced from
the rulings of the High Court, it is clear that it is immaterial
whether the fire was caused by the negligence of the
servant of the plaintiff firm or by some other method, unless
it is pleaded specifically that the fire occasioned by the
willful act of foul play or fraud by the insured himself. The
first defendant has not raised any plea of fraud and
therefore, as observed by the learned single Judge, since
the plaintiff has failed to prove the cause of fire, the claim
should be negatived, is not acceptable to us.
26. The learned counsel for the appellant submitted, that
the fire loss caused negligently by the insured, even if it is
correct, is covered by fire insurance, since otherwise such
policies would practically be of little importance. Therefore,
on the ground that the contract is based upon the utmost
good faith, the insurer cannot repudiate the claim of the
insured, unless it is shown that the assured or insured
failed to make such disclosure as agreed under the terms of
the contract.
27. In the book ‘Principles of Insurance Law’ by Dr. Avtar
Singh, it is said as follows, under the heading ‘Cause of fire
is immaterial’:
“In insuring against fire, the insured wishes to protect
himself from any loss or detriment which he may suffer
upon the occurrence of a fire, however it may suffer upon
the occurrence of a fire, however it may be caused. So long
as the loss is due to fire within the meaning of the policy, it
is immaterial what the cause of the fire is, generally. Thus,
whether it was because the fire was lighted improperly or
was lighted properly but negligently attended to thereafter
or whether the fire was caused on account of the negligence
of the insured or his servants or strangers is all immaterial
and the insurer is liable to indemnity the insured.”
Therefore, considering the policies taken by the insured
here, we affirm the above said view, thereby concluding that
the claim of the plaintiff cannot be dismissed on the ground
that the cause of fire pleaded in the plaint has not been
established. The cause of fire becomes material and should
be seen, where there is a defence such as that the fire
occasioned not by the negligence, but by the willful act of
the insured or where any foul play has been made out or
suspected, which are not even pleaded in this case and no
such case has also been made out…”
                                       (Emphasis Supplied)
16
24. The principles governing “Fire Insurance” have been very

    succinctly
laid down by
this Court in the case of
Orion

    Conmerx Pvt. Ltd. vs. National
insurance Co. Ltd. reported

    in 2025 SCC OnLine 2309, wherein it was held that if there

    was a fire and something was on fire which ought not to be on

    fire and such a fire was not caused by the wilful act of the

    insured, then any loss attributable to fire would be covered

    under the policy. The relevant portions of
the said judgment
are reproduced herein under:
“....REASONING
         PRINCIPLES GOVERNING ‘FIRE INSURANCE’
         “…32. Having heard learned counsel for the parties, this
         Court is of the view that fire insurance is a strategic tool for
         risk management, asset protection and economic resilience.
         Fire insurance policy does not prevent fire - but it cushions
         the financial impact when it occurs. Keeping in view the
         importance of the concept of fire insurance, it is important to
         outline the principles governing the same.
33. It is settled law that the contract of fire insurance
         is a contract to indemnify the Insured against loss by
         fire. The expression ‘fire’ signifies the cause of the
         loss and in order to determine whether in a particular
         case the loss is caused by fire, the following rules
         generally apply:—
a) There must be an actual fire; hence mere heating or
         fermentation will not be sufficient to render the
         insurers liable for loss occasioned thereby.
b) There must be something on fire which ought not to
         have been on fire.
c) There must be something in the nature of an
         accident, but a fire occasioned by the wilful act of a
         third person without the consent of the Insured, is to
         be regarded as accidental for the purpose of this rule.
         If these requisites are satisfied, any loss attributable
         to the fire, whether by actual burning or otherwise, is
         within the contract.
17
34. The object of the contract is to protect the Insured
          against loss occasioned by fire. The fire must be accidental.
          The dictionary meaning of the expression ‘accidental’ is a
          ‘happening occurring unexpectedly or by chance’.
          Consequently, damage from a deliberately set fire will not
          be covered. To carry out the investigation, therefore, beyond
          the cause of the loss and to cast upon the Insured the burden
          of establishing that the cause of the fire itself was covered
          by his contract, would largely defeat this object.
35. The cause of fire, however, becomes material where the
          circumstances of the case are open to suspicion, and seem
          to indicate that it would be contrary to the principle of good
          faith (doctrine of uberrima fides) inherent in the contract to
          permit the Insured to recover. Accordingly, the cause of fire
          becomes material in cases where the fire is occasioned not
          by negligence but by the wilful act of Insured himself or of
          someone acting with his privity or consent. In such a case,
          his conduct, coupled with the making of a claim, is a fraud
          upon the insurers and he cannot enforce his claim against
          them. (See: The Law Relating to Fire Insurance by A.W.
          Baker Welford and W.W. Otter-Barry Fourth Edition).
36. This Court in
New India Assurance Company Limited v.
          Mudit Roadways
, (2024) 3 SCC 193 has held, ‘the precise
          cause of a fire, whether attributed to a short-circuit or any
          alternative factor, remains immaterial, provided the
          claimant is not the instigator of the fire’. The said
          judgment categorically holds that the precise cause of fire is
          immaterial provided the Insured is not the instigator of the
          fire. This judgment underscores the importance of insurers'
          duty to act in good faith and honour its commitment to the
          Insured.
37. Consequently, this Court is of the opinion that once it is
          established that the loss is due to fire and there is no
          allegation/finding of fraud or that the Insured is the
          instigator of the fire, the cause of fire is immaterial and it will
          have to be assumed and presumed that the fire is accidental
          and falls within the ambit and scope of fire policy…”
                                                      (Emphasis Supplied)
25. In light of the law
laid down by
this Court as discussed above,

     it is a settled position that if the damage is caused by fire, then

     the reason by which the fire took place becomes irrelevant. In
18
the current scenario, the fire took place in the factory of the

    Appellant which caused a huge loss to the Appellant. The loss

    occurred on account of the transformer being set ablaze and

    the fire could not be controlled for about 6 hours. It is also an

    admitted    position    that,    on    the    intervening      night   of

    01.11.2006, some miscreants entered the factory and

    committed burglary. It was reported in the FIR that flames

    were coming out of the transformer and at no stage any

    defense was taken that the insured caused the fire. Thus, it is

    now established that the loss caused to the Appellant was due

    to fire only and the incident of theft/ burglary merely preceded

    the incident of fire.
26. Additionally, in case of insurance contracts, the exclusion

    clause must be construed strictly and wherever there is any

    ambiguity between two or more clauses in the contract, it

    must be interpreted in favour of the insured. This court in the

    case of
Texco Marketing Private Limited vs. Tata Aig

    General Insurance Company Limited and Others
reported

    in (2023) 1 SCC 428 has held as under:
“…13. An exclusion clause has to be understood on the
         touchstone of the doctrine of reading down in the light of the
         underlining object and intendment of the contract. It can
         never be understood to mean to be in conflict with the main
         purpose for which the contract is entered. A party, who relies
19
upon it, shall not be the one who committed an act of fraud,
coercion or misrepresentation, particularly when the
contract along with the exclusion clause is introduced by it.
Such a clause has to be understood on the prism of the main
contract. The main contract once signed would eclipse the
offending exclusion clause when it would otherwise be
impossible to execute it. A clause or a term is a limb, which
has got no existence outside, as such, it exists and vanishes
along with the contract, having no independent life of its
own. It has got no ability to destroy its own creator i.e. the
main contract. When it is destructive to the main contract,
right at its inception, it has to be severed, being a conscious
exclusion, though brought either inadvertently or
consciously by the party who introduced it. The doctrine of
waiver, acquiescence, approbate and reprobate, and
estoppel would certainly come into operation as considered
by this Court in
Union of India v. N. Murugesan [Union of
India
v. N. Murugesan.
14. On the aforesaid principle of law, particularly with
respect to the issues qua onus, burden and reading down,
this Court in Shivram Chandra Jagarnath Cold Storage v.
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. has held as follows : (SCC pp.
546-47, paras 19-20)
“19. Another instance where exception clauses may be
interpreted to the benefit of the insured is when the
exception clauses are too wide and not consistent with the
main purpose or object of the insurance policy.
In
B.V.
Nagaraju v. Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd.
, a two-Judge Bench
of this Court read down an exception clause to serve the
main purpose of the policy. However, this Court clarified that
the breach of the exception clause was not so fundamental
in nature that would have led to the repudiation of the
insurance policy. In that case, the terms of the insurance
policy allowed an insured vehicle to carry six workmen,
excluding the driver. When the vehicle met with an accident,
it was carrying nine persons apart from the driver. The
insured had moved a claim for repair of the vehicle, which
was rejected by the insurer.
20. Allowing the claim, this Court held thus : (
B.V. Nagaraju
case, SCC pp. 650-51, para 7)
‘7. It is plain from the terms of the Insurance Policy that the
insured vehicle was entitled to carry 6 workmen, excluding
the driver. If those 6 workmen when travelling in the vehicle,
are assumed not to have increased any risk from the point
of view of the Insurance Company on occurring of an
accident, how could those added persons be said to have
contributed to the causing of it is the poser, keeping apart
the load it was carrying. Here, it is nobody's case that the
driver of the insured vehicle was responsible for the
20
accident. In fact, it was not disputed that the oncoming
vehicle had collided head-on against the insured vehicle,
which resulted in the damage. Merely by lifting a person or
two, or even three, by the driver or the cleaner of the vehicle,
without the knowledge of the owner, cannot be said to be
such a fundamental breach that the owner should, in all
events, be denied indemnification. The misuse of the vehicle
was somewhat irregular though, but not so fundamental in
nature so as to put an end to the contract, unless some
factors existed which, by themselves, had gone to contribute
to the causing of the accident. In the instant case, however,
we find no such contributory factor.
In Skandia case, this
Court paved the way towards reading down the contractual
clause by observing as follows : (SCC pp. 665-66, para 14)
“14. … When the option is between opting for a view which
will relieve the distress and misery of the victims of
accidents or their dependants on the one hand and the
equally plausible view which will reduce the profitability of
the insurer in regard to the occupational hazard undertaken
by him by way of business activity, there is hardly any
choice. The Court cannot but opt for the former view. Even if
one were to make a strictly doctrinaire approach, the very
same conclusion would emerge in obeisance to the doctrine
of “reading down” the exclusion clause in the light of the
“main purpose” of the provision so that the “exclusion
clause” does not cross swords with the “main purpose”
highlighted earlier. The effort must be to harmonise the two
instead of allowing the exclusion clause to snipe
successfully at the main purpose. This theory which needs
no support is supported by Carter's “Breach of Contract”
vide para 251. To quote:
‘Notwithstanding the general ability of contracting parties to
agree to exclusion clauses which operate to define
obligations there exists a rule, usually referred to as the
“main purpose rule”, which may limit the application of wide
exclusion clauses defining a promisor's contractual
obligations. For example, in Glynn v. Margetson & Co., AC
at p. 357, Lord Halsbury, L.C. stated : (AC p. 357)
“… It seems to me that in construing this document, which
is a contract of carriage between the parties, one must in the
first instance look at the whole instrument and not at one
part of it only. Looking at the whole instrument, and seeing
what one must regard, … as its main purpose, one must
reject words, indeed whole provisions, if they are
inconsistent with what one assumes to be the main purpose
of the contract.”
Although this rule played a role in the development of the
doctrine of fundamental breach, the continued validity of the
rule was acknowledged when the doctrine was rejected by
the House of Lords in Suisse Atlantique Societe d' Armement
21
Maritime S.A. v. N.V. Rotterdamsche Kolen Centrale.
         Accordingly, wide exclusion clauses will be read down to the
         extent to which they are inconsistent with the main purpose,
         or object of the contract…”
27.
In the case of
Shivram Chandra Jagarnath Cold Storage

    and Another vs. New India Assurance Company Limited

    and Others
reported in (2022) 4 SCC 539, this Court has held

    as under:
“…18.
In a similar vein, a two-Judge Bench of this Court in
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Samayanallur Primary
         Agricultural Coop. Bank
held that an insurance policy must
         be construed only with reference to its stipulations and no
         artificial meaning can be given to the words of the policy.
         This Court observed that a cash box cannot be classified as
         a “safe” within the meaning of a burglary insurance policy
         and the insurer was exempted from any liability arising from
         the theft of jewellery and cash from the cash box. The
         exceptions to an insurance policy must be construed strictly
         since they reflect the agreement between the parties with
         respect to the losses that are covered by the insurance
         policy. Any departure from this principle is possible only if
         the terms of the policy are ambiguous or unclear.
In
Sangrur
         Sales Corpn. v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd.
, a two-Judge
         Bench of this Court, of which one of us (D.Y. Chandrachud,
         J.) was a part, held that in the event two constructions are
         possible or if there is any ambiguity, a construction that is
         beneficial to the insured should be adopted consistent with
         the purpose of the policy.
19. Another instance where exception clauses may be
         interpreted to the benefit of the insured is when the
         exception clauses are too wide and not consistent with the
         main purpose or object of the insurance policy.
In
B.V.
         Nagaraju v. Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd.
, a two-Judge Bench
         of this Court read down an exception clause to serve the
         main purpose of the policy. However, this Court clarified that
         the breach of the exception clause was not so fundamental
         in nature that would have led to the repudiation of the
         insurance policy. In that case, the terms of the insurance
         policy allowed an insured vehicle to carry six workmen,
         excluding the driver. When the vehicle met with an accident,
         it was carrying nine persons apart from the driver. The
22
insured had moved a claim for repair of the vehicle, which
was rejected by the insurer.
20. Allowing the claim, this Court held thus : SCC pp. 650-
51, para 7)
“7. It is plain from the terms of the Insurance Policy that the
insured vehicle was entitled to carry 6 workmen, excluding
the driver. If those 6 workmen when travelling in the vehicle,
are assumed not to have increased any risk from the point
of view of the Insurance Company on occurring of an
accident, how could those added persons be said to have
contributed to the causing of it is the poser, keeping apart
the load it was carrying. Here, it is nobody's case that the
driver of the insured vehicle was responsible for the
accident. In fact, it was not disputed that the oncoming
vehicle had collided head-on against the insured vehicle,
which resulted in the damage. Merely by lifting a person or
two, or even three, by the driver or the cleaner of the vehicle,
without the knowledge of the owner, cannot be said to be
such a fundamental breach that the owner should, in all
events, be denied indemnification. The misuse of the vehicle
was somewhat irregular though, but not so fundamental in
nature so as to put an end to the contract, unless some
factors existed which, by themselves, had gone to contribute
to the causing of the accident. In the instant case, however,
we find no such contributory factor.
In Skandia case
[
Skandia Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Kokilaben Chandravadan
,
(1987) 2 SCC 654] this Court paved the way towards
reading down the contractual clause by observing as
follows : (SCC pp. 665-66, para 14)
‘14. … When the option is between opting for a view which
will relieve the distress and misery of the victims of
accidents or their dependants on the one hand and the
equally plausible view which will reduce the profitability of
the insurer in regard to the occupational hazard undertaken
by him by way of business activity, there is hardly any
choice. The Court cannot but opt for the former view. Even if
one were to make a strictly doctrinaire approach, the very
same conclusion would emerge in obeisance to the doctrine
of “reading down” the exclusion clause in the light of the
“main purpose” of the provision so that the “exclusion
clause” does not cross swords with the “main purpose”
highlighted earlier. The effort must be to harmonise the two
instead of allowing the exclusion clause to snipe
successfully at the main purpose. The theory which needs
no support is supported by Carter's “Breach of Contract”
vide para 251. To quote:
“Notwithstanding the general ability of contracting parties
to agree to exclusion clauses which operate to define
obligations there exists a rule, usually referred to as the
23
“main purpose rule”, which may limit the application of wide
          exclusion clauses defining a promisor's contractual
          obligations. For example, in Glynn v. Margetson & Co.
          [Glynn v. Margetson & Co., 1893 AC 351 (HL)] , AC at p.
          357, Lord Halsbury, L.C. stated : (AC p. 357)
          ‘… It seems to me that in construing this document, which
          is a contract of carriage between the parties, one must in
          the first instance look at the whole instrument and not at
          one part of it only. Looking at the whole instrument, and
          seeing what one must regard … as its main purpose, one
          must reject words, indeed whole provisions, if they are
          inconsistent with what one assumes to be the main purpose
          of the contract.’
          Although this rule played a role in the development of the
          doctrine of fundamental breach, the continued validity of the
          rule was acknowledged when the doctrine was rejected by
          the House of Lords in Suisse Atlantique Societe d' Armement
          Maritime S.A. v. N.V. Rotterdamsche Kolen Centrale [Suisse
          Atlantique Societe d' Armement Maritime S.A. v. N.V.
          Rotterdamsche Kolen Centrale, (1967) 1 AC 361 : (1966) 2
          WLR 944 (HL)] . Accordingly, wide exclusion clauses will be
          read down to the extent to which they are inconsistent with
          the main purpose, or object of the contract…”
28. In the case at hand, in terms of the policy, the burglary/theft

     is not an exclusion under the specified peril “Fire”. Even, the

     general exclusions to the policy do not cover theft which

     precedes the insured peril as an exclusion and the said

     exclusion is only provided under the RSMD clause. It is a trite

     law that the exclusions in the contract for insurance must be

     read strictly and, therefore, the exclusion provided under the

     RSMD clause would not oust the liability of the insurer when

     the loss or damage is attributable to the peril of fire which has

     its independent exclusions.
24
29. In view of the above discussion, we are of the view that there

     is no justification for the Respondent to repudiate the claim of

     the Appellant and the NCDRC had erred in not rectifying the

     mistake and to reject the claim.
30. Consequentially, the appeal is allowed and the letter dated

     04.01.2008, sent by the Respondent repudiating the claim of

     the Appellant and impugned judgment, are set aside and

     matter is remitted back to the NCDRC to assess the loss

     pursuant to the claim filed by the Appellant. We further expect

     that the NCDRC must decide the issue as expeditiously as

     possible, and in any case, not later than six months from the

     date of receiving the certified copy of this judgment.
31. All pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
………………………. J.
(J.K. MAHESHWARI)




                                              ………………………. J.
(VIJAY BISHNOI)
  NEW DELHI,
  Dated: 16th DECEMBER, 2025