[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sohanvir@ Sohanvir Dhama vs State Of U.P on 8 December, 2025
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
2025 INSC 1397                                                  NON-REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.          OF 2025
                          (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL) NO.14100 OF 2025)


             SOHANVIR @ SOHANVIR DHAMA & ORS.                         …APPELLANT(S)
                                                  VERSUS
             STATE OF U.P. & ANR.                                    …RESPONDENT(S)


                                               J U D G M E NT
             VIKRAM NATH, J.
1.          Leave granted.
2.          The present appeal has been preferred assailing the
                         judgment dated 8th July, 2025 passed by the High Court of
                         Judicature at Allahabad, whereby Criminal Appeal No. 729
                         of 2025 filed by the Appellants was dismissed. The said
                         appeal was instituted under Section 14-A(1) of the
                         Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of
                         Atrocities) Act, 19891, seeking to set aside the order dated
                         12th     September,   2024   passed    by    the   Trial     Court
                         summoning the Appellants to face trial for offences
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2025.12.08
18:41:59 IST
Reason:
1
In short, “SC/ST Act”
Page 1 of 8
punishable under
Sections 323
and
504
of the Indian Penal
          Code2 and
Section 3(1)(s)
of the SC/ST Act.
3.        The facts necessary for adjudication of the present appeal
          may be summarized as follows:
3.1. Respondent        No.   2      belongs   to   the   Scheduled
             Castes/Scheduled Tribes community and was employed
             as a sweeper in the village. According to Respondent No.
             2, Appellant No. 1 allegedly compelled her on multiple
             occasions to remove garbage from his house and, upon
             her refusal, threatened to implicate her and her children
             in criminal proceedings.
3.2. It is the case of the Respondent No.2 that, on 23rd July,
             2023, while she was sweeping in the morning, the
             Appellant No.1 along with his son, Appellant No.2, and
             servant, Appellant No.3, began hurling abuses at her,
             assaulting her and thereafter started forcing themselves
             upon her.
3.3. Respondent No.2 alleges that she ran back to her house,
             but the Appellants chased her, entered her house and
             directed caste-based abuses at her. It is further claimed
             that they tore her clothes, threatened her and thereafter
             left the premises. On the following day, it is further
             alleged that the Appellants assaulted her son. When the
             Respondent No.2 approached the Police Station to lodge
2
In short, “
IPC
”
Page 2 of 8
a complaint, the police allegedly refused to do so under
             the influence of Appellant No.1.
3.4. Based on these events, on 6th October, 2023, the
             Respondent No.2 filed an application under
Section
             156(3)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19733 before
             the Special Judge which led to the registration of
             Complaint No.64/2023 on 2nd December, 2023 under
Sections 323
,
504
of IPC and
Section 3(1)(s)
of SC/ST Act
             against the Appellants. A separate complaint was also
             filed before the National Commission for Women on 26th
             July, 2023 against the Appellants regarding the same
             incidents.
3.5. The Appellants dispute all these allegations and contend
             that Respondent No.2 has withheld material facts and
             initiated the proceedings as a counter-blast. They
             contend that the allegations are false and the Respondent
             No.2’s son was never medically examined and no injury
             report was placed on the record. The delay in filing of
             complaint by the Respondent No.2 also casts doubt on
             their motive.
3.6. The Appellants assert that, on 24th July, 2023, it was the
             complainant’s son who assaulted Appellant No.3 with a
             sharp-edged weapon with the intention to kill, causing
             multiple injuries. It is further alleged that he also
3
In short, “
CrPC
”
Page 3 of 8
attempted to assault Appellant No.1. Consequently, FIR
      No.0179/2023 was registered on the same day under
Sections 307
and
308
of IPC against the son of
      Respondent No.2.
4.   Vide order dated 12th September, 2024, the Special Judge
     issued summons to the Appellants under
Sections 323
and
504
of the IPC, and
Section 3(1)(s)
of the SC/ST Act. The
     Appellants preferred Criminal Appeal No.729/2025 under
     Section 14-A (1) of the SC/ST Act before the High Court,
     challenging the said summoning order, wherein the
     impugned order was passed.
5.   The High Court, by the impugned order, dismissed the
     Criminal Appeal and upheld the order of the Trial Court.
The High Court observed that on a prima facie evaluation
     of the material on record, the allegations disclosed
     cognizable offences and that there existed sufficient
     material to justify the summoning of the Appellants to face
     trial.
6.   The High Court held that the complainant’s son was beaten
     by the Appellants on a public road, in public view, thereby
     bringing the incident within the ambit of the offence
     contemplated under
Section 3(1)(s)
of the SC/ST Act. The
     High Court further observed that the complaint itself
     indicates that a portion of the alleged occurrence took place
Page 4 of 8
outside the complainant’s house, which constitutes a
     public place within public view.
7.   We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the
     respective parties and have carefully perused the material
     on record.
8.   The learned counsel for the Appellants contends that the
     offence alleged under
Section 3(1)(s)
of the SC/ST Act is not
     made out, as one of the essential ingredients of the
     provision, namely, that the caste-related abuse must occur
     “within public view”, is absent in the present case. It is
     submitted that the allegations themselves indicate that the
     alleged abuses were uttered within the Respondent No.2-
     complainant’s residence, away from public view.
9.   In order to examine this contention, it is necessary to refer
     to
Section 3(1)(s)
of the SC/ST Act, which reads as under:
“3. Punishments for offences of atrocities. — (1) Whoever,
     not being a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled
     Tribe,                                                      —
(s) abuses any member of a Scheduled Caste or a
     Scheduled Tribe by caste name in any place within public
     view;”
10. The expression “any place within public view” has been
     interpreted by this Court in numerous decisions, most
     recently in
Karuppudayar v. State
represented by the
     Deputy Superintendent of Police, Lalgudi, Trichy &
Page 5 of 8
Others4.
Relying   on
Hitesh   Verma    v.   State     of
          Uttarakhand5
, this Court reaffirmed that:
“11. It could thus be seen that, to be a place
               ‘within public view’, the place should be open where
               the members of the public can witness or hear the
               utterance made by the accused to the victim. If the
               alleged offence takes place within the four corners of
               the wall where members of the public are not
               present, then it cannot be said that it has taken
               place at a place within public view.”
11. A perusal of the Application filed by the complainant under
Section 156(3)
of the CrPC reveals that the alleged casteist
          abuses were stated to have been used by the Appellants
          inside the premises of the complainant. This circumstance,
          on its face, does not satisfy the statutory requirement that
          the abuses were made “in any place within public view,”
          which is an essential component of the offence under
Section 3(1)(s)
of the SC/ST Act. The house of the
          complainant cannot be considered to be within public view.
12. Learned counsel appearing for the Respondent no. 2 has
          not been able to show that the complaint or the statement
          recorded under
Section 200
CrPC contained any specific
          averment that the caste based abuses were hurled at a
          place within public view.
4
2025 INSC 132
5
(2020) 10 SCC 710
Page 6 of 8
13. In our considered view, the High Court erred in concluding
    that the incident occurred in public view. A careful reading
    of the complaint makes it evident that the alleged caste-
    based abuses were uttered inside the premises, in the
    presence of the Appellants and Respondent No. 2.
    Therefore, the essential requirement of the offence under
Section 3(1)(s)
of the SC/ST Act is not satisfied.
14. Upon consideration of the submissions and scrutiny of the
    material placed on record, we find merit in the contention
    raised on behalf of the Appellants insofar as the
    applicability of the SC/ST Act is concerned. On the
    allegations as they stand, a prima facie case under
Section
    3(1)(s)
of the SC/ST Act is not made out against the
    Appellants.
15. It is beyond dispute that the appellate powers are to be
    invoked with due caution, and only in exceptional
    circumstances. It is equally well established that the Court
    cannot delve into the truthfulness or credibility of the
    allegations contained in the FIR or complaint. The
    Appellate Court has to examine the contents of the
    complaint as they stand. In the facts of the present case,
    the High Court ought to have exercised its appellate powers
    to quash the summoning order with respect to offences
    under the provisions of the SC/ST Act.
Page 7 of 8
16. In view of the foregoing discussion and having found that
    the essential ingredients of the offence under
Section
    3(1)(s)
of the SC/ST Act are not prima facie satisfied, we
    deem it appropriate to interfere to that limited extent.
    Accordingly,   the   proceedings   initiated   against   the
    Appellants under the
Section 3(1)(s)
of the SC/ST Act are
    hereby quashed. However, the trial insofar as it pertains to
    the remaining offences under the
IPC
shall proceed in
    accordance with law.
17. The impugned judgment of the High Court dated July 8th,
    2025 in Criminal Appeal No.729 of 2025 is hereby set aside
    in part to the extent indicated above. Appeal stands partly
    allowed.
18. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
………………………………………..J.
                                     [VIKRAM NATH]



                             ………………………………………..J.
                                    [SANDEEP MEHTA]

NEW DELHI
DECEMBER 08, 2025
Page 8 of 8