[Cites
19
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
K.P. Kirankumar @ Kiran vs State By Peenya Police on 19 December, 2025
2025 INSC 1473                                                                   REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.            /2025
                                   (Arising out of SLP (CRL.) No. 11287/2025)

           K.P. Kirankumar @ Kiran                                       ….Appellant(s)
                                                      Versus
           State by Peenya Police                                        ….Respondent(s)
                                                  JUDGMENT
Joymalya Bagchi, J.
1.            Leave granted.
2.            The instant case lays bare the deeply disturbing reality of child

                         trafficking and commercial sexual exploitation in India, an offence

                         that strikes at the very foundations of dignity, bodily integrity and

                         the State’s constitutional promise of protection to every child

                         against exploitation leading to moral and material abandonment.

                         The facts before us are not isolated aberrations but form part of a

                         wider and entrenched pattern of organised exploitation that

                         continues to flourish despite legislative safeguards.


           FACTUAL BACKGROUND
3.            On the fateful day of 22.11.2010, the complainant, H.Sidappa

                         (PW-1) received information from NGO workers, Tojo and Dominic
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2025.12.19
16:02:09 IST
(PW-11) that minor girls were being kept for prostitution at a
   Reason:
rented house in Peenya, T. Dasarahalli, Bangalore. After obtaining
Page 1 of 15
the requisite verbal permission from senior officers, he, along with

         the raiding party, proceeded to the spot. One Jaikar (PW- 8), an

         associate of PW-11 was sent to the premises as a decoy with

         Manjunath (PW-12). Jaikar offered money to the appellant (A1) for

         having sex with the minor victim (PW-13) who was in the house.

         After      handing   over   the   money,    PW-8   intimated   PW-1.

         Consequently, PW-1 along-with other officers and PW-11 rescued

         the minor victim. Upon search, the currency notes handed over to

         the appellant were recovered. A mobile phone and Rs. 620 were

         seized from the appellant’s wife (A2). A condom was also found on

         the cot. PW-1 lodged a written complaint bearing FIR No.

         778/2010 at Peenya Police Station, Bangalore against A1 & A2

         u/s. 366A, 372, 373 & 34 of the
Indian Penal Code
, 1860 1 r/w.

         s.3, 4, 5, 6 and 9 of the
Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956
2.

         Charge-sheet was filed
u/s. 366A
,
372
,
373
&
34
, IPC r/w. s. 3, 4,

         5 & 6, ITPA.
4.       The case was registered as C.C. No. 5438/2011 and taken up for

         trial. Charges were framed under the aforesaid provisions.

         Prosecution proceeded to examine 16 prosecution witnesses,

         arrayed as PW-1 to PW-16, to prove its case.
1
Hereinafter “
IPC
”.
2
Hereinafter “ITPA”.
Page 2 of 15
Brief description of the witnesses is set out hereunder:
S.No.          Particulars                                       Description
             1.   P.W. 1 (H.Sidappa)                                Head of the raiding team3; de
                                                                    facto complainant
              2.       P.W. 2 (Nagabhushan)                         Member of the raiding team
              3.       P.W. 3 (Premkumari)                          Member of the raiding team
              4.       P.W. 4 (Kavitha)                             Member of the raiding team
              5.       P.W. 5 (Prasanna Kumar)                      Member of the raiding team
              6.       P.W. 6 (Muddumahadevayya)                    Member of the raiding team
              7.       P.W. 7 (H.R. Nataraj)                        Headmaster of Shree Uma
                                                                    Pragathi High School; He
                                                                    issued the certificate recording
                                                                    date of birth of P.W. 13/Minor
                                                                    victim
              8.       P.W. 8 (Jaikar)                              NGO Worker/ decoy witness
              9.       P.W. 9 (Roopa)                               Police constable at Peenya
                                                                    Police Station; She took the
                                                                    sealed items to Madiwala FSL
                                                                    for examination
              10.      P.W. 10 (Chandrakala)                        Police constable at Peenya
                                                                    Police Station;
                                                                    She collected articles and
                                                                    certificate related to P.W. 13
                                                                    from Vanvilas Hospital.
              11.      P.W. 11 (Dominic)                            NGO Worker/ Informant
              12.      P.W. 12 (Manjunath)                          Independent       Witness;    He
                                                                    accompanied P.W. 8 to the
                                                                    rented premises
              13.      P.W. 13                                      Minor victim
              14.      P.W. 14 (Umadevi)                            Wife of P.W. 15, the owner of
                                                                    rented      premises;     turned
                                                                    hostile
              15.      P.W. 15 (Rangappa)                           Owner of the rented premises
              16.      P.W. 16 (Mallikarjunayya)                    Investigating Officer


FINDINGS RECORDED BY THE COURTS BELOW:

(i)      Trial Court:
5.       Trial Court placed substantial reliance upon the testimony of

         minor victim, PW-13, which stood amply corroborated by the
3
P.W. 2 to P.W. 6 constituted the raiding team.
Page 3 of 15
testimonies of PW-8 and PW-12. The victim’s testimony revealed

     that four unknown individuals had forcibly removed her from the

     Chikkabanavara bus stand and placed her in the custody of A1 &

     A2 at a rented premises in Dasarahalli. She further stated that the

     appellant subsequently sent her to the house of one Naveen, where

     she   was   coerced   into   prostitution.   Owing   to   her   ensuing

     reluctance, she was taken back to the rented premises and forced

     to indulge in illicit sexual intercourse. A1 & A2 also wrongfully

     confined her within the rented premises and prevented her from

     establishing any contact with the outside world. Upon considering

     the witness testimonies, the Court observed that the ingredients of

     the charged offences stood proved, particularly in the absence of

     any credible evidence from the accused persons to demonstrate

     that they bore any relationship with the victim. Therefore, the Trial

     Court convicted A1 & A2
u/s. 366A
,
373
,
34
IPC r/w. s. 3, 4, 5 &

     6 of the ITPA vide order dated 25.07.2013.
(ii) High Court:
6.   Assailing the judgment passed by the Trial Court, Criminal Appeal

     No. 860/2013 was preferred by A1 & A2 before the High Court.
The High Court, upon re-appreciation of the evidence on record,

     held that the ingredients of the alleged offences stood established.

     The defence failed to put forth any credible evidence while

     responding to the incriminatory circumstances proved by the
Page 4 of 15
prosecution.   Consequently,    High      Court    concluded   that    the

     prosecution had proved its case beyond reasonable doubt.

     Accordingly, the Criminal Appeal was dismissed vide order dated

     05.02.2025. The Court further observed that no mitigating

     circumstances were forthcoming on record to warrant any

     reduction of sentence.
7.   Aggrieved by the concurrent findings of the Trial Court and High

     Court, the appellant has preferred the present appeal.


ANALYSIS:
8.   The prosecution case primarily hinges on the version of the victim

     (PW-13). Driven by abject poverty, the victim left her residence

     seeking   respectful   employment.        Taking   advantage   of     such

     economic vulnerability, four unknown persons brought her to the

     appellant’s house. In her presence, appellant made telephone calls

     for sexually exploiting the victim. Pursuant to such negotiation,

     some persons came to the house and the victim was asked to have

     sex with them, which she refused. Thereupon, A1 & A2 compelled

     her to accompany one Naveen, who took her to another place

     where she was sexually exploited. Thereafter, she was brought

     back to the appellant’s rented apartment where she had to satisfy

     the lust of various customers. Finally, on 22.11.2020, the police

     raided the apartment and rescued her. Her statement was
Page 5 of 15
recorded before the Magistrate which substantially corroborates

     her version in Court.
9.   Ld. Counsel for appellant has challenged the victim’s version on

     various scores. He contends that the victim’s evidence regarding

     forcible sexual intercourse is an embellished one. While in Court

     the victim claimed that due to illicit sexual intercourse with two

     persons, she had suffered injuries and blood oozed out of her

     private parts, such fact does not transpire in her previous

     statement before the Magistrate. The topography of the rented

     apartment comprising two rooms, kitchen and a bathroom as

     narrated by the victim is not corroborated by PW-8 or PW-12 who

     claim that the apartment comprised a hall, kitchen and bathroom.
10. The Courts below rightly rebutted such contentions holding that

     the contradictions are minor and the victim’s version has been

     substantially corroborated by other evidence on record. We are of

     the view that both Trial Court and High Court have correctly

     appreciated   the   evidence   of    the   minor   trafficked   victim,

     considering the need for sensitivity and latitude while appreciating

     the evidence of minor victims of sex trafficking and prostitution.
11. While appreciating the evidence of a minor victim of trafficking, the

     Court ought to bear in mind:
Page 6 of 15
i.     Her   inherent   socio-economic       and,   at   times,   cultural

       vulnerability when the minor belongs to a marginalised or

       socially and culturally backward community.

ii.    Complex and layered structure of organised crime networks

       which operate at various levels of recruiting, transporting,

       harbouring and exploiting minor victims. Such organised

       crime activities operate as apparently independent verticals

       whose insidious intersections are conveniently veiled through

       subterfuges and deception to hoodwink innocent victims.

       Such diffused and apparently disjoint manner in which the

       crime verticals operate in areas of recruitment, transportation,

       harbouring and exploitation make it difficult, if not impossible

       for the victim, to narrate with precision and clarity the

       interplay of these processes as tentacles of an organised crime

       activity to which she falls prey. Given this situation, failure to

       promptly protest against ostensibly innocuous yet ominous

       agenda of the trafficker ought not to be treated as a ground to

       discard a victim’s version as improbable or against ordinary

       human conduct.
iii.   Recounting and narration of the horrible spectre of sexual

       exploitation even before law enforcement agencies and the

       Court is an unpalatable experience leading to secondary

       victimisation. This is more acute when the victim is a minor
Page 7 of 15
and is faced with threats of criminal intimidation, fear of

                retaliation, social stigma and paucity of social and economic

                rehabilitation. In this backdrop, judicial appreciation of

                victim’s evidence must be marked by sensitivity and realism.

         iv.    If on such nuanced appreciation, the version of the victim

                appears to be credible and convincing, a conviction may be

                maintained on her sole testimony. A victim of sex trafficking,

                particularly a minor, is not an accomplice and her deposition

                is to be given due regard and credence as that of an injured

                witness. We draw inspiration from the poignant remarks in
State of Punjab v. Gurmit Singh and Others4
, a locus

                classicus in victimology and gender justice:-
“21. Of late, crime against women in general and rape
                        in particular is on the increase. It is an irony that while
                        we are celebrating woman's rights in all spheres, we
                        show little or no concern for her honour. It is a sad
                        reflection on the attitude of indifference of the society
                        towards the violation of human dignity of the victims of
                        sex crimes. We must remember that a rapist not only
                        violates the victim's privacy and personal integrity, but
                        inevitably causes serious psychological as well as
                        physical harm in the process. Rape is not merely a
                        physical assault — it is often destructive of the whole
                        personality of the victim.
A murderer destroys the
                        physical body of his victim, a rapist degrades the very
                        soul of the helpless female. The courts, therefore,
                        shoulder a great responsibility while trying an accused
                        on charges of rape. They must deal with such cases
                        with utmost sensitivity. The courts should examine the
                        broader probabilities of a case and not get swayed by
                        minor contradictions or insignificant discrepancies in
                        the statement of the prosecutrix, which are not of a fatal
                        nature, to throw out an otherwise reliable prosecution
4
State of Punjab v. Gurmit Singh and Others
, (1996) 2 SCC 384.
Page 8 of 15
case. If evidence of the prosecutrix inspires
                 confidence, it must be relied upon without seeking
                 corroboration of her statement in material
                 particulars. If for some reason the court finds it
                 difficult to place implicit reliance on her
                 testimony, it may look for evidence which may
                 lend assurance to     her   testimony,   short    of
                 corroboration required in the case of an
                 accomplice. The testimony of the prosecutrix must
                 be appreciated in the background of the entire
                 case and the trial court must be alive to its
                 responsibility and be sensitive while dealing with
                 cases involving sexual molestations.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
12. Weighing PW-13’s version on the aforesaid legal scales, we are

    convinced that her testimony is most credible and establishes that

    A1 & A2 had procured her for sexual exploitation and utilised her

    for   such    immoral    purposes.      The    minor’s   version      is   also

    corroborated by other evidence on record. PW-11, an NGO worker

    had intimated the police with regard to prostitution being carried

    out by the appellant in his rented premises. In order to work out

    such information, PW-8, an associate of the NGO was sent as a

    decoy. PW-12 accompanied him. PW-8 found the minor in the

    premises      and   offered   money     to    the   appellant   for    sexual

    gratification. Thereafter, he intimated the police who subsequently

    raided the premises and rescued the minor. Police also recovered

    cash received by the appellant, along-with other incriminating

    articles namely, condom etc.
13. Defence sought to improbabilize the prosecution case on the

    following grounds. They contended that while PW-1 claimed he
Page 9 of 15
had received a missed call from PW-8, PW -8 deposed that he had

a conversation with PW-1 prior to the raid. This has been rightly

rebutted by the courts below as a minor contradiction. Admittedly,

there was some form of communication between PW-8 and PW-1

prior to the raid and as such, slight variation with regard to the

manner in which such communication took place does not render

the unfolding of the prosecution case vulnerable. The other aspect

highlighted by the defence namely, failure on part of PW-12 to

identify the accused in the court is also rendered inconsequential.

PW-12 has otherwise substantially corroborated the prosecution

case and explained away such lapse of memory due to passage of

time. Admittedly, A1 & A2 were apprehended from the spot along-

with the minor victim clearly dispelling any shadow of doubt with

regard to their presence at the spot. The fact that A1 & A2 had

taken the premises on rent is also proved through the house-

owner   PW-15’s   testimony.    The       apparent   variation   in   the

topography of the rented apartment i.e. whether there were two

rooms or one is also of no consequence. The decoy, PW-8 clearly

proves that appellant had received money in lieu of permitting him

to engage in sexual intercourse with PW-13 in the said apartment.

His version is corroborated by an independent witness, PW-12.

Cash and other incriminating articles i.e. condom were recovered

from the spot as per panchnama Ex. P-2. The evidence on record
Page 10 of 15
clearly proves beyond doubt that A1 & A2 were using the premises

         for prostitution by sexually exploiting the minor victim, PW-13, for

         commercial purposes, and thereby committed offences
u/s. 3
,
4
,
5
and
6
of the ITPA in addition to the offences under the Penal Code.
14. Age of the victim on the date of the incident has been proved as 16

         years and 6 months.                   The letter Ex. P-3 issued by the School

         Headmaster (P.W. 7) records her date of birth as 24.04.1994. The

         submission of the appellant that such evidence is unreliable as no

         ossification test was conducted does not hold water. Age

         determined through ossification test is a mere approximation and

         cannot be held to have better probative value than a certificate

         issued by the school.
In
Jarnail Singh v. State of Haryana5
, this

         Court held that determination of age of a minor victim of sexual

         offence is to be done with reference to Rule 12 of the Juvenile

         Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2007 wherein the

         date of birth recorded in the certificate from the school first

         attended by the victim would take precedence over medical opinion

         i.e. ossification test. The Court held as follows:
“23. Even though Rule 12 is strictly applicable only to
                   determine the age of a child in conflict with law, we are
                   of    the   view     that     the    aforesaid     statutory
                   provision should be the basis for determining age, even
                   of a child who is a victim of crime. For, in our view, there
                   is hardly any difference insofar as the issue of minority
                   is concerned, between a child in conflict with law, and a
5
Jarnail Singh v. State of Haryana
, (2013) 7 SCC 263.
Page 11 of 15
child who is a victim of crime. Therefore, in our
           considered opinion, it would be just and appropriate to
           apply Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules, to determine the age of
           the prosecutrix VW, PW 6. The manner of determining
           age conclusively has been expressed in sub-rule (3) of
           Rule 12 extracted above. Under the aforesaid provision,
           the age of a child is ascertained by adopting the first
           available basis out of a number of options postulated in
           Rule 12(3). If, in the scheme of options under Rule 12(3),
           an option is expressed in a preceding clause, it has
           overriding effect over an option expressed in a
           subsequent clause. The highest rated option available
           would conclusively determine the age of a minor. In the
           scheme of Rule 12(3), matriculation (or equivalent)
           certificate of the child concerned is the highest rated
           option. In case, the said certificate is available, no other
           evidence can be relied upon. Only in the absence of the
           said certificate, Rule 12(3) envisages consideration of the
           date of birth entered in the school first attended by the
           child. In case such an entry of date of birth is available,
           the date of birth depicted therein is liable to be treated as
           final and conclusive, and no other material is to be relied
           upon. Only in the absence of such entry, Rule 12(3)
           postulates reliance on a birth certificate issued by a
           corporation or a municipal authority or a panchayat. Yet
           again, if such a certificate is available, then no other
           material whatsoever is to be taken into consideration for
           determining the age of the child concerned, as the said
           certificate would conclusively determine the age of the
           child. It is only in the absence of any of the aforesaid,
           that Rule 12(3) postulates the determination of age of the
           child concerned, on the basis of medical opinion.”
15. Finally, it is argued that the prosecution, under the special law,

    must fail as the search and recovery of the minor was conducted

    in violation of
s. 15(2)
of the ITPA.
S.15(2)
reads as follows:
“15. Search without warrant.
(2) Before making a search under sub-section (1), the special
        police officer [or the trafficking police officer, as the case may
        be] shall call upon two or more respectable inhabitants (at
        least one of whom shall be a woman) of the locality in which
        the place to be searched is situate, to attend and witness the
        search, and may issue an order in writing to them or any of
        them so to do:
Page 12 of 15
[Provided that the requirement as to the respectable
             inhabitants being from the locality in which the place to be
             searched is situate shall not apply to a woman required to
             attend and witness the search.]”
16. The aforesaid provision enjoins that, at the time of search under

      the special law, the police officer shall call upon two or more

      respectable inhabitants of the locality, including a woman (who

      may not be a member of the locality) to attend and witness the

      search and may issue an order in writing to such persons to do so.

      The provision is akin to
S.100 (4)
of the Code of Criminal

      Procedure, 19736 which requires search to be conducted in

      presence of two or more respectable members of the locality.
S.

      15(2)
fell for interpretation in
Bai Radha v. State of Gujarat7
wherein distinguishing the ratio in
State (UT of Delhi) v. Ram

      Singh8
(where search was conducted by an authorised police

      officer), this Court held that infraction of such provision is an

      irregularity and does not per se vitiate the trial unless it is shown

      that there has been a failure of justice.
“6. … This case9 certainly supports one part of the
                 submission of the counsel for the appellant that the Act is
                 a complete Code with respect to what has to be done
                 under it. In that sense it would be legitimate to say that a
                 search which is to be conducted under the Act must
                 comply with the provisions contained in
Section 15
; but it
                 cannot be held that if a search is not carried out strictly in
                 accordance with the provisions of that section, the trial is
                 rendered illegal. There is hardly any parallel between an
6
Hereinafter
Cr.P.C
.
7
Bai Radha v. State of Gujarat
, (1969) 1 SCC 43.
8
State (UT of Delhi) v. Ram Singh
, (1962) 2 SCR 694.
9
Ibid.
Page 13 of 15
officer conducting a search who has no authority under
           and a search having been made which does not strictly
           conform to the provisions of
Section 15
of the Act. The
           principles which have been settled with regard to the effect
           of an irregular search made in exercise of the powers
           under
Section 165
of the Code of Criminal Procedure would
           be fully applicable even to a case under the Act, where the
           search has not been made in strict compliance with its
           provisions. It is significant that there is no provision in the
           Act according to which any search carried out in
           contravention of
Section 15
would render the trial illegal. In
           the absence of such a provision we must apply the law
           which has been laid down with regard to searches made
           under the provision of the
Criminal Procedure Code
.”
17. In the present case, the search was undertaken in presence of the

    decoy PW-8 and PW-12. They are respectable and independent

    persons residing in the same city, who had joined the search.

    Nothing is brought on record to show that they are pocket

    witnesses who had deposed for the police in other cases. It is also

    relevant to note that PW-14 (wife of the owner of the premises) had

    also been requested to witness the search. Unfortunately, she

    turned hostile and denied having made any previous statement to

    the   police,   but   during     cross-examination,      the    prosecution

    confronted her with her earlier statement, wherein it is noted that

    she had requested the police to undertake the search.
18. In this factual background, we are of the view that statutory

    requirements
u/s. 15(2)
were substantially complied with and the

    conviction cannot be doubted on such score.
Page 14 of 15
19. Therefore, we uphold the conviction and sentence awarded by the

    High Court and dismiss the appeal. Pending application(s), if any,

    shall stand disposed of.
……..…..……...……………………….J.
                                                  (MANOJ MISRA)



                                    ……..…..……...……………………….J.
                                              (JOYMALYA BAGCHI)
NEW DELHI,
DECEMBER 19, 2025.
Page 15 of 15