[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M.K. Ranjitsinh vs Union Of India on 19 December, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 1472                                                                                                    REPORTABLE
                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL ORIGINAL/APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                                WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 838 of 2019

                  M.K. Ranjitsinh & Others                                                                    …Petitioner(s)

                                                                          Versus

                  Union of India & Others                                                                  …Respondent(s)

                                                                            With

                                                    CIVIL APPEAL No. 3570 of 2022

                                                                            With

                                                WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 549 of 2025


                                                               JUDGMENT
CONTENTS

                 I.         Godawan, The Great Indian Bustard ............................................................. 2

               II.          Endangerment of the Great Indian Bustard ................................................... 6

              III.          Writ Petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution ........................................... 8

             IV.            Interim Order of this Court dated 19.04.2021 ................................................ 9

               V.           Interlocutory Application by Respondents ................................................... 10

             VI.            Order of this Court dated 21.03.2024 and formation of the Expert
                            Committee ................................................................................................... 12

           VII.
Signature Not Verified
The Committee Reports .............................................................................. 18
Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora
VIII.
Date: 2025.12.19
   15:52:33 IST
   Reason:                  Consideration of Objections to the Committee Reports by Renewable Energy
                            Generators................................................................................................... 33
Page 1 of 66
IX.        CSR to include Corporate Environmental Responsibility ............................. 41

  X.        Submissions   by         Petitioner           with         Objection             to       Committee’s
            recommendation. ......................................................................................... 44

 XI.        Objections/Additional measures suggested by Petitioners .......................... 46

XII.        Analysis ....................................................................................................... 48
        A. Re: Inclusion of 657 sq. kms to the Revised Priority Area in Rajasthan ..... 49
        B. Re: Even with respect to Non-Priority Areas, all Future Lines should Run
        through Power Line Corridors .......................................................................... 54
        C. Re: All Existing and Future Lines must be marked with Bird Flight Divertors
        (‘BFDs’) ............................................................................................................ 55
        D. Re: Regarding no new overhead powerlines (except 11kV and below) in the
        revised priority areas and leases of existing wind turbines not to be
        renewed. .......................................................................................................... 58
        E. Re: Prohibition on limestone or other mines in the priority areas or revised
        priority areas .................................................................................................... 61
        F. Re: Conversion of existing and installation of new 11 kV and below Powerlines
        as Aerial Bunched Cables in Revised Priority Areas ...................................... 61
        G. Re: Undergrounding of 250 Km of critical power lines identified by WII in
        Rajasthan in a time-bound manner. ................................................................. 62
        H. Re: Mandatory Undergrounding or Time-Bound Rerouting of All Powerlines
        (400 kV and Below) ......................................................................................... 62
        I. Re: Mitigation of two lines of 400 kV from Bhachunda-Varsana of approx.
        11.5 Kms.......................................................................................................... 63

XIII.       Directions..................................................................................................... 64
1.       Godawan, The Great Indian Bustard: We may not find more apt

 lines to describe the present state and nature of one of the most wonderful

 avian species of our ecosystem, the conservation of which this Court has

 grappled with in the recent past:
“Luckily for one giant bird, they have such eyes. For millions of years,
                way before primates evolved into humans, they used this lateral vision
                to thrive in desert lands. This is the Great Indian Bustard, the State
                bird of Rajasthan. It's over three foot tall and weighs forty pounds,
Page 2 of 66
about as big as a bird can be and still be able to take wing. A bird that
            big should be easy to find.
Then people came and built wind turbines, and cables between tall
            pylons to ferry to the city electricity garnered from desert winds.
            Now the species is almost extinct.” 1
2.     In Rajasthan, it is affectionately alluded by its cultural name as

“Godawan”. It is inextricably connected to the culture and living of desert

communities. The Godawan has been associated with the nobility of the

Rajput kings and its majestic stature was likened to the qualities of a noble

warrior, making it a subject of admiration in local art and literature. Its

survival is a shared cultural responsibility, as the bird represents not just

a species but the unique natural heritage and resilience of the arid

landscapes. Traditional folklores have also revolved around formulaic folk

motifs which usually rhyme like;
मरुधरा रो मोती, म्हारो प्यारो गोडावण;
धीमी-धीमी चाल चाले, नखरालो गोडावण;
धोरा वाल� धरती माथे, घम
                                              ू े म्हारो गोडावण;
सब पं�छया में ऊंचो, प्यारो गोडावण 2        1
3.      Godawan holds deep cultural and historical significance for the

people of Rajasthan. It is considered a symbol of pride and grace,


1 Martin Goodman, My Head for a Tree: The Extraordinary Story of the Bishnoi, the World’s First Eco-

Warriors, pg. 95 (Profile Books, 2025).
2
“The pearl of the desert land, my dear Godawan; It walks with a slow, graceful gait, my stylish
Godawan; On the land of the sand dunes, my Godawan wanders tallest among all the birds, my beloved
Godawan”;       (Ghorad      Kare     Che   Yaad     –    Great     Indian      Bustard      Song)
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pZP8KVMSc-Q>.
Page 3 of 66
interwoven with local folklore and traditions, and is highly revered,

particularly by communities like the Bishnois, who practice eco-veneration

and include the bird in their traditional protection norms. This is a classic

example depicting our country’s tradition of ecocentric, rather than

anthropocentric perspective of the universe3. There is much to learn from

the philosophy of this community, a movement which began with Shri

Jambheshwar, fondly known as Guru Jambhoji proclaiming firmly that “A

tree covered in greenery is my temple and my home” to the deeply moving

courage and sacrifice of 363 Martyrs in 1730 led by Amrita Devi Bishnoi

to protect Khejri trees and late Radheshyam Bishnoi4 (1997-2025) whose

sacrifice will continue to inspire us in the times to come. By practising

ecocentric living, they honour the intrinsic value of every living being, 5




3 A man said to the universe:
“Sir, I exist!”
“However,” replied the universe,
“The fact has not created in me
A sense of obligation.”- Stephen Crane.
4 Rajat Ghai, Radheshyam Bishnoi was a man rooted in the Thar; he must be remembered as India’s

very own ‘Godawan Man’ (Down to Earth, May 31, 2025) <https://www.downtoearth.org.in/wildlife-
biodiversity/radheshyam-bishnoi-was-a-man-rooted-in-the-thar-he-must-be-remembered-as-indias-
very-own-godawan-man-sumit-dookia#google_vignette>.

5 The Bishnoi Community’s conservation impact is well reflected in Bombay Natural History Society and

Rotary Fellowship of Wildlifers for Conservation’s joint effort to install a godawan statue to honour the
female bustard who tragically lost her life due to collision with power lines in Deg Rai Mata Temple,
Oran. See, The Heartfelt Story Of Rajasthan’s Godawan Smarak: A Tribute To A Female Great Indian
Bustard Who Tragically Lost Her Life (BNHS, December 14, 2024) <https://blog.bnhs.org/the-heartfelt-
story-of-rajasthans-godawan-smarak-a-tribute-to-a-female-great-indian-bustard-who-tragically-lost-
her-life/>.
A detailed account of conservation story of Bishnoi Community is narrated in Martin Goodman, My
Head for a Tree: The Extraordinary Story of the Bishnoi, the World’s First Eco-Warriors (Profile Books,
2025), specifically chapter 7 that discusses the interactions of the author with late Radheshyam Bishnoi
on GIB protection.
Page 4 of 66
sustaining a delicate harmony that thrived long before we were told that

we can conquer nature and overrule it.
4.    The Great Indian Bustard (GIB), one of the heaviest flying birds in

the world and a flagship species of the arid and semi-arid grasslands of

the Indian subcontinent, is a majestic, long-legged bird that symbolizes

the health of the fragile grassland ecosystem, as its presence indicates a

balanced environment. Historically, this magnificent creature was found

across much of India, but today, its population being critically endangered,

is primarily concentrated in and around the Thar Desert. The urgent

conservation efforts, including the state-led ‘Project Godawan,’ (Project

GIB) seek to protect this cultural and ecological emblem from extinction,

ensuring that the regal bird continues to grace the golden sands of the

state for future generations.
5.    Despite its immense historical, cultural, and ecological significance,

today GIB is one of the rarest birds to spot due to a steep decline in its

population in the last few decades. The GIB is, therefore, soon

approaching the fate of recently extinct animals like Golden Toad,

Western Black Rhinoceros, Pinta Giant Tortoise, Poʻouli, Bridle White-

Eye, etc., which the universe has lost forever. The threats of climate

change and unplanned development are real, and it is widely

acknowledged that our planet is experiencing the sixth mass extinction in
Page 5 of 66
its history. In addition to traditional conservation measures, steps must be

taken to protect currently endangered animals, and moreover, to

regenerate populations. 6 The present exercise is one such step in this

regard.
6.     The instant case concerns the protection of the Great Indian Bustard

(‘GIB’) and the Lesser Florican (‘LF’), both of which are on the verge of

extinction, and invites our attention to the critical aspects of environmental

protection and conservation. The issues in the instant case aptly

demonstrate the contestation between the goals of preserving historically

and ecologically significant species and green energy generation to

address climate change, and have previously resulted in two orders of this

Court, dated April 19, 2021, and March 21, 2024, directing certain

measures. The present adjudication aims to move further towards greater

certainty in our approach to conserving two species, and, importantly, to

rethink environmental conservation going forward in our pursuit of

sustainability and mutual coexistence with other living beings on our

mother Earth.
7.     Endangerment of the Great Indian Bustard: With time, the

country has seen a rapid and steady decline in the population of the GIB.



6  ‘18 Animals that recently went Extinct’ (IFAW International,             December   12,   2023)
<https://www.ifaw.org/international/journal/18-animals-recently-extinct>.
Page 6 of 66
As of 2018, the International Union for Conservation of Nature, or IUCN

as it is popularly known, classified the GIB as a ‘critically endangered’

species. In IUCN’s system of classification, only two categories indicate a

graver threat to a particular species – ‘extinct in the wild’ and ‘extinct’. The

GIB has been classified as a critically endangered species from 2011 until

the most recent assessment in 2018. From 1994 to 2008, it was classified

as ‘endangered’ and in 1988, it was labelled ‘threatened’.
8.      The Rajasthan government estimates that only about 125 GIBs

were present in the year 20137 while IUCN placed the number of mature

GIBs between 50 and 249. 8 There are significant factors bearing upon the

dwindling numbers and low rate of reproduction of the existing population

of these species:
i.    Pollution, climate change, predators and competition with

             invasive species are among the many threats that exacerbate

             the challenges faced by these vulnerable species.

      ii.    GIBs usually lay a single egg which has an incubation period of

             approximately one month. The GIBs nest on open ground or in

             cavities in the soil. Consequently, their eggs are also laid and



7   Government of Rajasthan, Forest Department, ‘Project Great Indian Bustard’
<https://forest.rajasthan.gov.in/content/raj/forest/en/footernav/department-wings/project-great-indian-
bustard.html>.
8 IUCN Red List.
Page 7 of 66
incubated on the ground. The eggs are therefore at risk of being

            preyed upon by local predators including mongooses, monitor

            lizards, and other birds. Cows may also trample on or crush the

            eggs while grazing in the grasslands.
iii.   The loss of habitat is also a serious concern. As humans have

            expanded their settlements and economic activities into the

            grasslands, the natural habitat of the GIB has diminished. The

            expansion of human population and accompanying activities has

            also resulted in the fragmentation of the GIB’s habitat.

     iv.    The expansion of infrastructure such as roads, mining and

            farming activities have cumulatively contributed to the dangers

            faced by the avian species.
v.     The attrition of the existing population of these endangered birds

            has been attributed to overhead transmission lines.
9.      Writ Petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution: The present

writ petition invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 32
of the

Constitution was filed in 2019 seeking immediate directions for the

conservation of these species. The writ petition prayed for various

directions via issuance of writs, inter alia, including:
Page 8 of 66
a) direction to Respondents to urgently frame implement an

        emergency response plan for the protection and recovery of the

        GIB, including directions for the installation of bird diverters,

        immediate embargo on the sanction of new projects, as well as

        other measures in and around critical and semi-critical habitats; and
b) appointment of an Empowered Committee to oversee the

        implementation of the directions issued by the Court, to preserve

        and manage the endangered species and their habitats.
10.    Another writ petition9 filed by renewable energy developer ACME, is

tagged with the primary writ petition, as well as a civil appeal 10 arising from

an NGT order that concerns with deployment of Bird Flight Diverters

(‘BFD’). The issues in the tagged matters are congruent to the issues

raised by main writ petition and will be addressed in our analysis.
11.    Interim Order of this Court dated 19.04.2021: The writ petition led

to the interim directions of this Court vide order dated 19.04.2021,

imposing restriction on setting up of overhead transmission lines in a large

territory of about 99,000 square kilometres. Directing accordingly, the

court also appointed a three-member committee to assess the feasibility

of laying high-voltage underground power lines. The Court also directed
9 W.P.(C) No. 549 of 2025.
10 C.A. No. 3570/2022.
Page 9 of 66
that, in all cases where overhead power lines exist as of the date in the

priority and potential GIB areas, steps shall be taken to install bird

diverters pending consideration of converting the overhead power lines to

underground power lines. Furthermore, the court directed that in all cases

where it is feasible to convert overhead lines to underground power lines,

this shall be undertaken and completed within one year. The said order

was implemented by the Committee by granting sanctions on a case-by-

case basis when undergrounding was not possible.
12.     Interlocutory Application by Respondents: However, about six

months after the order, it was felt by the respondents that the wide sweep

and coverage of the directions, qua a large area of Rajasthan in the April

2021 order, was not feasible, as it hampered the solar energy production

potential in the region. In this view, in November 2021, the respondents,

namely the Ministry of Environment, Forests, and Climate Change

(‘MoEFCC’), the Ministry of Power, and the Ministry of New and

Renewable Energy (‘MNRE’), respectively, filed IA No 149293 of 2021

seeking modification of directions issued by the April 2021 order. The

grounds for seeking modifications were primarily that:
a) The April 2021 order has vast adverse implications for the power

        sector in India and energy transition away from fossil fuels;
b) Respondent No. 4 (MNRE) was not heard before passing the order;
Page 10 of 66
c) India has made international commitments, including under the

        agreement signed in Paris in 2015 under the United Nations

        Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), for the

        transition to non-fossil fuels and for the reduction of emissions;
d) The area with respect to which the directions were issued is much

        larger than the actual area in which the GIBs dwell. Moreover, that

        area contains a significant proportion of the country's solar and wind

        energy potential;
e) Undergrounding high voltage power lines is technically not

        possible, and the coal-fired power, which would be used to replace

        the untapped energy from renewable sources in the concerned

        area, would cause pollution.
13.     In the course of hearing of the interlocutory application, the Union of

India filed an affidavit and comprehensive status report submitting and

proposing that a blanket direction of the nature that has been imposed by

this Court, would not be feasible in the conservation of the GIB, as global

practice indicates that large swathes of land need not be closed off as a

conservation strategy. Furthermore, it was noted that the decline in the

population of GIBs began in the 1960s, well before the electrification of

the area and the construction of transmission lines. Additionally, it was

highlighted that the direction by this Court for laying high-voltage, or as
Page 11 of 66
the case may be, low-voltage lines underground was practically

impossible to implement. It was also argued that multiple alternative

measures have been taken by the Union of India as well as the State

Governments to conserve and protect the endangered species of GIB.
14.     Order of this Court dated 21.03.2024 and formation of the

Expert Committee: Taking stock of submissions of the stakeholders and

the need to balance conservation of endangered species with imperative

of protecting against climate change, which is possible only if ample thrust

is placed upon renewable energy, the Court modified the direction as

contained in April 2021 order by its order dated 21.03.2024 observing that

there was no basis to impose a general prohibition in regard to the

installation of transmission lines for the distribution of solar power in an

area about 99,000 square kilometres. The primary reasons for the

modification of the 2021 order in the context of power generation included,

inter alia:
a. The diverse factors responsible for the reduction of the GIB

        population, including low fecundity, fragmentation, habitat loss,

        predators, and loss of prey, must be addressed, and the conversion

        of overhead into underground transmission lines is not likely to lead

        to the conservation of the species;
Page 12 of 66
b. Underground power transmission cables are available only in 400

  kV. The drum size for such cables is 250 m. These cables have a

  greater number of joints. As the number of joints increases, there is

  a corresponding rise in the risk to safety, especially for farmers

  whose land the cables are laid under. The downtime of electricity

  plants will also increase;
c. Flag Markers of underground cables do not serve the intended

  purpose in desert regions because of strong winds that blow and

  carry sand. This may cover or otherwise impact the flag markings.

  In the absence of functional markings, it is unsafe and impractical

  to underground high voltage cables in deserts;

d. Underground cables do not efficiently transmit AC power. The

  transmission loss in such cables is about five times higher;

e. Underground cables may give rise to environmental issues for

  many vulnerable species. They may also result in forest fires or

  other fires;
f. The area sought to underground powerlines has immense solar

  potential. To date, only 3% of this potential has been realised. If the

  remaining potential remains untapped, an additional 93,000 MW of

  coal would be required in the future. An estimated 623 billion kg of
Page 13 of 66
carbon dioxide would be released from coal-fired power generation.
This would significantly damage the environment and hinder global

      efforts to combat climate change.
15.   This Court found it suitable to entrust the task of recommendation

of protective, mitigation, and conservation measures to an expert

committee. The relevant portions of the March 2024 order are as under:
“60. While balancing two equally crucial goals - the conservation of the
         GIB on one hand, with the conservation of the environment as a whole
         on the other hand - it is necessary to adopt a holistic approach which
         does not sacrifice either of the two goals at the altar of the other. The
         delicate balance between the two aims must not be disturbed. Rather,
         care must be taken by all actors including the state and the courts to
         ensure that both goals are met without compromising on either. Unlike
         other competing considerations, these do not exist in disjunctive silos.
         Therefore, a dilemma such as the present one does not permit the
         foregrounding of one of these as a priority, at the cost of the other. If
         this Court were to direct that the power transmission lines be
         undergrounded in the entire area delineated above, many other parts
         of the environment would be adversely impacted. Other endangered
         species may suffer due to the emission of harmful gases from fossil
         fuels. Rising temperatures and the attendant evils of climate change
         may not be halted in a timely fashion, leading to disastrous
         consequences for humankind and civilisation as a whole. The
         existential threat may not be averted.
61. Moreover, the decision on whether to convert the overhead power
         transmission lines into underground lines is a matter of environmental
         policy. While adjudicating writ petitions which seek reliefs which are of
         the nature sought in the present case, this Court must conduct judicial
         review while relying on domain experts. Those who are equipped and
         trained to assess the various facets of a problem which is litigated
         before the Court must be consulted before a decision is taken. If this
         is not done, the Court may be in danger of passing directions without
         a full understanding of the issue in question. Consequently, in the
         absence of evidence which forms a certain basis for the directions
         sought, this Court must be circumspect in issuing sweeping directions.
In view of the implications of the direction issuing a blanket prohibition
         on overhead transmission lines, we are of the view that the direction
         needs to be recalled and it will be appropriate if an expert committee
         is appointed. The committee may balance the need for the
         preservation of the GIB which is non-negotiable, on one hand, with the
Page 14 of 66
need for sustainable development, especially in the context of meeting
            the international commitments of the country towards promoting
            renewable sources of energy, on the other hand. By leveraging
            scientific expertise and engaging stakeholders in meaningful
            consultations, this approach ensures that conservation efforts are
            grounded in evidence and inclusive of diverse perspectives.
62. We are accordingly of the view that the order passed by this Court
            on 19 April 2021 needs to be suitably modified. A blanket direction for
            undergrounding high voltage and low voltage power lines of the nature
            that was directed by this Court would need recalibration for the
            reasons discussed above. This task is best left to domain experts
            instead of an a priori adjudication by the Court. Experts can assess the
            feasibility of undergrounding power lines in specific areas, considering
            factors such as terrain, population density, and infrastructure
            requirements. This approach allows for more nuanced decision-
            making tailored to the unique circumstances of each location, ensuring
            that conservation objectives are met in a sustainable manner.”
16.   Taking the suggestions from all the stakeholders and in view of the

need of a high-stakes study, the Court deemed fit to constitute an expert

committee comprising the following members:
(i)     Director, Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun;
(ii) Dr Hari Shankar Singh, Member, National Board for Wildlife;
(iii) Dr Niranjan Kumar Vasu, Former Principal Chief Conservator

              of Forest;
(iv) Mr. B Majumdar, former Chief Wildlife Warden and Principal

              Chief Conservator of Forest, Maharashtra;
(v) Dr Devesh Gadhavi, Deputy Director, The Corbett Foundation;
(vi) Shri Lalit Bohra, Joint Secretary (Green Energy Corridor),

              Ministry of New and Renewable Energy; and
Page 15 of 66
(vii) Joint Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate

                  Change.
17.   Since the Committee was required to traverse the area of the setting

up of transmission lines to facilitate solar power generation, the Court

directed that the Committee shall consist of the following two special

invitees:
(i)     Shri Ashok Kumar Rajpur, Member Power Systems,

                    Central Electricity Authority; and
(ii)    Mr.     PC   Garg,   Chief      Operating   Officer,   Central

                    Transmission Utility of India Ltd.
18.   The remit of the Expert Committee was to encompass the following:
a. Determining the scope, feasibility and extent of overhead and

      underground electric lines in the area identified as priority areas in

      the reports of the Wildlife Institute of India in the States of Rajasthan

      and Gujarat;
b. The need for adopting conservation and protection measures for the

      GIB as well as other fauna specific to the topography;

   c. Identification of the measures to be adopted in the priority areas to

      ensure the long-term survival of the GIB and facilitate an increase
Page 16 of 66
in its population. Such measures may include habitat restoration,

  anti-poaching initiatives, and community engagement programs;

d. Evaluating the potential consequences of climate change on GIB

  habitats, considering factors such as shifting precipitation patterns,

  temperature extremes, habitat degradation and developing adaptive

  management strategies to enhance their resilience;

e. Identification of suitable options in the context of sustainable

  development in the matter of laying power lines in the future. The

  alternatives identified should balance the conservation and

  protection of the GIB with the arrangement of power lines in a

  manner that facilitates the fulfilment of India's international

  commitments to develop renewable sources of energy;

f. Engaging with relevant stakeholders, including government

  agencies, environmental organisations, wildlife biologists, local

  communities, and energy industry representatives, to solicit inputs,

  build consensus, and promote collaborative efforts towards

  achieving conservation and sustainable development goals;

g. Conducting a thorough review of conservation efforts and innovative

  approaches in similar contexts globally, such as the Houbara
Page 17 of 66
Bustard in the Middle East or the Black Stilt in New Zealand, to

      inform best practices;
h. Implementing a robust monitoring and research program to track

      GIB populations, habitat dynamics, and the effectiveness of

      conservation measures over time. This may include employing

      techniques such as satellite tracking, camera trapping, and

      ecological surveys to gather essential data for informed decision-

      making; and


   i. Adopting any additional measures, both in regard to the priority and

      potential areas, as the Committee considers appropriate, including

      considering the efficacy and suitability of installing bird diverters on

      existing and future power lines on the basis of a scientific study.
19.   By ordering thus, the Court recalled the order dated 19.04.2021

insofar as it imposed the injunction in respect of the area described as the

priority and potential areas.
20.   The Committee Reports: The expert committee, after holistic

scientific analysis of all the issues concerning the conservation measures

for the GIB and other threatened species, submitted its recommendation

report to this Court on 03.09.2024 for the State of Rajasthan. While

submitting the report, the Committee noted a lack of consensus among its
Page 18 of 66
members on recommendations for the State of Gujarat and recommended

maintaining the status quo in terms of the judgment dated 21 March 2024.

However, on 07.11.2024, this Court directed the Committee to submit a

report for Gujarat so that the matter can be discussed jointly for both

States. The report for the State of Gujarat is now before us.
21.   The Expert Committee reports that it held many proceedings, field

visits, and stakeholder consultations to arrive at its decision. The process

undertaken by the expert committee, primarily in State of Rajasthan,

before arriving at its recommendations included:
a. Committee meetings, virtual and on-site

         b. Site visit to Jaisalmer, Rajasthan (a hotspot for GIB

            conservation) on 1-2 July 2024 for assessing the ground

            situation concerning GIB habitats, transmission lines, and

            conservation efforts being implemented by the MoEFCC,

            Rajasthan Forest Department and WII, as well as holding

            stakeholder meetings.
c. Meeting for consultation with stakeholders, attended by all

            committee    members      and       included    power   generation

            companies,     power     transmission          companies,   power
Page 19 of 66
distribution companies, other industry representatives, and

           local communities.
d. In addition to the site visits and stakeholder meetings on the

           ground, a consultation workshop to prepare a conservation

           report for the GIB in Rajasthan was held at the Wildlife Institute

           of India on 6 July 2024, attended by all committee members

           and other stakeholders.
e. Meeting of committee members with the Chief Wildlife

           Warden, holding deliberations on various issues related to the

           subject.
f. Meeting at MNRE office, New Delhi, to reach a final balanced

           solution that aids the conservation of the GIB, LF, and

           associated fauna while balancing India’s renewable energy

           targets.
22.   As regards the peculiar character of Godawan, the GIB, the

Committee expressed its findings that Godawan is a large bird of open

grasslands and dryland habitats and is susceptible to hunting by humans

and other predators. While their eyes are arranged laterally on the head

to provide enhanced peripheral vision, which improves vigilance in open

areas, this trait is maladaptive in current landscapes with linear aerial
Page 20 of 66
infrastructures. 11 Additionally, bustards are slow breeders, and any loss

of adult birds is very harmful to the viability of their population.
23.     The Committee also noted that, out of the 26 bustard species across

the globe, 15 (58%) are threatened / near-threatened 12. This situation is

more severe for Asia, especially India, where all three resident bustard

species - the GIB, LF, and Bengal Florican - are found and are critically

endangered. 13 The committee highlights that the historical decline of the

birds was largely due to trophy hunting, which intensified alongside the

development of intensive agriculture and energy infrastructure.14
24.     Recommendations for State of Rajasthan: The report of the nine-

member committee 15 is nearly unanimous, except for the notes of

disagreement by one member. The recommendations by the majority

members, include, inter alia:
(i) Rationalisation of GIB areas: The committee recommends a

          priority area of 14,013 sq. km by including 850 sq. km of area to

          the existing 13,163 sq. km of priority area in the State of Rajasthan.
11 Martin, G. R., and J. M. Shaw. “Bird collisions with power lines: failing to see the way ahead?”

Biological Conservation 143.11 (2010): 2695-2702.
12 Collar, N. J., et al. “Averting the extinction of bustards in Asia”, Forktail 33 (2017): 1-26.
13 Committee Report (Rajasthan).
14 Uddin, Mohib, et al. “High bird mortality due to power lines invokes urgent environmental mitigation

in a tropical desert”, Biological Conservation 261 (2021): 109262.
15 In the course of the judgment, reference to recommendations made by the Committee must be

understood as Recommendations made by the ‘Majority Committee’.
Page 21 of 66
(ii) Measures for Conservation and Protection of GIB (also applicable

   for Gujarat):
a) Initiation of restoration, conservation and consolidation of

              grassland ecosystem in India.
b) Identification of five critical sites in Rajasthan within the

              revised priority area for consolidation, restoration and

              protection, namely,

        i.      Desert National Park Wildlife Sanctuary- Salkha-Kuchri

                area,

       ii.      Sanu - Mokla - Parewar area,

       iii.     Pokhran Field Firing Range (PFFR) and buffer areas,

      iv.       Ramdevra area and habitats on the eastern periphery of

                the PFFR, and

       v.       Dholiya-Khetolai-Chacha         area    along     with    habitats

                adjoining southern boundary of PFFR.
c) Recommendations            regarding          measures     for    in-situ

              conservation of GIB within the revised priority areas of

              Rajasthan, in addition to this Court’s judgement dated

              21.03.2024, namely
Page 22 of 66
i.   Enclosure Establishment/Improvement;
ii.   Predator management (monitoring, translocation and

              sterilisation);
iii.   Weed removal and grass plantation;
iv.    Food and water management;

        v.    Improving protection of GIB in the revised priority area;

       vi.    Community engagement, including designation of certain

              areas as conservation reserve;
vii.   Administrative and institutional arrangements, such as

              cooperation between different states, initiation of Project

              Bustard along the lines of other Projects such as Project

              Tiger, Elephant etc.
(iii) Project Great Indian Bustard (Also applicable to the State of

    Gujarat): Finalization of the next phase of Project Bustard (Phase-

    II 2029-2033) and its funding through the National CAMPA funds.

    Provision of funding to the State Forest Departments for restoring

    habitats, mitigating threats and developing suitable sites for future

    release of captive GIB from the National Conservation Breeding

    Centre. Scaling up of the current activities being undertaken for
Page 23 of 66
conservation breeding and habitat improvement, including in other

      range States; ensuring dedicated support for these activities.
(iv) Monitoring of GIB and Habitats (Also applicable to the State of

      Gujarat): Continuous monitoring of the GIB and LF Populations and

      the monitoring of habitat restoration efforts.
(v)   Effects of Climate Change on GIB (Also applicable to the State of

      Gujarat): Continuation of study being undertaken by the WII for

      monitoring the impacts of climate change on GIB and LF, as well

      as the utility of enclosures to provide resilience against the effects

      of climate change. Further mechanistic studies on bustards and

      other associated taxa, and monitoring of climate change resilience

      of conservation actions.
(vi) Powerline Corridor through the revised priority area: The

      Committee has recommended providing a power corridor of up to 5

      km width, which will be at a distance of 5 km or more to the south

      of the southern-most enclosure of Desert National Park.

      Coordinates of the Corridor to be proposed by the Rajasthan Forest

      Department (‘RFD’) and WII. If feasible, High-Capacity HDCV

      corridors are to be adopted to reduce the number of lines required

      to carry the same quantum of power. No new powerlines to be

      allowed in revised priority areas except through a dedicated
Page 24 of 66
‘powerline corridor’. No new wind turbines and new solar

     parks/plants of more than 2MW capacity should be allowed within

     the revised priority area.
(vii) Mitigation Measures in the Potential Areas (Also applicable to the

     State of Gujarat): The Expert Committee has recommended no

     restriction on the laying of powerlines in the Potential Area (area

     outside the revised priority area)
(viii) No Mitigation for low tension lines in 100m of settlement boundary

     (Also applicable to the State of Gujarat): The Committee has

     suggested no mitigation of existing and future powerlines of 11kV

     and below voltage in the 100 metre buffer around the settlement

     areas.
(ix) Recommendations for Mitigation of Powerlines:
- Powerlines of 11 kV and below: The Committee has

        recommended that all 11kV and below lines in the revised

        priority area be mitigated using insulated cables in horizontal

        configuration or insulated cables with bunching. Any new power

        line in a forest or critical area should preferably be laid

        underground. Critical wildlife habitat to be suggested by the WII
Page 25 of 66
in consultation with the RFD will be considered for additional

  mitigation measures on a case-by-case basis.
- 33 kV lines: 80 km out of the 104 km of lines identified in the

  earlier   order   dated    19.04.2021    to     be   immediately

  undergrounded. The lengths proposed by the Committee to be

  undergrounded are at Para 44(b)/Report. The remaining 33 kV

  lines, to be identified by the WII and the Rajasthan Forest

  Department within 3 months, and these lines are to be mitigated

  using     undergrounding/re-routing/insulated    cables    (Para

  44(c)/Report). The Committee also recommends that segments

  of 33kV and above powerlines passing through enclosures be

  rerouted to more suitable locations that are 1-2 km away from

  the boundaries of the enclosures.
- 66 kV and above: The Committee recommends rerouting of nine

  66 kV lines with horizontal alignment of conductors and in

  horizontal configuration as per their indicated alignments,

  subject to finalisation of route by the State Transmission

  Utility/owner of the line in consultation with the CEA, Rajasthan

  Forest Department and WII within 6 months. The Committee has

  also recommended that the technical feasibility of rerouting
Page 26 of 66
these lines through a 2km wide corridor on the right/east side of

      Mokla enclosure, in order to avoid haphazard rerouting.
- As regards remaining lines, the Committee has generally

      recommended that wherever undergrounding is not feasible,

      high tension power lines of 66kV and above be mitigated in other

      ways, with preference given to re- routing of critical sections to

      avoid important habitats/units in the revised priority areas.
- The Committee recommends that remaining powerlines of 33kV

      and above that pass through or are in the vicinity of enclosures

      are to be re-routed to locations that are 1-2 km away from the

      enclosures.
(x) Use of Bird Flight Diverters (Also applicable to the State of Gujarat):
The Expert Committee has not recommended the use of Bird Flight

   Diverters ('BFD') as a mitigation measure in either the revised

   priority or the potential areas on the basis of unproven efficacy and

   high cost of installation and maintenance. The Committee has

   recommended that an ongoing study by WII, assessing the

   effectiveness of bird diverters in reducing bird collision mortality

   with power lines, be conducted within a year (or an additional year

   or two years), and recommendations be submitted to the Ministry

   for further consideration.
Page 27 of 66
(xi) The Committee recommends that all mitigation measures, such as

         undergrounding and re-routing, are to be started immediately and

         completed before 2028. Proposals for re-routing are to be

         discussed with the Rajasthan Forest Department and WII to ensure

         that the alignment does not compromise the goal of GIB

         conservation.
25.     Recommendations for State of Gujarat: On similar lines with

major mitigation recommendations for the State of Rajasthan, the

Committee suggests following measures for Gujarat:
(i) Rationalisation   of   the     GIB    Priority   Area:   The   committee

         recommends the Revised Priority Area of 740 sq. km. The Expert

         Committee modified some portion of the original Priority Area, but

         maintains a major part of the same for the State of Gujarat at 500

         sq. km, and added approximately 240 sq. km to the Priority Area of

         Gujarat, and consolidates it into a new 'Revised Priority Area' (total

         740 sq. km.).
(ii) Specific recommendations of in-situ measures for the State of

         Gujarat in the revised priority area (apart from the general

         recommendations adopted from the Rajasthan Report):
Page 28 of 66
i.   'Jump Start' using fertile eggs from Rajasthan- a process where

         infertile egg is swapped with a fertile egg, allowing the female to

         incubate and raise chick in the wild.
ii.   Tagging of remaining birds by GPS to facilitate jump start and

         subsequent monitoring.
iii.   Consolidation of revenue areas around forest lands.

  iv.    Prosopis juliflora management which are an invasive species.

   v.    Removal of plantation of non-native woody species.

  vi.    Restoration of grasslands after removal of prosopis/plantations.

 vii.    Predator Management (particularly targeted at free ranging

         dogs).
viii.   Restrictions on infrastructure within restored grassland areas.

  ix.    Designation of important areas as protected areas under the

         Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, indicative list of which is given.

   x.    Pasture development to reduce dependency of livestock on

         grassland protected for GIB.
(iii) Powerline Corridor passing through revised priority area: The

     Committee has recommended following two corridors:
i.   A power corridor of 1 km width along the Akrimota-Bachunda

         22kV transmission line upto Bhachunda 400 kV GIS. The

         Akrimota - Bhachunda 220 kV transmission line will be the
Page 29 of 66
eastern border of the proposed corridor, while the Tera-
Kunathiya road will be the western border. The committee

         recommends the continuity of the corridor from Bhachunda 400

         kV GIS via Varsana – Bhachunda 400 kV line up to Bhachunda

         village, as highlighted in map 4 (a). The width of this part of the

         corridor will be up to 2 kms. All existing 66 kV and above lines

         originating or terminating at the Bhachunda substation and all

         future powerlines of 66 kV and above capacity coming to the

         Bhachunda substation are to be within the corridor only.

   ii.   Another power corridor is recommended from Kothara to

         Sindhodii Nani substation in the west and Suthri substation in the

         south. This corridor will be used to evacuate power from the

         windmills situated along the coast. Additionally, the 66 kV and

         above powerlines located between Nani Sindhodii and Godhra,

         are to be rerouted through the Corridor.
(iv) Timeline of action within priority area: The Committee has divided

     the revised priority area into two parts- north and south and provided

     timeline of 2 years for mitigation of existing lines in the northern part

     and mitigation in the remaining area to be done around 2028.
(v) Mitigation of existing 33kV lines:
Page 30 of 66
i.    The Committee has identified certain segments of four 33kV lines

         (total 79.2km) in the revised priority area for immediate

         undergrounding/re-routing outside the revised priority area. The

         Committee has also suggested that if undergrounding or re-

         routing is technically infeasible overall or in some sections, the

         sections may remain overhead, but they should be mitigated

         through conversion to insulated cables (preferably with bunching)

         and laid in horizontal configuration such that all wires (both

         conductors) are parallel to each other in the same height level.

         The technical feasibility and subsequent mitigation to be decided

         by a joint committee having representative of CEA, State

         Transmission Utility, GFD and WII and next best mitigation

         measure should be adopted

   ii.   All remaining 33kV lines in the revised priority areas are to be

         mitigated using underground/re-routing outside revised priority

         area or conversion to insulated-cables in single horizontal frame.

         The decision to be based on habitat suitability criteria and case

         to case technical feasibility. Such lines will be identified by WII

         and GFD within 3 months and technical feasibility be evaluated

         by CEA.
(vi) Mitigation of existing 66kV and above lines:
Page 31 of 66
i.    The Committee has recommended nine critical 66kV lines (total

       64.9 km) for immediate undergrounding. The Committee has

       further   recommended       that   where   undergrounding      some

       stretches of these lines is not technically feasible, the option of

       rerouting outside the revised Priority Area or through the

       proposed corridors should be considered. Further, where

       undergrounding is not technically feasible and re-routing is to be

       done, the State Transmission Utility/owner of the transmission

       lines refer to the alignments proposed in Map 4 and finalise them

       within 6 months, in consultation with the CEA, GFD and WII.
ii.    The Committee has recommended that other existing 66 kV lines

       (10.2 km in length) in the revised Priority Area be mitigated on a

       case-to-case basis

iii.   For 220 kV and above lines, the Committee has generally

       suggested measures such as re-routing outside the revised

       priority area or within the revised priority area through a powerline

       corridor or laying of lines in horizontal configuration. The

       measures from these three options are to be decided on case to

       case basis by a joint committee having representative of CEA,

       State Transmission Utility, GFD and WII.
Page 32 of 66
iv.   The Committee has further given specific recommendations for

            seven identified 220kV and 400 kV lines (total 48.4 km) (see table

            at pg. 3489, pdf pg. 2139 of Gujarat Report/Vol V of CC).
(vii) On account of large scale erection of transmission lines at the cost

        of avifaunal diversity, the Committee has recommended re-

        examination of undergrounding powerlines above 33 kV in critical

        habitat by power line experts, considering the advancement in

        technology.
26.     Consideration of Objections to the Committee Reports by

Renewable Energy Generators: Mr. Vikas Singh, learned senior counsel

appearing for JSW and ACME, argued that while he agrees with the

majority report so far as the stakes of ACME are concerned, he would

argue that some of the committee's recommendations are not in line with

India’s solar energy generation commitment and go beyond the remit of

the committee as outlined in this Court’s 2024 order. Mr. Singh has made

elaborate      submissions     arguing     that    the   Expert   Committee’s

recommendations on many issues are untenable and shall not be given

effect. Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, Ld. ASG has responded to those submissions

and also filed written submissions. We deem it fit to deal with Mr. Singh’s

arguments straightaway.
Page 33 of 66
(i)   Mr. Singh submits that the committee’s recommendation to

      increase the priority area from 13,163 sq. km. to 14,013 sq. km.

      should be rejected. He submits that there is no quantitative

      analysis (e.g., projected GIB population viability gain) to show that

      adding these 850 km² will materially reduce extinction risk,

      especially given that the bulk of the GIB population was already

      within the original 13,163 sq. km. priority area.
In this regard, Ms. Bhati has invited our attention to the mandate of

      the Committee in terms of paragraph 69 of the 2024 order, which

      specifically provided that the Committee shall be at liberty to

      recommend other measures, including identifying and adding

      suitable areas beyond the priority zones if considered crucial for

      the conservation of species. Ms. Bhati submits that the committee

      has recommended the addition of priority areas after extensive

      consultation with Rajasthan Forest Department, scientific agencies

      including the Wildlife Institute of India and relevant stakeholders,

      by referring to extensive materials which are part of the Annexures

      to the Rajasthan Report. In this view, the objection to the addition

      of revised area by generators should be rejected.
We are in agreement with this submission, which is apparent from

      reading the remit of the committee from the Court’s order. There is
Page 34 of 66
no infirmity in the Committee’s recommendation for the addition of

    areas vis-à-vis its mandate.
(ii) Mr. Singh submits that there should not be a blanket ban on the

    installation of solar projects over 2MW capacity or the laying of

    overhead transmission lines because there is no reasonable basis

    to allow solar projects under 2MW and stall projects above it. Ms.

    Bhati has invited our attention to the Committee Report, which

    elaborates on how the 2MW threshold is well reasoned because

    projects below 2MW shall help in “generation of renewable energy

    by local communities to meet part of their increasing electricity

    demand and avail various government schemes” without “leading

    to additional habitat loss for the great Indian Bustard”.


    In our opinion, it would be improper for the Court to revisit a

    quantitative threshold determined by experts without any

    compelling reason.
(iii) Mr. Singh also submitted that rather than imposing omnibus

    prohibition across the priority area, the Court should mandate site-

    specific safeguards for any projects, such as undergrounding of the

    highest-risk segments, compulsory installation of certified bird
Page 35 of 66
diverters on all overhead spans, use of insulated cables, seasonal

    adjustments, and any other measure as may be recommended.


    Ms. Bhati submits, and as it is apparent from the Committee report

    that there are, in fact, case-based measures recommended at

    certain instances, and this is the reason for the classification of

    various powerlines and varied mitigation measures for different

    areas.
The Committee report in any manner cannot be read to imposed

    omnibus restrictions or make wholesale recommendations as

    submitted by Mr. Singh. The argument, therefore, is rejected.
(iv) Alternatively, he submits that the Court should consider exempting

    projects currently being set up in the Revised Priority Area (for

    which land has already been allotted by the State Government)

    from the restrictions imposed in the report of the Expert Committee.

    In this view, he submits that the Expert Committee has deviated

    from its mandate, as tasked by the Supreme Court, which was not

    to reinstate a blanket ban but to devise nuanced, site-specific

    recommendations that reconcile GIB protection with sustainable

    development.
Page 36 of 66
Additionally, he submits that the State Government be directed to

       grant alternative land for the development of solar projects, such

       as those of JSW, that are now included in the Priority Area, without

       incurring any additional costs. He further submits that the Expert

       Committee has made recommendations without referring to

       parallel international studies and practices, including those in

       Germany, and has also failed to appreciate the successful

       conservation of the Asian Houbara Bustard in Iran by identifying

       high-risk collision hotspots and installing spiral bird diverters.


      Ms. Bhati submits that there is no embargo placed by Committee

       on generators to request the State Government for an alternate

       land. In fact, this is an issue that the Committee has not addressed

       at all.
We are of the view that the State Government can consider the

       representation of Generators on its own merits.
27.   Mr. Singh also argues that there are two aspects to undergrounding

of powerlines – technical and financial. He proposes that instead of

adopting the omnibus and one-size-fits-all recommendation of the

Committee regarding underground powerlines, this Court shall delegate

the authority to direct undergrounding to the Central Electricity Authority,
Page 37 of 66
a statutory body, which shall deal with undergrounding where possible,

and where not, recommend BFDs on a case-by-case basis under
section

68
of the Electricity Act, 2003. 16
28.     While this submission is rooted in core electricity regulatory

oversight, we are of the view that when a committee, which also

comprises electricity regulation experts, has made recommendations on

an aspect of the interlinkage of electricity generation and species

protection, it would not be proper to further delegate the exercise to a new

body and delay the measures. This Court expedited the hearing for the

matter and nudged the Committee to submit its reports in a timely manner,

so that measures, as necessary, can be implemented as soon as


16
Section 68
. Overhead lines.–

(1) An overhead line shall, with prior approval of the Appropriate Government, be installed or kept
installed above ground in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2).
(2) The provisions contained in sub-section (1) shall not apply--
(a) in relation to an electric line which has a nominal voltage not exceeding 11 kilovolts and is used or
intended to be used for supplying to a single consumer;
(b) in relation to so much of an electric line as is or will be within premises in the occupation or control
of the person responsible for its installation; or
(c) in such other cases, as may be prescribed.
(3) The Appropriate Government shall, while granting approval under sub-section (1), impose such
conditions (including conditions as to the ownership and operation of the line) as appear to it to be
necessary.
(4) The Appropriate Government may vary or revoke the approval at any time after the end of such
period as may be stipulated in the approval granted by it.
(5) Where any tree standing or lying near an overhead line or where any structure or other object which
has been placed or has fallen near an overhead line subsequent to the placing of such line, interrupts
or interferes with, or is likely to interrupt or interfere with, the conveyance or transmission of electricity
or the accessibility of any works, an Executive Magistrate or authority specified by the Appropriate
Government may, on the application of the licensee, cause the tree, structure or object to be removed
or otherwise dealt with as he or it thinks fit.
(6) When disposing of an application under sub-section (5), an Executive Magistrate or authority
specified under that sub-section shall, in the case of any tree in existence before the placing of the
overhead line, award to the person interested in the tree such compensation as he thinks reasonable,
and such person may recover the same from the licensee.
Explanation.-- For the purposes of this section, the expression "tree" shall be deemed to include any
shrub, hedge, jungle growth or other plant.
Page 38 of 66
possible. In an exercise where time is of the essence, we do not find it

fitting to delegate the matter for further consideration.
29.     Mr. Maninder Singh, learned senior counsel appearing for

Sustainable Power Developers Association (SPDA), which is representing

the interests of solar power developers, submits that more than 21 solar

energy generation projects are awaiting permission under
section 68
of

the Electricity Act, 2003. If these permissions are granted, these 21

projects can be completed soon, resulting in the production of more than

9000 MW of power. Arguing so, Mr. Maninder Singh opposes the prayers

made by the Petitioners regarding an increase in the revised priority area,

establishing a power line corridor, undergrounding of lines above 66kV,

installation of BFD, etc.
30.     Mr. Maninder Singh invites our attention to previous judgments and

orders of this Court in Centre for
Environmental Law, World Wide

Fund-India v. Union of India
, 17
T N Godavarman Thirumulpad v.

Union of India,18
and
U. P. Public Service Commission v. Rahul

Singh
19 and argues that the views/recommendations of Expert




17 (2013) 8 SCC 234.
18 Judgment dated 13.02.2012 in W.P. 202/1995 (Protection of Red Sandalwood);
T N Godavarman

Thirumulpad v. Union of India
.
19 (2018) 7 SCC 254.
Page 39 of 66
Committees have been traditionally accepted by this Court, and the same

should be done in the instant case.
31.   As Mr. Maninder Singh’s submissions before us are majorly for

accepting the recommendations of the Expert Committee, we will be

dealing with these submissions when we examine and consider the Expert

Committee recommendations.
32.   Mr. Vishrov Mukerjee, learned counsel appearing for Wind

Independent Power Producers Association, an association of wind power

developers, submits that wind projects stand on a different footing than

solar projects and therefore recommendations in respect to solar projects

are inapplicable to wind generators.
33.   Mr. Mukerjee argues that instead of undergrounding cables, BFDs

shall be resorted to as they are much more effective. Mr. Mukerjee also

seeks a declaration from this Court to treat the April 2021 order as a

change in law event and allow wind power projects in the Priority and

Potential areas which have been commissioned prior to 19.04.2021 to

continue with overhead transmission lines with installation of appropriate

mitigation measures such as BFDs and any other measures suggested

by the Committee and exclude Wind Power Projects from the requirement

of undergrounding transmission lines in the Priority and Potential areas.
Page 40 of 66
34.   We have made it clear to Mr. Mukerjee that the issue arising for

consideration relating to problems caused by transmission lines have got

nothing to do with the source of generation of power, be it thermal, hydro,

solar or wind. In any event of the matter, as the Committee has not

considered the distinction between solar and wind generations, we are not

inclined to consider the submissions at this stage.
35.   CSR to include Corporate Environmental Responsibility: The

legal formation of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) in India is

intended to mark a paradigm shift from voluntary philanthropy to statutory

obligation. Under
Section 135
of the Companies Act, 2013, Parliament

institutionalized this duty by mandating companies to meet specific

financial thresholds espousing social responsibility. This provision

effectively codifies the principle that corporate profit is not solely the

private property of shareholders but is partly owed to the society that

enables its generation. The magic of legitimacy is in the perspective that

private property is a trust.
36.   This statutory mandate redefines the traditional role of corporate

governance. Historically, a director's primary duty was to maximize value

for shareholders. However,
Section 166(2)
of the Companies Act, 2013

dismantled this narrow view by imposing a broader fiduciary duty.

Directors are now legally mandated to act in good faith not just for
Page 41 of 66
members, but for the "best interests of the company, its employees, the

shareholders, the community, and for the protection of environment." This

crucial expansion recognizes that a corporation is an organ of society, and

its "social" responsibility extends to the wider community impacted by its

operations.
37.   The definition of "community" within the CSR framework has been

expanded to explicitly include the natural world, cementing the link

between social welfare and environmental health.
Schedule VII of the

Companies Act, 2013
enumerates permissible CSR activities, specifically

listing "ensuring environmental sustainability, ecological balance,

protection of flora and fauna, animal welfare, and conservation of natural

resources." By categorizing these ecological activities as "social"

responsibility, the law acknowledges that as human beings, we cannot

“own” or “use” environment for “our purpose”. The corporate duty must

evolve from merely protecting the shareholders to protecting the

ecosystem that we all inhabit.
38.   Therefore, the corporate definition of "Social Responsibility" must

inherently include "Environmental Responsibility." Companies cannot

assert to be socially responsible while ignoring equal claims of the

environment and other beings of the ecosystem. The Constitution of India,

under
Article 51A(g)
, imposes a fundamental duty on every citizen "to
Page 42 of 66
protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,

rivers and wildlife, and to have compassion for living creatures." A

corporation, as a legal person and a key organ of society, shares this

fundamental duty. CSR funds are the tangible expression of this duty.

Consequently, allocating funds for the protection of environment is not a

voluntary act of charity but a fulfilment of a constitutional obligation.
39.   The obligation to protect endangered species is paramount.
In

Centre for
Environmental Law, World Wide Fund-India
(supra), this Court

emphasized the "Species Best Interest" standard, prioritizing the survival

of endangered species over commercial or industrial interests. Where

corporate activities such as mining, power generation, or infrastructure

threaten the habitat of endangered species, the "Polluter Pays" principle

mandates that the company bears the cost of species recovery. CSR

funds must, therefore, be directed towards ex-situ and in-situ conservation

efforts to prevent extinction.
40.   The non-renewable power generators operating in the priority as

well as non-priority areas in Rajasthan and Gujarat must always

remember that they share the environment with the Godawan, the Great

Indian Bustard and must undertake their activities as if they are guests in

its abode.
Page 43 of 66
41.     Submissions by Petitioner20 with Objection to Committee’s

recommendation: Mr. Shyam Divan, learned senior counsel, accepts

most of the recommendations made by the Committee and suggests that

the following measures, as suggested by the Committee must be

implemented at the earliest.
42.     Recommendations of the Committee with respect to Rajasthan that

the Petitioner accepts:
a. Modification of the Priority Area from 13,163 sq. kms. to 14,013 sq.

        kms.
b. Initiation of restoration, conservation and consolidation of grassland

        ecosystem in India, along with the identification of five such critical

        sites.
c. Key measures for in-situ conservation, read with Paragraphs 71-72

        of this Hon'ble Court's judgment dated 21.03.2024, including

        declaration of important areas such as Degray Oran as

        Conservation/Community Reserve

    d. Project GIB along with its funding

    e. Monitoring of GIBs and their habitats



20 The reference to Petitioner(s)/submission by Petitioner(s) in the text of the judgment is with respect

to Petitioner(s) in Writ Petition (C) No. 838 of 2019, unless specified otherwise.
Page 44 of 66
f. Continuation of study by WII regarding impact of climate change on

      GIBs

  g. Powerline Corridor through the Revised Priority Area

  h. No mitigation measures for existing and future powerlines of 11kV

      and below within 100m of the settlement boundary

  i. No new wind turbines, no new solar parks/plants of more than 2MW,

      no expansion of existing solar parks and wind farms to be allowed

      within the Revised Priority Area

  j. Identified 80km of 33kV powerlines to be undergrounded

      immediately

  k. Identified nine 66kV and above lines to be re-routed immediately in

      a powerline corridor, with horizontal configuration.
43.   Recommendations of the Committee with respect to Gujarat that the

Petitioner accepts:
l. Modification of Priority Area from 500 sq. kms. to 740 sq. kms.

  m. Key measures for in-situ conservation along with specific

      suggestions for the State of Gujarat such as designation of

      important areas (like Naliya Grassland and other associated areas)

      as Conservation Reserve; removal of non-native plantation etc.
Page 45 of 66
n. Project GIB and its funding

  o. Monitoring of GIBs and their habitats

  p. Continuation of study by WII regarding impact of climate change on

      GIBs

  q. No mitigation measures for existing and future powerlines within

      100m of the settlement boundary

  r. No new wind turbines, no new solar parks/plants of more than 2MW,

      no expansion of existing solar parks and wind farms to be allowed

      within the Revised Priority Area.
s. Identified 79.2km of 33kV powerlines within the Revised Priority

      Area to be undergrounded or re-routed outside the Revised Priority

      Area

  t. Identified nine critical 66kV lines (total 64.9 km) to be immediately

      undergrounded

  u. Two powerline corridors through the Revised Priority Area

  v. All mitigation measures to be adopted and implemented within 2

      years
44.   Objections/Additional measures suggested by Petitioners:
Over and above the measures suggested by the Committee, though in the
Page 46 of 66
written submissions, detailed objections are articulated, Mr. Divan

confined his submissions to the following measures. In fact, after having

disposed of the objections of the Power Developers, the issue arising for

our     consideration     will   naturally   be      confined   to   the   following

objections/suggestions which are as follows:
a. Drawing from the dissent note, Mr. Divan suggests that the area of

        657 sq. km for the Rasla region must be added to the Revised

        Priority Area in Rajasthan to avoid fragmentation of the Revised

        Priority Area (total of 14,670 sq. kms).
b. There ought to be mitigation measures in the Potential Areas (i.e.,

        areas outside the Revised Priority Areas). These measures include:
i. All future lines to run through a powerline corridor.

              ii. All existing and future lines must be marked with BFDs.

      c. No new overhead powerlines (except 11kV and below) in the

        Revised Priority Areas.
d. No limestone or other mines in the priority areas or the revised

        priority areas.
e. The leases of existing wind turbines ought not to be renewed and

        the turbines in the revised priority areas be dismantled once their

        life is over.
Page 47 of 66
f. All existing and new powerlines of 11kV and below in the Revised

        Priority Area ought to be converted into Aerial Bunched Cables.

      g. 250km of critical powerlines in Rajasthan, as identified by Wildlife

        Institute of India, ought to be directed to be undergrounded in a time

        bound manner not exceeding 12 months.
h. All powerlines of 400kV and below ought to be

              (1) undergrounded; or

              (2) rerouted in a powerline corridor in a time-bound manner.
These lines be marked with good quality BFD until they are

        undergrounded/re-routed.
i. Mitigation of two lines of 400 kV from Bhachunda-Varsana (approx.

        11.5 kms) in the State of Gujarat in the manner suggested in the

        Dissent Note to the Gujarat Report.
j. All existing powerlines of 765kV must be marked with BFDs.
45.     Mr. Prashanto Chandra Sen, learned senior counsel, joined Mr.

Divan and made arguments on environment protection, particularly the

need to take a shift from the anthropocentric to ecocentric approaches of

environmental conservation.
46.     Analysis: We will now deal with each of the objections/suggestions

as articulated hereinabove:
Page 48 of 66
A.     Re: Inclusion of 657 sq. kms to the Revised Priority Area in
       Rajasthan
47.    The Committee has recommended that the priority area of 13,163

sq. km. as per this Court’s order dated 21.03.2024, is extremely important

for GIB conservation and hence kept intact, however, the additional

important area of 5977 sq. km., as mentioned in para 51 of the Supreme

Court judgement, was deliberated upon by the committee, and the

Committee has decided to entirely exclude (except for some critical

patches) the additional important area due to the following reasons:
a. The area (particularly the northern arm) has relatively fewer GIB

         sightings and is important for the transmission of power that may

         be generated towards the west of the priority area in the future.

      b. The area has intensive agriculture due to irrigation and requires the

         addition of power capacity. The lower arm, on the other hand, is

         important for renewable energy production and already has a

         dense network of power lines that is difficult to mitigate.
48.    While the Committee excludes the area and nomenclature of

additional important areas altogether, it also felt that some parts of the

existing additional important areas are very important for conservation of

the GIB and should be retained for addition to the Priority Area.

Furthermore, some more areas, were recommended for inclusion in the
Page 49 of 66
Priority Area based on GIB sightings, habitat suitability, and importance

for other associated species. In this view, a total area of 850 sq. km,

consisting of GIB habitats around i) Sam (such as grasslands adjoining

Rojani ki Basti, Hameero ki Basti, Turke ki Basti), ii) Netsi and iii) southern

boundary of PFFR (particularly Lathi, Dholiya, Chacha, Odhaniya) was

recommended for addition to the Priority Area.
49.     The Committee also excluded a minimal 0.005 sq. km. area from

existing priority area observing that “the area is surrounded by irrigated

agriculture and is close to the Chandhan village, making it an unsuitable

habitat for the GIB.”21 The revised priority area for Rajasthan, as

recommended by the committee, shall be 14,013 sq. km. However, in

such modifications, the Committee has excluded the area around Rasla-

Degray/Degrai Oran Enclave.
50.     The Petitioners submit that there is a major oversight in the priority

area with respect to Rasla-Degrai Oran Enclave which comprises an area

of 657 sq. km. between Rasla Enclosure and the boundary of Priority Area

and invites our attention to the recent order of this Court dated 18.12.2024

in
T N Godavarman Thirumulpad v. UoI & Ors22
whereby this Court had

directed the State to identify, survey, and notify Orans and similar sacred



21 Committee Report (Rajasthan), Paragraph, 26(b)(iii).
22 I.A. No. 41723/2022 in WP (C) No. 202/1995.
Page 50 of 66
groves as forest land, reflecting both their cultural significance and

ecological value. Per Petitioners, the area around Rasla is very important

as Rasla and Degrai are locations where populations have been sighted

during the breeding season. The area of 657 sq. km. lies between the

Pokharan and Rasla-Degray Oran regions, which also serve as a

wintering site and a stopover for GIBs when they fly from the relatively

safe zones in Pokhran to and from the Desert National Park. Petitioners

submit that due to this exclusion, which was once an additionally important

area, the Rasla Priority Area has been reduced to an island with no

connectivity with the adjoining priority area of the Pokhran region.
51.   The anxiety of the Petitioners is that once an area is removed from

a priority area and in the absence of any additional important area, there

will be no protection in the region for GIBs, including BFDs. This

apprehension is not without merit, petitioners argue, highlighting the

dissenting note as to how additional important areas play a significant role

as a corridor, and the significance of the Rasla region becomes apparent

in this light. Noting so, the dissenting note recommends the following:
“4.5 Recommendations for Additionally Important Areas of
         Rajasthan
         4.5.1. Considering all the ecological insights and information
         mentioned above, my humble submission is as follows.
         4.5.2. The removal of the entire southern arm of the original
         additionally important area will lead to a) the loss of connectivity
         between the two subpopulations through the south, as the corridor
Page 51 of 66
between the Degrai Oran and Revised Priority Area is compromised,
b) if the existing lines (33Kv and above) in this area are not mitigated
         with bird flight diverter, it would pose a high risk of collision to
         bustards and all the other associated threatened avian species of the
         topography, leading to significant bird mortality c) adding new lines
         in this area would also add to the existing threat and may further
         compromise the safety of all the threatened bird species. Therefore,
         I submit the following recommendations.
4.5.3. The area between the Rasla Enclosure and the boundary of
         the Priority Area, 52pprox. 657 sq km., shown within the black
         boundary in the Map-2 above, should be merged with the ‘Revised
         Priority Area’ to maintain connectivity between Pokharan and Rasla
         Priority Areas.
4.5.4. The Degrai Oran area is an important habitat for bustards, and
         many other threatened fauna; however, to maintain a balance
         between the conservation of critically endangered species and
         development, the PGCIL’s Fatehgarh-2 Substation Area (~2 km2) is
         excluded from the suggested polygon, shown as ‘3’ in Map-2. The
         remaining area within this polygon has important bustard habitats
         and grazing grounds crucial for birds and local communities.
         4.5.5. The addition of new and expansion of existing solar parks and
         wind farms should be prohibited in this area, as it would further lead
         to loss of habitat for birds and loss of grazing ground for local
         communities’ livestock. A majority of the local communities here are
         associated with pastoralism and these habitats also serve as their
         traditional grazing grounds. Thus, preserving these habitats will also
         be beneficial to the pastoralist communities.
4.5.6. All the existing lines in these areas (except 11Kv and below)
         should be marked with Bird Flight Diverter (BFD), as per the
         installation design given at para 18.2. of this note.
         4.5.7. No new overhead lines (except 11Kv and below) should be
         allowed in this area. The existing and new powerlines (only of 11Kv
         and below) should also be installed with Aerial Bunched Cable, and
         marked with BFD in ‘critical areas’ identified following the
         recommendations made at Para 11.2.4 of this note.”
52.   Having considered the matter in detail and taking a holistic view for

rationalisation of the priority area with respect to Rajasthan, the

Committee recommended that, “The lower arm, on the other hand, is

important for renewable energy production and already has a dense
Page 52 of 66
network of power lines that is difficult to mitigate”. 23 The conclusion of the

Committee is based on field visits and stakeholder consultation.
53.     As an important step towards conservation, the Committee took the

decision of including an extent of 20 sq. kms around Rasla as an integral

part of the revised priority area itself. The revised priority area, of 14,013

sq. kms therefore, includes 20 sq. km area with and around Rasla.

Additionally, the contiguous area has already been declared the Desert

National Park, having its own stringent regulatory measures. The

Committee noted the difficulty of bringing about any variation in the

existing network of power lines as there exist couple of power sub-stations

in the area. Having taken a holistic view, the Committee was of the opinion

that the revised priority area, coupled with the additionally important area,

is adequate for habitat sustainability of GIB.
54.     To bring about efficient regulatory measure, the units of Eco Task

Force can be deployed even in these areas and in fact the Committee has

specifically recommended such measure in para 32(e)(ii) where it has

recommended that “Units of the Eco Task Force can be engaged for

protection and day-to-day management of the proposed enclosures within

the Field Firing Range. Similarly, units of the Eco Task Force currently



23 Committee Report (Rajasthan), Paragraph, 26(b)(i).
Page 53 of 66
deployed in DNP can be used for protection activities in neighbouring non-

protected areas as well.”
55.   The Committee’s recommendation also finds ground in the fact that

there is already a dense network of existing power lines from 765 Kv

Fatehgarh-I Substation and 765 Kv Fatehgarh-II Substation in the

adverted 657 sq. km area forming part of the proposed potential area,

from which large quantum of renewable power is being exported.
56.   The measures suggested by the Committee regarding community

engagement clearly include that, after considering the matter, the State of

Rajasthan shall endeavour to designate areas around Dholiya, Khetolai,

Chacha, Rasla and Degrai Oran, etc., as community reserves and should

be managed with participation of local communities.
57.   In view of the above, we are of the opinion that the measures

suggested by the Committee are adequate. Over and above that, we are

of the opinion that effective and efficient regulatory measures by the

concerned duty bearers of conservation will be taken periodically as and

when required and will prove effective and beneficial in the long term.

B.    Re: Even with respect to Non-Priority Areas, all Future Lines
      should Run through Power Line Corridors
Page 54 of 66
58.   It is suggested that mitigation measures must be undertaken for the

areas outside the revised priority area. For this purpose, it is

recommended that all future lines be routed through power line corridors.
59.   As regards the suggestion to provide a powerline corridor even with

respect to areas outside the revised priority area, we are of the opinion

that the Committee has identified that GIB movements are majorly

confined to the Revised Priority area, in which two corridors have already

been proposed by the Expert Committee to meet the objective. However,

we direct that in the cases of dedicated lines starting from different

Renewable Energy (‘RE’) Pooling stations, but terminating at a common

Grid Pooling station, the routes shall be optimised in such a way that they

share a maximum common stretch to the extent possible. Equally, in case

of lines starting from different RE plants, but terminating at a common RE

Pooling station, their routes may be optimised in such a way that they also

share a maximum common stretch to the extent possible. There shall be

a direction to the concerned authorities to ensure this requirement.


C.    Re: All Existing and Future Lines must be marked with Bird
      Flight Divertors (‘BFDs’)
60.   After recommending the rerouting of certain powerlines for ensuring

consolidation of GIB strongholds, the committee observes that such

rerouting will nullify the requirement of additional mitigation measures,
Page 55 of 66
such as the installation of Bird Flight Diverters. 24 Commenting on

additional mitigation            measures         for    both States,          the     committee

recommends measures on case-by-case basis to be decided by local

Forest Departments and observes that 25:
“44. (h) (…) BFD are known to reduce bird collisions significantly 26,
         except in the case of bustards where their effectiveness is lower 27. These
         devices come with installation and maintenance costs. Depending on the
         landscape, additional modifications may be necessary to install diverters
         effectively. Despite all investments and all possible modifications, the bird
         diverters can help to mitigate only a singular threat. Moreover, its efficacy
         in reducing bird mortality (particularly GIB) is far from proven in the Indian
         context. Since more than 50% of the transmission lines in the revised
         priority area already have bird diverters, it allows for evaluating the
         efficacy of the existing bird diverters before recommending the use of
         such measures. Bird flight diverters may offer a quick fix to a specific
         problem (collision with power lines) if at all its efficacy is proven but they
         would be cost-intensive due to recurring maintenance issues on account
         of reported poor quality. Strategic planning of power lines and targeted
         habitat management, on the other hand, provides long-term benefits and
         a sustainable solution that will not only help the GIB, but it will also tackle
         broader ecological problems, benefiting the entire ecosystem. Given the
         unproven efficacy of BFDs and the high cost involved in installation and
         maintenance of the same, spending such a huge amount may not be in
         the overall interest of common consumers as the same shall be
         eventually passed on to them. Therefore, the committee is of considerate
         view to presently focus more on other measures as recommended in the
         preceding paras. The committee also recommends that an ongoing study
         by WII for assessing the effectiveness of bird flight diverters in reducing
         collision mortality of birds with power lines shall be done within a year
         and recommendations submitted to the Ministry for further
         consideration.”
                                                                       (emphasis supplied)




24 Committee Report (Rajasthan), pg.    40.
25 Committee Report (Rajasthan), pg.    42.
26 Barrientos, Rafael, et al. “Meta‐analysis of the effectiveness of marked wire in reducing avian

collisions with power lines.” Conservation Biology 25.5 (2011): 893-903.
27 Silva, Joao Paulo, et al. “The effects of powerlines on bustards: how best to mitigate, how best to

monitor?” Bird Conservation International 33 (2023): e30.
Page 56 of 66
61.   The view of the Committee with respect to deployment of BFDs is in

consonance with Indian experience about maintenance. Apart from the

effectiveness of BFDs, which is a matter of science, maintenance is an

issue that is integrally connected to the institutional discipline, which

means that there must be a regular follow-up of the maintenance of the

instruments, particularly since a large number of these instruments are

deployed, and the human resources, coupled with the discipline to

maintain them with regularity and efficiency is a big issue for public

administration. For this reason, we are inclined to accept the suggestion

of the Committee to await detailed studies undertaken by WII for the

assessment and effectiveness of BFDs. We therefore direct the

authorities to ensure that at least one agency, apart from WII, assesses

the efficiency and effectiveness of BFDs at the same time and undertakes

a pilot project in some areas before making final recommendations.
62.   The real test before deployment of these instruments is twin-fold.

Firstly, they must be durable and long lasting. Secondly, they must

virtually be maintenance free. As the issue relating to deployment of BFDs

is integrally connected to effectiveness of the device and efficiency in its

maintenance, we are not inclined to give a direction to deploy them.

However, in view of the ideas expressed in:
Page 57 of 66
a. Affidavit filed on 15.03.2021 on behalf of the Ministry of Power in

         the present case states that the CEA has suggested the installation

         of bird diverters on high voltage lines in the critical areas. The

         affidavit further stated that BFDs are to be placed on identified

         stretches to prevent collisions between birds and transmission

         lines.
b. Wildlife institute of India in its presentation to the Expert Committee

         has recommended the use of good quality of BFD as a mitigation

         measure on overhead lines.
63.     We direct the Inspector General, Wildlife Division, MoEFCC,

Government of India, to ensure that necessary studies are undertaken

and take appropriate action for its deployment.
D.      Re: Regarding no new overhead powerlines (except 11kV and
        below) in the revised priority areas and leases of existing wind
        turbines not to be renewed
64.     Petitioners submit that no new lines ought to be allowed in the

Revised Priority Areas (even through a dedicated powerline corridor) as

these areas are now the last remaining habitat of bustard, which ought to

be kept sacrosanct and free from further appearance of overhead

powerlines/renewable energy projects.
Page 58 of 66
65.   As regards future power lines in the revised priority area, the

Committee examined the issue in detail and has given a clear and

categorical recommendation. It is necessary to extract the relevant portion

for clarity and certainty:
“43. Further, as per para 66(e), with regards to balancing sustainable
       development and GIB conservation in the matter of laying future power
       lines. It is also noted that Power generated from the RE generators is
       evacuated through power lines of 11 kV and 33 kV lines, which are owned
       by RE generators and further transmission of this power is done through
       high voltage lines (66 kV and above voltage level) which are owned by
       State Transmission utilities and also by Transmission Service Providers
       (TSPs) and further power will be distributed by Distribution lines (LV, 11
       kV and 33 kV) which Electricity Distribution companies own. Extension of
       distribution lines right up to end use is necessary if the distribution network
       supplies the electricity. Considering both the historical and recent decline
       of the GIB for many reasons, not only due to transmission lines, the
       committee recommends measures which include mitigation of all threats,
       including the need for habitat management across the GIB areas in the
       State of Rajasthan. The details of the specific interventions for GIB areas
       in Rajasthan are given below:
(…)
(d) Restrictions on future renewable energy projects within the
       Revised Priority Areas of Rajasthan: Considering the risk posed to the
       GIBs, LFs and other associated species now surviving in the last
       remaining habitats of the revised priority areas, it is proposed that no new
       overhead powerlines except through dedicated power corridors (except
       11kV and below capacities with mitigation or as in 43c above) and no new
       Wind turbine should be allowed in the revised Priority Area. New solar
       parks/plants of more than 2 MW capacity and expansion of existing solar
       parks should not be allowed within revised Priority Areas. This relaxation
       will help in the generation of renewable energy by local communities to
       meet part of their increasing electricity demand and avail various
       government schemes.
As per present Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC)
       regulations, new renewable energy plants with a capacity of less than
       50MW are not eligible for connection to the Inter-State Transmission
       System (ISTS). Further, in case of capacity enhancement of any existing
       plant after 50 MW, the minimum capacity required for ISTS connection is
       5 MW. Thus, the relaxation for solar plants up to 2 MW would not lead to
       additional habitat loss for the Great Indian Bustard.”
Page 59 of 66
66.   There is a similar recommendation for the State of Gujarat as

following:
“15. Committee's recommendations regarding laying future power
      lines and energy infrastructure in the revised Priority area: It was
      agreed that general recommendations for mitigating the threat to GIB from
      powerlines and energy infrastructure in Rajasthan should apply to Gujarat
      as well. Thus, the committee ratified the recommendations made in paras
      43c and 43d of the Rajasthan report. Additionally, and similar to 43b of
      the Rajasthan Report, the committee recommended that no blanket
      restriction should be kept on laying new power lines outside the revised
      priority area.
(…)
      c. Restrictions on future renewable energy projects within the
      Revised Priority Areas of Gujarat:….. (Ref: Para 43d of Rajasthan
      report)
      (…)
19. Power connections for agricultural purposes: Taking into account
      both the ecology of the GIB and LF - which uses agricultural areas - and
      the agricultural dependence of people living in the revised priority area of
      Gujarat, the committee reiterates its suggestion mentioned in para 15 and
      16 of this report, that no additional restrictions should be placed on
      providing domestic and agricultural connections to people living within the
      revised priority area.”
67.   The proposal of the Committee is accepted, and it is directed that

no new overhead powerlines except through dedicated power corridors

(except 11kV and below capacities) and no new Wind turbines should be

allowed in the revised Priority Area. Furthermore, it is directed that new

solar parks/plants with a capacity exceeding 2 MW and the expansion of

existing solar parks should not be permitted within the revised Priority

Areas.
Page 60 of 66
E.    Re: Prohibition on limestone or other mines in the priority
      areas or revised priority areas
68.   Petitioners submit that the Court should prohibit limestone or other

mining in the priority areas or revised priority areas. Though the issue of

mining in the province of GIB was not under scrutiny in our orders dated

19.04.2021 and 21.03.2024 or in the expert committee report, we are of

the opinion that mining, even of minor minerals, is subject to the regulatory

regimes under the
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act,

1957
, the
Environment Protection Act, 1986
and such relevant statutes.

The statutory authorities, as well as the regulators, will certainly be aware

of the fragility and importance of this area, and we believe that no

decisions will be made that would even marginally impinge upon the

conservation and protection of GIB.
F.    Re: Conversion of existing and installation of new 11 kV and
      below Powerlines as Aerial Bunched Cables in Revised Priority
      Areas
69.   Petitioners submit that all existing powerlines and all new

powerlines of 11 kV and below in the Revised Priority Area ought to be

insulated and should be converted and installed as Aerial Bunched

Cables. With respect to distribution Mitigation of distribution lines (11kV

and below) in the revised Priority Area of Rajasthan, the recommendation

of the Committee are as under:
Page 61 of 66
“44 (a). Mitigation of distribution lines (11kV and below) in the
       revised Priority Area of Rajasthan: Providing electricity to all residents
       through underground transmission lines will be very difficult and
       economically very costly. Overhead lines with insulated power cables will
       eliminate the possibility of electrocution. The committee suggests that all
       lines of 11 kV and below may be mitigated using an insulated cable in
       horizontal configuration or insulated cables with bunching. In addition, if
       any new power line is allowed on forest land or other critical area, the
       same should be preferably laid underground...”
70.   We are not inclined to direct the conversion of powerlines into aerial

bunching. Instead, there shall be a direction that all lines of 11 kV and

below may be mitigated using an insulated cable in a horizontal

configuration or insulated cables with bunching.
G.    Re: Undergrounding of 250 Km of critical power lines identified
      by WII in Rajasthan in a time-bound manner
71.   It is absolutely necessary to implement this recommendation with

expedition. For this purpose, we direct that the Inspector General, Wildlife

Division, MoEFCC, Government of India, as a duty-bearer, will be

responsible for overseeing and implementing the recommendations of the

Committee as approved by us within two years from the date of our order.

H.    Re: Mandatory Undergrounding or Time-Bound Rerouting of
      All Powerlines (400 kV and Below)
72.   Petitioners submit that the critical powerlines located within the

Revised Priority Area should be undergrounded wherever feasible. It is

submitted that WII has already identified approximately 250 km of critical

powerlines that pose a high risk and therefore directions should be issued
Page 62 of 66
for their immediate undergrounding. Where undergrounding is found to be

infeasible, the powerlines should be rerouted outside the Revised Priority

Area through a designated powerline corridor, petitioners submit.
73.   We are not inclined to take a different view of the matter as the

Committee has taken stock of the issue.
I.    Re: Mitigation of two lines of 400 kV from Bhachunda-Varsana
      of approx. 11.5 Kms
74.   Petitioners submit that the two 400 kV lines listed at serial numbers

1 and 2 of the table, running from Bhachunda to Varsana (approximately

11.5 km), are not existing lines as only the pylons have been installed. It

is further argued that no approval for the erection of these lines was

granted by the erstwhile three-member Court-appointed Committee, as is

evident from its report dated 07.02.2024. Moreover, the pylons were

installed even before any application for permission was made to the

erstwhile Committee, which has recorded the matter as one seeking post

facto approval. Notwithstanding the above, the petitioners submit that if

the line is permitted to remain without appropriate mitigation, it would pose

a very high risk to the existing population of the GIB.
75.   These lines have been taken note of by the Committee as reflected

in Annexures to the Committee Report and suggested the required

measures. We are not inclined to take a different view on this aspect.
Page 63 of 66
76.    Directions: In terms of the conclusions arrived at in the foregoing

analysis, we direct as under:
i.    The revised priority area for Rajasthan, as recommended by the

       Expert Committee, shall be 14,013 sq. kms., and the revised priority

       area for Gujarat, as recommended by the committee, shall be 740

       sq. kms.
ii.   The measures recommended by the committee for in-situ and ex-
situ conservation of GIB within the priority areas of Rajasthan and

       Gujarat shall be implemented forthwith.
iii.   Recommendations of the committee with respect to the monitoring

       of GIB in the revised priority areas shall be given effect immediately.

iv.    Recommendation of the committee for the conduct of long-term

       studies on the effects of climate change on GIB must be conducted.

 v.    Recommendations of the committee for providing a power corridor

       of up to 5 km width, which will be at a distance of 5 km or more to

       the south of the southern-most enclosure of Desert National Park,

       are accepted.
vi.    Recommendations of the committee negating the necessity for

       Mitigation of existing and future power lines of 11 kV and below

       voltage in the 100-metre buffer around the settlement is accepted.
Page 64 of 66
vii.    Restrictions as stipulated by the committee on future renewable

        energy projects within the Revised Priority Areas of Rajasthan are

        approved.
viii.   The committee’s recommendation pertaining to the immediate

        undergrounding of 80 km of 33 kV line in Rajasthan is accepted.

 ix.    Recommendations of the committee pertaining to the Mitigation of

        33 kV lines in the revised Priority Area of Rajasthan is accepted.
x.    Recommendations of the committee regarding the rerouting of

        certain specific existing lines of 66kV and above in the revised

        Priority Area of Rajasthan shall be done in a time-bound manner.

 xi.    All the mitigation measures such as undergrounding, rerouting as

        suggested in the Committee Report should be started immediately

        and completed within two years from the date of our order.

xii.    In the cases of dedicated lines starting from different RE Pooling

        stations, but terminating at a common Grid Pooling station, the

        routes shall be optimised in such a way that they share a maximum

        common stretch to the extent possible.
xiii.   In case of lines starting from different RE plants, but terminating at

        a common RE Pooling station, their routes may be optimised in such

        a way that they also share a maximum common stretch to the extent
Page 65 of 66
possible. There shall be a direction to the concerned authorities to

       ensure this requirement.
xiv.   The competent authority will engage with the issue of BFDs and take

       appropriate action, based on scientific analysis, for its deployment.

xv.    The competent authority will ensure the undergrounding of 250 km

       of critical power lines identified by WII in Rajasthan in a time-bound

       manner not exceeding more than 2 years.
xvi.   Other recommendations of the Committee, which are in addition to

       the above directions, will be implemented as soon as possible.
77.    With these directions, the writ petition(s) and civil appeal are

disposed of. Pending applications including the applications for

intervention/impleadment are also disposed of accordingly.
………………………………....J.
                                    [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]


                                              ………………………………....J.
                                                [ATUL S. CHANDURKAR]
   NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 19, 2025
Page 66 of 66