[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Belide Swagath Kumar vs The State Of Telangana on 19 December, 2025
2025 INSC 1471
                                                                          NON-REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                    OF 2025
                            (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.     of 2025
                                         arising out of Diary No.47072 of 2023)


                   BELIDE SWAGATH KUMAR                                     …APPELLANT

                                       VERSUS

                   STATE OF TELANGANA & ANOTHER                             …RESPONDENTS




                                                JUDGMENT
NAGARATHNA, J.
Delay Condoned.
Leave granted.
2.       This appeal arises out of the order dated 27.04.2023 passed

                   by the High Court for the State of Telangana at Hyderabad in

                   Criminal Petition No.4364 of 2023 dismissing the criminal petition

                   filed under
Section 482
of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for
Signature Not Verified
short, “
CrPC
”) preferred by the accused-appellant herein, and
Digitally signed by
BORRA LM VALLI
Date: 2025.12.19
17:14:58 IST
Reason:
1
thereby refusing to quash the proceedings arising out of the FIR

No.29 of 2022 dated 27.01.2022 registered with Saroornagar

Women Police Station, District Rachakonda under
Section 498A
of

the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, “
IPC
”) and
Sections 3
and
4
of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (for short, “
DP Act
”) and

Complaint Case No.1067 of 2022 on the file of the Additional

Metropolitan Magistrate-cum-Additional Junior Civil Judge, Ranga

Reddy District.
3.   The said FIR was filed by Smt. Nalla Rashmi, the

complainant-respondent No.2, against her husband, the accused-

appellant herein, her father-in-law, one Belide Anjaiah (accused

No.2), her mother-in-law, one Belide Sandhya Rani (accused No.
3), her brothers-in-law Belide Ranjith Kumar and Belide Santosh

Kumar (accused Nos.4 and 5) and her sister-in-law, one Belide

Vishnu Priya (accused No.6) under
Section 498A
of the IPC and
Section 4
of the DP Act. Based on the said FIR, respondent No.1 -

State filed a Final Report in the form of Chargesheet arraigning all

the accused persons including the accused-appellant herein, giving

rise to Complaint Case No.1067 of 2022.
2
4.     It is pertinent to mention herein that the accused Nos.2 to 6,

i.e. the parents-in-law and other accused of the complainant-

respondent No.2 preferred Criminal Petition No.4025 of 2022,

before the High Court for the State of Telangana seeking quashing

of the criminal proceedings arising out of the aforementioned FIR

and complaint case qua them. The said Criminal Petition No.4025

of 2022 was allowed by the High Court vide order dated 23.04.2025

and therefore all the proceedings qua the said accused persons

were quashed. The husband i.e. the accused-appellant of the

complainant-respondent No.2 has preferred the present appeal.
5.     Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the complainant-

respondent No.2 and the accused-appellant, both software

engineers working in the USA, got married on 04.12.2016 at

Tirumala, Andhra Pradesh; thereafter both of them cohabited in

Michigan, USA and on 26.04.2019, the couple was blessed with a

son.
6.     On 05.08.2019, on account of matrimonial discord, the

complainant-respondent No.2 along with her minor son moved

back to India and started living in her parental house at Hyderabad
3
and since then there has been no resumption of cohabitation

between the parties. Thereafter, a legal notice dated 11.01.2022

was sent by the accused-appellant to the complainant-respondent

No.2 seeking restitution of conjugal rights and asking her to return

to USA.
7.   On 24.01.2022, the complainant-respondent No.2 filed a

complaint against the accused-appellant and his family members.

Based on the said complaint, FIR No.29 of 2022 was registered on

27.01.2022 at Saroornagar Women Police Station under
section

498A
of the IPC and
Section 4
of the DP Act.
8.   Thereafter, on 02.02.2022, the Saroornagar Women Police

Station issued a look-out circular against the accused-appellant

and a chargesheet was filed arraigning the accused-appellant and

his family members as accused giving rise to Complaint Case

No.1067 of 2022 under
section 498A
of the IPC and
Sections 3
and
4
of the DP Act.
9.   On perusal of the complaint dated 24.01.2022, FIR dated

27.01.2022 and Complaint Case No.1067 of 2022, the allegations

contained in the same can be crystallized as hereunder:
4
i. The complainant-respondent No.2 married the accused-
appellant on 04.12.2016 and gave birth to a male child while

      living in USA. Before the marriage, she was working as a

      Software Consultant but after the marriage, she was asked to

      quit and stay at home as a housewife.
ii.   After leading a year of happy marital life, the accused-appellant

      along with her other in-laws started physically and mentally

      harassing her with demands of dowry in order to repay their

      family loans and debts.
iii. On 13.12.2019, she came back to India to her parents’ house

      and since then the accused-appellant has neither supported

      her nor their child financially.
iv. The accused-appellant used to harass her whenever she used

      to ask him for money for the household purposes and used to

      ask for penny-wise accounts whereas he used to send lakhs of

      rupees to his parents in India.
10. Aggrieved by the registration of the FIR and the Complaint

Case, the accused-appellant filed a Criminal Petition No.4364 of

2023 under
Section 482
of CrPC before the Telangana High Court
5
praying for quashing of the FIR No.29 of 2022 and Complaint Case

No.1067 of 2022.
11. By the impugned order dated 27.04.2023, the Telangana High

Court has refused to quash the proceedings arising out of the said

FIR and Complaint Case. It was observed by the High Court that

there were no grounds made out by the accused-appellant and on

perusal of the facts and circumstances of the case, it was evident

that the accused-appellant has to undergo the trial to prove his

defence and the same cannot be considered to quash the

proceedings.
12. Aggrieved by the impugned order dated 27.04.2023 passed by

the High Court of Telangana, the accused-appellant has preferred

the present appeal praying for the quashing of the FIR No.29 of

2022 dated 27.01.2022 and the Complaint Case No.1067 of 2022

arising out of the said FIR.
13. We heard the learned counsel for the accused-appellant and

learned counsel for the respondent No.1-State as well as

complainant-respondent No.2. We have perused the material on

record.
6
14. It was argued by the learned counsel for accused-appellant

that the incidents mentioned in the FIR are general in nature and

consist of sweeping unsubstantiated and frivolous allegations

which do not fall under the definition of dowry as defined under
Section 498A
of the IPC. It was further argued that the allegations

made by the complainant-respondent No.2 pertain to general wear

and tear of the marriage which are part and parcel of a matrimonial

life. Furthermore, it was contended by the learned counsel for the

accused-appellant that the complaint and the FIR are a

counterblast of the legal notice dated 11.01.2022 sent by the

accused-appellant and motivated by vengeance and malice to vex

the accused-appellant and his family. Lastly, it was argued that all

the other family members of the accused-appellant who were

arraigned as accused in the said FIR as well as the Complaint Case

have been exonerated by the High Court for the State of Telangana

in the order dated 23.04.2025 in Criminal Petition No.4025 of

2022.
15. On the other hand, the learned counsel for the complainant-
respondent No.2 contended that the FIR and Complaint Case
7
preferred by her is not a counter-blast to the legal notice sent by

the accused-appellant but stems from actual instances of atrocities

inflicted by the accused-appellant and his family members upon

the complainant-respondent No.2. It was further contended that

the complainant-respondent No.2 was required to maintain

complete account details in excel sheet for the perusal of the

accused-appellant and at his instance, various amounts were

transferred from her account to the account of husband i.e. the

accused-appellant and thereby he exercised full monetary control

over the financial independence of the complainant-respondent

No.2. It was also alleged that the accused-appellant used to send

money to his parents and his brothers for business purposes

whereas, complainant-respondent No.2 had to beg for money to

meet her daily needs. It was further contended that during her

pregnancy, the accused-appellant did not support or take care of

the complainant-respondent No.2 but rather, after the delivery of

the child she was pressurised to lose weight and was constantly

insulted to the extent that she requested the accused-appellant to

permit the complainant-respondent No.2 to be taken for better

postpartum care. Lastly it has also been alleged that the
8
complainant-respondent No.2 was incessantly harassed by the

accused-appellant and his family members with constant demands

of dowry to repay their business loans and expenses.
16. We have given our thorough consideration to the arguments

advanced at the Bar and the material on record.
17. In the instant case, the allegations in the FIR and the

Complaint Case are under
Section 498A
of the IPC and
Sections 3
and
4
of the DP Act.
18.
Section 498A
of the IPC deals with offences committed by the

husband or relatives of the husband subjecting cruelty towards the

wife. The said provision reads as under:
“498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman
    subjecting her to cruelty.— Whoever, being the husband
    or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such
    woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for
    a term which may extend to three years and shall also be
    liable to fine.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, “cruelty”
    means—
(a)    any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is
    likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause
    grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether
    mental or physical) of the woman; or
9
(b)    harassment of the woman where such harassment
      is with a view to coercing her or any person related to her
      to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable
      security or is on account of failure by her or any person
      related to her to meet such demand.”
19.    Further,
Sections 3
and
4
of the DP Act talk about the penalty

for giving or taking or demanding a dowry.
“3. Penalty for giving or taking dowry.— (1) If any
      person, after the commencement of this Act, gives or takes
      or abets the giving or taking of dowry, he shall be
      punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not
      be less than five years, and with fine which shall not be
      less than fifteen thousand rupees or the amount of the
      value of such dowry, whichever is more.
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special
      reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence
      of imprisonment for a term of less than five years.

      (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to, or in relation
      to,—
(a) presents which are given at the time of a marriage to
      the bride (without any demand having been made in that
      behalf):
Provided that such presents are entered in a list
      maintained in accordance with the rules made under this
      Act;
(b) presents which are given at the time of a marriage to
      the bridegroom (without any demand having been made in
      that behalf):
Provided that such presents are entered in a list
      maintained in accordance with the rules made under this
      Act:
10
Provided further that where such presents are made by or
    on behalf of the bride or any person related to the bride,
    such presents are of a customary nature and the value
    thereof is not excessive having regard to the financial
    status of the person by whom, or on whose behalf, such
    presents are given.
4. Penalty for demanding dowry.—If any person
    demands, directly or indirectly, from the parents or other
    relatives or guardian of a bride or bridegroom, as the case
    may be, any dowry, he shall be punishable with
    imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six
    months, but which may extend to two years and with fine
    which may extend to ten thousand rupees:
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special
    reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a
    sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six
    months.”
20. An offence is punishable under
Section 498A
of the IPC when

a husband or his relative subjects a woman to cruelty, which may

result in imprisonment for a term extending up to three years and

a fine. The Explanation under
Section 498A
of the IPC defines

“cruelty” for the purpose of
Section 498A
of the IPC to mean any of

the acts mentioned in clauses (a) or (b). The first limb of clause (a)

of the Explanation of
Section 498A
of the IPC states that “cruelty”

means any wilful conduct that is of such a nature as is likely to

drive the woman to commit suicide. The second limb of clause (a)

of the Explanation of
Section 498A
of the IPC, states that cruelty
11
means any wilful conduct that is of such a nature as to cause grave

injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical)

of the woman. Further, clause (b) of the Explanation of
Section

498A
of the IPC states that cruelty would also include harassment

of the woman where such harassment is to coerce her or any

person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any

property or valuable security or is on account of failure by her or

any person related to her to meet such demand.
21. Further,
Section 3
of the DP Act deals with the penalty for

giving or taking dowry. It states that any person who engages in

giving, taking, or abetting the exchange of dowry, shall face a

punishment of imprisonment for a minimum of five years and a

fine of not less than fifteen thousand rupees or the value of the

dowry, whichever is greater.
Section 4
of the DP Act talks of penalty

for demanding dowry. It states that any person demanding dowry

directly or indirectly, from the parents or other relatives or

guardians of a bride or bridegroom shall be punishable with

imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months,
12
but which may extend to two years and with fine which may extend

to ten thousand rupees.
22.    The issue for consideration is whether, given the facts and

circumstances of the case and after examining the FIR and the

Complaint Case, the High Court was correct in refusing to quash

the ongoing criminal proceedings against the appellants arising out

of FIR No.29 of 2022 dated 27.01.2022 and the Complaint Case

No. 1067 of 2022 under
Section 498A
of the IPC and
Sections 3
and
4
of the DP Act.
23. Courts have to be extremely careful and cautious in dealing

with   complaints   and   must   take   pragmatic   realities    into

consideration while dealing with matrimonial cases where the

allegations have to be scrutinized with greater care and

circumspection in order to prevent miscarriage of justice and abuse

of process of law. The allegations put forth by the complainant-

respondent No.2 have been considered by us. In our view, they

reflect the daily wear and tear of marriage and can, in no way, be

categorised as cruelty. The act of the accused-appellant of sending

money back to his family members cannot be misconstrued in a
13
way that leads to a criminal prosecution. The allegation that the

accused-appellant forced the complainant-respondent No.2 to

maintain an excel sheet of all the expenses, even if taken on the

face value, cannot come under the definition of cruelty. The

monetary and financial dominance of the accused-appellant, as

alleged by the complainant-respondent No.2, cannot qualify as an

instance of cruelty, especially in the absence of any tangible mental

or physical harm caused. The said situation is a mirror reflection

of the Indian society where men of the households often try to

dominate and take charge of the finances of the women but

criminal litigation cannot become a gateway or a tool to settle

scores and pursue personal vendettas. Furthermore, the other

allegations of the complainant-respondent No. 2 such as lack of

care on the part of the husband-the accused-appellant during

pregnancy and postpartum and constant taunts about her after-

birth weight, if accepted prima facie, at best reflect poorly upon the

character of the accused-appellant but the same cannot amount to

cruelty so as to make him suffer through the process of litigation.
14
24.   A bare perusal of the FIR shows that the allegations made by

the complainant-respondent No.2 are vague and omnibus. Other

than claiming that the husband and his family along with the

accused-appellant herein mentally harassed her with a demand of

dowry, the complainant-respondent No.2 has not provided any

specific details or described any particular instance of harassment.

Although she has alleged that an amount totalling to Rupees One

Crore was demanded by the accused-appellant and his family

members, the complainant-respondent No.2 has failed to put forth

any evidence or material on record to elaborate or substantiate the

same. Furthermore, the complainant-respondent No.2 has failed to

impress the court as to how the said alleged harassment has

caused her any injury, mental or physical. There has been no

remote or proximate act or omission attributed to the accused-

appellant that implicates him or assigns him any specific role in

the said FIR for the offence of 498A of the
IPC
. Merely stating that

the accused-appellant has mentally harassed the complainant-

respondent No.2 with respect to a demand of dowry does not fulfil

the ingredients of
Section 498A
of the IPC especially in the face of

absence of any cogent material or evidence on record to
15
substantiate the said allegations. The term “cruelty” cannot be

established without specific instances. The tendency of invoking

these sections, without mentioning any specific details, weakens

the case of prosecution and casts serious aspersions on the

viability of the version of the complainant. Therefore, this Court

cannot ignore the missing specifics in an FIR which is the premise

of invoking criminal machinery of the State. In such cases involving

allegations of cruelty and harassment, there would normally be a

series of offending acts, which would be required to be spelt out by

the complainant against perpetrators in specific terms to involve

such perpetrators into the criminal proceedings sought to be

initiated against them and therefore mere general allegations of

harassment without pointing out the specifics against such

persons would not be sufficient to continue criminal proceedings.
25.
In this regard, it would be apposite to rely on the judgment in

the case of
State of Haryana vs. Bhajan Lal
, 1992 Supp (1) SCC

335 (“Bhajan Lal”) with particular reference to paragraph 102

therein, where this Court observed:
16
“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various
relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of
the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series
of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary
power under
Article 226
or the inherent powers under
Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted and
reproduced above, we have given the following categories
of cases by way of illustration wherein such power could
be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it
may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly
defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list
of myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be
exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information
report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face
value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the
accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and
other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not
disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by
police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except
under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of
Section 155(2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR
or complaint and the evidence collected in support of the
same do not disclose the commission of any offence and
make out a case against the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable
offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer
without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under
Section 155(2) of the Code.
17
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are
    so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which
    no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that
    there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the
    accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of
    the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under
    which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution
    and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is
    a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act,
    providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the
    aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended
    with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously
    instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance
    on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private
    and personal grudge."
26. On a careful consideration of the aforementioned judicial

dictum, we find that none of the offences alleged against the

accused-appellant herein is made out. In fact, we find that the

allegations of cruelty, mental harassment and voluntarily causing

hurt against the accused-appellant herein have been made with a

mala-fide intent with vague and general allegations and therefore,

the judgment of this Court in the case of Bhajan Lal and

particularly sub-paragraphs (1) and (7) of paragraph 102, extracted

above, squarely apply to the facts of these cases. It is neither

expedient nor in the interest of justice to permit the present
18
prosecution emanating from the FIR and consequent Complaint

Case No.1067 of 2022 to continue.
27. Furthermore, at this juncture, we find it appropriate to quote

the judgment of this Court in Dara Lakshmi Narayana vs. State

of Telangana, (2025) 3 SCC 735 wherein it was observed:
“27. A mere reference to the names of family members in
    a criminal case arising out of a matrimonial dispute,
    without specific allegations indicating their active
    involvement should be nipped in the bud. It is a well-
    recognised fact, borne out of judicial experience, that there
    is often a tendency to implicate all the members of the
    husband's family when domestic disputes arise out of a
    matrimonial discord. Such generalised and sweeping
    accusations unsupported by concrete evidence or
    particularised allegations cannot form the basis for
    criminal prosecution. Courts must exercise caution in
    such cases to prevent misuse of legal provisions and the
    legal process and avoid unnecessary harassment of
    innocent family members. In the present case, Appellants
    2 to 6, who are the members of the family of Appellant 1
    have been living in different cities and have not resided in
    the matrimonial house of Appellant 1 and Respondent 2
    herein. Hence, they cannot be dragged into criminal
    prosecution and the same would be an abuse of the
    process of the law in the absence of specific allegations
    made against each of them.
xxx
30.    The inclusion of
Section 498-A
IPC by way of an
    amendment was intended to curb cruelty inflicted on a
    woman by her husband and his family, ensuring swift
    intervention by the State. However, in recent years, as
    there have been a notable rise in matrimonial disputes
19
across the country, accompanied by growing discord and
   tension within the institution of marriage, consequently,
   there has been a growing tendency to misuse provisions
   like
Section 498-A
IPC as a tool for unleashing personal
   vendetta against the husband and his family by a wife.
   Making vague and generalised allegations during
   matrimonial conflicts, if not scrutinised, will lead to the
   misuse of legal processes and an encouragement for use of
   arm-twisting tactics by a wife and/or her family.
   Sometimes, recourse is taken to invoke
Section 498-A
IPC
   against the husband and his family in order to seek
   compliance with the unreasonable demands of a wife.
   Consequently, this Court has, time and again, cautioned
   against prosecuting the husband and his family in the
   absence of a clear prima facie case against them.
31.     We are not, for a moment, stating that any woman
   who has suffered cruelty in terms of what has been
   contemplated under
Section 498-A
IPC should remain
   silent and forbear herself from making a complaint or
   initiating any criminal proceeding. That is not the
   intention of our aforesaid observations but we should not
   encourage a case like as in the present one, where as a
   counterblast to the petition for dissolution of marriage
   sought by the first appellant, husband of the second
   respondent herein, a complaint under
Section 498-A
IPC
   is lodged by the latter. In fact, the insertion of the said
   provision is meant mainly for the protection of a woman
   who is subjected to cruelty in the matrimonial home
   primarily due to an unlawful demand for any property or
   valuable security in the form of dowry. However,
   sometimes it is misused as in the present case.”
28. In the aforementioned circumstances, keeping the judicial

dicta laid down by this Court in mind, the impugned order dated

27.04.2023 of the High Court is set aside and consequently, the
20
FIR No.29 of 2022 dated 27.01.2022 registered with Saroornagar

Women Police Station, District Rachakonda, Telangana and

consequent proceedings initiated pursuant thereto in Complaint

Case No.1067 of 2022 stand quashed.
29. It is needless to observe that the observations made in the

present appeal shall not come in the way of any matrimonial or

other proceedings pending between the parties which shall be

decided on their own merits and in accordance with law.
The appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms.
…………………………………..J.
                                    (B.V. NAGARATHNA)




                                    …………………………………..J.
                                    (R. MAHADEVAN)
NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 19, 2025.
21