[Cites
56
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Danesh Singh vs Har Pyari (Dead) Thr. Lrs on 15 December, 2025
2025 INSC 1434


                                                                            REPORTABLE


                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 14761 of 2025
                                      (Arising out of SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019)



                            DANESH SINGH & ORS.                       …APPELLANT(S)


                                                     VERSUS


                            HAR PYARI (DEAD) THR. LRS. & ORS.         …RESPONDENT(S)




                                                  JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.12.15
15:33:32 IST
Reason:
J.B. PARDIWALA, J:
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the
following parts:-
INDEX

A.    FACTUAL MATRIX ............................................................................... 3
B.    THE JUDGMENT & DECREE OF THE TRIAL COURT................ 8
      I.   Ownership and possession of the respondent nos. 1 and 2
           respectively ................................................................................................. 8
      II. Knowledge of both the auction sale and the existence of the
          mortgage in favour of the respondent no. 6-bank on part of the
          plaintiffs-respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively. ................................. 9
      III. Manner in which the auction was conducted. ................................... 10
      IV. Maintainability of the suit instituted by the respondent nos. 1 and
2 respectively ............................................................................................ 11
      V. Relief granted ........................................................................................... 12
C.    THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT......................................................... 12
D.    SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PARTIES ......................... 14
      I.   Submissions on behalf of the appellants ........................................... 14
      II. Submissions on behalf of the respondent nos. 1 & 2
          respectively ............................................................................................... 17
E.    ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION ..................................................... 20
F.    ANALYSIS ............................................................................................. 21
      I.   Whether the transfer of the suit property is hit by Section 52 of the
           1882 Act and the doctrine of Lis Pendens? ......................................... 21
           a.      Whether the suit property was “directly and specifically in
                   question” in the suit instituted by the respondent no.6-bank and
                   the import of the words “any suit” along with “any right”
                   occurring in Section 58 of the 1882 Act. ....................................... 25
      II. Whether the respondent nos. 1 and 2, respectively, could have
          sought for any relief under Rule(s) 89 or 90 of
Order XXI CPC
,
          respectively? ............................................................................................. 39
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                                                  Page 1 of 172
a.      Scope and application of Rule 89 of
Order XXI CPC
, with
                   specific reference to whether pendente lite transferees can
                   maintain such an application ....................................................... 40
           b.      Scope and application of Rule 90 of
Order XXI CPC
................ 49
                   i.  The maintainability of an application under Rule 90 vis-á-vis
                       fraud or irregularities pertaining to stages prior to the
                       proclamation of sale i.e., at the stage of attachment. .................... 51
                   ii. Questions on whether the judgment-debtor had any “saleable
                       interest” over the attached/sold property cannot be brought
                       under the ambit of Rule 90 ............................................................... 66
      III. Whether the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, could have
           maintained a separate suit in light of the bar envisaged under Rule
           92(3) of
Order XXI CPC
and
Section 47
CPC respectively, and
           whether they are “third parties” as referred to under Rule 92(4) of
Order XXI CPC
? ....................................................................................... 73
           a.      Scope and application of Rule 92 of
Order XXI CPC
................ 73
           b.      The bar to a separate suit envisaged under sub-rule (3) of
                   Rule 92. .............................................................................................. 76
           c.      The interplay between the bar to a separate suit as provided in
                   Rule 92(3) of
Order XXI CPC
and the bar to a separate suit
                   referred to under
Section 47
CPC. ................................................. 88
           d.      The scope and meaning of the term “third party” under Rule
                   92(4), the option of filing a separate suit being made available
                   to such third parties and its interplay with Rule 58 of
Order XXI
                   CPC
. ................................................................................................... 97
      IV. Whether the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively could have
          obtained any relief under Rule 99 of
Order XXI CPC
and in the
          absence of availing such remedy, could their suit be said to be not
          maintainable? ......................................................................................... 114
           a.      Essential ingredients for the invocation of Rule 99 ................. 117
           b.      The scheme underlying Rules 100 to 104 respectively and the
                   availability of the remedy of filing a separate suit as an
                   alternative to an application under Rule 99 of
Order XXI
                   CPC
.................................................................................................. 127
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                                                    Page 2 of 172
V. Delineating when a third party could file an application under
Order XXI CPC
and when he could resort to a separate suit in order
         to assert his right, title and interest in the said property. ............. 152
      VI. The decision of this Court in T. Vijendradas (supra). ................... 161
G.    CONCLUSION .................................................................................... 166
1.    Leave granted.
2.    This appeal arises from the judgment and order dated 29.01.2019
      (hereinafter, the “Impugned Judgment”) passed by the High Court
      of Punjab and Haryana in RSA. No. 2518 of 2004 (O&M)
      (hereinafter, the “High Court”), by which the second appeal filed
      by the appellants herein came to be dismissed, thereby affirming the
      judgment and order dated 12.05.2004 passed by the Court of District
      Judge, Faridabad (hereinafter, the “Appellate Court”) holding the
      suit instituted by the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively herein to
      be maintainable.
A.    FACTUAL MATRIX
3.    The description of the parties before this Court, the High Court, the
      Appellate Court, and before the Trial Court is tabulated as follows:-
BEFORE          BEFORE THE           BEFORE THE         BEFORE THE            PARTICULARS
     THIS COURT        HIGH COURT           APPELLATE          TRIAL COURT
                                              COURT
     Appellants         Appellants          Appellants           Defendant         Auction
                                                                  Nos. 1-3         Purchasers and
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                                   Page 3 of 172
sons of one of
                                                            the judgment-
debtors i.e., the
                                                            respondent no.4.
Respondent    Respondent   Respondent     Plaintiffs   Wife         and
      Nos. 1-2      Nos. 1-2     Nos. 1-2                   husband,
                                                            respectively
                                                            through     their
                                                            LRs,         who
                                                            purchased the
                                                            suit    property
                                                            from
                                                            respondent no.
3.
Respondent    Respondent   Respondent     Defendant    One     of    the
        No. 3         No. 3        No. 3         No. 4      judgment-
                                                            debtors      and
                                                            vendor of the
                                                            suit property.
     Respondent    Respondent   Respondent     Defendant    One     of    the
        No. 4         No. 4        No. 4         No. 5      judgment-
                                                            debtors      and
                                                            father of the
                                                            appellants.
     Respondent    Respondent   Respondent     Defendant    One     of    the
        No. 5         No. 5        No. 5         No. 6      judgment-
                                                            debtors      and
                                                            sister of the
                                                            respondent nos.
                                                            4 & 5.
     Respondent    Respondent   Respondent     Defendant    Decree-holder
        No. 6         No. 6        No. 6         No. 7      bank.
4.    In the year 1970, Duli Chand had availed a loan of Rs. 20,000/- from
      New Bank of India, i.e., the respondent no. 6, to purchase a tractor,
      and in lieu thereof he had mortgaged his property admeasuring 116
      Kanals 13 marlas (hereinafter, “the mortgaged property”), vide a
      registered Mortgage Deed dated 06.06.1970. However, it is to be
      noted that this appeal pertains to only a portion of the aforesaid
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 4 of 172
mortgaged property, more particularly, a parcel of land
      admeasuring 24 Kanals 11 marlas (hereinafter, “the suit property”).
5.    Owing to his failure in repaying the entire loan amount, on
04.06.1982, the respondent no. 6-bank instituted a suit before the
      Sub-Judge, 1st Class, Faridabad, being Suit No. 151 of 1982, for
      recovery of the due amount of Rs. 15,529/- and in the event of
      default in repayment, the respondent no. 6-bank prayed for
      foreclosure and sale of the aforesaid mortgaged property.
6.    On 12.11.1984, the suit instituted by the respondent no. 6-bank was
      decreed ex-parte against the respondent nos. 3 to 5 respectively, as
      the original borrower had passed away during the pendency of the
      suit (hereinafter, the “original decree”). The decree ordered the
      recovery of the due amount alongwith costs and interest amounting
      to Rs. 22,753/- (hereinafter, “the decretal amount”). No appeal was
      preferred against the original decree and the same had, therefore,
      attained finality.
7.    It is only subsequent to the passing of the original decree that, on
      13.05.1985, the respondent no. 1 purchased 17 Kanals 2 marlas of the
      mortgaged property for Rs. 45,000/- from the respondent no. 3, i.e.,
      one of the judgment debtors and son of the original borrower.
8.    Shortly thereafter, on 25.05.1985, the respondent no. 6-bank moved
      for execution of the decree and prayed that the decretal amount be
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 5 of 172
paid, alongwith costs and interest by way of attachment and sale of
      the mortgaged property.
9.    Again, on 24.06.1985, the respondent no. 2 (husband of the
      respondent no. 1) purchased another 7 Kanals 9 marlas of the
      mortgaged property for Rs. 25,000/- from the same respondent no.
3. Thus, in totality the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively,
      purchased 24 Kanals 11 marlas of the mortgaged property (which
      constitutes the present suit property) for an amount of Rs. 70,000/-
      from the respondent no.3. The first purchase was effected before the
      execution petition came to be instituted by the respondent no. 6-
      Bank and the second purchase occurred after its institution.
10.   Thereafter, the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, are also said to
      have mortgaged the suit property or a portion thereof with the
      Ballabgarh Primary Co-op Agricultural and Rural Development
      Bank for the purpose of availing a loan.
11.   Meanwhile, the Executing Court, vide order dated 08.10.1985,
      attached the entire mortgaged property, i.e., 116 Kanals 13 marlas,
      as the judgment-debtors failed to make the payment to the
      respondent no.6-bank. Consequently, an auction of the mortgaged
      property came to be held on 20.06.1988. In the said auction, the
      appellants, who are the sons of one of the judgment debtors, i.e.,
      respondent no. 4, were declared as the highest bidders. The
      appellants’ bid for a sum of Rs. 35,000/- for the entire mortgaged
      property, was accepted.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 6 of 172
12.   On 30.08.1988, the Executing Court confirmed the auction sale. The
      delivery of possession in favour of the appellants is also said to have
      been completed on 24.06.1989. Later, after a month, on 28.07.1989,
      the Executing Court had disposed of the execution proceedings
      after recording its satisfaction as regards the fulfillment of the
      decretal amount and delivery of possession to the appellant-
      auction-purchasers.
13.   It is the case of the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively that on
      05.07.1989, i.e., on a date after the delivery of possession to the
      appellant-auction-purchasers, they were denied access to the suit
      property. This denial, according to them, gave rise to the cause of
      action to file a separate suit, being Suit No. 353 of 1989, before the
      Civil Judge (Jr. Division), Faridabad (hereinafter, the “Trial Court”).
      This suit is the genesis of the appeal before us.
14.   In the suit, the plaintiffs-respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively,
      prayed for a declaration to the effect that the sale in respect of the
      suit property is void and not binding upon their right, title and
      interest, and that they continue to be owners in possession. As a
      consequential relief, a decree for permanent injunction against the
      appellants was also prayed for, and in the alternative, a decree for
      possession qua the suit property was sought.
15.   In the aforesaid suit, the Trial Court passed a decree declaring that
      the sale in respect of the suit property was void, illegal and not
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 7 of 172
binding upon the plaintiffs-respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively,
      and that the plaintiffs are the owners of the suit property. Further, a
      decree for joint possession was passed in favour of the plaintiffs-
      respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively.
16.   Aggrieved by the decree, the appellants-auction-purchasers,
      preferred an appeal before the Appellate Court. The Appellate
      Court dismissed their appeal and held that the vendor of the
      plaintiffs-respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively (i.e., respondent no.
3) being the joint owner of the mortgaged property was competent
      to sell the same and that the plaintiffs-respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively, are lawful owners of the suit property.
17.   Being aggrieved by the aforesaid, the appellants preferred Regular
      Second Appeal No. 2518 of 2004 before the High Court. The High
      Court had also dismissed the second appeal.
18.   In such circumstances referred to above, the appellants are here
      before this Court with the present appeal. Vide order dated
      15.07.2019, while issuing notice, this Court had directed that the
      parties shall maintain status quo.
B.    THE JUDGMENT & DECREE OF THE TRIAL COURT

I.    Ownership and possession of the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 8 of 172
19.   In order to ascertain the ownership of the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively to the suit property, the Trial Court found it necessary
      to determine whether the respondent no. 3 possessed any subsisting
      right to the suit property at the time of transfer in favour of the
      plaintiffs-respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively. While answering
      this issue in the affirmative, the Trial Court observed that the
      original decree in the suit instituted by the respondent no. 6-bank
      was passed only on 12.11.1986, whereas, the respondent no. 3
      executed the sale deed on 24.06.1985. Therefore, since the suit
      property was purchased before the passing of the original decree, it
      could not be said that the respondent no. 3 lacked any right to
      transfer the property. It further held that the attachment of the
      property by the Executing Court would not affect the rights of those
      parties who had purchased the property prior to such attachment.
20.   However, on the issue of possession, the Trial Court observed that
      no evidence had been adduced by the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively to establish that they still remained in possession over
      the suit property. Hence, it concluded that although plaintiffs were
      the owners of the suit property, yet they were not in continuing
      possession.
II.   Knowledge of both the auction sale and the existence of the
      mortgage in favour of the respondent no. 6-bank on part of the
      plaintiffs-respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                         Page 9 of 172
21.    The Trial Court recorded that the plaintiffs-respondent nos. 1 and 2
       respectively had purchased the suit property with due diligence as
       they had obtained a No Encumbrance Certificate from the Tehsildar
       before entering into the sale with the respondent no. 3, and their
       names were also mutated in the revenue records. It further observed
       that, owing to the subsequent mortgage of a part of the suit property
       by the plaintiff-respondent no. 1 with the Ballabgarh Primary Co-
       op Agricultural and Rural Development Bank and its reflection in
       the revenue records, there was sufficient material before the
       respondent no. 6-bank to ascertain that the plaintiffs-respondent
       nos. 1 and 2 respectively had a right, title and interest in the suit
       property and thereby give notice of the proclamation of sale to
       them. However, the respondent no. 6-Bank failed to give such notice
       and also failed to indicate the same in its affidavit filed under Rule
       66 of
Order XXI CPC
.
22.    In such circumstances, the plaintiffs-respondent nos. 1 and 2
       respectively could not have reasonably had any notice of the auction
       sale or the mortgage that was created by Duli Chand in favour of
       the respondent no. 6-bank. It was only much later, i.e., on 05.07.1989,
       when the plaintiffs-respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively were not
       allowed to plough their land did they know about the auction sale
       and the transfer of the property in favour of the appellants.
III.   Manner in which the auction was conducted.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 10 of 172
23.   The Trial Court found that the manner of conducting the auction of
      the mortgaged property in camera, where only the appellants herein
      were the bidders along with the auctioning of the entire property
      instead of a portion thereof, was contrary to the provisions of law
      and that it left little room for doubt that the sale of the suit property
      was illegal, void, and not binding upon the plaintiffs-respondent
      nos. 1 and 2 respectively. The Court further found that the
      respondent nos. 3 to 5 respectively, i.e., the judgment debtors were
      specifically debarred from participating in the bidding process by
      the Executing Court and that the same was clear from the conditions
      of sale. However, in order to circumvent the said restriction, the
      appellants, being the sons of one of the judgment debtors, had
      participated in the auction on their behalf. Thus, the Trial Court held
      that the manner in which the auction was conducted was not
      permissible, either in law or in equity.
IV.   Maintainability of the suit instituted by the respondent nos. 1 and
      2 respectively
24.   The Trial Court noted that the appellants-defendant nos. 1 to 3
      respectively failed to make good their case as to how the suit was
      not maintainable. It held that the appellants failed to show why the
      plaintiffs-respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively were estopped from
      instituting the said suit. Accordingly, the Court answered the issue
      of maintainability in favour of the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively. It must be noted that the argument that the suit would
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 11 of 172
be barred on account of Rules 99 to 103 of Order XXI respectively,
      was not raised by the appellants before the Trial Court.
V.    Relief granted
25.   The Trial Court held the suit to be maintainable and passed a decree
      in favour of the plaintiffs-respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively. It
      declared that the auction sale only insofar as the suit property was
      concerned, was void, and did not affect the right, title and interest
      of the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively. The Trial Court further
      held that the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively were the lawful
      owners of the suit property and granted them the relief of joint
      possession of the entire mortgaged property along with the
      appellants.
26.   In the first appeal, the Appellate Court affirmed the judgment and
      decree passed by the Trial Court, and held that the respondent no.
      3, being the joint-owner of the mortgaged property, was competent
      to sell the land to the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively.
C.    THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT
27.   The High Court, in its impugned judgment, also took note of the fact
      that the auction had taken place in camera at the residence of the
      Village Sarpanch. It further observed that the proclamation of the
      sale issued by the Executing Court specifically barred the judgment-
      debtors from offering any bid or participating in the said auction.
      Despite such a prohibition, the appellants had participated in the
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 12 of 172
auction without obtaining any express permission of the Executing
      Court. It further lamented that not only were the plaintiffs-
      respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively kept uninformed about the
      auction, the fact of the transfer of the property in favour of the
      plaintiffs-respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively was also not
      disclosed before the Executing Court.
28.   The High Court expressed its concern over the validity of the
      auction sale by noting that the suit property admeasuring 24 Kanals
      11 marlas, which constitutes merely 1/4th of the entire mortgaged
      property, admeasuring 116 Kanals and 13 marlas, was sold for Rs.
      70,000/- to the plaintiffs-respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively.
      Whereas the entire mortgaged property was sold in auction only for
      a meagre amount of Rs. 35,000/-. It further observed that although
      the amount sought to be recovered by the respondent no.6-Bank
      was only Rs. 22,753/- and that such amount stood satisfied yet the
      plaintiffs-respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively had been put in a
      very precarious position on account of the auction sale.
29.   On the question of maintainability of the suit, the High Court held
      that the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively could be said to be
      “representatives” of the judgment debtor (respondent no. 3) as per
Section 47
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short, “
the
      CPC
”). It held that despite such status, the suit would be
      maintainable owing to the fact that the auction sale in the execution
      proceedings was a result of fraud, thereby vitiating the entire
      proceedings. The Court arrived at the finding that the respondent
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                         Page 13 of 172
nos. 1 and 2 respectively were bona fide vendees, and that a decree
      or sale obtained through fraud must not cause any prejudice to
      them. The High Court held that despite the auction sale being
      confirmed by the Executing Court, a separate suit would be
      maintainable, and, stating so, it upheld the decision of the courts
      below, although for different reasons, and consequently, dismissed
      the appeal preferred by the appellants.
D.    SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PARTIES

I.    Submissions on behalf of the appellants
30.   Mr. Vikas Singh, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
      appellants would argue that since the decree obtained by the
      respondent no. 6-bank had attained finality as no appeal had been
      preferred against it, the judgment-debtor(s) had no subsisting right,
      title and interest in the mortgaged property for the purpose of
      selling a portion of it to the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively. It
      is well-settled law that a vendor cannot transfer a title to the vendee
      better than what he himself possesses. He submitted that the
      respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively could be said to have attained
      a derivative title from the respondent no. 3 and accordingly,
      stepped into his shoes.
31.   Further, relying on the decision of this Court in M/s
Siddamsetty
      Infra Projects Pvt. Ltd. v. Katta Sujatha Reddy & Ors.
, reported in
      2024 INSC 861, he submitted that the transfer of the suit property
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 14 of 172
by the respondent no. 3 in favour of the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively would be hit by
Section 52
of the Transfer of Property
      Act, 1882 (for short, “the 1882 Act”), as the principle of lis pendens
      continues till the satisfaction of the decree.
By placing reliance on
      another decision of this Court in
Sanjay Verma v. Manik Roy
,
      reported in (2006) 13 SCC 608, he submitted that no question of
      good faith or bona fides arise as the principle of lis pendens is a
      principle of public policy. He urged that this Court must not
      encourage pendente lite transactions and regularize the conduct of
      such transferees by showing equity in their favour.
32.   He further submitted that the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively
      were fully aware of the possession being handed over to the auction
      purchasers-appellants on 24.06.1986, i.e., during the pendency of the
      execution proceedings. At that stage they could have availed
      themselves of the remedy available under Order XXI Rules 99 and
      100 respectively but could not have instituted a separate suit. Such
      a suit, in his opinion, would also be barred under
Section 47
of the
      CPC.
33.   He relied on the decision of this Court in Harnandrai Badridas v.
Debidutt Bhagwati Prasad & Ors., reported in (
1973) 2 SCC 467,
      N.S.S. Narayana Sarma & Ors. v. Goldstone Exports (P) Ltd.
,
      reported in (2002) 1 SCC 662, Asgar & Ors. v. Mohan Varma,
      reported in (2020) 16 SCC 230, and Shamsher Singh & Anr. v. Lt.
      Col. Nahar Singh (D) Thr. Lrs., reported in 2019 SCC OnLine SC
      938, to submit that it is a settled position of law that all questions
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 15 of 172
arising between the parties to the suit in which the decree was
      passed or their representatives, and relating to the execution,
      discharge or satisfaction of the decree, shall be determined by the
      executing court and not by a separate suit. Such is also the mandate
      reflected under
Section 47
CPC.
34.   Mr. Singh further submitted that no material facts regarding fraud
      were pleaded in the plaint by the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively as required under Order VI Rules 2 and 4
of the CPC
respectively, hence, no issue regarding fraud was framed by the
      Trial Court. He stated that allegation of fraud was raised for the first
      time before the High Court.
35.   Furthermore, Mr. Singh submitted that as regards the alleged
      irregularities in the auction sale, the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively could have preferred an application under Order XXI
      Rule 90. However, even if they had preferred such an application,
      they would have still remained unsuccessful since no sale is liable
      to be set aside solely on the ground of fraud or irregularity as
      regards the price at which the property was sold. He submitted that
      an auction sale cannot be reversed solely on the ground of
      inadequacy of price.
In this regard, he placed reliance on the
      decision of this Court in
Siddagangaiah v. N.K. Giriraja Shetty
,
      reported in (2018) 7 SCC 278.
He also submitted that due sanctity
      must be attached to the auction sale conducted by the executing
      court and to make this argument good, he placed reliance on the
      decision of this Court in M/s
Al-Can Export Pvt. Ltd. v. Prestige HM
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 16 of 172
Polycontainers Ltd. & Ors.
, as reported in (2024) 9 SCC 94. He
      further submitted that a separate suit cannot be allowed to be filed
      by the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively to overcome the
      limitation period which has been prescribed for an application
      under Rule 90.
36.
In such circumstances
referred to above
, the learned Senior Counsel
      appearing for the appellants-auction purchasers would submit that
      there being merit in his appeal, the same may be allowed and the
      impugned judgment passed by the High Court be set aside.
II.   Submissions on behalf of the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively
37.   Per contra, Ms. Aparajita Singh, the learned Senior Counsel
      appearing for the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively would
      submit that no error, not to speak of any error of law, could be said
      to have been committed by the High Court in passing the impugned
      judgment.
38.   She submitted that the separate suit was not barred by
Section 47
of
      the CPC as the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively were “third
      parties” as contemplated under Order XXI Rule 92(4). The said
      provision permits a third party to challenge the title of a judgment-
      debtor by filing a suit against the auction purchaser wherein the
      decree-holder and the judgment-debtor would be necessary parties.
      She further submitted that the essentials of Order XXI Rule 92(4)
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                         Page 17 of 172
stood satisfied, and therefore, the question of maintainability
      assumes no relevance.
39.   To fortify her submission on the question of maintainability,
      reliance was placed on the decision of this Court in
T. Vijendradas
      v. M. Subramanian
, as reported in (2007) 8 SCC 751, wherein in an
      almost-identical factual situation, the property was fraudulently
      auctioned in execution of a decree without notice to the actual
      owner. She submitted that the court took note of the fraudulent
      conduct of the vendor and held that a judgment or an order
      obtained by fraud is a nullity and non-est, and could thereby be
      challenged even in a collateral proceeding. Therefore, it was her
      view that the High Court rightly arrived at the finding that the
      appellants    had    indulged   in   fraudulent transactions     as   a
      consequence of which the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively
      could have challenged the validity of the auction sale even in
      collateral proceedings. Thus, the separate suit in no manner suffered
      from the want of maintainability as per
Section 47
of the CPC.
40.   To indicate the bona fides of the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively,
      Ms. Singh submitted that the respondent no. 3 was competent and
      had a proper title in law to transfer the suit property also because
      the warrant of attachment of the mortgaged property came to be
      issued only on 08.10.1985, i.e., much after the sale in their favour.
      The respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively had also obtained a No
      Encumbrance Certificate from the Office of the Sub-Registrar before
      their purchase. The certificate reflected no charge over the property.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 18 of 172
After obtaining these certificates, the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively took another loan over the suit property which would
      not have been possible if there were encumbrances over the
      property.
41.   She further submitted that given the mandate of Order XXI Rule
      66(2)(a), it belies credence that there was a need to sell the entire
      mortgaged property for a paltry amount of Rs. 22,753/-, when just
      four years before the auction, the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively had paid Rs. 70,000/- for the suit property which
      constituted 1/4th of the total extent of the mortgaged property.
      Order XXI Rule 66(2)(a) states that where the mortgaged property is
      large and more valuable than the decretal amount, it would be
      incumbent upon the Executing Court to order the sale of only such
      portion of the mortgaged property which would satisfy the decree.
      Ms. Singh contended that the nature of Order XXI Rule 66 is
      mandatory and not directory. To fortify her submission, she relied
      upon the decision in the case of
Lal Chand v. VIIIth Additional
      Judge & Ors.
, reported in (1997) 4 SCC 356.
42.   Ms. Singh alluded to the deceitful conduct of the auction
      purchasers-appellants by pointing out that, on the date of the
      auction, they had purchased the entire mortgaged property for
      meagre amount of Rs. 35,000/- in spite of the fact that they were
      proscribed from participating in the auction without the permission
      of the Executing Court. On the other hand, the respondent nos. 1
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                         Page 19 of 172
and 2 respectively have registered sale deeds in their favour, along
      with their names mutated in the revenue record.
43.   In the last, she submitted that the suit property was lawfully
      transferred to the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively. The Trial
      Court had rightly declared the auction sale to be void on the
      grounds of fraud and irregularities in and during the auction
      proceedings. The two appellate courts below could not be said to
      have committed any error in refusing to disturb the said findings.
44.   In such circumstances
referred to above
, the learned Senior Counsel
      prayed that there being no merit in the appeal, the same may be
      dismissed.
E.    ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
45.   Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and
      having gone through the materials on record, the following
      questions fall for our consideration: -
I.     Whether the transfer of the suit property in favour of the
               respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, is hit by
Section 52
of
               the 1882 Act and the doctrine of Lis Pendens?
II.     Whether the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, could
               have sought any relief under Rule(s) 89 or 90 of
Order XXI
               CPC
respectively before the Executing Court?
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 20 of 172
III.     Whether the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, were
               “third parties” who could have instituted a separate suit as
               per sub-rule (4) of Rule 92
Order XXI CPC
?
IV.      Whether the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, were
               “representatives of the judgment-debtor” upon whom the
               bar to a separate suit as envisaged under
Section 47
CPC
               could be said to be applicable?
V.      Whether the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, should
               have sought the remedy made available to a dispossessed
               third party under Rule 99 read with Rules 100 to 102 of
Order XXI of the CPC
respectively? If yes, whether the
               failure to do so would affect the maintainability of a
               separate suit for the same relief(s)?
F.    ANALYSIS

I.    Whether the transfer of the suit property is hit by
Section 52
of the
      1882 Act and the doctrine of Lis Pendens?
46.   It was submitted on behalf of the appellants that the decree obtained
      by the respondent no. 6-bank had attained finality owing to no
      appeal being filed against the same. Therefore, the judgment debtor-
respondent no. 3 could not be said to have any subsisting right, title,
      or interest in the suit property to transfer the same to the respondent
      nos. 1 and 2 respectively, after the passing of the original decree.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 21 of 172
Moreover, it was submitted that the suit instituted by the
      respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively was hit by the doctrine of lis
      pendens, and therefore, that the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively
      could be said to suffer the same legal rights and obligations as that
      of their vendor.
47.   Whereas on the other hand, it was canvassed on behalf of the
      respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively that although the respondent
      no.6-bank, in their plaint, prayed for the payment of the due amount
      either in cash or by way of sale of the mortgaged property, the
      original decree had only provided for the recovery of the due
      amount without specifically directing that the mortgaged property
      be sold. In other words, the original decree was a simple money
      decree. It was only subsequent to the aforesaid decree that the
      mortgaged property came to be attached by the Executing Court
      vide its order dated 08.10.1985 due to the failure of the judgment-
      debtors in making the payment to the decree-holder bank.
      Therefore, in the suit instituted by the bank for recovery of money,
      the right, title or interest of the mortgaged property was not directly
      in question, and the transfer of the suit property, after the passing
      of the original decree, would not be hit by the doctrine of lis pendens,
      especially considering that the order of attachment was made much
      later in time. To reiterate, she would submit that the sale deeds in
      favour of the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, were executed
      on 13.05.1985 and 24.06.1985 respectively, whereas, the suit
      property was attached only much later, on 08.10.1985.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 22 of 172
48.   To address this issue, we shall look into
Section 52
of the 1882 Act.
It reads thus:-
“52. Transfer of property pending suit relating
            thereto.—During the pendency in any Court having
            authority within the limits of India excluding the State of
            Jammu and Kashmir or established beyond such limits by the
            Central Government, of any suit or proceeding which is not
            collusive and in which any right to immovable property is
            directly and specifically in question, the property cannot be
            transferred or otherwise dealt with by any party to the suit or
            proceeding so as to affect the rights of any other party thereto
            under any decree or order which may be made therein, except
            under the authority of the Court and on such terms as it may
            impose.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the
            pendency of a suit or proceeding shall be deemed to commence
            from the date of the presentation of the plaint or the
            institution of the proceeding in a Court of competent
            jurisdiction, and to continue until the suit or proceeding has
            been disposed of by a final decree or order and complete
            satisfaction or discharge of such decree or order, has been
            obtained, or has become unobtainable by reason of the
            expiration of any period of limitation prescribed for the
            execution thereof by any law for the time being in force.”
49.
Section 52
of the 1882 Act stipulates that during the pendency of any
      suit in a court of competent jurisdiction in which any right to the
      immovable property is directly and specifically in question, such
      property cannot be transferred or otherwise be dealt with by any
      party to the suit or proceedings with a view to affect or defeat the
      rights of any other party under any decree or order. The only
      exception that the provision carves out is with regard to a situation
      where the transfer of the property is made permissible under the
      authority of the court and in accordance with the terms imposed by
      the court.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 23 of 172
50.   The explanation to the section further elaborates that the pendency
      of a suit or proceeding shall be deemed to commence from the date
      of the presentation of the plaint and would continue until the suit is
      disposed of by a final decree, and the “complete satisfaction or
      discharge of such decree” has been obtained, unless the same cannot
      be obtained due to the expiry of the prescribed limitation period.
51.   This Court in Celir LLP v. Sumati Prasad Bafna, reported in 2024
      SCC OnLine SC 3727, where one of us (J.B. Pardiwala, J.) was part
      of the Bench had the occasion to elucidate the essentials of
Section
      52
of the 1882 Act. The relevant observations read as under:-
“158. The following conditions ought to be fulfilled for the
               doctrine of lis pendens to apply:—
               i. There must be a pending suit or proceeding;
               ii. The suit or proceeding must be pending in a competent
               court;
iii. The suit or proceeding must not be collusive;
               iv. The right to immovable property must be directly and
               specifically in question in the suit or proceeding;
               v. The property must be transferred by a party to the
               litigation; and
               vi. The alienation must affect the rights of any other party to
               the dispute.
159. In short, the doctrine of lis pendens, which
Section 52
of the TPA encapsulates, bars the transfer of a suit property
               during the pendency of litigation. The only exception to the
               principle is when it is transferred under the authority of the
               court and on terms imposed by it. Where one of the parties to
               the suit transfers the suit property (or a part of it) to a third-
party, the latter is bound by the result of the proceedings even
               if he did not have notice of the suit or proceeding.”
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                   Page 24 of 172
(Emphasis supplied)
52.   This Court in Celir LLP (supra) had also emphasized that such a
      pendente lite transferee would be bound by the result of the
      proceedings irrespective of whether they had notice of the pending
      suit or not. In other words, that the lack of knowledge of the
      proceedings would not be a valid defence against the application of
      the doctrine of lis pendens.
a.   Whether the suit property was “directly and specifically in
           question” in the suit instituted by the respondent no.6-bank
           and the import of the words “any suit” along with “any right”
           occurring in
Section 58
of the 1882 Act.
53.   The principal contention canvassed on behalf of the respondent nos.
1 and 2 respectively was that
Section 52
of 1882 Act will not apply
      to the facts of the present case as the suit property was not “directly
      and specifically in question” in the suit instituted by the respondent
      no. 6-bank which was only for the recovery of money. The
      submission although seemingly lucrative yet is flawed in our
      considered opinion for the reasons elaborated hereinbelow.
54.
The Transfer of Property (Amendment) Act, 1929
had brought
      certain significant changes by way of which the present
Section 52
has come into existence. It had substituted the words “active
      prosecution” occurring at the beginning of the provision with the
      word “pendency” and the words “a contentious suit or proceedings”
      was replaced with the words “any suit or proceedings”. Along with
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 25 of 172
this, an explanation was also inserted in order to clarify that the
      pendency of a lis would continue till the satisfaction or discharge of
      the decree, or until the satisfaction or discharge of the decree has
      become unobtainable by reason of the expiration of the prescribed
      limitation period.
55.   There is no gainsaying that by the substitution of the words “a
      contentious” with “any”, the scope of the provision has been
      widened. We say so because, first, the dictionary meaning of the
      word “contentious” would be - an adversary, or a litigation between
      adverse or contending parties, or a judicial proceeding comprising
      of an attack and defense as between opposing parties. By the use of
      the expression “a contentious suit or proceeding”, the application of
      the doctrine may have been confined only to those proceedings in
      which both the parties were present and actively contesting the
      matter. In other words, the provision may have had no application
      on ex-parte proceedings where one of the parties had chosen not to
      participate.
56.   It was recognised that such a restricted view would defeat the
      purpose of the provision.
Section 52
casts an embargo on the parties
      to the suit from transferring the property in question, in order to
      preserve the subject matter of the lis and to prevent the rights of the
      parties from being defeated by alienations pendente lite. If the
      doctrine were made inapplicable to ex-parte proceedings, a party
      would deliberately abstain from appearing before the court, transfer
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 26 of 172
the property during the pendency of the suit, and thus, render the
      adjudication of rights in the said suit, infructuous.
57.   Secondly, the words “any suit or proceeding” has to be read in
      conjunction with the expression “in which any right to immovable
      property is directly and specifically in question”. Careful attention must
      be paid to the words “any right” along with the words “directly and
      specifically”. While the former indicates the intention of the
      legislature to afford some expansiveness to
Section 58
, the latter
      narrows down its scope. To elaborate, this indicates, on the one
      hand, that the scope of the provision is not confined to suits wherein
      the same right to the property is in question, while indicating on the
      other hand that, that it also cannot be expanded to all suits wherein
      any right to the suit property is not directly and specifically
      considered by the court.
58.   What then holistically emerges from the amendment is that, under
      the pre-amended provision, the suit was required to be actively
      contested in relation to any right in the immovable property.
      However, after the amendment, the pendency of any suit, whether
      contentious or not, is enough. Moreover, even where the suit is not
      solely one relating to the same right in the immovable property, if
      any right, title or interest as regards such immovable property is
      directly and specifically forming part of the subject-matter of the
      suit,
Section 52
and the doctrine of lis pendens would stand attracted.
      In other words, the amendment, considered cumulatively, has
      widened the application of
Section 52
of the 1882 Act.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                             Page 27 of 172
59.
In this regard, we may refer to the decision of the Full Bench of the
      Allahabad High Court in
Mahesh Prasad & Ors. v. Musammat
      Mundar
, reported in 1950 SCC OnLine All 16, wherein the plaintiff
      had filed a suit for maintenance, and prayed that it be charged on
      the whole or a sufficient portion of the ancestral property specified
      in the plaint. The suit was dismissed by the trial court, however, in
      appeal, the appellate court fixed an amount as maintenance by
      creating a charge on the property vide its decree dated 21.02.1917.
      Sometime on or after 01.04.1930, the property had been sold to the
      transferees. Thereafter, the plaintiff-appellant filed an application
      for execution of the decree against the defendants as well as the
      transferees. As a result, the executing court had directed the sale of
      the properties in execution. The transferees claimed that they were
      transferees for consideration and without notice of the charge. One
      of the main issues before the High Court was whether the doctrine
      of lis pendens would apply to the facts of the case. The Court held
      that the want of notice would be immaterial to the application of
Section 52
of the 1882 Act, and the plaintiff would be entitled to
      enforce the decree against the property in the hands of the
      transferees, even if the transferees had purchased the property for
      consideration and without notice of the original suit. The Court
      concluded that the right to be maintained out of the income of the
      immovable property was a “right to immovable property” which was
      directly and specifically in question, thereby attracting the doctrine
      of lis pendens. The relevant observations read thus:-
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 28 of 172
“The next point for consideration is whether
section 52
of the
            Transfer of Property Act applied. If
section 52
applied then
            want of notice would be immaterial and the widow would be
            entitled to enforce the decree against the property in the
            hands of the transferee from her judgment-debtors even if the
            transferee had purchased the property for valuable
            consideration and without notice.
xxx
Section 52
, as amended by Act XX of 1929, is in these
            terms—
               “During the pendency in any court having authority in
               British India, or established beyond the limits of British
               India by the Governor-General in Council of any suit or
               proceeding which is not collusive and in which any right
               to immoveable property is directly and specifically in
               question, the property cannot be transferred or
               otherwise dealt with by any party to the suit or
               proceeding so as to affect the rights of any other party
               thereto under any decree or order which may be made
               therein, except under the authority of the court and on
               such terms as it may impose.
Explanation— For the purposes of this section the
               pendency of a suit or proceeding shall be deemed to
               commence from the date of the presentation of the plaint
               or the institution of the proceeding in a court of
               competent jurisdiction, and to continue until the suit or
               proceeding has been disposed of by a final decree or order
               and complete satisfaction or discharge of such decree or
               order has been obtained, or has become unobtainable by
               reason of the expiration of any period of limitation
               prescribed for the execution thereof by any law for the
               time being in force.”

            The section has been amended in certain material particulars.
            The word ‘pendency’ has been substituted for the words
            ‘active prosecution’. The words ‘any suit or proceeding which
            is not collusive’ have been substituted for the words ‘a
            contentious suit or proceeding’, and the Explanation has been
            added. These amendments were not with the object of
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                              Page 29 of 172
changing the law of lis pendens, but to remove certain doubts
            and conflicts which had arisen in the decisions of the High
            Courts in India. There is no doubt that the amended section
            will apply to the transfers which have taken place after the
            amendment came into force. The only question is whether in
            a suit filed by a Hindu widow, claiming that she was entitled
            to be maintained out of the income of the properties
            mentioned in the plaint, which she claimed were joint family
            properties in which her husband had a share and asking for a
            charge to be created on the said property, any right to
            immoveable property is directly and specifically in question.
            The right to be maintained out of the income of immoveable
            property is no doubt right to immoveable property. It may be
            mentioned that the words are not ‘right in the immoveable
            property’, but ‘right to immoveable property’. The fact that
            the Hindu widow claimed that this was property belonging
            to her husband, that she was entitled to be maintained out of
            the income of that property, and that she was entitled to have
            a charge created on the property, all raise questions relating
            to right to immoveable property. The point, however, is
            whether ‘right, to such property’ is ‘directly and specifically
            in question’ or the main claim is for maintenance and it is
            only collaterally that the property has been brought in. There
            is some difference of opinion on this point, but I am inclined
            to the view that in such a case it can be said that right to
            immoveable property is directly and specifically in question.
            Any doubts that one may have had on the point must be
            deemed to have been set at rest by the decision of their
            Lordships of the Judicial Committee in Syud Bazayet
            Hossein v. Dooli Chund [(1879) I.L.R. 1 Cal. 402.] . In that
            case a Mohammedan widow had claimed a right to be
            maintained out of certain properties detailed in the plaint and
            had also claimed that a charge be created, and when the
            property was transferred in disregard of the charge created in
            favour of the widow by the decree their Lordships of the
            Judicial Committee held that the doctrine of lis
            pendens applied. It is not for me to examine whether a
            Mohammedan widow is entitled to the maintained out of
            certain properties in the absence of agreement merely on the
            ground that she is a Mohammedan widow. It is also not for
            me to consider whether the charge was rightly created, but
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 30 of 172
that being the nature of the suit and a decree creating a charge
            having been passed their Lordships held that it operated as lis
            pendens, and that, to my mind, must set this point at
            rest.[…]”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
60.
In
Siddagangaiah
(supra), the plaintiff had filed a suit against her
      defendant-husband for the grant of maintenance and the creation of
      a charge on certain properties. After the filing of the suit and before
      it came to be decreed, the defendant executed a sale deed qua some
      of those properties.
This Court by relying on the decision in the case
      of
Nagubai Ammal & Ors. v. Shama Rao & Ors.
, reported in (1956)
      1 SCC 698, held that when a prayer in the suit seeks to create a
      charge on a specific property, it is a suit in which the right to
      immovable property is directly in question. Further, the lis is said to
      commence on the date of the presentation of the plaint and not on
      the date of the decree. The relevant observations read thus:-
“28. Coming to the question of lis pendens, Smt Thopamma
            had filed the suit in 1968 for the creation of charge of
            maintenance, inter alia, on the properties in question.
            Explanation to
Section 52
of the TP Act makes it clear that
            pendency of a suit or proceeding shall be deemed to commence
            from the date of the presentation of the plaint. Thus, on the
            date of execution of the sale deed on 9-11-1974, the suit filed
            by Thopamma was pending. Thus, the provisions contained
            in
Section 52
would clearly apply to the case.
In
Nagubai
            Ammal v. B. Shama Rao [Nagubai Ammal
v. B. Shama Rao,
            AIR 1956 SC 593] this Court observed: (AIR p. 597, para 9)
            “9. On this question, as the plaint in OS No. 100 of 1919-20
            praying for a charge was presented on 6-6-1919, the sale to
            Dr Nanjunda Rao subsequent thereto on 30-1-1920 would
            prima facie fall within the mischief of
Section 52
of the
            Transfer of Property Act, and would be hit by the purchase
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 31 of 172
by Devamma on 2-8-1928 in the execution of the charge
            decree.
Sri K.S. Krishnaswami Ayyangar, learned counsel for the
            appellants, did not press before us the contention urged by
            them in the courts below that when a plaint is presented in
            forma pauperis the lis commences only after it is admitted
            and registered as a suit, which was in this case on 17-6-1920,
            subsequent to the sale under Ext. VI — a contention directly
            opposed to the plain language of the Explanation to Section
52. And he also conceded and quite rightly, that when a suit
            is filed for maintenance and there is a prayer that it be
            charged on specified properties, it is a suit in which right to
            immovable property is directly in question, and the lis
            commences on the date of the plaint and not on the date of the
            decree, which creates the charge.[…]”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
61.   One could argue that the decree in
Mahesh Prasad
(supra) had
      specifically mentioned that a charge be created on the property and
      the property was alienated after the passing of such a specific
      decree, and it was therefore held that the transaction would be hit
      by the doctrine of lis pendens. Whereas in the facts of the present
      case, the decree was silent on whether the mortgaged property must
      be directed to be sold and hence, the transfer in favour of the
      respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively would not be covered by
Section 52
. In other words, that the decree in the present case was
      simply a money decree. This is, more or less, the argument
      canvassed by the counsel for the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively.
62.   This line of reasoning is plainly defeated by the decision in
Siddagangaiah
(supra) wherein the court had applied the doctrine
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 32 of 172
underlying
Section 52
even in a situation where the plaint had
      prayed that a charge be created on the properties and some of the
      properties were sold off before the decree creating a charge came to
      be passed. Therefore, one must also look carefully at the prayers
      sought for in the plaint to ascertain the application of the doctrine
      of lis pendens.
63.   To substantiate our reasoning, we may also look into the decision of
      the High Court of Madras in
Annakkili v. Murugan & Anr.
, reported
      in 2021 SCC OnLine Mad 1673, wherein the plaintiff had filed a suit
      for the recovery of money, and also sought for a direction to be
      given to the judgment-debtor to furnish security for the suit claim,
      failing which the court must direct that the properties mentioned in
      the plaint, be attached. Before any direction could be passed, the
      appellant therein purchased one of the properties mentioned in the
      plaint. It was then argued that
Section 52
of the 1882 Act cannot be
      invoked in case of a simple money suit. The Court held that
Section
      52
does not state that it is not applicable to suits for recovery of
      money, and the provision would not say so, because the
      Explanation to the provision states that the pendency of any suit
      continues until the suit or proceeding has been disposed of by a final
      decree or order and complete satisfaction or discharge of such
      decree or order has been obtained. It was further held that the
      parties must not create new rights in the property till the execution
      proceedings are discharged. The Court underscored that if
Section
      52
was read as always excluding money suits, despite a specific
      prayer in the plaint as regards the attachment of the property, a
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 33 of 172
decree passed therein would be rendered meaningless, since the
      party would be free to alienate the property and there would be no
      property available to execute the money decree. The relevant
      observations read thus:-
“7. […]In this context only, the Supreme Court in the case
            of
Vidur Impex & Traders Pvt. Ltd. v. Tosh Apartments Pvt.
            Ltd., CDJ
2012 SC 560 has clearly ruled that the transfer of
            any right, title or interest in the suit property or the
            consequential acquisition of any right, title or interest during
            the pendency of the suit will be subject to the decision in the
            suit. The reason being that the operation of bar under
Section
            52
is subject to the power of the Court to exempt the suit
            property from the operation of
Section 52
.[…]”

                                          xxx
9. A close reading of the Explanation given under
Section 52
makes it abundantly clear and comes to the aid of the first
            respondent/decree holder that for the purposes of this section,
            the pendency of a suit or proceeding shall be deemed to
            commence from the date of presentation of the plaint or the
            institution of the proceeding in a court of competent
            jurisdiction. As highlighted above, when the plaintiff/decree
            holder had filed the suit and also the I.A. No. 1513 of 2009 on
            29.9.2009, it goes without saying that the interest on the
            immovable property was directly and specifically in question,
            therefore, the suit properties ought not to have been sold in
            favour of the appellant on 8.10.2009, who is the brother's wife
            of the second respondent/judgment debtor.
10. Further,
Section 52
does not say that the doctrine of lis
            pendens will not apply to any money suit, because this
            section cannot say so, since the Explanation given in
Section
            52
is conspicuous and explicit that for the purpose of this
            section, the pendency of a suit or proceeding shall be deemed
            to commence from the date of presentation of the plaint or the
            institution of the proceeding in a Court of competent
            jurisdiction and to continue until the suit or proceeding has
            been disposed of by a final decree or order and complete
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 34 of 172
satisfaction or discharge of such decree or order has been
            obtained. Therefore the true intent of
Section 52
with
            Explanation is vividly clear that the Defendant or Judgment
            Debtor cannot transfer the suit property from the date of
            initiation of proceeding for attachment before judgment in a
            pending money suit and moreover, till the execution
            proceeding of decree or order obtained is completely satisfied
            or discharged, the mischief of
Section 52
with Explanation
            and
Section 53
will operate against the Defendant,
            irrespective of the fact whether it is a money suit or suit for
            immovable property, inasmuch as
Section 52
with
            Explanation does not bar application of the principle of lis
            pendens to money suit. Law maker of the
Transfer of Property
            Act
were careful enough to mention in the Explanation that
            the pendency of a suit or proceeding shall be deemed to
            commence from the date of presentation of the plaint or the
            institution of the proceeding, namely, filing of an
            Interlocutory Application for Attachment Before Judgment.
Moreover, if
Section 52
is excluded to money suit, then the
            money decree obtained after a long contest from a Court of
            competent jurisdiction will become meaningless, if there is no
            property available for execution of money decree, as a result,
            the decree holder of money suit will go remediless.[…]”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
64.   In a simple mortgage, the property is encumbered with the
      mortgagee’s interest in it, which means that any purchaser of the
      property would receive an interest in the property subject to the
      mortgagee’s rights, irrespective of whether the transfer is with or
      without notice of the mortgage, unless there is anything to the
      contrary to this effect in the mortgage agreement. It is in the same
      breath that we say that a transferee of a mortgaged property will
      have only such interest which the mortgagor himself had at the time
      of transferring the property.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 35 of 172
65.   In the present case, the suit property purchased by the respondent
      nos. 1 and 2 respectively, was a parcel of land forming part of the
      mortgaged property that the original borrower had mortgaged with
      the respondent no. 6-bank in lieu of the loan availed by him. When
      the bank instituted the suit and described the mortgaged property
      in its material particulars along with seeking that the property be
      sold in the event of default, the Trial Court could be said to have
      been in seisin of a dispute wherein the right or interest in the suit
      property was directly in play.
66.   When the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively purchased the suit
      property, it was a property which was “directly and specifically in
      question” in the pending proceedings and hence, stood squarely
      covered by
Section 52
of the 1882 Act and the principle of lis pendens.
      By purchasing a mortgaged property during the pendency of the
      suit instituted by the respondent no.6-bank, the respondent nos. 1
      and 2 respectively could be said to have agreed to be bound by the
      outcome of such proceedings. Their contentions regarding the lack
      of knowledge of the proceedings and the procurement of a No
      Encumbrance Certificate respectively, to say that they were bona fide
      purchasers, cannot be countenanced as the doctrine of lis pendens
      applies to an alienation during the pendency of the suit irrespective
      of whether the transferee had notice of the pending proceedings or
      not. [See:
Sanjay Verma v. Manik Roy
, (2006) 13 SCC 608;
Usha
      Sinha v. Dina Ram
, (2008) 7 SCC 144]
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 36 of 172
67.   Further, once the decree itself recorded the existence of the
      mortgage, and the plaint contained a joint prayer for recovery of
      money alongwith the sale of the mortgage property, the implication
      would naturally be that if the decretal amount remained unpaid, the
      amount was to be realized by proceeding against the mortgaged
      property in execution. In other words, the mortgage created an
      interest in the property in favour of the respondent no. 6-bank, and
      the decree also recognized that the property would answer the debt
      in the event of default. The decree read thus:-
“2. The plaintiff is a banking company incorporated under
            the banking companies (Acquisition and transfer of
            Undertakings) Act, 1980, having its head office at New Delhi
            and a branch at Nehru Ground Faridabad Sh. V.P. Gupta is
            the Manager and Principal Officer of the plaintiff bank. He is
            conversant with the fact of the case and is authorized and
            competent to institute the present suit vide power of attorney
            dt.29.4.71. The defendant No.1 was given a loan of Rs.
            20,000 /- against hypothecation of his tractor bearing
            No.HRG884 7 and the personal guarantee of defendant no.2
            and mortgage of movable property by defendant no. 1. The
            defendant no. 1 executed several documents in favour of the
            bank enumerated in para no. 4 of the plaint. The said amount
            was disbursed to defendant no. 1 on 31.7.70. Besides
            execution of the documents given above, the defendant no.1
            mortgaged his agricultural land with the plaintiff vide
            registered mortgage deed dt. 6.6. 70 and the details of the
            mortgage can be found in para no. 6 of the plaint. The amount
            of loan was to carry interest @ 2 o/o over the R.B.I. rate with
            a minimum of 91;20;0 which was subsequently raised to
            15112% The said amount as to be repaid in six half yearly in
            statements. The defendants remained irregular in payment of
            the amount. They acknowledged their liability by signing
            acknowledgment in favour of the plaintiff on various dates,
            last of which is 5.6.79. The defendant No 1 &2 died and the
            defendants no. 1a to 1c and defendant no. 2(a) are their legal
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 37 of 172
heirs. Various demands were made on them to do so and
            hence the present suit.
3. The defendants did not appear despite service and they
            were proceeded against exparte.
4. In exparte evidence, Sh. S.C. Gupta Assistant Manager of
            the plaintiff bank appeared as PW1 and he has supported the
            plaintiffs case in all material particulars. The on oath
            statement of this witness which goes un rebutted, goes to
            prove the plaintiffs case. Hence, the suit of the plaintiff for
            recovery of Rs. 15529.35p. is decreed exparte against the
            defendants with costs. Interest @ 15°/o P.a. is allowed to the
            plaintiff on the decretal amount from the date of institution
            of the suit till the date of 3ealization of the decretal amount.
Decree sheet be prepared and file be consigned.
Announced.
Dated: 12.11.84”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
68.   Therefore, there exists no doubt that the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively were pendente lite transferees of the judgment-debtor(s).
69.   We would also like to point out at this juncture, that the Trial Court
      had unfortunately misdirected itself in recording that the
      transaction in favour of the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively was
      made on a date prior to the passing of the original decree, when in
      actuality, it was made in two tranches i.e., one, after the decree came
      to be passed and another, after the execution petition came to be
      filed by the respondent no.6-bank. To put it simply, both tranches
      of the transaction in favour of the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively were made well after the original decree was passed.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 38 of 172
70.   Even going by the Trial Court’s understanding of when the
      transactions in favour of the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively
      were made, for the reasons we have assigned hereinabove, we are
      of the view that they would still be hit by the doctrine of lis pendens
      since the transactions were made after the institution of the original
      suit by the respondent no.6-bank in which the right and interest to
      the mortgaged property was directly and specifically in question.
II.   Whether the respondent nos. 1 and 2, respectively, could have
      sought for any relief under Rule(s) 89 or 90 of
Order XXI CPC
,
      respectively?
71.   Before directly addressing the rival contentions as regards the
      maintainability of the suit instituted by the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively, we must first look into Order XXI, more particularly,
      the various kinds of remedies that are contemplated under Rules 89
      to 92 thereunder. We find it necessary to do so because – first, the
      counsel appearing for the appellant seems to have made an
      argument before the High Court that the plaintiffs-respondent nos.
      1 and 2 respectively, should have preferred an application under
      Rule 89 of
Order XXI CPC
before the confirmation of the auction-
      sale and upon failing to do so, and allowing the sale to be confirmed,
      they would have no remedy.
72.   Secondly, Mr. Vikas Singh would submit that a sale made during
      execution by the executing court must be accorded some sanctity
      and not be left vulnerable to general claims of irregularity or fraud.
      He would argue that the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively must
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 39 of 172
have preferred an application under Rule 90 immediately after they
      got to know of the alleged irregularities. However, even in such a
      scenario, several essentials must have been fulfilled for them to
      successfully set-aside the sale. Having not fulfilled those essentials,
      it is his view that their application under Rule 90 would have also
      been unsuccessful.
73.   Thirdly, Ms. Aparajita Singh would submit that the separate suit
      instituted by the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, would be
      maintainable by virtue of Rule 92(4) which comes into play once the
      sale is confirmed.
74.   Before we specifically address ourselves to these submissions, let us
      look into the scope of these provisions.
a.   Scope and application of Rule 89 of
Order XXI CPC
, with
           specific reference to whether pendente lite transferees can
           maintain such an application
75.   Order XXI Rule 89 reads thus:-
“89. Application to set aside sale on deposit.—
            (1) Where immovable property has been sold in execution of
            a decree, [any person claiming an interest in the property sold
            at the time of the sale or at the time of making the application,
            or acting for or in the interest of such person,] may apply to
            have the sale set aside on his depositing in Court,—
(a) for payment to the purchaser, a sum equal to five per cent
            of the purchase-money, and
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 40 of 172
(b) for payment, to the decree-holder, the amount specified in
            the proclamation of sale as that for the recovery of which the
            sale was ordered, less any amount which may, since the date
            of such proclamation of sale, have been received by the decree-
holder.
(2) Where a person applies under rule 90 to set aside the sale
            of his immovable property, he shall not, unless he withdraws
            his application, be entitled to make or prosecute an
            application under this rule.
(3) Nothing in this rule shall relieve the judgment-debtor
            from any liability he may be under in respect of costs and
            interest not covered by the proclamation of sale.”
76.   The rule stipulates the procedure for setting aside the sale made in
      execution of a decree by (a) any person claiming an interest in the
      auctioned property, either at the time of the sale or at the time of
      making the application under Rule 89 or; (b) by a person acting for
      or in the interest of such person. However, such an application
      under Rule 89 must mandatorily be accompanied by a deposit
      which contains two components – (a) a sum equal to five per cent of
      the purchase money paid in the auction sale, which is to be given to
      the auction purchaser, and; (b) the amount specified in the
      proclamation of sale, less any amount which may have already been
      received by the decree-holder since the date of such proclamation,
      which is to be given to the decree-holder.
77.   What can be discerned from the aforesaid is that the heart of the
      provision lies in the expression, “apply to have the sale set aside on
      depositing in Court”. The strict nature of the rule is reflected by the
      necessary condition stipulated by the legislature that the sale would
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 41 of 172
be set-aside only upon the payment of a deposit of the prescribed
      amount. In other words, the deposit of the amount stipulated in sub-
      rule (1) of Rule 89 is sine qua non for an application seeking to set
      aside the execution sale under this rule.
78.   A careful perusal of the rule indicates that it gives the judgment
      debtor another opportunity to retain his property, even after the
      property is sold, by paying the decretal amount to the decree-holder
      and compensating the auction purchaser with five percent of the
      purchase money.
In
Challamane Huchha Gowda v. M.R. Tirumala
,
      reported in (2004) 1 SCC 453, this Court held that Rule 89 provides
      the judgment-debtor a final opportunity to put an end to the dispute
      and prevent his dispossession from the property, before the sale is
      confirmed by the court. If the conditions prescribed under this rule
      are satisfied, then the executing court would be obligated to make
      an order setting aside the sale, provided that notice is given to all
      persons affected thereby, as stipulated under the proviso to Rule
      92(2). The relevant observations read thus:-
“9. Execution is the enforcement by the process of the court
            of its orders and decrees. This is in furtherance of the inherent
            power of the court to carry out its orders or decrees.
Order 21
            CPC
deals with the elaborate procedure pertaining to the
            execution of orders and decrees. Sale is one of the methods
            employed for execution. Rule 89 of Order 21 is the only
            means by which a judgment-debtor can escape from a sale
            that has been validly carried out. The object of the rule is to
            provide a last opportunity to put an end to the dispute at the
            instance of the judgment-debtor before the sale is confirmed
            by the court and also to save his property from dispossession.
            Rule 89 postulates two conditions: they are depositing: (1) of
            sum equal to five per cent of the purchase money to be paid to
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 42 of 172
the purchaser, (2) of the amount specified in the proclamation
            of sale less any amount received by the decree-holder since the
            date of such proclamation, in the court. If these two
            conditions are satisfied the court shall make an order for
            setting aside the sale under Rule 92(2) of
Order 21 CPC
on
            an application made to it. In other words, then there will be
            compliance with the court's order or decree that is sought to
            be executed. Because the purpose of Rule 21 is to ensure the
            carrying out of the orders and decrees of the court, once the
            judgment-debtor carries out the order or decree of the court,
            the execution proceedings will correspondingly come to an
            end. It is to be noted that the Rule does not provide that the
            application in a particular form shall be filed to set aside the
            sale. Even a memo with prayer for setting aside sale is
            sufficient compliance with the said Rule. Therefore, upon the
            satisfaction of the compliance with conditions as provided
            under Rule 89, it is mandatory upon the court to set aside the
            sale under Rule 92. And the court shall set aside the sale after
            giving notice under Rule 92(2) to all affected persons.
(Emphasis supplied)
79.   The question which would then arise is whether a transferee
      pendente lite of the judgment-debtor would also fall within the scope
      of the words “any person claiming an interest in the auctioned property”.
      There remains very little reason for the courts to extend the benefit
      of Rule 89 to the judgment-debtor himself but not to a transferee
      pendente lite of the judgment-debtor.
80.   A perusal of the amendment to Rule 89 made by the Amendment
      Act of 1976 would prove beneficial in the answering the aforesaid
      question. Through the amendment, the words, “any person, either
      owning such property or holding an interest therein by virtue of a title
      acquired before such sale” was replaced with “any person claiming an
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 43 of 172
interest in the property sold at the time of the sale or at the time of making
      the application, or acting for or in the interest of such person”.
81.   The Andhra Pradesh High Court in Pallepu Poleswari v.
Tammisetty Nageswarao Rao and Others reported in 2011 SCC
      OnLine AP 601 had looked into what had prompted the legislature
      to amend Rule 89 and stated that the impetus was given by the
      decision of a Full Bench of the Patna High Court in
Onkar Nath
      Jalan v. Ramanand Prasad
reported in AIR 1970 Patna 368. In
the
      said decision
, the Full Bench had suggested a change to Rule 89
      along the lines of what it thought would truly be in consonance with
      the intent of the provision. The amendment was also suggested with
      a view to prevent an unnecessary investigation into the nature of
      interest that an applicant may have. This suggestion is what has
      been verbatim adopted by the
Amending Act
of 1976. The relevant
      observations are thus:
“17. What prompted the Parliament to amend Rule 89 of
            Order XXI
CPC
in 1976 appears to be certain administrative
            and judicial steps taken by the Patna High Court. Even when
            the Rule remained in its unamended form, the Patna High
            Court introduced a State amendment to that Rule, in its
            application to the State of Bihar, substituting the following
            text:
“a judgment-debtor or any person deriving title through
               the judgment-debtor, or any person holding an interest
               in the property at the date of the application under this
               rule.”
               (in the place of the words underlined portion at page
535)
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                   Page 44 of 172
18. The said provision has fallen for interpretation before a
            Full Bench of the Patna High Court in Onkar Nath Jalan's
            case (supra). The Full Bench took note of the background in
            which the Patna High Court substituted a different provision
            and the division of opinion among various High Courts.
Ultimately, it held that provision as it applied to the State of
            Bihar did not warrant that an applicant must prove his title
            to the property, before he can seek the relief of setting aside
            the sale. After holding so, the Full Bench made the following
            observation:
“I may, however, state before parting with the case that
               the most comprehensive wording and the one which is
               not only consonant with the underlying policy of the
               amendments but has besides it, the advantage of
               avoiding unnecessary investigation of the nature of
               interest is that of the High Court of Lahore, prior to
               partition and that of the Nagpur High Court and should
               be adopted in our High Court as well. The amendment
               stands thus:
“any person claiming any interest in the
                  property sold at the time of the sale or at the
                  time of making the application under this rule
                  or acting for or in the interest of such a
                  person.” The decree-holder is interested in getting
                  his dues. The auction-purchaser while bidding
                  knows the provision of Order XXI, Rule 89. and
                  receives the compensation and thereby can have no
                  grudge as to why the amount of purchase money is
                  deposited and sale set aside. No one suffers by the
                  procedure adopted in the above amendment and it
                  may be reaffirmed that no prudent man is likely to
                  waste his good money in depositing it for the
                  benefit of the judgment-debtor merely in a
                  gratuitous manner.”
19. It is indeed gratifying that the text suggested by the Full
            Bench were adopted verbatim, by the Parliament and it was
            incorporated in Rule 89, in the year 1976.”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 45 of 172
82.   On a bare reading of the aforesaid amendment, it is lucid that the
      legislature had consciously widened the ambit of the rule by
      undertaking two major changes – first, doing away with the
      requirement that an applicant under Rule 89 must either own the
      property or hold an interest by virtue of a title, and secondly,
      expanding the period during which such an interest could have
      been acquired from ‘before the occurrence of the sale’ to ‘at the time
      of making the application under Rule 89’. Therefore, the legislature
      very consciously did away with the requirement of having an
      applicant under Rule 89 prove his title or absolute right in the
      property. Presently, it is sufficient if the applicant claims an
      “interest” in the property sold, either at the time of the auction or at
      the time of making the application under Rule 89 or, is acting for or
      on behalf of the persons having such interest.
83.   We have had the benefit of looking into a decision of the Madras
      High Court in
Vootla Viriah and Others v. Tadepalli Subba Rao
      and others
reported in 1948 SCC OnLine Mad 287, wherein it was
      emphasized that the word “interest” occurring in Rule 89 must be
      construed quite liberally. Such an interest which is referred to under
      Rule 89 may not be sufficient to enforce any claim to the detriment
      of the auction-purchaser or the decree-holder and this is probably
      why the interest referred to in this rule, may not be successfully
      used to prevent the attachment of the property and defeat the rights
      of the decree-holder. However, the object of this rule is very
      different - what Rule 89 seeks to achieve is to provide the decree-
      holder the amount that he is owed and also compensate the auction-
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 46 of 172
purchaser in the course of setting-aside the sale – i.e., to set-aside
      the sale while not detrimentally affecting the rights of the decree-
      holder or the auction-purchaser. In other words, the decree-holder
      is relegated to the same position as if the sale of the property was
      not interfered with at all and the auction-purchaser, in whose favour
      the sale has not yet been confirmed and rights are not crystallized,
      is instead compensated. Therefore, even an inchoate right which a
      party may have over the property may be enough to constitute an
      “interest” under Rule 89. The relevant observations are thus:
“[…] O. 21, R. 89 should be liberally construed and a
            restricted interpretation should not be put upon the words of
            that rule.[…]

            […] It may be that the interest may not be sufficient to be put
            forward as a shield against the decree-holder's claim, and that
            was the-reason why the properties were attached and sold in
            execution of the decree. The word “interest” in O. 21. R. 89
            has got a very wide import and should be construed very
            liberally, as Venkatasubba Rao, J. observed in the case
            abovementioned. Any inchoate right which a party may have
            over a property may be sufficient “interest” to enable him to
            apply under O. 21, R. 89.[…]”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
84.   The mandate of this rule is further strengthened by the time limit
      stipulated by the legislature under sub-rule (2) of Rule 92, wherein
      the deposit required under Rule 89 has to be made within sixty days
      from the date of sale. This time-limit also flows from
Article 127
of
      the
Limitation Act, 1963
. A relaxation of this sixty-day period is only
      contemplated if, the amount already deposited within this period of
      sixty days is found to be deficient for the reason that the depositor
      made a clerical or arithmetical mistake. In such a scenario, the court
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 47 of 172
fixes an additional time within which the depositor shall make good
      that deficiency.
85.   Furthermore, sub-rule (2) goes on to indicate that an application
      under Rule 89 cannot be made when the same person has already
      applied under rule 90 for setting aside the sale on the ground of
      irregularity or fraud. One cannot allege material fraud or
      irregularity to set-aside the sale while simultaneously also wanting
      to pay a deposit to set it aside.
86.   On a complete reading, what then becomes obvious is that the
      provision is in the nature of a concession. It is intended to provide
      the person claiming an interest in the property sold, or a person
      acting for or on behalf of the persons having such an interest, a last
      opportunity to receive the property, by getting the auction sale set
      aside and depositing the amount as stipulated. The payment of the
      deposit by such persons, by itself, is reason enough to stop the sale
      of the property from being confirmed. We say so because of two
      reasons, first, the deposit is in lieu of the execution of the decree
      which is the sole concern of the executing court in such cases, and
      secondly, as a sequitur, the deposit of the amount is couched in
      mandatory terms alongwith the time limit prescribed, reinforcing
      that the sale cannot be set-aside without the deposit, and within
      prescribed timeline.
87.   Having explained the scope of Rule 89 in the aforesaid manner and
      having arrived at the conclusion that a pendente lite transferee of the
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 48 of 172
judgment-debtor would also be eligible to make an application
      under this rule, we are of the view that even if the respondent nos.
      1 and 2 respectively were willing to make the deposit and set-aside
      the sale as contemplated under Rule 89 of Order XXI, they were not
      in a position to move an application under this rule. This is because
      they were put to knowledge about the auction of the mortgaged
      property much after the date of confirmation of sale. The sixty-day
      time limit which starts running from the date of the sale, had long
      lapsed. In other words, the stage of the execution proceedings
      during which they could have preferred an application under Rule
      89 had already passed.
b.   Scope and application of Rule 90 of
Order XXI CPC
88.   We may now examine the parameters provided for under Rule 90
      and whether the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively could have
      preferred an application under the said rule. Rule 90 reads thus:-
“90. Application to set aside sale on ground of
            irregularity or fraud.—(1) Where any immovable property
            has been sold in execution of a decree, the decree-holder, or
            the purchaser, or any other person entitled to share in a
            rateable distribution of assets, or whose interests are affected
            by the sale, may apply to the Court to set aside the sale on the
            ground of a material irregularity or fraud in publishing or
            conducting it.
(2) No sale shall be set aside on the ground of irregularity or
            fraud in publishing or conducting it unless, upon the facts
            proved, the Court is satisfied that the applicant has sustained
            substantial injury by reason of such irregularity or fraud.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 49 of 172
(3) No application to set aside a sale under this rule shall be
            entertained upon any ground which the applicant could have
            taken on or before the date on which the proclamation of sale
            was drawn up.
Explanation.—The mere absence of, or defect in,
            attachment of the property sold shall not, by itself, be a
            ground for setting aside a sale under this rule.”
89.   The aforesaid rule contemplates that an application can be made
      under Rule 90 by four categories of individuals – (a) the decree-
      holder, (b) the purchaser in such sale, (c) any other person entitled
      to share in a rateable distribution of assets, or (d) any person whose
      interests are affected by the sale. The Amendment Act of 1976 had
      inserted the words “or the purchaser” under Rule 90 and thereby,
      clarified that the purchasers in the sale made in execution of a decree
      could also prefer an application under this rule.
90.   Moving further, the rule states that the aforesaid individuals can
      apply to the executing court to set-aside a sale that has already been
      conducted on the ground that a “material irregularity or fraud in
      publishing or conducting it” has occurred. Careful attention must be
      paid to two aspects herein – First, what constitutes “material”
      irregularity or fraud would depend on the facts and circumstances
      of each case, and secondly, such material irregularity or fraud must
      be as regards the manner of “publishing or conducting” the sale in
      execution of a decree.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 50 of 172
91.   Along with the aforesaid two-pronged requirement, by virtue of
      sub-rule (2) the court must also be satisfied, upon the facts proved,
      that the applicant praying for such sale to be set-aside has sustained
      a “substantial injury” “by reason of” such material irregularity or
      fraud. This sub-rule, apart from indicating that the injury must be
      substantial, also denotes that the injury claimed to be suffered by
      the applicant must have a direct nexus with the publishing or the
      manner in which the sale was conducted.
92.   The respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, have made several
      allegations as regards the manner in which the sale was conducted
      including that of the sale being conducted in camera, the auction
      price being inadequate etc. However, they are also of the opinion
      that the suit property should not have been attached by the
      Executing Court in the first place. Therefore, we find it necessary to
      examine whether an application under Rule 90 could have been
      made to address any grievances pertaining to attachment.
i.   The maintainability of an application under Rule 90 vis-á-vis
           fraud or irregularities pertaining to stages prior to the
           proclamation of sale i.e., at the stage of attachment.
93.   In order to make an application under Rule 90, the applicant must
      ensure that the ground which they have taken is not one that they
      could have raised on or before the date on which the proclamation
      of sale was drawn up. This comes as a caution from sub-rule(3) of
      Rule 90. Sub-rule (3) must, however, not be read to mean that the
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 51 of 172
ground sought to be raised must only be related to a stage which
      arrives after the date of drawing up the proclamation of sale. One
      must pay careful attention to the words “grounds which the applicant
      could have taken”. This refers directly to the ability of the applicant to
      take the same ground on a prior occasion. Necessary context as to
      why the legislature felt the need to incorporate this sub-rule can be
      derived from the 14th Report of the Law Commission of India (Vol
1. Pg 454-455) which is reproduced thus:
“50. Proclamation of sale. Rules 64 to 73 contain
            provisions for the sale of property generally. We have dealt
            with the notice of the proclamation of sale to be given to the
            judgment-debtor under Rule 66. The proclamation which is
            drawn up under sub-rule (2) of Rule 66 must contain several
            particulars relating to the description of the property. Under
            clause (e) of sub-rule (2) the court is required to state in the
            proclamation everything material for a purchaser to know in
            order to judge of the nature and value of the property. The
            court has to make an approximate estimate of the market
            value of the property to be stated in the proclamation. This
            requirement has been known to cause much trouble and
            delay. Under the present law, an omission to state the correct
            market value of the property or an undervaluation of it has
            been regarded as a material irregularity affecting the sale
            under Rule 90. In practice, a judgment-debtor who is intent
            upon postponing the sale of property allows the sale to be held
            knowing that the particulars as regards the valuation in the
            proclamation are defective and thereafter makes an
            application under Rule 90 for setting aside the sale on the
            ground of a material irregularity in publishing or conducting
            the sale. These proceedings involve delays which may well be
            avoided by omitting the item of the court's estimate of the
            price. The Patna High Court has made what is in our view a
            very wholesome and salutary amendment by adding a proviso
            to clause (e) of sub-rule (2) of Rule 66 as follows:
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 52 of 172
“Provided that no estimate of the value of the property
               other than those, if any, made by the decree- holder and
               the judgment-debtor respectively together with the
               statement that the court does not vouch for the accuracy
               of either shall be inserted in the sale proclamation.”

            Similar amendments have also been made by the High Courts
            of Calcutta, Madras, Orissa and Punjab. We are of the view
            that clause (e) may itself be amended on these lines.
51. Setting aside of sale. Under Rule 90 a sale of immovable
            property in execution of a decree can be set aside on the
            ground of material irregularity or fraud in publishing or
            conducting the sale. The right to apply under this Rule is
            given to the decree-holder or to any person entitled to a share
            in the rateable distribution of assets or whose interests are
            affected by the sale. It is generally accepted that a large
            percentage of applications made by the judgment-debtors to
            set aside, sales under this Rule are frivolous and are filed with
            the object of delaying the delivery of possession. It is therefore
            necessary to make an amendment in Rule 90 by providing
            that no sale shall be set aside on the ground of any defect in
            the proclamation of sale at the instance of any person who did
            not attend, though given notice to appear at the drawing up
            of the proclamation or of any person in whose presence the
            proclamation was drawn up, unless an objection was taken
            by him before the sale was held. Following the
            recommendations of the Uttar Pradesh Judicial Reforms
            Committee the High Court of Allahabad has added sub-rule
            (2) to Rule 90 providing for an award of costs to the decree-
holder or auction-purchaser or both as against the party
            whose application under Rule 90 has been rejected. Another
            useful amendment made by the Allahabad High Court in sub-
            rule (1) is to the effect that the application to set aside a sale
            shall not be entertained unless the applicant deposits such
            amount not exceeding 12 per cent of the sum realized at the
            sale or furnishes such security as may be fixed by the court,
            except when the court for reasons to be recorded dispenses
            with the requirements of this clause. This provision is
            presumably made in order to compensate the purchaser.
            Under Rule 89 the applicant at whose instance the sale is set
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                  Page 53 of 172
aside has to deposit 5 per cent of the purchase money for
            payment to the purchaser. We recommend that a provision
            similar to that in the Allahabad amendment be inserted in
            Rule 90. An amendment of the Rule on these lines would, in
            our opinion, serve to control the filing of frivolous
            applications.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
94.   A reading of the aforesaid would indicate that, an omission to state
      the correct market value of the property or its undervaluation in the
      proclamation of sale was earlier considered to constitute a material
      irregularity in publishing or conducting the sale under Rule 90.
      Therefore, a cunning judgment-debtor, who was already aware that
      the particulars in the proclamation of sale as regards the valuation
      of the property are wrong/defective, could allow the sale to be
      conducted without raising an issue and thereafter, make an
      application under Rule 90 with an intent to set-aside the sale and
      postpone the process. Furthermore, it was also suggested that an
      allegation regarding a defect that has occurred in the proclamation
      of sale must not be made in an application under Rule 90 at the
      instance of those persons who did not attend the drawing up of the
      proclamation of sale despite a notice being served upon them, or by
      those persons who were present during the drawing up of the
      proclamation, unless an objection was taken before the sale was
      conducted.
95.   These issues which were identified in the 14th Report were remedied
      by the insertion of sub-rule (3) in Rule 90 which stated that the
      objections which could have been taken on or before the date on
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 54 of 172
which the proclamation of sale was drawn up, cannot be brought
      under Rule 90. The reason behind clarifying this was to fend off such
      individuals who may unnecessarily and with a view to prevent the
      sale from being confirmed, prefer an application under Rule 90,
      when they could have very-well raised their objection at the
      appropriate time and stage.
96.   A recent decision of this Court in G.R. Selvaraj (Dead), through
LRs
      v. K.J. Prakash Kumar and Others
reported in 2025 INSC 1353
      emphasized that as per the mandate of sub-rule (3) of Rule 90, an
      applicant cannot, at a belated stage, seek to assail an auction sale,
      particularly when there existed a prior opportunity to raise the same
      objection before the proclamation of sale was drawn up. Therein,
      the applicant had ample opportunity to raise the ground that the
      entire property need not be sold to satisfy the decree even before the
      date of the last proclamation of sale. Therefore, it was held that one
      who has acquiesced despite being put to notice would be precluded
      from assailing the legality or correctness of the same thereafter. The
      relevant observations are thus:
“17. Given the insertion of Order XXI Rule 90(3) in the
            statute book with effect from 01.02.1977, it would be
            incumbent upon a judgment debtor or any other interested
            person who applies for setting aside an execution sale, held
            thereafter, to satisfy the executing Court that the ground
            upon which the application was made could not have been
            taken on or before the date on which the proclamation of sale
            was drawn up. In effect, if such a ground could have been
            taken by that applicant who seeks setting aside of the sale but
            he failed to do so at the appropriate stage, he would stand
            barred, by Order XXI Rule 90(3)
CPC
, from doing so at a
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 55 of 172
subsequent stage. It is in this context that the aforementioned
            observations made by this Court in Desh Bandhu Gupta
            (supra) gain significance as that was a case involving an
            execution sale held after the insertion of Order XXI Rule
            90(3)
CPC
and this Court made it clear that, even in the
            context of a material irregularity under Order XXI Rule
            66(2)(a)
CPC
, if the judgment debtor had been put on notice
            by the executing Court but had acquiesced, by taking no
            action before the date of the sale, he would be precluded from
            assailing its legality or correctness thereafter. In a given case,
            where a judgment debtor is not given notice prior to the sale,
            as was the situation in Desh Bandhu Gupta (supra), Order
            XXI Rule 90(3)
CPC
obviously cannot posit a bar to his
            raising a ground thereafter.
18. However, on the facts obtaining presently, we are
            convinced that not only were the judgment debtors in the case
            on hand put on notice at every stage during the exercises
            undertaken by the executing Court to reduce the upset price
            from one unsuccessful sale to the other, they also participated
            to an extent and then chose to refrain from doing so.
            Therefore, they do not have the right to claim that they were
            not put on notice, though they feebly contended to such effect.
            The record clearly negates their claim in that regard. Having
            failed to raise a material irregularity in the context of Order
            XXI Rule 66(2)(a)
CPC
at the appropriate stage, i.e., with
            regard to sale of a part of the property being sufficient to
            satisfy the decree, it is not open to them to now raise such a
            belated plea and blithely place the burden on the executing
            Court, so as to seek setting aside of a sale held as long back as
            in the year 2002. Unfortunately, the High Court, having
            noted the bar postulated by Order XXI Rule 90(3)
CPC
in
            para 31 of the impugned judgment, failed to give effect to it
            assuming that the obligation under Order XXI Rule 66(2)(a)
CPC
would operate independently upon the executing Court,
            irrespective of the lapse on the part of the judgment debtors.”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
97.   Finally, the Explanation to Rule 90 also takes forward this
      underlying theme that an irregularity or fraud pertaining to stages
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                  Page 56 of 172
prior to the drawing up of the proclamation of sale could also be
      brought within the ambit of Rule 90, provided an opportunity to
      raise the same did not exist earlier. It states that “the mere absence of,
      or defect in, attachment of the property sold shall not, by itself, be a ground
      for setting aside a sale under this rule”. It is necessary for us to
      understand the import and rationale behind this Explanation to
      ascertain whether grievances which specifically relate to attachment
      can be brought within the ambit of Rule 90. If yes, then what kind?
98.   The 27th Report of the Law Commission (Vol 1, pg 206-207) had
      made some observations regarding the explanation which came to
      be added to Rule 90. They are as follows:
“         Order XXI, rule 90 and absence of attachment
            The question whether absence of, or irregularity in
            attachment is, a defect in the "publication or conduct of the
            sale" has been discussed in several decisions. At one extreme
            is the view that attachment is not necessary at all before sale.
            At the other extreme stands the view that sale without
            attachment is void. A third view is, that attachment is an
            irregularity, but not in publishing or conducting the sale.
            According to the fourth view, a sale is not a nullity because
            of a defect in the attachment or want thereof, but if it causes
            "substantial injury", it can be set aside under rule 90. The
            last view seems to be the correct one. The object of attachment
            is to bring the property under the control of the court, and in
            the case of immovable property one of the requirements is that
            the order of attachment should be publicly proclaimed. The
            main object of the proclamation is to give publicity to the fact
            that the sale of the proclaimed property is in contemplation.
            The publication of the attachment is thus a step leading up to
            the proclamation of the sale.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 57 of 172
The question whether it is necessary to insert a provision to
           clarify the position on the subject, has been considered. In the
           draft Report which had been circulated, an Explanation had
           been proposed to rule 90 to the effect that absence of or defect
           in attachment shall be regarded as an irregularity under this
           rule. After some consideration, it has been decided that no
           such provision need be inserted.”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
99.    The 27 Report pointed out that, prior to the insertion of the
             th


       Explanation, several courts were faced with the issue of whether the
       absence of, or irregularity in the attachment of a property would
       constitute a defect in the “publication or conduct of the sale”. Several
       decisions gave divergent opinions. Some operated in extremes i.e.,
       the first view was that an attachment is not necessary at all for
       conducting a sale and the second view was that a sale conducted
       without an order of attachment is void and a nullity. A third view
       was that matters pertaining to attachment would constitute an
       irregularity but would, however, remain outside the scope of Rule
       90 since they would not amount to an irregularity in “publishing or
       conducting the sale”. The Law Commission found merit in an
       alternate fourth view which stated that a sale which has been
       conducted in the absence of attachment or a defect in attachment
       must not automatically be considered as null and void. Such a defect
       in the attachment or the want thereof, must cause substantial injury
       for Rule 90 to be applicable to it.
100.   Therefore, the Law Commission subscribed to the idea that
       irregularities pertaining to attachment must not completely be taken
       away from the purview of Rule 90. This is plainly evident from its
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 58 of 172
implicit disagreement with the third view taken by a few decisions,
      as aforementioned. However, it was emphasized that a sale would
      be set-aside, only if the defect in the attachment or the absence of
      attachment, causes “substantial injury” to an applicant under Rule
90. Meaning thereby, that if the process involved in publishing or
      conducting the attachment of a property is riddled with a material
      irregularity or fraud, interference can be justified under Rule 90 if
      substantial injury is proved. The intention was that, just the mere
      pointing out of the absence of attachment or a defect in attachment,
      by itself, must not be construed as nullifying the entire sale and
      thereby, giving rise to substantial injury as a very natural
      consequence. In other words, substantial injury is not automatic or
      implicit in these scenarios. If it were assumed so, then all
      applications under Rule 90 pertaining to such facts and
      circumstances would always be allowed and the sale would be set-
      aside. That would be a very extreme position to take. Due emphasis
      must be placed on the words “mere” present in the Explanation to
      reconcile the wording of the Explanation with the aforesaid
      intention of the Law Commission. This indicates that, apart from
      pointing out the defect in the process of attachment or the absence
      of attachment itself, one must move a step forward and also
      specifically plead as to how substantial injury has been caused,
      similar to what has already been mandated under sub-rule (2) of
      Rule 90. This Explanation only clarifies and takes forward the intent
      already evident from Rule 90 and sub-rule (2) thereof.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                         Page 59 of 172
101. The fourth alternate view endorsed by the 27th Report is the decision
      of the Madras High Court in
K. Swaminatha Iyer v. K.G.
      Krishnaswami Iyer and Others
reported in 1946 SCC OnLine Mad
      189, wherein emphasis was placed on “whether substantial injury
      was caused” due to the absence of a subsisting attachment order for
      interference to be justified under Rule 90. The relevant observations
      are thus:
“As regards the second contention that the Court had no
            jurisdiction to sell the house as the attachment had ceased, it
            is to be observed that this Court has held in a series of cases
            that a sale of immoveable property without previous
            attachment is not null and void and that the omission to
            attach before the sale is only an irregularity which renders
            the sale liable to be set aside if substantial injury is proved.
            […]

            […]The position therefore is this: Attachment is a necessary
            preliminary to a judicial sale, but a sale without attachment
            is not a nullity. Omission to attach is a material irregularity
            which renders the sale liable to be set aside under O. 21, R.
            90 if substantial injury is proved.
Are the plaintiffs then entitled to avoid the sale to
            Sundararaja Pillai so far as their shares are concerned? Their
            father, the first defendant, failed to take any steps to have the
            sale set aside under O. 21, R. 90 on account of the
            irregularity, presumably because no substantial injury had
            resulted. Nor did they avail themselves of that remedy which
            was open to them also as “persons whose interests are affected
            by the sale.” [See Bubaneshwar Prasad Narayan
            Singh v. Biharilal]. Even in the present proceedings they
            have not attempted to prove any substantial injury by reason
            of the attachment having ceased to be in force at the time of
            the order for sale.
If omission to attach does not affect the jurisdiction of the
            Court to sell and is a mere irregularity, the purchaser's title
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 60 of 172
cannot, as it seems to us, be displaced by any antecedent
             irregularity in publishing or conducting the sale except by
             resort to the statutory remedy provided by O. 21, R. 90. That
             remedy not having been availed of, the purchaser's title has
             become unassailable and the appeals must fail.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
102. The 54th Report of the Law Commission of India (Vol 1, pg 186)
       took the discussion made in the 27th Report forward and suggested
       that the Explanation, as we see it today, be inserted in Rule 90 in
       order to put the matter to rest and obviate any further confusion.
103.   That rule 90 concerns itself with material irregularities and fraud
       occurring in the process of sale and those causing substantial injury,
       at any stage of the sale, even prior to the proclamation of sale, is also
       brought forth from the decision of this Court in
Satyanarain
       Bajoria and Another v. Ramnarain Tibrewal and Another
reported
       in (1993) 4 SCC 414. Therein, after the decree was passed, the
       judgment-debtor deposited the decree amount in satisfaction of his
       debt. However, after about three years, the decree-holder had filed
       an application before the executing court claiming an additional
       amount. In execution of this application, the property of the
       judgment-debtor came to be sold. It was of note that the decree-
       holder himself had purchased the property in the auction sale.
       Furthermore, before the expiry of the sixty-day period as provided
       under
Article 127
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
, the sale was confirmed
       by the executing court. In such circumstances, the judgment-debtor
       had preferred an application under Rule 90 within the prescribed
       period of limitation for setting aside the sale alleging that he had no
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                              Page 61 of 172
knowledge of the sale whatsoever because no process had been
      served on him at any stage. The notice published in the newspaper
      during the time of proclamation of sale also deliberately contained
      incorrect particulars to misguide the judgment-debtor. Upon a
      detailed consideration of the evidence and the oral testimony of
      several witnesses, the executing court concluded that no notice was
      served as prescribed under Rules 22 and 54 respectively, upon the
      judgment-debtor and since, “substantial injury” was caused to him,
      the application under Rule 90 must be allowed. The relevant
      observations are reproduced hereinbelow:
“13. […]It will be noticed that the decree was passed as far
            back as 1964. The present application was filed in 1968 more
            than 2 years after dismissal of earlier execution application
            and, therefore, for further proceedings in pursuance of a fresh
            execution application, the court was duty bound to issue
            notice and serve notice of the execution application on the
            judgment-debtor as provided for in Order 21 Rule 22 of the
            Code which contemplates inter alia that if an application for
            execution is made more than two years after the date of the
            decree, the court executing the decree shall issue a notice to
            the person against whom execution is applied for requiring
            him to show cause, on a date to be fixed, why the decree should
            not be executed against him. The last order made in the earlier
            execution application was on November 29, 1965 and the
            second execution application was filed more than two years
            thereafter i.e. in 1968. Therefore, issuing of notice under
            Order 21 Rule 22 was mandatory. The idea of issuing such a
            notice is to ascertain whether the averments as to the amount
            being claimed in the execution application are true or
            incorrect. Besides, even if the amount was due, the judgment-
            debtor could have paid it and he was deprived of this
            opportunity to clear off dues, if any, under the decree. It is
            only after the service of notice under Order 21 Rule 22 of the
            Code and failure of the judgment-debtor to pay the decretal
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 62 of 172
amount, as claimed, that the decree-holder takes recourse to
            proceedings under Order 21 Rule 54 of the Code. […]
14. It will be noticed that sub-rule (1) of Rule 54 of Order 21
            of the Code contemplates an order of prohibition to be served
            on the judgment-debtor from transferring or charging the
            property in any way first if the property sought to be sold is
            immovable property. This is for the benefit of the decree-
holder. Even at this stage if the judgment-debtor had notice
            of attachment, he could pay the balance decretal amount and
            thereafter attachment would either not be effected and if
            already effected would be vacated. Sub-rule (1-A)
            contemplates that this order shall also require the judgment-
            debtor to attend court on a specified date, to take notice of the
            date to be fixed for settling the terms of the proclamation of
            sale provided under Rule 66 of Order 21 of the Code. There
            was no evidence that the judgment-debtor was personally
            served with such a notice. Though sale proclamation after
            settlement of terms of proclamation ex parte was published in
            local newspaper Dalit Mitra but that gave wrong case
            number and wrong name of the court. There was also no
            evidence that any notice was affixed on a conspicuous part of
            the court-house or that the provisions of sub-rules (1-A) and
            (2) of Rule 54 of Order 21 of the Code were complied with.
            Rule 54 is again for safeguarding the right of the decree-
            holder as well as the judgment-debtor. By the notice the
            judgment-debtor is put on notice that his property is attached
            and would be sold unless he pays off to the decree-holder. The
            trial court observed that this notice is required to be affixed
            on a conspicuous part of the property. We do not mean that
            merely if it is not being affixed on the conspicuous part, the
            sale would be liable to be set aside but we are only
            emphasising the requirement of it being affixed on a
            conspicuous part of the property and on court house. All these
            stages give an opportunity to the judgment-debtor to pay off
            dues, if any under the decree. The proclamation of sale in this
            case was thus settled without notice to the judgment-debtor.
            The judgment-debtor had the right to participate in the
            proceedings for settlement of terms of proclamation of sale
            and atleast to know the date of sale. This is necessary since
            Order 21 Rule 89 of the Code confers again a right on any
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 63 of 172
person having interest in the property sold, to file an
            application to set aside sale on making deposit as
            contemplated by Rule 89.
15. The lower appellate court after assuming that there was
            no proper service of notice under
Order 21 Rule 54 of the
            Code of Civil Procedure
went on to the question of judgment-
            debtor's having not pleaded any substantial loss or injury. It
            will be noticed that it was a case of typical money lender who
            has evil-eye to grab the property of the judgment-debtor
            somehow or the other. He allows the first application for
            execution to be dismissed; waits for practically three years to
            file another execution application claiming a sum of Rs 350
            only; sees to it that judgment-debtor is kept ignorant of the
            proceedings in court; obtains permission to himself buy the
            property; gets the property sold for recovery of petty amount
            of Rs 649.45ps and buys the property himself. This again is a
            typical illustration of fraudulent conduct of decree-holder. In
            such cases the court will even presume loss and substantial
            injury to the judgment-debtor. In the present case there was
            evidence of value of the property and both the parties had led
            evidence in this behalf and it was too late for the lower
            appellate court to blame the executing court for recording
            evidence as to the valuation at that stage. The fraud
            permeates the whole proceedings. At no stage was the
            judgment-debtor made aware of the pending execution
            application till even the confirmation of sale and purchase of
            the property by the decree-holder himself.
17. […] It is true that now it has been specifically clarified by
            the Explanation to Rule 90 of Order 21 of the Code that “the
            mere absence of, or defect in, attachment of the property sold
            shall not, by itself, be a ground for setting aside a sale under
            this rule”. But if the judgment-debtor is kept totally ignorant
            of the execution proceedings right from the date of execution
            application till sale, it cannot be merely called a mere
            irregularity in attachment and thus of no consequence.
18. The facts of the case show that the lower appellate court
            totally missed the points which were required to be
            determined and merely by assuming that even if notice under
            Order 21 Rule 54 of the Code is not served, by virtue of
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 64 of 172
explanation to Rule 90 of Order 21 of the Code it is not a
            material irregularity or illegality to auction sale. The lower
            appellate court totally misunderstood the importance and
            efficacy of notices being served in execution proceedings
            under Order 21 Rule 22; Order 21 Rule 54(1-A) notice for
            settlement of terms of proclamation in the presence of the
            judgment-debtor which led to the finding recorded by it and
            the finding on fact in the circumstances is totally vitiated.”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
104.
In
Satyanarain Bajoria
(supra), this Court has specifically stated
      that the Explanation to Rule 90 must be understood in the right
      manner and courts must be cognizant of differentiating between a
      “mere irregularity or defect” from one that causes “substantial injury”.
      In its only in the latter scenario that one can press an application
      under Rule 90.
105. Having now understood the scope and intent underlying sub-
rule(3) of Rule 90 and the Explanation thereto, it can be said without
      any cavil of doubt that although any fraud or irregularity in the
      process of publication of an order of attachment or the lack thereof
      is broadly covered within the scope of Rule 90, yet an applicant
      must be able to prove that he has suffered substantial injury as a
      consequence of it. At the very least, the facts must be able to
      convince that substantial injury has been caused. Only then can it
      fall within the ambit of Rule 90.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                              Page 65 of 172
ii.   Questions on whether the judgment-debtor had any “saleable
            interest” over the attached/sold property cannot be brought
            under the ambit of Rule 90
106. However, the scope of Rule 90 as elaborated in the aforesaid
      paragraphs must, by no means, be read to mean that a grievance
      that the judgment-debtor did not have any title to the attached
      property, can be raised by an applicant under Rule 90. This would
      squarely fall within the scope of Rule 58 wherein one is entitled to
      make a claim or raise objections “on the ground that such property was
      not liable to attachment”. The same would be beyond the purview of
      Rule 90 also for the reason that under this rule the executing court,
      unlike Rule 58, does not have the expanded scope to decide all
      questions relating to the right, title, or interest arising between the
      parties to the proceeding.
107. There exists a fine but pertinent distinction between the questions –
      whether the attachment and/or sale of the immovable property
      could have been ordered by the executing court and whether the
      manner in which such attachment and/or sale has taken place, was
      proper or not. The former directly refers to a dispute pertaining to
      whether the immovable property could be attached or sold for the
      purpose of satisfaction of decree, whereas the latter refers to ‘how’
      such attachment or sale is effected for the purpose of satisfying the
      decree. It is only the latter which is covered by Rule 90.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 66 of 172
108. To buttress the aforesaid, we may look into the decision of High
      Court of Allahabad in
Ch. Syed Iqbal Husain v. Rameshwar Dayal
,
      reported in 1972 SCC OnLine All 288, wherein the Court held that
      the question as to whether the property was saleable in execution of
      the decree or in other words, whether the judgment-debtor had a
      saleable right in the immovable property was neither a question of
      fraud nor a question of material irregularity, and hence, would be
      beyond the scope of Order XXI Rule 90. The relevant observations
      read thus:-
“7. The next question which was pressed in this appeal was
            that the plea now raised by Iqbal Husain is barred by
            constructive res judicata. In so far as the plea that the
            property in dispute was not saleable, was not taken by Iqbal
            Husain in his objection which he filed under
Order 21, Rule
            90 of the CPC
is concerned, the reply to this question would
            come round the fact as to whether such an objection is covered
            under
Order 21, Rule 90 of the CPC
or under
Section 47
of
            the CPC
Order 21, Rule 90 of the CPC
relates to setting aside
            of a sale on the ground of a material irregularity or fraud in
            publishing or conducting if. Does the question about the
            saleability of the property relate to a question of material
            irregularity or fraud in publishing or conducting a sale? My
            reply to this question would be in the negative. There are a
            number of authorities to the effect that where the decree is
            against the asset of a deceased debtor, an objection by the
            judgment-debtor that the property belongs to him personally
            is one covered under
Section 47
of the CPC. Such a person
            cannot file a regular suit or raise such an objection under
Order 21, Rule 58 of the CPC
. The question as to whether the
            property was saleable in execution of the decree is neither a
            question of fraud nor a question of material irregularity. In
            the instant case, the only question was as to whether the
            property was the asset of the deceased debtor against whose
            asset the decree has been passed or it was the personal
            property of Iqbal Husain. Such a question, in my opinion, is
            beyond the ambit of
Order 21, Rule 90 of the CPC
.”
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                              Page 67 of 172
(Emphasis supplied)
109. This Court in
Kadiyala Rama Rao v. Gutala Kahna Rao and Others
reported in (2000) 3 SCC 87 had similarly emphasized that the issue
      of absence of a saleable interest cannot be introduced as a ground
      under Rule 90. The relevant observations are as follows:
“10. The provisions of Order 21 Rule 90 thus categorically
            envisage that material irregularity and fraud alone would
            confer jurisdiction on to the executing court to set aside the
            same. […] Needless to record here that there is no evidence of
            fraud or material irregularity, neither even an allegation in
            regard thereto. The only issue was of saleable interest for a
            period of 15 years since the deed of sale as executed by the
            Municipality of Rajamundhry in favour of the judgment-
            debtor, contained a condition that the property cannot be
            alienated by the judgment-debtor for a period of 15 years. It
            is to be noticed at this juncture that question of saleable
            interest does not come within the ambit of Order 21 Rule 90
            and as such the judgment-debtor had no locus standi to apply
            to the court for setting aside the sale. In the present factual
            context, statute recognises such a locus standi only in the
            event of material irregularity or fraud and not otherwise.
            Apart therefrom, saleable interest can only be challenged by
            the purchaser and not by the judgment-debtor since the
            purchaser's right would otherwise be clouded therewith by
            reason of there being no saleable interest in the property so
            far as the judgment-debtor is concerned. Order 21 Rule 91 is
            specific on this score and a right has been conferred on to the
            purchaser only.
14. […] The learned Single Judge erroneously proceeded on a
            certain misconception of facts as also of law by reason of the
            factum of challenge of sale being on the ground of saleability.
Order 21 Rule 90 does not envisage the issue of saleability
            and the learned Single Judge was in error in introducing such
            a concept under Order 21 Rule 90 of the Code. In any event
            as noticed above the issue of “saleable interest” can only be
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 68 of 172
agitated by the purchaser in terms of Order 21 Rule 91 and
            not in any event by the judgment-debtor. The ground of
            challenge is specific in the provision itself, namely, material
            irregularity or fraud and in the absence of any evidence or
            even an allegation in regard thereto in the petition under
            Order 21 Rule 90, question of introduction of the concept of
            no saleable interest or another opportunity to the judgment-
            debtor does not and cannot arise.”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
110. One of the principal contentions of the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively is that, since the suit property had been sold to them by
      one of the judgment-debtors, prior to the attachment of the property
      by the Executing Court, the said property could not have been
      attached and consequently, made a subject-matter in the execution
      proceedings for the satisfaction of the original decree. This is
      because, according to them, the judgement-debtor had ceased to be
      the lawful title-holder of the suit property on the date of the order
      of attachment i.e., on 08.10.1985 owing to the transfer of the suit
      property in their favour by way of the two sale deeds dated
      13.05.1985 and 24.06.1985 respectively. It is to be noted that the
      respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, wish to set-aside the sale
      conducted by the Executing Court only insofar their share is
      concerned i.e., only as regards a portion of the entire mortgaged
      property sold by way of auction and confirmed in favour of the
      appellants herein.
111. Although much has been canvassed on behalf of the respondent
      nos. 1 and 2 respectively that the auction was conducted in an
      irregular manner inasmuch, as the auction process was conducted
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 69 of 172
in secrecy, the property was undervalued and was eventually sold
      off to the relatives of the judgment debtor, yet these reasons do not
      constitute the actual grievance of the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively. In other words, there was no “substantial injury” which
      was caused to them by reason of these alleged irregularities.
112. Why an application under this rule could not have been maintained
      may be better understood from one another angle. Had the auction
      in the present case been conducted in the prescribed manner, in
      accordance with Order XXI, even then, the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively would have been aggrieved. We say so because the
      source of their grievance is the attachment and sale of the suit
      property; the source is not the manner in which the sale was
      conducted. In other words, the injury that may have been sustained
      by the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively cannot be said to stem
      from the aforesaid alleged irregularities in the sale, but rather by the
      deceptive manner in which the judgment-debtors allowed the suit
      property to be attached by the Executing Court under Rule 54 of
      Order XXI, despite the fact that one of them had already sold the
      same to the respondents nos. 1 and 2 respectively. However, we
      have already explained that an issue regarding the saleability of the
      property or the title of the judgment-debtor to the property, could
      not be brought within the ambit of Rule 90.
113. The respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively have also made averments
      that, at all stages of the execution proceedings they were
      deliberately kept in the dark. Therefore, it was not just the secretive
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 70 of 172
nature of the auction sale, the undervaluation of the property and
      the relationship of the auction-purchasers with the judgment-
      debtors that rendered the entire process doubtful, but that notices
      even during prior stages of the execution proceedings were also not
      served upon them. Hence, the auction sale was entirely bad for
      having been done at their back and expense. We have explained that
      irregularities pertaining to stages prior to the proclamation of sale
      could also very well be brought within the scope of Rule 90.
114. Let us now ascertain whether in the entire process of execution there
      was any other irregularity, for example, whether the respondent nos.
      1 and 2 were entitled to receive some notice which was not served
      upon them. The notices under Rules 22 and 66 respectively, only
      pertain either to the judgment-debtor alone (or the persons against
      whom execution is applied for) or to the judgment-debtor and the
      decree-holder. On the other hand, the notices mentioned under
      Rules 54 (pertaining to order of attachment) and 67 (pertaining to
      order of proclamation of sale) respectively, are required to be
      proclaimed by the beat of drum or any other customary mode at
      some place on or adjacent to the concerned property. Further, a copy
      of such order is to be affixed on a conspicuous part of the property,
      courthouse and the office of the Collector/Gram Panchayat.
115. It is not the case of the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, that the
      aforesaid Rules 54 and 67 respectively were not complied with or
      that there were any irregularities as regards the issuance and
      publishing of notices under these rules. They have not specifically
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 71 of 172
pleaded that there were material irregularities in the aforesaid
      context and that therefore, that they were put to any substantial
      injury. In the absence of such a specific pleading, it would not be
      open to the executing court or for us to assume the contrary. [See:
      Ram Maurya v. Kailash Nath and Others, (1999) 9 SCC 276]
116. No specific pleading is evident from the record especially as regards
      non-compliance with Rules 54 and 67 respectively and insofar as the
      other alleged irregularities specifically mentioned in the plaint are
      concerned, we have already explained as to how they could not
      have caused substantial injury to the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively. Therefore, the twin conditions for setting aside any
      sale under Rule 90, i.e., (i) material irregularity or fraud in
      publishing or conducting the sale AND (ii) substantial injury being
      sustained by reason of such irregularity or fraud, cannot be said to
      have been fulfilled. In light of the aforesaid, we are of the view that
      the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively could not have maintained
      an application under Rule 90 of
Order XXI CPC
.
117. Another aspect of the matter is also that, the order of sale declaring
      the appellants as the highest bidders was issued on 20.06.1998 and
      as per
Article 127
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
, the time-limit to prefer
      an application under Rule 90 would be sixty days from the date of
      the sale. The same would have lapsed on 20.08.1998 and any delay
      could not have been condoned. Therefore, limitation would have
      also come in the way of any application under Rule 90 that the
      respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively may have preferred. [See:
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 72 of 172
Aarifaben Yunusbhai Patel and Others v. Mukul Thakorebhai Amin
       and Others
, (2020) 5 SCC 449]


III.   Whether the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, could have
       maintained a separate suit in light of the bar envisaged under
       Rule 92(3) of
Order XXI CPC
and
Section 47
CPC respectively, and
       whether they are “third parties” as referred to under Rule 92(4) of
Order XXI CPC
?
a.   Scope and application of Rule 92 of
Order XXI CPC
118. Order XXI Rule 92 reads thus:-
“92. Sale when to become absolute or be set aside.—(1) Where
            no application is made under rule 89, rule 90 or rule 91, or
            where such application is made and disallowed, the Court
            shall make an order confirming the sale, and thereupon the
            sale shall become absolute:
Provided that, where any property is sold in execution of a
            decree pending the final disposal of any claim to, or any
            objection to the attachment of, such property, the Court shall
            not confirm such sale until the final disposal of such claim or
            objection.
(2) Where such application is made and allowed, and where,
            in the case of an application-under rule 89, the deposit
            required by that rule is made within sixty days from the date
            of sale, or in cases where the amount deposited under rule 89
            is found to be deficient owing to any clerical or arithmetical
            mistake on the part of the depositor and such deficiency has
            been made good within such time as may be fixed by the
            Court, the Court shall make an order setting aside the sale:
Provided that no order shall be made unless notice of the
            application has been given to all persons affected thereby:
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 73 of 172
Provided further that the deposit under this sub-rule may be
            made within sixty days in all such cases where the period of
            thirty days, within which the deposit had to be made, has not
            expired before the commencement
of the Code of Civil
            Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2002
.
(3) No suit to set aside an order made under this rule shall be
            brought by any person against whom such order is made.
(4) Where a third party challenges the judgment-debtor’s title
            by filing a suit against the auction-purchaser, the decree-
holder and the judgment-debtor shall be necessary parties to
            the suit.
(5) If the suit referred to in sub-rule (4) is decreed, the Court
            shall direct the decree-holder to refund the money to the
            auction-purchaser, and where such an order is passed the
            execution proceeding in which the sale had been held shall,
            unless the Court otherwise directs, be revived at the stage at
            which the sale was ordered.”
119. Order XXI Rule 92 governs the circumstances in which the sale of
      an immovable property attains finality and becomes absolute or,
      conversely, stands set-aside by the executing court. No separate
      application is required to be made to the executing court for this
      purpose.
120. Sub-rule (1) of Rule 92 clearly states that where no application is
      filed under Rules 89, 90, or 91 respectively within the prescribed
      period of limitation, or where any such application is filed but
      disallowed, the executing court shall proceed to pass an order
      confirming the sale, upon which the sale shall become absolute. In
      other words, where the remedies under Rules 89 to 91 respectively
      are not invoked or do not succeed, the sale stands confirmed.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 74 of 172
121. The proviso to sub-rule (1) of Rule 92 takes care of a situation where
      the order of sale has been passed while an application under Rule
      58 raising a claim or an objection as regards the attachment of the
      property sold, is still pending adjudication. While the process of sale
      by itself does not come to a halt solely owing to an application being
      filed under Rule 58, the executing court stands barred from
      confirming the sale until such an application under Rule 58 is finally
      disposed. This is also due to the fact that upon an order of
      confirmation of sale being passed, the same becomes absolute and
      immune from being assailed under any rule preceding rule 92.
      Therefore, it becomes the duty of the executing court to ensure that
      no application remains pending or undecided when it is making its
      decision under Rule 92(1).
122. Rule 92(1) being couched in a mandatory language reflects that the
      executing court is cast with an obligation to pass an order
      confirming the sale when the requisites mentioned therein stand
      fulfilled. When the sale becomes absolute, the executing court
      proceeds to grant a certificate under Rule 94, specifying the
      particulars of the property and the name of the purchaser.
123. On the contrary, under Rule 92(2), where an application under
      Rules 89, 90, or 91 respectively, as the case may be, is made within
      the prescribed period of limitation and allowed, the court must
      proceed to pass an order setting aside the sale.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 75 of 172
b.   The bar to a separate suit envisaged under sub-rule (3) of Rule
92.
124. Rule 93(3) prohibits any person against whom an order under sub-
rule (1) or sub-rule (2) respectively has been passed, from instituting
      a separate suit to set-aside that order. Thus, what Rule 92(3) seeks
      to achieve is to prevent the institution of separate suit by those
      persons     who      are   already   bound     by    the   order     of
      confirmation/setting aside made under sub-rule (1) or (2) of Rule 92
      respectively. They simply must not be allowed to rehash their
      grievance by way of a separate suit. The object is to accord some
      finality to the order passed under sub-rule (1) of Rule 92 (subject to
      an appeal against the order disallowing an application under 89, 90
      or 91 respectively or confirming a sale under Rule 92(1)). Moreover,
      this sub-rule to Rule 90 also fortifies that there should be some
      sanctity granted to a sale which has been conducted in execution of
      a decree in case it comes to be confirmed and it indirectly reinforces
      the weight of the words “the sale shall become absolute” occurring in
      sub-rule (1) of Rule 92.
125. On the other hand, when an order setting aside the sale has been
      passed under sub-rule (2) of Rule 92, some finality is, again,
      required to be accorded to it (subject to an appeal against the order
      allowing an application under 89, 90 or 91 respectively or setting-
      aside the sale under Rule 92(2)). It is ensured that such an order
      setting aside the sale is not subject to further litigation by way of a
      separate suit and there remains no unnecessary delay in moving
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 76 of 172
ahead with or resuming the execution process to enable the decree-
holder obtain the fruits of his decree. To put it simply, seeking to
      either set aside an order confirming the sale under sub-rule (1), or
      to set-aside an order setting aside a sale under sub-rule (2), both, by
      instituting a separate suit, is barred.
126. Sub-rule (3) only foists this bar on “any person against whom such an
      order is made”. The breath of this bar to filing a separate suit is,
      therefore, only applied to those persons against whom an order
      either confirming or setting-aside the sale, operates. The decisions
      of several High Courts have interpreted the extent of the operation
      of this bar based on the unique grounds which have been raised in
      the facts and circumstances of each case, and rightly so.
127. However, what appears to be the general rule is that - (a) any person
      who has already filed an application under Rules 89, 90 and 91
      respectively, and the same has been disallowed, cannot re-agitate
      their grievances by instituting collateral proceedings once the sale
      has been confirmed; and (b) any grievance pertaining to grounds
      which are covered under Rules 89, 90 and 91 respectively, cannot be
      brought in by way of a separate suit after the sale has been
      confirmed, especially when such a person instituting the suit was
      competent to maintain an application under Rules 89, 90 or 91
      respectively, had they preferred it within the time stipulated under
Article 127
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 77 of 172
128. With a view to elaborate on (a), it is obvious that it embodies the
      well-entrenched principle of res judicata. However, one must
      particularly look closely into how or why the application under
      Rule 90 was disallowed to contextualize when a separate suit filed
      after the confirmation of the sale, could be said to be maintainable.
      Let us look at a few illustrations in this regard:
i.   Illustration 1: Say, the application under Rule 90 was regarding
           certain alleged irregularities or fraud in publishing or
           conducting the sale which did not cause substantial injury to
           the applicant and for this reason, his application was
           disallowed. In such a scenario, the bar under sub-rule (3) of
           Rule 93 would apply to a suit which is brought by the same
           applicant to set-aside the order confirming the sale made under
           Rule 92, upon the same or similar grounds.
ii.   Illustration 2: Say, the application under Rule 90 was dismissed
           for the reason that, although the alleged irregularities or fraud
           in publishing or conducting the sale may have caused
           substantial injury to the applicant yet it was not maintainable
           because it was not preferred within the prescribed period of
           limitation i.e., it was preferred after the sale was confirmed. In
           such a situation, the bar under sub-rule (3) of Rule 92 would
           squarely apply to a separate suit preferred by the same
           applicant seeking to set-aside the order confirming the sale by
           alleging irregularities or fraud in publishing or conducting the
           sale.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 78 of 172
iii.   Illustration 3: Say, the application under Rule 90 was dismissed
            because the applicant sought to raise the issue that the
            judgment-debtor did not have any saleable interest in the
            property. This application came to be disallowed for the reason
            that such questions cannot be gone into by the executing court
            under Rule 90. Here, the bar under sub-rule (3) of Rule 92
            would not apply to a separate suit instituted by the same
            applicant challenging the title of the judgment-debtor. This is
            because the question of saleable interest was raised under the
            misapprehension that Rule 90 would cover an adjudication of
            the same. Such an applicant must not be prevented from raising
            his grievance before a competent forum, even after the sale is
            confirmed.
129. We have emphasized on placing the scenario covered under the
      third illustration beyond the bar under sub-rule (3) of Rule 92, in
      light of our exposition of law as regards Rule 90 of
Order XXI CPC
.
      Under     the   scenario   mentioned       in   third   illustration,   the
      maintainability of a separate suit would also depend on whether the
      applicant under Rule 90 was a party to the original decree or his
      representative (as understood under
Section 47
CPC) or whether
      they were a third party. It is only in the latter case where, the party
      is a third party, can one maintain a separate suit in that regard. We
      would further elaborate on the reasoning behind holding so, in the
      subsequent paragraphs of this judgment by discussing the scope of
Section 47
and also the meaning of the words “third party”
      occurring in sub-rule (4) of
Section 92
.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                              Page 79 of 172
130. On the aspect referred to in (b), we say that someone who was
      competent to prefer an application under Rules 89, 90 or 91
      respectively, but did not raise it at the appropriate time i.e., within
      the limitation period prescribed under
Article 127
of the
Limitation
      Act, 1963
, would also be covered by the bar under sub-rule (3) of
      Rule 92. This is because the relief envisaged under the aforesaid
      rules are strictly time-bound and according to
Article 127
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
, the prescribed period of limitation would start
      running “from the date of the sale” and not from the “date of knowledge
      of the sale” or “the date of knowledge of the grounds covered under those
      rules”. The decision to have the limitation period tethered to the date
      of sale itself and not making it dependent on the knowledge of any
      prospective applicant, seems to have been conscious on part of the
      legislature. It was designed to ensure that the execution proceedings
      do not take forever to grant the decree-holder the amount that he is
      entitled to and that they also not make the auction-purchaser
      endlessly wait for the sale certificate to be issued to him. Therefore,
      it would be of no avail for one to say that they didn’t have the
      requisite knowledge to file an application under Rules 89, 90 or 91
      respectively and that they must be allowed to institute a separate
      suit for the same grounds envisaged under those rules. This plea is
      especially rampant in relation to grounds envisaged under Rule 90
      and the same must be curbed. However, we must emphasize that if
      a separate suit is allowed for grounds which could be raised under
      Rule 90, this would, in effect, render the limitation period laid out
      under
Article 127
, meaningless.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 80 of 172
131. In addition to the aforesaid, it must be noted that sub-rule (1) of Rule
      93 states that “where no application is made under rule 89, rule 90, or
      rule 91”, the sale would be confirmed. If it was the intention of the
      legislature to allow grounds or grievances which could have very-
      well been brought under Rules 89, 90 or 91 respectively, to also be
      brought under a separate suit, then there would have been no
      reason for such a phrase to be inserted in the first place. If such a
      phrase was omitted by the legislature, then there may have been
      some scope for an individual to state that they could not prefer an
      application under Rules 89, 90 or 91 respectively, for the want of
      knowledge of the proceedings, and that therefore, they must be
      allowed to institute a separate suit in that regard; that otherwise
      great prejudice must be cause to such a plaintiff. However, it is
      almost as if the legislature had foreseen such a defence and
      therefore, deemed it fit to clarify that even if such an application
      under Rules 89, 90 or 91 was not preferred, the sale would be
      confirmed, and the clock would not be turned back. Having
      acknowledged that this phrase has been inserted with a specific
      purpose, we must not render it otiose by allowing the same grounds
      to be raised under a separate suit and dilute the intent that is
      manifest from a combined reading of this phrase with sub-rule (3)
      of Rule 92 i.e., that there is only a small window of time within
      which such grounds falling under Rules 89, 90 or 91 respectively,
      can be taken. In this regard, Mr. Vikas Singh would be right in
      submitting that an aggrieved party must not be able to circumvent
      or indirectly overcome the limitation prescribed for an application
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 81 of 172
under Rule 90 and be allowed to institute a separate suit on the same
      grounds.
132. To further buttress the aforesaid, we may look at the decision of the
      Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Basanta Mal v. Behari Lal and
      Another
reported in 1952 SCC OnLine Punj 115. Therein, no
      application was made under Rules 89, 90 or 91 respectively and
      consequentially, the auction sale was confirmed. After more than 10
      years, the appellant instituted a suit, which amongst other reliefs,
      prayed that the auction be set-aside for being fraudulent. The
      respondent took recourse to sub-rule (3) of Rule 92 to submit that
      the suit was barred. Finding merit in the said submission, it was
      observed that the objections which were raised in the suit fell within
      the ambit of Rule 90 and therefore, a suit in that regard would be
      barred. The relevant observations are thus:
“From paragraph 9 of the plaint it appears that the right of
            redemption was sold on the 19th of April, 1935 and that the
            sale was confirmed within rule 92 of
Order 21 of the Code of
            Civil Procedure
on the 14th of May, 1935. In paragraphs
            Nos. 10, 11 and 12 of the plaint it is stated that there was
            fraud in the matter of publishing the sale. Clearly the
            objections on which the auction sale is sought to be set aside,
            fall within rule 90 of
Order 21 of the Code of Civil Procedure
.
            If so, rule 92(3) of Order 21 bars the suit.
[…]
Article 166
of the
Limitation Act
provides that the period
            of limitation for an application to set aside an auction-sale is
            30 days from the date of the sale.
Now, the sale which is sought to be set aside took place on the
            19th of April, 1935, while the suit was brought on the 27th
            of March, 1946. […]”

                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 82 of 172
133. To the same effect, is the decision of the Bombay High Court in
Nagindas Chhotalal v. Kunversha Hormasji and Others
reported in
      1946 SCC OnLine Bom 20 wherein it was observed that when all
      the grounds set out in the plaint fell under the scope of Rule 90, and
      having failed to prefer the said application before the sale was
      confirmed, the suit would be barred under sub-rule(3) of Rule 92.
      The relevant observations are thus:
“[…] If the plaintiffs wanted to have the sale set aside on the
            ground of such an irregularity, the only course open to them
            was to make an application under O. XXI, r. 90, of the Civil
            Procedure Code. But they failed to make such an application
            and allowed the sale to be confirmed by the Collector under
            O. XXI, r. 90 [sic r. 92], sub-r. (1). There is no ground set
            out in the plaint which is not covered by O. XXI, r. 90 of the
            Civil Procedure Code. Hence the present suit is barred under
            O. XXI, r. 92, sub-r. (3) of the Civil Procedure Code and the
            learned District Judge was wrong in setting aside the
            dismissal of the suit and remanding it for further hearing.”

                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
134.
In
Siddagangaiah
(supra) as well, one of the issues pertained to
      whether the dismissal of an application under Rule 90 for default of
      appearance, could operate as a bar to the filing of a separate suit by
      the same applicant. This Court answered in the affirmative, and
      observed thus:
“23. Where an application has been filed under Rule 90
Order 21 CPC
to set aside a sale on the ground of material
            irregularity, and the sale is confirmed under Rule 92(1) of
            Order 21, the objector is precluded by virtue of the provisions
            under Order 21 Rule 92(3) from bringing a suit to set aside
            the sale on the same grounds as held in
Kalianadhahotla
            Brahmayya v. Maria Appayya Sastri [Kalianadhahotla
            Brahmayya
v. Maria Appayya Sastri, 1920 SCC OnLine
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 83 of 172
Mad 212 : ILR (1921) 44 Mad 351 : AIR 1921 Mad 121 : 62
            IC 203] , Ma Saw v. Maung Kyaw Gaung [Ma
            Saw v. Maung Kyaw Gaung, 1927 SCC OnLine Rang 58 :
AIR 1928 Rang 18] and Nand Kishore v. Sultan
            Singh [Nand Kishore v. Sultan Singh, 1925 SCC OnLine
            Lah 293 : AIR 1926 Lah 165] .
24. […] There can be restoration of the petition dismissed for
            default filed under Order 21 Rule 90 and thereafter if sale has
            been confirmed, it is provided under Order 21 Rule 92(3) that
            no suit to set aside an order made under Rule 92(1) shall be
            brought by any person against whom such an order is made.
Order 21 Rule 92(1) provides that where an application has
            been filed under Order 21 Rule 89, 90 or 91, same has been
            disallowed, the court shall make an order confirming the sale
            and thereupon the sale shall become absolute, and no suit
            shall lie as per the mandate of sub-rule (3) of Rule 92 of
Order
            21 CPC
against whom such an order is made. The order
            confirming the sale may be made either where no application
            is made at all to set aside the sale or where an application is
            made and disallowed may be that it is dismissed for default.
            No suit shall lie in either case to set aside the order confirming
            the sale. The refusal to set aside a sale is an order appealable.
            In case the court has set aside or refused to set aside a sale
            that would include a case where an application under Order
            21 Rule 89, 90 or 91 has been dismissed for default.
25. In the instant case admittedly an application was filed by
            the original plaintiff under Order 21 Rule 90 read with
            Section 47, on the ground that he was the owner of the land
            in question purchased by a sale deed dated 9-11-1974 for a
            sum of Rs 10,000 and was placed in possession. He was not
            aware of the court sale. There was no beat of drums before the
            auction was held. He was not aware of the execution
            proceedings. He was a purchaser for value. The property was
            not correctly valued. There were material irregularities in the
            conduct of the sale. Hardship would be caused in case auction
            was confirmed. Thus, prayer was made to set aside the
            auction-sale. The aforesaid application had been dismissed.
            Thus, Order 21 Rule 92(3)
CPC
would operate as a bar for
            the entertainment of the fresh suit on the ground so urged.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                  Page 84 of 172
26. The plaintiff has totally suppressed the factum of court
            auction-sale and confirmation in the plaint and did not make
            any averment that he had filed an application under Order 21
            Rule 90(1)
CPC
and it was dismissed on 31-3-1978 whereas
            the suit was filed on 19-4-1978 after 19 days of the dismissal
            of the objection and confirmation of the sale. The plaintiff has
            not questioned the auction so held by the court on the ground
            of fraud or any material irregularity. He has claimed himself
            to be a bona fide purchaser. That plea was also raised in the
            application filed under
Order 21 Rule 90 CPC
. Dismissal of
            the same would preclude him to file a fresh suit[…]”

                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
135. When no application has been made under Rule 90 and a suit is
      preferred directly to assail an auction sale conducted in execution of
      a decree, courts have attempted to adopt a balanced approach in
      deciding whether the suit was maintainable or not. While, on the
      one hand, courts have taken a strict approach in situations where
      the grounds which fall under Rules 89, 90 or 91 are being raised in
      a separate suit; on the other hand, in cases where the executing court
      did not have jurisdiction to sell the properties in the first place and
      therefore, the sale as a whole was rendered, a nullity, several
      decisions have leaned in favour of holding the separate suit
      maintainable. To curb any misuse of this leeway granted in the latter
      situation, over the period of time, the discussions reflected in the
      various law commission reports and the coming into force of the
      1976 amendment respectively, have shown us that several grounds
      which were earlier interpreted as rending the whole sale a nullity
      were clarified as only being irregularities which would fall under
      the scope of Rule 90 instead. As a result, this progressively
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 85 of 172
narrowed down the already small scope which existed for the filing
      of a separate suit.
136. An example of allowing the filing of a separate suit on the ground
      of the sale as a whole being rendered a nullity (as understood in the
      present narrow manner) would be the decision of the Bombay High
      Court in
Smt. Savitri Poto Gaonkar & Ors. v. Jaganath Cau
      Bhomkar & Ors.
reported in 2005 SCC OnLine Bom 904. Therein,
      certain properties which were neither the subject-matter of the
      execution application or the attachment nor the proclamation of
      sale, in fact a property which was not auctioned at all in reality, was
      included, for the first time, in the certificate of sale issued at the time
      of the sale confirmation under Rule 92. In other words, the executing
      court did not have any jurisdiction to sell such property at all and
      the confirmation of sale against it was void and non-est. The question
      was whether a suit as regards the setting-aside of auction vis-à-vis
      the said property would be barred due to the operation of sub-rule
      (3) of Rule 92. Holding the suit to be maintainable, it was observed
      as thus:
“21. […] Both the lower courts, not having followed the said
            procedure, in my view, have committed a grave error in
            deciding the suit pertaining to the property described in 2(f)
            on the preliminary issue by holding that it is not
            maintainable in view of the bar under Rule 92(3) of Order
            XXI of the Civil Procedure Code. While deciding the issue
            regarding the maintainability of the suit the trial court ought
            to have first considered whether the provisions of Order XXI,
            Rules 92 sub-clause (3) were applicable to the property in
            question. If there is prima facie evidence to indicate that the
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 86 of 172
said property was not the subject matter of the auction which
            was held
,
in that case
, the provisions of order XXI Rule 89,
            90, 91 and 92 would not apply at all and the Executing
            Court, therefore, would not be justified in including the
            property which is not auctioned or sold in auction and
            include such property in its order of confirmation of sale. In
            my view, therefore, it the sale itself had not taken place in
            respect of a particular property the confirmation of the sale of
            such property need not arise. Such an order could be
            challenged in the second suit on the ground that it is non est.
            All these questions, therefore, ought to have been decided by
            the trial court along with other issues which were raised by
            the parties in respect of the property described in 2(f). The
            submission of the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the
            respondents that the issue whether the suit is barred under
            the provisions of Order XXI, Rule 92(3) is a pure question of
            law and, therefore, it would be decided by the trial court as a
            preliminary issue cannot be accepted. In a given case, if the
            plaintiffs are in a position to show that the property which is
            not sold in auction is referred in the final confirmation of sale
            under Order XXI, Rule 92(1) then the said issue would
            become a mixed question of fact and law and the Court would
            be required to decide the issue after considering the factual
            aspect of the case and the oral and documentary evidence
            which is brought on record and, thereafter, decide whether the
            bar under the aforesaid section should be made applicable or
            not. If such a question which is a mixed question of fact and
            law is to be decided by the trial court then, in my view, it
            would be appropriate to decide all other issues which have
            been raised and framed by the trial court. For the aforesaid
            reasons, in my view, both the lower Courts have committed
            an error in not deciding the preliminary issue in respect of
            the property described in para 2(f) along with other issues
            and, on that ground also, the finding of both the courts below
            that the suit is not maintainable in respect of the property
            described in 2(f) is clearly illegal and the said finding will
            have to be set aside, and the matter will have to be remanded
            back to the trial court for deciding the maintainability of the
            suit vis-a-vis the property described in 2(f) along with other
            issues which have arisen in the matter.”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 87 of 172
137.
In a situation akin to that of
Savitri Poto Gaonkar
(supra), where
      the entire sale is alleged to have been without jurisdiction and
      therefore, a nullity or non-est, if the persons seeking to assail the sale
      are either the parties themselves or their representatives, the
      appropriate course of action would be to file an application under
Section 47
CPC before the executing court itself, rather than
      preferring a separate suit.
138. This is because several decisions have, time and again, emphasized
      that the recourse under
Section 47
CPC could be availed in a
      situation where the execution proceedings were itself without
      jurisdiction and a nullity. Therefore, in holding a separate suit
      maintainable, along with ensuring that it is not hit by the bar under
      Rule 92(3), one must also be mindful of the fact that the words “and
      not by a separate suit” finds mention under Section 47 as well.
      Therefore, courts have to consider the interplay between allowing
      the filing of a suit and the possibility of raising such an issue under
Section 47
CPC.
c.   The interplay between the bar to a separate suit as provided
           in Rule 92(3) of
Order XXI CPC
and the bar to a separate suit
           referred to under
Section 47
CPC.
139. Mr. Vikas Singh would submit that the Trial Court also lacked
      jurisdiction to entertain the suit filed by the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively, in light of the bar to the filing of a separate suit
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                             Page 88 of 172
envisaged under
Section 47
CPC. The questions raised in the suit,
      according to him, directly related to the execution of the original
      decree which lies under the exclusive domain of the executing court.
      He further submitted that the impugned decision had clearly
      declared the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively to be
      representatives of the judgment-debtor and therefore, the bar under
      Section 47 would squarely apply to them.
140.
Section 47
CPC reads as follows:
“47. Questions to be determined by the Court executing
            decree.—(1) All questions arising between the parties to the
            suit in which the decree was passed, or their representatives,
            and relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the
            decree, shall be determined by the Court executing the decree
            and not by a separate suit.
****
            (3) Where a question arises as to whether any person is or is
            not the representative of a party, such question shall, for the
            purposes of this section, be determined by the Court. 2

            Explanation I.—For the purposes of this section, a plaintiff
            whose suit has been dismissed and a defendant against whom
            a suit has been dismissed are parties to the suit.
Explanation II.—(a) For the purposes of this section, a
            purchaser of property at a sale in execution of a decree shall
            be deemed to be a party to the suit in which the decree is
            passed; and
(b) all questions relating to the delivery of possession of such
            property to such purchaser or his representative shall be
            deemed to be questions relating to the execution, discharge or
            satisfaction of the decree within the meaning of this section.”
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 89 of 172
141. A bare perusal of Section 47 makes it clear that all the questions
      which arise between (a) the parties to the original suit in which the
      decree was passed, or (b) their representatives, which relate to the
      execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree, shall be
      determined by the executing court and not by way of a separate suit.
      Therefore, Section 47 also envisages a bar to the filing of a separate
      suit under certain circumstances. Our attempt is to understand how
      the bar envisaged under Section 47 interacts with the bar envisaged
      under Rules 92(3) of
Order XXI CPC
; whether they are one and the
      same or whether there is a nuanced distinction between the two?
142. In our opinion, there is indeed a difference, although admittedly
      small, between the bar to the filing of a separate suit as mentioned
      under the aforesaid two provisions. On the one hand, Rule 92(3)
      states that no suit to set aside an order made under Rule 92 shall be
      filed by a person against whom such an order is made. Meaning
      thereby that, the person must, first, somehow be prevented by an
      order made under Rule 92 from filing a separate suit. We have
      explained in sufficient detail as to when and how the bar under Rule
      92(3) would apply to a separate suit. On the other hand, Section 47
      envisages a bar which is wider in scope and states that any (other)
      question pertaining to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of a
      decree which is arising between the parties to the original suit or
      their representatives, must not be raised in a separate suit. This
      enlarged scope of application of Section 47 is probably why parties,
      on several instances, file simpliciter applications under Section 47.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 90 of 172
143. What we are trying to say is that there may also arise unique
      situations where the party cannot file a separate suit to set-aside the
      order of confirmation of sale owing to the bar under Rule 92(3), yet
      they may be able to prefer an application under Section 47 to allege
      that the entire sale was without jurisdiction or a nullity. To put it
      simply, although someone could be covered under the bar to a
      separate suit referred to in Rule 92(3), yet they may very well
      maintain an application under
Section 47
CPC. For example, consider
      a scenario where a judgment-debtor has already paid the decretal
      amount but his property is nevertheless sold in the auction sale and
      the auction sale is also confirmed – he would not be able to file a
      separate suit owing to him being a person against whom the order
      confirming the sale was passed under Rule 92(1) and thereby, he
      would fall under the bar specified in Rule 92(3). However, he would
      be able to prefer an application under
Section 47
CPC on the ground
      that the entire sale was a nullity. In such a situation, both the bars to
      a suit i.e., the bar under Rule 92(3) and the bar under
Section 47
CPC,
      would interact and prevent the filing of a separate suit while
      making the option of preferring a simpliciter application under
Section 47
CPC available to him. In such cases, the appropriate
      course of action would be to prefer an application under Section 47
      and not institute a separate suit.
144. However, the aforesaid must not be construed to mean that when a
      party is unable to raise the grounds mentioned under Rules 89, 90
      or 91 respectively within the limitation as prescribed under
Article
      127
of the Act, 1963, they can file an application under Section 47
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 91 of 172
CPC
after the sale has been confirmed by reiterating those same
      grounds falling under Rules 89, 90 or 91 respectively. In such cases,
      the executing court would look at the averments made in the
      application and the grounds raised therein. Where upon an
      examination of the same, the executing court is of the opinion that
      the application under
Section 47
CPC directly relates to a specific
      rule i.e., either Rules 89, 90 or 91 respectively, then the section 47
      application would be treated as an application under Rules 89, 90 or
      91 respectively as the case may be, and it will be decided according
      to the law settled under those rules. This settled law would then
      have the consequence of such a Section 47 application being
      dismissed, for the reason that the limitation period under Rules 89,
      90 or 91 respectively has long lapsed.
145. To put it simply, one cannot overcome the limitation period
      prescribed under Rules 89, 90 or 91 respectively by filing a
      simpliciter application under Section 47 and demanding that the
      same be allowed. Only in situations wherein a party to the original
      suit or their representative wants to assail the auction sale for the
      reason that the entire auction sale was without jurisdiction and a
      nullity, can a simpliciter application under Section 47 be allowed
      after the order of confirmation of sale has been passed under Rule
92. As we have already elaborated previously, the grounds on
      which the execution sale could as a whole be rendered a nullity have
      been narrowed over the period of time and grounds which may,
      say, fall under Rule 90, could not be camouflaged as those rendering
      the entire sale a nullity or non-est.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 92 of 172
146. The reason we have endeavored to explain the aforesaid is simple -
that in order to maintain a separate suit, merely overcoming the bar
      under Rule 92(3) would not be enough, one must also satisfy the
      court that the bar under Section 47 does not apply to the separate
      suit which has been instituted.
147. The grounds which are urged in the plaint would give an idea as to
      whether it is only a material irregularity or fraud in publishing or
      conducting the sale which is sought to be raised as a ground (in
      which case the bar under Rule 92(3) would apply) or whether it is
      alleged that the entire sale was rendered a nullity. For the latter
      ground, depending on whether such a plaintiff was a party to the
      original decree or their representative, or not, the bar under Section
      47 would then apply. If such a plaintiff was indeed a party to the
      original suit in which the decree was passed or their representative,
      then the bar under Section 47 would operate against the filing of a
      separate suit. However, if the plaintiff can establish that they do not
      fall within the meaning of the phrase “parties to the suit in which the
      decree was passed” or “their representatives” and if they allege that the
      auction sale was a nullity and was done without jurisdiction, then
      they may be able to maintain a separate suit. One of these instances
      where the sale could be rendered a nullity and be held to be without
      jurisdiction is, if a “third party”, obtaining knowledge that his
      property was sold in execution of a decree after the sale was
      confirmed, asserts that the judgment-debtor never possessed any
      title over the concerned property. This aspect shall be dealt with in
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 93 of 172
more detail in the subsequent parts of our judgment, more
      particularly in the part relating to Rule 92(4) of
Order XXI CPC
.
148.
In
Ameena Bi v. Kuppuswami Naidu and Others
reported in (1993)
      2 SCC 405, this was precisely the reason behind holding the suit
      filed by the plaintiff to not be barred by Section 47. Therein, the
      plaintiff was neither a party to the original suit nor a representative
      and she alleged that the sale was a nullity and not binding on her.
      Therein, the appellant-plaintiff and her uncle were amongst the
      heirs to her father’s estate. The uncle, upon being appointed as a
      receiver by the High Court in the partition suit, had leased some
      properties belonging to the estate in favour of the respondent no. 1
      and had obtained an advance for the same. Before the partition suit
      came to be decreed, the respondent no. 1 filed a suit for recovery of
      the advance amount paid by him to the uncle. This money suit filed
      against the uncle was decreed with a direction that such advance
      amount be adjusted from the uncle’s share to the deceased estate
      upon partition. However, the respondent no. 1, in execution of his
      money decree, got attached and sold the properties which were
      allotted to the plaintiff in the partition suit. All the while, the
      plaintiff was kept in the dark about the said execution proceedings.
      Thus, the plaintiff had instituted a separate suit for possession by
      stating that the sale was a nullity and not binding on her.
149.
In
Ameena Bi
(supra), amongst several questions, the question
      whether the money decree was the personal liability of the uncle or
      a liability against the estate as a whole, was crucial to the issue of
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 94 of 172
whether the separate suit was hit by Section 47. This was because in
      the former situation, the plaintiff would not be a representative and
      in the latter she would be. If the money decree created a liability as
      against the estate, then the appropriate course of action would have
      been to prefer an application under Section 47. However, it was held
      that the liability was the personal liability of the uncle. In light of the
      same, the plaintiff neither being a party to the money suit nor a
      representative of the uncle, the separate suit was held to be
      maintainable.        The   relevant   observations       are   reproduced
      hereinbelow:
“15. We have given our anxious considerations to the
            submissions made on behalf of the appellant and find lot of
            merit in the same. It is clear from the extract of the decree of
            the suit register (Ext. A-7) that the decree was personally
            against the second defendant, Mohammad Sheriff only and
            also against defendant 1 to the extent of second defendant's
            family properties in the hands of the Receiver. It is thus clear
            that no decree had been passed against the estate of deceased
            S.M. Sheriff. The plaintiff/appellant, Ameena Bi, got her
            rights from her father. She never got any right from
            Mohammad Sheriff in the partition decree. At the stage when
            the execution was applied for, the court Receiver had ceased
            to exist and the final decree had been passed in the partition
            suit allotting the disputed properties to Ameena Bi. Ameena
            Bi was never a party to the suit filed by Kuppuswami Naidu.
            Even the decree which was passed against defendant 1 was to
            the extent of the family properties of Mohammad Sheriff in
            the hands of the Receiver and not the properties of the
            deceased S.M. Sheriff in the hands of the Receiver.
16. We are thus of the view that the High Court erred in
            construing as if the money decree had been passed against the
            estate of deceased S.M. Sheriff. Admittedly Ameena Bi was
            not a party to the suit. Since Ameena Bi was neither a party
            to the suit nor any decree was passed against the estate of
            deceased S.M. Sheriff, no question arose of Ameena Bi taking
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 95 of 172
proceedings under
Section 47
of the Code of Civil Procedure
            in the suit filed by Kuppuswami Naidu (O.S. No. 208 of
            1955). We thus set aside the finding of the High Court on the
            construction of Ext. A-7, and uphold the construction placed
            by the trial court and the lower appellate court.”

                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
150. In the present case, Mr. Vikas Singh would be right in submitting
      that the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, have been identified
      as being "representatives” of the judgment-debtors by the
      impugned decision owing to them being pendente lite transferees of
      the judgment-debtor. In other words, the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively, had stepped into the shoes of their vendor who was a
      judgment-debtor. The relevant observations by the High Court are
      reproduced as follows:
“Let us now examine as to whether plaintiffs are
            representatives of the Judgment Debtor or not.
Section 47
of the Code of Civil Procedure lays down that all
            questions arising between the parties to the suit in which the
            decree was passed, or their representatives, and relating to the
            execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree, shall be
            determined by the Court, executing the decree and not by a
            separate suit. The subsequent purchasers after the decree
            passed are representative of the Judgment Debtor. Plaintiffs
            have stepped into the shoes of Judgment Debtors. Counsel for
            the plaintiffs-respondent is not correct in contending that the
            plaintiffs are not representatives of the Judgment Debtor.”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 96 of 172
151. In view of the above finding of the High Court, it is difficult to reject
      the contention of Mr. Vikas Singh, that the separate suit would be
      hit by the bar envisaged under Section 47 as well.
152. To get more clarity as regards the position of law pertaining to who
      can prefer a separate suit by alleging that the entire sale was without
      jurisdiction and a nullity, after the confirmation of sale, we must
      necessarily explain the scope and ambit of Rules 92(4) and 92(5)
      respectively, with special focus on who is a “third party” as referred
      to in Rule 92(4).
d.   The scope and meaning of the term “third party” under Rule
           92(4), the option of filing a separate suit being made available
           to such third parties and its interplay with Rule 58 of
Order
           XXI CPC
.
153. It was submitted on behalf of the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively, that Rule 92(4) permits a “third party” to challenge the
      title of a judgment-debtor by filing a suit against the auction-
      purchaser, and joining the decree-holder along with the judgment-
      debtor as necessary parties in such suit. It was stated that since the
      respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively fall within the term “third
      parties” as given under Rule 92(4) of Order XXI, and the essentials
      of this provision are fulfilled, their suit would be maintainable. We
      find ourselves, yet again, unable to agree with this submission of
      the learned Senior Counsel for the respondents for the reasons that
      we shall assign hereinafter.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 97 of 172
154. To understand the import of the term “third party” let us look at a
      pertinent observation made by the Law Commission in its 54th
      Report (Vol 1, pg. 172) which reads that – “Attachment may be
      followed by an application for its removal by a third party, and the present
      rules require a summary inquiry and order, which may be followed by a
      suit to establish the right denied in the summary proceedings”. This
      referred to the scheme of Rule 58 as it existed prior to the 1976
      Amendment. However, the reason behind our drawing attention to
      this observation is the acknowledgment that a third party asserting
      their title would be able to raise the grievance that his property has
      been wrongly attached in the execution proceedings under Rule 58.
      The third party referred herein, in the context of Rule 58, has some
      significance as regards how the same term must be interpreted
      under Rule 92(4) as well.
155. With particular reference to Rule 92, the 54th Report of the Law
      Commission of India, had recommended the insertion of sub-rules
      (4) and (5) respectively, to address a situation where a sale
      conducted by the executing court is subsequently found to be a
      nullity for want of title, more particularly, where the defect in title
      is discovered after confirmation of the sale in a suit instituted by a
      “third party”. The objective of sub-rule (5) is to reimburse the
      auction purchaser, and the liability for such reimbursement is
      placed upon the decree-holder because it was at his instance that the
      sale was held. The Report reads thus:-
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 98 of 172
“21.48-D. Recommendation.—Whatever be the correct view
            on the existing language, it appears to us that something
            should be done to improve the position. No doubt, to permit
            the auction-purchaser to sue for refund from the decree-
            holder, is to add to the troubles of the decree-holder and thus
            to delay execution. But that seems to be the only possible
            alternative. As between the decree-holder and the auction-
            purchaser, if someone has to suffer, the former should suffer.
It may not be feasible for the court to inquire into the title of
            the judgment-debtor (at the time of the proclamation), in an
            elaborate manner; but that does not answer the basic
            question, namely, when a sale held by a Court and
            culminating in a certificate issued by the court is held to be a
            nullity for want of title, by reason of a defect discovered after
            expiry of the period for making objections under R. 91 etc. is
            it justice to dispose of the purchaser's grievance by saying
            that the purchaser purchased the property at his peril? The
            decree-holder should reimburse him for the loss suffered by
            him, because it is the decree-holder at whose instance the sale
            was held. The abstract principle that there is no warranty at
            court sales fails to yield a just result in this case.
The auction-purchaser should have a right to sue the decree-
            holder. Where a third party challenges the judgment-debtor's
            title by filing a suit against the auction-purchaser the decree-
            holder and judgment-debtor should be necessary parties and
            in that suit the court shall direct the decree-holder to refund
            the money to the auction-purchaser.
If such a decree is passed, the original execution proceedings
            shall be revived at the stage where the sale was ordered, unless
            the court otherwise directs. This provision is necessary to
            avoid complications as to limitation.
21.49. Recommendation.—We, therefore, recommend that
            the following sub-rules should be added to Or. 21 R. 92:
“(5) Where a third party challenges the judgment-
              debtor's title by filing a suit against the auction-
              purchaser, the decree-holder and the judgment-debtor
              shall be necessary parties to the suit;
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 99 of 172
(6) If the suit referred to in sub-r. (5) is decreed, the
               court shall, direct the decree-holder to refund the money
               to the auction-purchaser and where such an order is
               passed, the execution proceedings in which the sale had
               been held shall, unless the court otherwise directs, be
               revived at the stage at which the sale was ordered.”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
156. No doubt, the aforesaid discussion of the Law Commission as
      regards Rule 92 stemmed from a different lacunae in law that they
      were trying to cure. However, in the aforesaid observations too, it is
      very clear that only upon a suit for title instituted by a “third party”
      which comes to be decreed in the third party’s favour, would the
      auction-purchaser be entitled to a refund of his purchase money and
      the execution proceedings would be revived at the stage at which
      the sale was ordered, unless otherwise directed. While the refund of
      money to the auction-purchaser is mandatory, the revival of the
      execution proceedings is subject to any other direction from the
      court. This recommendation is what has been adopted verbatim and
      have become Rules 92(4) and 92(5) respectively, as we see them
      today.
157. We may, with a view to obviate any confusion, clarify that Rule
      92(4) does not create or confer a right to challenge the judgment
      debtor’s title. It only prescribes a mandatory procedural
      requirement i.e., where a third party files a suit asserting his title
      over the property, he must necessarily implead the auction-
      purchaser, the decree-holder, and the judgment-debtor as parties to
      the suit. The sub-rule is couched in mandatory terms because once
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 100 of 172
the sale has attained finality under Rule 92(1), any decree passed in
      a separate suit without the presence of all the affected parties would
      be ineffective. To put it simply, Rule 94(4) is not a jurisdiction-
      conferring provision; it merely lays down the condition as to who
      must be made parties to such a separate suit.
158. The interplay of Rules 92(1) and 92(2) respectively, indicates that
      such a suit under Rule 92(4) can arise only after an order confirming
      the sale under Rule 92(1) has been passed. We say so because a third
      party would otherwise be able to challenge the title of the judgment-
      debtor under Rule 58 instead, by raising a claim or an objection as
      regards the attachment of the property in the execution
      proceedings. In other words, the option to assert his title over the
      attached property is available to the third party under Rule 58 until
      the sale comes to be confirmed. If knowledge that his property has
      been attached and sold in an unrelated execution proceeding, has
      been acquired by a third party after the sale has been confirmed
      under Rule 92(1), then the only remedy available to him would be
      to file a suit challenging the judgment-debtor’s title to the property,
      alleging the sale to be a nullity. Here, although he is challenging the
      title of the judgment-debtor to the property in question, yet his suit
      would be instituted against the auction-purchaser because the sale
      has become absolute in favour of the auction purchaser. Conversely,
      if the sale is set-aside under Rule 92(2), there would be no reason for
      a third party to institute a separate suit to assert his title, since the
      remedy to file an objection under Rule 58 would be re-opened to
      him.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 101 of 172
159. Therefore, what then becomes obvious is that, a third party referred
      to in Rule 92(4) has no other option to challenge the judgment-
      debtor’s title to the property sold, within the realm of the execution
      proceedings, owing to the sale being confirmed. This is the reason
      behind allowing such a person to institute a separate suit for the
      same. The general principle is that all matters pertaining to the
      execution, discharge and satisfaction of the decree be kept under the
      umbrella of the executing court. A deviation from the above is
      justified when the legislative scheme does not envisage an adequate
      and proper remedy within the scheme of Order XXI and
Section 47
CPC respectively. We have already emphasized that Rule 92(4) is
      not a jurisdiction conferring provision. It is merely a reflection of the
      right to institute a suit which exists with the third party who is
      unable to address his grievances before the executing court.
160. With a view to demarcate when such a right of a third party to file
      a separate suit would arise with respect to the property which is the
      subject matter of execution proceedings, we find it necessary to
      briefly discuss the scheme underlying Rule 58 of
Order XXI CPC
which reads as follows:
“58. Adjudication of claims to or objections to
            attachment of, property.—(1) Where any claim is
            preferred to, or any objection is made to the attachment of,
            any property attached in execution of a decree on the ground
            that such property is not liable to such attachment, the Court
            shall proceed to adjudicate upon the claim or objection in
            accordance with the provisions herein contained:
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                              Page 102 of 172
Provided that no such, claim or objection shall be
            entertained—
(a) where, before the claim is preferred or objection is made,
            the property attached has already been sold; or
(b) where the Court considers that the claim or objection was
            designedly or unnecessarily delayed.
(2) All questions (including questions relating to right, title
            or interest in the property attached) arising between the
            parties to a proceeding or their representatives under this rule
            and relevant to the adjudication of the claim or objection,
            shall be determined by the Court dealing with the claim or
            objection and not by a separate suit.
(3) Upon the determination of the questions referred to in
            sub-rule (2), the Court shall, in accordance with such
            determination,— (a) allow the claim or objection and release
            the property from attachment either wholly or to such extent
            as it thinks fit; or (b) disallow the claim or objection; or (c)
            continue the attachment subject to any mortgage, charge or
            other interest in favour of any person; or (d) pass such order
            as in the circumstances of the case it deems fit.
(4) Where any claim or objection has been adjudicated upon
            under this rule, order made thereon shall have the same force
            and be subject to the same conditions as to appeal or otherwise
            as if it were a decree.
(5) Where a claim or an objection is preferred and the Court,
            under the proviso to sub-rule (I), refuses to entertain it, the
            party against whom such order is made may institute a suit
            to establish the right which he claims to the property in
            dispute; but, subject to the result of such suit, if any, an order
            so refusing to entertain the claim or objection shall be
            conclusive. ”
161. What is relevant from the aforesaid, for the purposes of our
      discussion is that, Rule 58 uses the words “where any claim is preferred
      to, or any objection is made to the attachment” along with the words “on
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                  Page 103 of 172
the ground that such property is not liable to such attachment”
       respectively. This would indicate that a third party, i.e., a party who
       was alien to the proceedings in the original suit in which the decree
       was passed, could also prefer a claim or file an objection under Rule
       58 against the attachment of the property by stating that the
       judgment-debtor does not have title to such property. By virtue of
       Rule 58(2) (in its amended form), all questions including those
       relating to the right, title or interest in the property attached could
       be looked into by the executing court. A separate suit in this regard,
       at this stage of the execution proceeding, is barred and this is
       indicated from the words “and not by a separate suit” occurring in
       Rule 58(2).
162.   The proviso to Rule 58(1) states that no claim or objection under
       Rule 58 shall be entertained by the executing court under two
       circumstances – (a) where the property attached has already been
       sold before the claim is made or the objection is preferred under
       Rule 58, or (b) where the executing court considers that the claim or
       objection preferred was designedly or unnecessarily delayed. The
       use of the word “shall” in the proviso indicates that at least insofar
       as (a) is concerned i.e., when the attached property has already been
       sold, the executing court has to mandatorily dismiss the application
       made under Section 58. When the executing court disallows an
       application under Rule 58 by invoking clause (a) of the proviso to
       Rule 58(1), Rule 58(5) comes into the picture.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 104 of 172
163. Rule 58(5) states that when a claim or an objection is not entertained
      owing to the mandatory nature of clause (a) of the proviso to Rule
      58(1), then such a party against whom this order under Rule 58 was
      made, may institute a separate suit to establish the right which he
      claims to the property that is the subject matter of attachment in the
      execution proceedings. However, during the period in which such
      a separate suit, if any, is being decided by the court of competent
      jurisdiction, the order refusing to entertain the claim or objection
      made under Rule 58 would be conclusive insofar as the progress of
      the execution proceedings are concerned.
164. What is evident from the aforesaid reading is that the executing
      cannot entertain an application under Rule 58 once the stage of sale
      has already passed. In other words, it would only be competent to
      decide an application under Rule 58, at stages prior to the
      occurrence of the sale. The moment the property comes to be sold,
      the recourse available to any third party would be to institute a
      separate suit, as so specifically elaborated under Rule 58(5).
165. Having said so, the words “the property attached has already been sold”
      under clause (a) of the proviso to Rule 58 could give rise to some
      interpretational ambiguity. In other words, it is unclear as to
      whether the legislature intended this to refer to a stage when the
      order of sale has been passed or whether it refers to a stage when
      the order of confirmation of sale has been passed under Rule 92(1).
      There is, otherwise, a very stark distinction between these two
      orders - the former refers to the order which creates an opportunity
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 105 of 172
to resort to Rules 89, 90 and 91 respectively to set-aside the sale, and
      the latter refers to the order which arises after the applications made
      under Rules 89, 90 and 91 respectively have been decided or when
      the time for making those applications has lapsed. Therefore, there
      is a significant gap between these two orders, which is, at the least
      a minimum of 60 days as prescribed under
Article 127
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
.
166. Let us understand why a conscientious and careful interpretation of
      the words “the property attached has already been sold” is of utmost
      importance here. One possible way of interpreting it would be to
      say that it refers to the order of sale which is passed once the
      property has been auctioned and the auction-purchaser has been
      chosen. To be more specific, it is that order after the passing of which
      the recourse to Rules 89, 90 and 91 respectively would become
      available. However, with such an interpretation, the consequence
      would be that, if an application under Rule 58 is preferred even one
      day after the order of sale has been made, then such an application
      would come to be rejected in accordance with clause (a) of the
      proviso to Rule 58(1) and Rule 58(5) would be set in motion,
      whereby the said applicant could institute a separate suit. To put it
      simply, this would mean that the option to institute a suit for a third
      party arises from the moment the order of sale has been passed and
      he needn’t wait until the sale has been confirmed. Therefore, in that
      period between the order of sale and the order confirming sale,
      which can be 60 days or more (as we had stated previously), any
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 106 of 172
third party would be able to file a separate suit for a claim or
      objection which he could otherwise agitate under Rule 58.
167. Another possible way of interpreting the aforesaid phrase would be
      to understand it to mean an order of confirmation of sale as referred
      to in Rule 92(1). Reading it in such a manner would mean that the
      option of filing a suit would be activated or, to be precise, re-
      activated for a third party, the moment the sale has been confirmed
      under Rule 92(1). The benefit of this view would be that, during the
      period between the order of sale and the order confirming the sale,
      the third party asserting that the judgment-debtor does not have
      title to the attached property could still move the executing court in
      that regard under Rule 58. This view would also be in consonance
      with the plain reading of Rule 92(4) which states that when a “third
      party” challenges the judgment-debtor’s title, after the sale has been
      confirmed, he must institute the same against the auction-purchaser
      and must implead the decree-holder and judgment-debtor as
      necessary parties. This would cohesively tie the rationale in Rule
      58(5) with that in Rule 92(4) and infer that they allude to the same
      underlying suit which is instituted after the sale has been confirmed
      under Rule 92(1), wherein a third party asserts his title amongst
      other rights.
168. Furthermore, Rule 92(1) also requires the executing court to halt the
      confirmation of sale if an application under Rule 58 is pending. This
      should ideally be inferred as also referring to any application under
      Rule 58 which has been instituted after the order of sale has been
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 107 of 172
passed and is pending adjudication before the executing court,
      unless any contrary intention is apparent. We do not see any reason
      why we must deviate from this view.
169. The         following          visualizes      the     consequences         of     the     two
      interpretations:
(i)       Interpretation (A)
                                                           Order of
                                                           confirmation
                                    Order of sale          of sale


  Progress of
  the execution
  proceedings.




             Recourse to a “third          Recourse to a “third     Recourse to a “third party” to
             party” to assert his          party” to assert his     assert his title through a
             title through an              title through a          separate suit against the
             application under             separate suit owing to   auction purchaser, as
             Rule 58                       the mandatory            indicated under Rule 92(4)
                                           dismissal of the
                                           application under
                                           Rule 58 under clause
                                           (a) of the proviso to
                                           Rule 58(1) and the
                                           operation of 58(5)




      (ii)      Interpretation (B)


                                                           Order of
                                                           confirmation
                                    Order of sale          of sale


  Progress of
  the execution
  proceedings.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                                Page 108 of 172
Recourse to a “third party”
Recourse to a “third party” to   to assert his title through a
                    assert his title through an      separate suit against the
                    application under Rule 58        auction purchaser, as
                                                     indicated under Rule 92(4)
                                                     which would be in
                                                     consonance with Rule
                                                     58(5)
170. What the aforesaid further makes clear is that, in the former
      interpretation, the effect would be that the recourse to file a separate
      suit would be made available to a third party at a relatively earlier
      stage of the execution proceedings and in the latter interpretation, it
      would be available at a later stage. We are of the opinion that the
      latter interpretation of the words “the property attached has already
      been sold” i.e., to understand it as referring to the order confirming
      the sale under Rule 92(1) would ensure better coherence and
      synergy in the overall scheme of
Order XXI CPC
.
171. Such a view insofar as Rule 58(1) and its proviso are concerned, has
      also been taken by the decision of this Court in
Kancherla
      Lakshminarayana v. Mattaparthi Syamala and Others
reported in
      (2008) 14 SCC 258 wherein it was held that the word “sold” used in
      Rule 58(1) proviso (a) would mean complete sale including the
      confirmation of auction as under Rule 92(1). Therefore, objections
      made under Rule 58 before the date on which the sale was
      confirmed, would be tenable. The relevant observations are
      reproduced as thus:
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                  Page 109 of 172
4. […] The High Court has thus considered the question of
            the stage at which the objection could be raised and has dealt
            with that such objection would not be tenable on the backdrop
            of the language of clause (a) of the proviso to Order 21 Rule
58. The stress is thus on the stage at which the objection could
            be raised (or the time when the objection is raised). These
            concurrent orders are now in challenge before us.
-xxx-
16. […] It is our considered opinion that in this case the sale
            was not confirmed and that made a substantial difference.
            The word “sold” in clause (a) of the proviso to Rule 58 has to
            be read meaning thereby a complete sale including the
            confirmation of the auction. That not having taken place, it
            cannot be said that the objection by the appellant was ill-
            founded or untenable as has been held by the High Court and
            the trial court.
(Emphasis supplied)
172. Therefore, the decision in
Kancherla Lakshminarayana
(supra)
      supports the view that the words “sold” under Rule 58(1) proviso
(a) must be understood to mean confirmation of sale under Rule
      92(1). This decision is key in clarifying the “time factor” in
      challenging the sale i.e., what remedy would be available to a third
      party at what time.
173. Having arrived at the aforesaid interpretation of the word “sold”
      under Rule 58(1) proviso (a) and having held that the underlying
      suit referred to in Rule 58(5) and Rule 92(4) respectively is one and
      the same, the interpretation of the term “third party” under Rule
      92(4) must also be in consonance with Rule 58.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 110 of 172
174. Therefore, the term “third party” under Rule 92(4) would mean a
      party other than the judgment-debtor, decree-holder or the auction-
      purchaser and would refer to a party who has not had his right, title
      or interest vis-à-vis the property in question adjudicated under Rule
      58, Rule 97 or Rule 99 of
Order XXI CPC
respectively or has not had
      the opportunity to do so.
175. The reason why we have included Rules 97 and 99 respectively
      within this ambit will become more apparent after the discussion
      we have undertaken in the subsequent paragraphs of this judgment
      on Rules 99 to 104 respectively. For a specific kind of third parties
      i.e., third parties who are in possession and who come to be
      dispossessed,
Order XXI CPC
, through Rule 99 has already
      envisaged a remedy, which will be shortly elaborated upon.
      Therefore, there might be no need for such third parties in
      possession who are able to avail a remedy under Rules 97 or 99 to
      also be allowed to institute a separate suit as indicated under Rule
      92(4).
176. However, to put it very simply, the term “third party” under Rule
      92(4) would refer to a party who is extraneous to the original suit
      proceedings and the proceedings under
Order XXI CPC
, and who
      either has not had his right, title or interest adjudicated or having
      the opportunity to have his right, title or interest adjudicated, has
      not availed such a remedy within the required time.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                         Page 111 of 172
177. A few High Courts have taken the view that the words “third party”
      under Rule 92(4) must be read to mean any third person who is
      asserting an independent title to the property. However, such a
      reading would keep at bay those persons who have bought the
      property from the judgment-debtor but before the institution of the
      suit i.e., bona fide purchasers for value who are not hit by the
      doctrine of lis pendens. The unintentional bar to the filing of a suit by
      such purchasers who wish to establish their right, title and interest
      to the property must not be a by-product of the interpretation of the
      term “third party” in Rule 92(4). The legislature has consciously
      used the term “party” instead of “person” to reinforce that those
      individuals who have not been party to the original suit
      proceedings or party to the execution proceedings and have not had
      the opportunity to avail any remedy both in the original suit and in
      the execution proceedings, must be given the option of filing a
      separate suit.
178. Such an interpretation of the term “third party” would also
      naturally refer to those parties who are not covered under
Section
      47
CPC. In other words, parties to the original proceedings in which
      the decree was passed and their representatives could never fall
      under the aforesaid interpretation of the term “third party”. As a
      consequence, synergy would also be established between
Section 47
CPC and Rule 92(4), especially the words “and not by a separate suit”
      occurring in Section 47. The third parties referred to under Rule
      92(4) could never be said to comprise those persons who could
      prefer an application under
Section 47
CPC. To put it simply, the
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 112 of 172
suit referred to in Rule 92(4) cannot be resorted to by someone to
      overcome the bar to a suit under
Section 47
CPC for the reason that
      such persons falling within the scope of
Section 47
CPC could never
      be “third parties”.
179. To recapitulate, once the sale is confirmed, if a party seeks to set the
      sale aside on grounds that they could have taken under Rules 89, 90
      or 91 respectively, the defence that they didn’t obtain knowledge of
      the grounds falling under those rules at a time before the sale came
      to be confirmed would not be reason enough to allow the filing of a
      separate suit. Such a suit would be hit by the bar to a suit under Rule
      92(3). However, there is some leeway, albeit very small, for a party
      to assail the sale which was made in execution of a decree even after
      the sale comes to be confirmed. If it is their case that the entire sale
      was without jurisdiction and a nullity and the person taking such
      an objection is either a party to the original decree or their
      representatives, then their remedy would ideally exist under
Section 47
CPC. They would not be able to prefer a separate suit
      owing to the bar to a separate suit under
Section 47
CPC. On the
      other hand, if they are neither parties to the original decree nor their
      representatives, then the bar to a suit under Section 47 would also
      not operate against them and they would be able to file a separate
      suit alleging that the entire sale was a nullity. One of those
      predominant grounds wherein such a person not falling with the
      scope of
Section 47
CPC can claim that the entire sale was without
      jurisdiction or a nullity is that the judgment-debtor did not have any
      title over the property which came to be sold. Such a specific
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 113 of 172
situation has been addressed under Rule 92(4) where guidance is
      given as to whom such a suit must be filed against and who would
      be the necessary parties under such proceedings. It is of utmost
      importance to ensure that such a third party who has instituted the
      separate suit could not get his rights adjudicated under Rule 58 for
      the want of knowledge of the execution proceedings at the relevant
      time. Otherwise, third parties could derail the outcome of the
      execution proceedings by simply waiting to institute collateral
      proceedings when they very well had an opportunity to file an
      application under Rule 58.
180. From the above exposition of law, it is limpid that the respondent
      nos. 1 and 2 respectively were not “third parties” under Rule 92(4).
      This is because they were representatives of the judgment-debtor as
      envisaged under
Section 47
CPC having purchased the suit
      property during the pendency of the proceedings. Although the
      respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively had instituted a suit against the
      auction purchaser-appellants, the decree holder-bank, and the
      judgment-debtors respectively yet owing to the reason that they are
      not third parties, their suit could not be said to be maintainable.
IV.   Whether the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively could have
      obtained any relief under Rule 99 of
Order XXI CPC
and in the
      absence of availing such remedy, could their suit be said to be not
      maintainable?
181. It was submitted on behalf of the appellants that the respondent nos.
1 and 2 respectively could have raised their objections regarding the
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 114 of 172
alleged irregularities in the auction sale during the execution
      proceedings itself by filing an application under Rule 99 r/w Rule
      101 of
Order XXI CPC
. Further, it was submitted that in preferring
      not to do so, the filing of a separate suit must also be disallowed. We
      shall now discuss whether the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively
      could have filed such an application.
182. At the outset, we must clarify that any irregularity or fraud in the
      publishing or conducting of the auction sale cannot be raised even
      in a proceeding under Rule 99, as such grounds lie within the
      exclusive domain of the application under Rule 90. However, in an
      application under Rule 99, a dispossessed person could allege that
      the entire sale conducted by the executing court was a nullity for the
      reason that the judgment-debtor did not have any title over the said
      property.
183. Rule 99 of
Order XXI of the CPC
reads thus:
“99. Dispossession by decree-holder or purchaser.—(1)
            Where any person other than the judgment-debtor is
            dispossessed of immovable property by the holder of a decree
            for the possession of such property or, where such property
            has been sold in execution of a decree, by the purchaser
            thereof, he may make an application to the Court complaining
            of such dispossession.
(2) Where any such application is made, the Court shall
            proceed to adjudicate upon the application in accordance with
            the provisions herein contained.”
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                             Page 115 of 172
184. We also find it apposite to reproduce Rules 100, 101 and 102 of
Order XXI CPC
respectively, since they are closely connected with
      Rule 99 referred to hereinabove. These rules read thus:
“100. Order to be passed upon application complaining
            of dispossession.—Upon the determination of the questions
            referred to in rule 101, the Court shall, in accordance with
            such determination,—
(a) make an order allowing the application and directing that
            the applicant be put into the possession of the property or
            dismissing the application; or
(b) pass such other order as, in the circumstances of the case,
            it may deem fit.
101. Question to be determined.—All questions
            (including questions relating to right, title or interest in the
            property) arising between the parties to a proceeding on an
            application under rule 97 or rule 99 or their representatives,
            and relevant to the adjudication of the application, shall be
            determined by the Court dealing with the application and not
            by a separate suit and for this purpose, the Court shall,
            notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any
            other law for the time being in force, be deemed to have
            jurisdiction to decide such questions.
102. Rules not applicable to transferee lite pendente.—
            Nothing in rules 98 and 100 shall apply to resistance or
            obstruction in execution of a decree for the possession of
            immovable property by a person to whom the judgement-
            debtor has transferred the property after the institution of the
            suit in which the decree was passed or to the dispossession of
            any such person. Explanation.—In this rule, “transfer”
            includes a transfer by operation of law.”
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 116 of 172
a.      Essential ingredients for the invocation of Rule 99
185. On a reading of the aforesaid, it can be seen that the necessary
      requirements for the purpose of invoking Rule 99 of Order XXI are
      as follows:
i.      The person making an application, i.e., the applicant under
               Rule 99, must be ‘any person’ other than the judgment debtor;
        ii.     Such an applicant must be ‘dispossessed’ from the
                immovable property;
iii.     The dispossession of such a person must be caused by:
a.   the holder of a decree for the possession of such an
                     immovable property; or
                b.   the purchaser, in case the immovable property is sold
                     pursuant to the execution of the decree.
186. The condition precedent for making an application under Rule 99
      maintainable is that the person preferring such an application must
      be dispossessed from the immovable property, and that he must be
      someone other than the judgment debtor. This dispossession must
      occur as a direct consequence of or in the course of execution of said
      original decree. Thus, an applicant under Rule 99 needs to establish
      two things: first, that he had possession prior to the execution of the
      decree; and secondly, that he was dispossessed by the decree holder,
      or the auction purchaser, as the case may be, during the execution
      of the decree. When such an application complaining of his
      dispossession is made, all questions including the questions relating
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 117 of 172
to the right, title and interest of the property can be decided by an
      executing court.
187.
Insofar as Rule 99 of
Order XXI CPC
is concerned, the decision of
      this Court in
Brahmdeo Chaudhary v. Rishikesh Prasad Jaiswal
      and Another
reported in (1997) 3 SCC 694 observed that if a stranger
      to the original decree is dispossessed of the suit property relating to
      which he claims any right, title or interest, then his remedy would
      lie in filing an application under Rule 99 of
Order XXI CPC
. In
      deciding such an application, the executing court would then
      determine whether his dispossession was illegal and whether
      possession must be restored to such an applicant by way of an order
      under Rule 100. The relevant observations are reproduced
      hereinbelow:
“8. A conjoint reading of Order 21, Rules 97, 98, 99 and 101
            projects the following picture:
[…]

            (2) If for any reason a stranger to the decree is already
            dispossessed of the suit property relating to which he claims
            any right, title or interest before his getting any opportunity
            to resist or offer obstruction on the spot on account of his
            absence from the place or for any other valid reason then his
            remedy would lie in filing an application under
Order 21,
            Rule 99 CPC
claiming that his dispossession was illegal and
            that possession deserves to be restored to him. If such an
            application is allowed after adjudication then as enjoined by
            Order 21, Rule 98 [sic Rule 100], sub-rule (1)
CPC
the
            executing court can direct the stranger applicant under
            Order 21, Rule 99 to be put in possession of the property or
            if his application is found to be substance-less, it has to be
            dismissed. Such an order passed by the executing court
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 118 of 172
disposing of the application one way or the other under Order
            21, Rule 98 [sic Rule 100], sub-rule (1) would be deemed to
            be a decree as
laid down by
Order 21, Rule 103 and would be
            appealable before appropriate appellate forum. But no
            separate suit would lie against such orders as clearly enjoined
            by Order 21, Rule 101.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
188.
In
H. Seshadri v. K.R. Natarajan and Another
reported in (2003) 10
      SCC 449, this Court was concerned with an application under Rule
      99 of
Order XXI CPC
filed by a tenant who claimed a title
      independent to that of the judgment-debtor and was dispossessed
      in the course of the execution of an eviction decree. In holding that
      such a person can maintain an application under Rule 99, it was
      observed thus:
“13. For the purpose of considering an application under
          Order 21 Rules 99 and 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure
what was required to be considered was as to whether the
          applicant herein claimed a right independent of the
          judgment-debtor or not.[…]”
                                             (Emphasis supplied)
189. In order to better understand who can maintain an application
      under Rule 99, the words “any person” other than the judgment-
debtor used therein must be further clarified. This is more so
      because the decision in
Brahmdeo Chaudhary
(supra) has employed
      the phrase “a stranger to the decree” as analogous to the words “any
      person other than the judgment debtor”
190. A “stranger to the decree” must necessarily be someone other than the
      person who is the judgment-debtor and of course, other than
      someone who is the decree-holder. Meaning thereby that, they must
      be unconnected to the original lis which decree is sought to be
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 119 of 172
executed by the executing court. It is only logical that a decree-
holder can never be an applicant under Rule 99 since he is the
      dispossessor. In that sense, the terms “stranger to the decree” and “any
      person other than the judgment debtor” are synonymous and they may
      be used interchangeably, insofar as Rule 99 is concerned.
191. The words “any person other than the judgment debtor” in Rule 99 is of
      a wider import. It must be read to mean any person other than the
      judgment-debtor or his legal representatives. To put it simply, it
      may include a person asserting his own independent title and it may
      also include persons who are subsequent transferees of the
      judgment-debtor but were not made parties to the original suit.
      Although the latter group of persons would be deriving their title
      or interest from the judgment-debtor, the phrasing of Rule 99 is such
      that, in the event of their dispossession, they would be able to prefer
      an application under the said provision. Whether they would be
      able to obtain any order under Rule 100 is another question
      altogether. However, if the intention was to prevent even such
      persons from falling within the purview of Rule 99, then the
      provision would have read as “any person other than the judgment
      debtor or those claiming through or under the judgment-debtor”.
192. Furthermore, reading the phrase “any person other than the judgment-
debtor” widely and the words “judgment-debtor” narrowly also
      makes sense for the simple reason that it is only the judgment-
      debtor who has been dispossessed by virtue of execution of the
      original decree, by the decree-holder or the auction purchaser, who
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 120 of 172
must not reagitate what he has already agitated or had the
      opportunity to agitate in the original suit. If that were allowed, then
      it would virtually create an endless loop in favour of the
      unsuccessful judgment-debtor when the decree against him has
      already attained finality.
193. We subscribe to the aforesaid wider reading of the phrase for yet
      another reason. It is only afterwards, that in Rule 102 of
Order XXI
      CPC
, it is stated that a transferee pendente lite of the judgment-debtor
      or to put it simply, a person to whom the judgment-debtor has
      transferred the suit property after the original suit was instituted,
      would not be able to avail the remedy available under both Rules 97
      and 99 respectively, by way of an order under Rules 98 and 100
      respectively. There was no reason for Rule 102 to explicitly exclude
      such transferees pendente lite if the words “any person other than the
      judgment debtor” employed in Rule 99 had not already included
      them.
194. The net effect of the phrase “any person other than the judgment debtor”
      used in Rule 99 and the bar under Rule 102 is that, it is only the
      judgment-debtors themselves or the pendente lite transferees of the
      judgment debtor who would not be able to take the cumulative
      benefit of Rules 99 and 100 of
Order XXI CPC
in the event of their
      dispossession. A person who has bought the property from the
      judgment-debtor but before the institution of the suit i.e., a bona fide
      purchaser for value who is not hit by the doctrine of lis pendens,
      would then be able to prefer an application under Rule 99 and may
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 121 of 172
obtain an order under Rule 100 in the event of his dispossession by
      the auction-purchaser, without the bar under Rule 102 operating
      against him.
195. The decision of this Court in
Ashan Devi and Another v. Phulwasi
      Devi and Others
reported in (2003) 12 SCC 219 discussed the
      maintainability of an application under Rule 99 of Order XXI and
      contextualized the meaning of the terms “possession” and
      “dispossession”. It was stated that the term must not always be
      relegated to a restricted understanding i.e., as the ouster from actual
      and physical possession. Rather, its legal meaning must necessarily
      be understood from the context that it is subject to. In the context of
      an open vacant land, it was stated that such a land is generally
      possessed by someone who can exercise control over it to the
      exclusion of others. Therefore, dispossession must also be
      understood as occurring when such a general control to put the land
      to their own use, is lost. The relevant observations are thus:
“22. The word “dispossessed” as used in Order 21 Rule 99 of
            the Code has been narrowly construed to be an ouster from
            actual and physical possession of the property by several High
            Courts. See
Pera Naidu v. Soundaravalli Ammal
[AIR 1954
            Mad 516 : (1954) 1 MLJ 179] AIR at p. 519; Rajendra N.
            Das v. Minatunnisa Bibi [ (1966) 32 Cut LT 972 : ILR 1966
            Cut 611] and Emerciano Leonardo Dias (Dr.) v. Ganexama
            B. Naique Vaingancar [AIR 1978 Goa 48] .
23.Salmond on Jurisprudence explains that the word
            “possession” is a word of “open texture”. Its legal meaning
            has to be ascertained from the context. The property involved
            in the present case is open vacant land. Such property is
            possessed by a person who has control over the same. This
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                              Page 122 of 172
“control” over the property means “power to exclude all
            others”. The test then for determining whether a man is in
            possession of anything is whether he is in “general control”
            of it — maybe, that he is not in actual and physical possession
            or using the same.
24. The objectors have laid evidence before the executing
            court to show that after obtaining by recitals in the sale deeds
            delivery of possession of the property, the names of purchasers
            were also mutated in the municipal records. Merely because
            at the time of execution of the decree through Court Nazir,
            the objectors were not physically present on the property, it
            cannot be said that the delivery of possession to the decree-
holder by the court does not amount to the objectors' legal
            ouster or “dispossession”. The word “possession”, therefore,
            has to be given contextual meaning on facts of a particular
            case and the nature of the property involved.
(Emphasis supplied)
196. Several decisions have laid down that the dispossession of the
      applicant who was in possession of the suit property is a sine-qua
      non for the maintainability of an application under Rule 99 of
Order
      XXI CPC
. Without referring to all those decisions in detail, we refer
      with profit to the decision of this Court in
Sriram Housing Finance
      and Investment India Limited v. Omesh Mishra Memorial
      Charitable Trust
reported in (2022) 15 SCC 176, wherein it was held
      that since the appellant continued to remain in possession, the
      application under Rule 99 could not have been entertained. The
      relevant observations are as thus:
“24. […] Further, Rule 99 pertains to making a complaint to
            the Court against “dispossession” of the immovable property
            by the person in “possession” of the property by the holder of
            a decree or purchaser thereof.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 123 of 172
25. It is factually not in dispute that the appellant purchased
            the said property from Mr Yogesh Mishra vide sale deed
            dated 12-4-2004 and has been in vacant and physical
            possession of the property since then. Had it been the case that
            the appellant was dispossessed by the respondent Trust in
            execution of decree dated 2-9-2003, the appellant would have
            been well within the ambit of Rule 99 to make an application
            seeking appropriate relief to be put back in possession. On the
            contrary, the appellant in the instant case was never
            dispossessed from the property in question and till date, as
            contended and unrefuted, the possession of same rests with
            the appellant. Considering the aforesaid, the appellant cannot
            be said to be entitled to make an application under Rule 99
            raising objections in execution proceedings since he has never
            been dispossessed as required under Rule 99.”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
197. On a combined reading of
Ashan Devi
(supra) and
Sriram Housing
(supra), what possession and dispossession would mean in the facts
      and circumstances of each case must be adequately and
      conscientiously contextualized. In the present matter, there seems
      to be some confusion regarding whether the respondent nos. 1 and
      2 respectively were dispossessed or not. In the SLP before us, the
      appellants have contended that they have been in possession of the
      suit land for the past 20 years or so. Meaning thereby, that the
      respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively were successfully dispossessed
      during the execution of the original decree. In this context, certain
      averments made by the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively in their
      plaint need to be reproduced:
“7. That the plaintiffs were not aware of the above-said
            proceedings and they continued to be in possession of the land
            mentioned in para No. 1 above of the plaint.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 124 of 172
8. That a week ago, the plaintiffs went to the land for
            ploughing it, but they were prevented by defendant No. 1 to
            3, who asserted that they have purchased the whole land
            including the suit land in court auction and that they have
            alleged to have taken possession on 14-6-1989 of the same, on
            the basis of warrant of possession having been issued by the
            Civil Courts.
-xxx-
11. That the defendants No. 1 to 3 alleged to have taken
            possession of the land including of the land of the plaintiffs
            on 24-6-1989, vide Rapat Roznamcha No. 400. This entry is
            a paper entry so far as the plaintiffs are concerned. No notice,
            whatsoever, was given to the plaintiffs while making the
            alleged delivery of possession and writing of the Rapat
            Roznamcha entry by the revenue officials. The plaintiffs still
            continue to be in possession of the suit land. In the
            alternative, if for any reason, the plaintiffs are proved to have
            been dispossessed from the suit land, they are entitled to a
            decree for possession of the suit land.”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
198. We have also had the benefit of looking into the ‘Possession Mauja’
      which records that the possession was successfully handed over to
      the appellants in execution of the warrant of possession issued by
      the executing court on 24.06.1989. The relevant portions of the same
      read thus:
“Thereafter, I called the opposite party namely Sh. Sumer
            Singh and Smt. Harpyari through Chowkidar who flatly
            refused to come at the spot. Now after reaching at the spot,
            the above said land has been inspected and there is small crops
            of Jawar and Arhad over the land bearing Rect. No. 30, Killa
            Nos. 10, 11/1, 11/3, 20/1, 20/2; ,Rect. No. 31, Killa Nos. 4/2,
            7/2, 14/1, 14/2, which has not been possessed by opposite
            party. The said land has been owned and possessed by the
            applicant whereas the remaining land is lying vacant.
            Therefore, the possession of above said entire land was given
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 125 of 172
to the applicant by using Phawra. The aforesaid fact of
            completion of auction and delivery of possession was
            announced through Narangi Chowkidar the receipt of which
            is enclosed. Now the entry has been made in the Daily Diary
            with Patwari vide Rapat No. 400. At the same time the
            Patwari has been directed to make mutation entry No 929.
            This mutation entry be produced before C.R.O. Accordingly,
            the present report is being submitted.”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
199. The Trial Court vide its judgment and decree dated 22.02.2001 also
      observed that the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively were no
      longer in possession of the suit land and observed as follows:
“However, I am agreed with the contention of counsel for
            defendants that plaintiffs could not prove the fact by leading
            any cogent and reliable material that he is still in possession
            of the suit property. […] It is therefore, held that though
            plaintiffs are owners of the suit property but not in possession
            of the same.”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
200. On a consideration of all the above, it could be said that, having
      fulfilled all the necessary conditions underlying Rule 99, the
      respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively could have preferred an
      application under Rule 99 instead of instituting a separate suit.
      However, we have already explained in sufficient detail in the
      preceding parts of this judgment as to why the respondent nos. 1
      and 2 respectively are transferees pendente lite of the judgment-
      debtor. The consequence of this would be that even if they had
      chosen to prefer an application under Rule 99, Rule 102 would have
      stood in their way. Therefore, in light of the bar against transferees
      pendente lite of the judgment-debtor in obtaining any relief under
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 126 of 172
Rule 99 read with rule 100, we must further examine whether this
      by itself would make a separate suit instituted by such transferees
      pendente lite maintainable.
201. It is at this juncture that we must look into the import of the words
      “and not by a separate suit” occurring in Rule 101 of
Order XXI CPC
with a view to understand what this means for any general
      applicant under Rule 99 and also for an applicant who may be a
      transferee pendente lite of the judgment debtor, especially in the
      context of the availability of the option of filing a separate suit. The
      answer to this question would also help in understanding whether
      the separate suit filed by the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively,
      could said to be maintainable.
b.   The scheme underlying Rules 100 to 104 respectively and the
           availability of the remedy of filing a separate suit as an
           alternative to an application under Rule 99 of
Order XXI CPC
202. There are two possible views that one can take with regard to the
      aforesaid – i.e., First, subscribe to the interpretation that the scheme
      underlying Rules 99 to 102 respectively only bar the filing of a
      separate suit when an application under Rule 99 has already been
      preferred before the executing court. To put it simply, Rule 101
      would be interpreted quite literally herein. This would imply that a
      person dispossessed in the course of execution of a decree, either by
      the decree-holder or the auction purchaser, has an option to either
(a) to prefer an application under Rule 99; or (b) to file a separate
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 127 of 172
suit. Therefore, it is only when one of these options are already
      adopted that the other would be barred. Several High Courts seem
      to have adopted this approach.
203. Secondly, on the other hand, one could also adopt the view that, even
      in a scenario where the dispossessed person has not preferred an
      application under Rule 99 and has instead, alternatively filed a
      separate suit, such a separate suit would not be maintainable since
      the executing court exercising its jurisdiction afforded under Rule
      99 would be the only appropriate forum for adjudicating such a
      dispute. In other words, that the dispossessed person cannot be said
      to have options that he could exercise simultaneously.
204. Before we lay down which interpretation is more plausible, we must
      look into the provisions which existed prior to the Amendment Act
      of 1976. The same are reproduced as under:
“97. Resistance or obstruction to possession of
            immovable property - (1) Where the holder of a decree for
            the possession of immovable property or the purchaser of any
            such property sold in execution of a decree is resisted or
            obstructed by any person in obtaining possession of the
            property, he may make an application to the court
            complaining of such resistance or obstruction.
(2) The court shall fix a day for investigating the matter and
            shall summon the party against whom the application is
            made to appear and answer the same.
98. Resistance or obstruction by judgment debtor -
            Where the court is satisfied that the resistance or obstruction
            was occasioned without any just cause by the judgment-
            debtor or by some other person at his instigation, it shall
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 128 of 172
direct that the applicant be put into possession of the
            property, and where the applicant is still resisted or
            obstructed in obtaining possession, the court may also, at the
            instance of the applicant, order the judgment-debtor, or any
            person acting at his instigation, to be detained in the civil
            prison for a term which may extend to thirty days.
99. Resistance or obstruction by bona fide claimant -
            Where the court is satisfied that the resistance or obstruction
            was occasioned by any person (other than the judgment-
            debtor) claiming in good faith to be in possession of the
            property on his own account or on account of some person
            other than the judgment-debtor, the court shall make an order
            dismissing the application.
100. Dispossession by decree-holder or purchaser - (1)
            Where any person other than the judgment-debtor is
            dispossessed of immovable property by the holder of a decree
            for the possession of such property or, where such property
            has been sold in execution of a decree, by the purchaser
            thereof, he may make an application to the court complaining
            of such dispossession.
(2) The court shall fix a day for investigating the matter and
            shall summon the party against whom the application is
            made to appear and answer the same.
101. Bona fide claimant to be restored to possession -
            Where the Court is satisfied that the applicant was in
            possession of the property on his own account or on account
            of some person other than the judgment-debtor, it shall direct
            that the applicant be put into possession of the property.
102. Rules not applicable to transferee lite pendente -
            Nothing in rules 99 and 101 shall apply to resistance or
            obstruction in execution of a decree for the possession of
            immoveable property by a person to whom the judgment-
            debtor has transferred the property after the institution of the
            suit in which the decree was passed or to the dispossession of
            any such person.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 129 of 172
103. Orders conclusive subject to regular suit - Any
            party not being a judgment-debtor against whom an order is
            made under Rule 98, Rule 99 or Rule 101 may institute a suit
            to establish the right which he claims to the present
            possession of the property; but, subject to the result of such
            suit (if any), the order shall be conclusive.”
205. We also deem it necessary to reproduce some pertinent
      observations made by the Law Commission of India in several of
      its reports. In its 14th Report (Vol I, pg. 454), it was suggested that
      the executing court under Rules 97 and 99 respectively, must
      themselves indulge in a full inquiry as regards the ultimate right
      and title of the parties and must not keep it restricted to a summary
      inquiry leaving it open for the aggrieved party to again file a suit
      under the old Rule 103. This suggestion was whole-heartedly
      accepted by way of the Amendment Act of 1976. The relevant
      excerpts from the report are thus:
“49. Suits under Rules 63 and 103 to be barred. – In
            regard to suits under Rule 63 or 103 we have no hesitation in
            accepting the suggestion which has been made by a number
            of persons including some eminent members of the judiciary
            that the executing court itself should make a full inquiry into
            the ultimate right and title of the parties and not merely a
            summary inquiry into possession leaving it open to the
            aggrieved party to file a suit. Such a recommendation has
            been made by us in our report on the
Limitation Act
. The
            order passed in such inquiries should be deemed to be a decree
            within the meaning of
section 2
, sub-section (2) as in the case
            of orders under section 47 and be subject to such appeals as
            are allowed by the law relating to appeals from decrees. We
            recommend that the law be amended in this manner and the
            provisions saving or enabling suit to be filed in Rules 63 and
            103 be omitted.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 130 of 172
206. Thereafter, in its 27th Report (Vol 1, pg 18-20), the Law Commission
      of India gave further necessary context as to why the aforesaid old
      provisions came to be amended and it agreed with the
      recommendations of the 14th Report in view of giving expedited
      relief to the litigants. The excerpts are as under:
“41. Delay in execution – Order 21, Rule 58 and 97.
            Delay in execution proceedings is mainly due to certain
            dilatory tactics adopted by judgment-debtors. When in
            execution proceedings any property is attached, there is
            generally a claim filed under Order XXI, rule 58. If this claim
            is rejected, a suit is filled under rule 63 of that Order. If the
            attachment of the property is finally upheld, there are
            obstruction proceedings under rule 97, followed by a suit
            under rule 103. The Fourteenth Report, contains a
            recommendation that claim proceedings or obstruction
            proceedings should be finally determined by the execution
            court, and that where they are so determined, there should be
            no right of suit. This recommendation has been made with a
            view to eliminating delay in execution proceedings.
            Unfortunately, we have no statistics to indicate in what
            percentage of cases a suit is filed under rule 63 or rule 103.
            We are, however, in agreement with the recommendation in
            the Fourteenth Report, which is based upon certain evidence
            recorded by the Commission.
-xxx-
45. Other changes suggested in Order 21 to avoid delay.
Apart from these principal amendment, we have suggested
            some other amendments in Order XXI, which in our opinion,
            will expedite execution proceedings.”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
207. Although the aforesaid observations allude only to the mischief
      which was being caused under the old rule 97, where undue
      obstruction would be caused either by the judgment-debtor or by
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 131 of 172
persons colluding with him and thereafter, the same persons would
      resort to the filing a separate suit under the old Rule 103 in order to
      delay giving finality to the proceedings, yet it must be remembered
      that under the new regime, the option of filing a separate suit has
      been done away with for both rules 97 and 99 respectively.
      Therefore, it would only be reasonable for us to infer that the same
      or at least a similar mischief was sought to be curtailed even under
      Rule 99 and thereby, it was included within the ambit of the new
      Rule 101 which bars the filing of a separate suit.
208.
In
Ghasi Ram v. Chait Ram Saini
reported in (1998) 6 SCC 200, this
      Court made some important observations as regards the regime that
      existed pre-amendment and that which exists post-amendment. It
      was stated that under the pre-amendment scheme, an order which
      was made under the old Rules 98, 99 and 101 respectively could be
      the subject of a separate suit by virtue of the old Rule 103. In other
      words, since an order under the rules as aforesaid did not always
      involve a full and final adjudication on the questions of right, title
      or interest of the competing parties, the old provisions collectively
      envisaged that the any party not being a judgment-debtor would
      have the option of file a separate suit to decide those questions in
      case an order adverse to him is rendered by the executing court
      under the old Rules 98, 99 and 101 respectively. Therefore, the order
      passed by the executive court would be final subject to a separate
      suit being filed by the aggrieved person under the old Rule 103. The
      relevant observations are as thus:
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 132 of 172
“7. A perusal of the aforesaid provisions would show that the
            scheme commencing under Rule 97 and onwards before the
            enactment of the Amendment Act, 1976 was that where a
            decree-holder or the purchaser at the court sale of property
            was obstructed in obtaining possession of such property by
            any person, he was entitled to apply to the court complaining
            of such resistance or obstruction. […]If an order was passed
            under Rule 98 allowing the application under
Rule 97 CPC
,
            such an order was conclusive between the parties except that
            a party other than the judgment-debtor against whom the
            order was passed was entitled to file a fresh suit under Rule
            103 to establish his right to the possession. […] However, the
            position has changed after amendment
of the Code of Civil
            Procedure
by the Amendment Act of 1976. Now, under the
            amended provisions, all questions, including right, title,
            interests in the property arising between the parties to the
            proceedings under Rule 97, have to be adjudicated by the
            executing court itself and not left to be decided by way of a
            fresh suit.
8. The word “conclusive” appearing in Rule 103 indicates
            that it creates a presumption in favour of facts relating to
            rights to property as well as legality of the matter stated in
            the order. Such an order passed under Rule 98 is not subject
            to any further enquiry in any other proceeding, except by
            bringing a fresh suit under Rule 103. Thus, in view of the
            conclusiveness attached to the order passed by the executing
            court on an application filed under Rule 97, which is subject
            to result of a suit, if any, filed under Rule 103, is not
            assailable in any other proceedings. In case no suit is filed
            under Rule 103, the order passed under Rule 98 is final
            between the parties.[…]”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
209. Hence, the filing of a separate suit, even under the old regime, was
      available as a remedy only because of the inability of the executing
      court to look into the questions of right, title or interest of the
      competing parties. So, in that sense, there was a distinct and very
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                              Page 133 of 172
specific reason why the remedy of filing a separate suit was kept
      open. When the legislature has consciously done away with the old
      Rule 103 and instead, empowered the executing court itself to look
      into these questions, then logic would demand that there is now no
      need for providing the remedy of filing a suit in the same regard.
210.
In
Noorduddin v. K.L. Anand
reported in (1995) 1 SCC 242, this
      Court elaborated on the nature of determination envisaged under
      the Rules 98, 100 and 101 of Order XXI respectively, as follows:
i.    First, a comparison was drawn between the position which
            existed prior to the Amendment Act of 1976 to state that the
            old Rule 103 allowed the filing of a separate suit, however,
            that this right has been explicitly taken away post the
            amendment. This combined with the change brought through
            the new Rule 101 would mean that the legislature has
            relegated the parties to an adjudication of right, title or interest
            in the immovable property in the execution proceedings itself
            and finality is also accorded to it.
ii.    Secondly, the change made vide the amendment was said to
            have been enacted with the object of putting an end to the
            protraction of execution and in order to shorten the litigation
            between all persons claiming a right, title or interest in the
            immovable property which is the subject of execution.
    iii.    Thirdly, it was stated that although the right, title or interest
            are substantive rights, yet the right to adjudication in that
            behalf is a procedural right to which no person can claim to
            have a vested right. It was emphasized that the judicial
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                             Page 134 of 172
process should not be interpreted such that it becomes an
            instrument of abuse or a means to subvert justice. Courts
            must, therefore, evolve processes that aid expeditious
            adjudication.
The relevant observations are reproduced as under:
“8. Thus, the scheme of the Code clearly adumbrates that
            when an application has been made under Order 21, Rule 97,
            the court is enjoined to adjudicate upon the right, title and
            interest claimed in the property arising between the parties
            to a proceeding or between the decree-holder and the person
            claiming independent right, title or interest in the immovable
            property and an order in that behalf be made. The
            determination shall be conclusive between the parties as if it
            was a decree subject to right of appeal and not a matter to be
            agitated by a separate suit. In other words, no other
            proceedings were allowed to be taken. It has to be remembered
            that preceding
Civil Procedure Code Amendment Act, 1976
,
            right of suit under Order 21, Rule 103 of 1908 Code was
            available which has been now taken away. By necessary
            implication, the legislature relegated the parties to an
            adjudication of right, title or interest in the immovable
            property under execution and finality has been accorded to it.
            Thus, the scheme of the Code appears to be to put an end to
            the protraction of the execution and to shorten the litigation
            between the parties or persons claiming right, title and
            interest in the immovable property in execution.
9. Adjudication before execution is an efficacious remedy to
            prevent fraud, oppression, abuse of the process of the court or
            miscarriage of justice. The object of law is to mete out justice.
Right to the right, title or interest of a party in the immovable
            property is a substantive right. But the right to an
            adjudication of the dispute in that behalf is a procedural right
            to which no one has a vested right. The faith of the people in
            the efficacy of law is the saviour and succour for the
            sustenance of the rule of law. Any weakening like (sic) in the
            judicial process would rip apart the edifice of justice and
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 135 of 172
create a feeling of disillusionment in the minds of the people
            of the very law and courts. The rules of procedure have been
            devised as a channel or a means to render substantive or at
            best substantial justice which is the highest interest of man
            and almameter (sic) for the mankind. It is a foundation for
            orderly human relations. Equally the judicial process should
            never become an instrument of oppression or abuse or a
            means in the process of the court to subvert justice. The court
            has, therefore, to wisely evolve its process to aid expeditious
            adjudication and would preserve the possession of the
            property in the interregnum based on factual situation.
            Adjudication under Order 21, Rules 98, 100 and 101 and its
            successive rules is sine qua non to a finality of the
            adjudication of the right, title or interest in the immovable
            property under execution.”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
211.
In the aforesaid context, in
Noorduddin
(supra) it was observed that
      “Adjudication under Order 21, Rules 98, 100 and 101 and its successive
      rules is sine qua non to a finality of the adjudication of the right, title or
      interest in the immovable property under execution.” This observation,
      read in light of the change brought in post-amendment can only
      mean that, with a view to accord finality to the dispute pertaining
      to the subject property, even a third party asserting a right, title or
      interest ought to agitate his grievances only under Rule 99 in the
      event his dispossession is caused by the execution of the decree.
212. In Babulal v. Rak Kumar reported in (1996) 3 SCC 154, this Court
      made an observation that the procedure prescribed under Rules 98
      to 103 is a complete code in itself and observed thus:
“6. […] Thus, the procedure prescribed is a complete code in
            itself. Therefore, the executing court is required to determine
            the question, when the appellants had objected to the
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 136 of 172
execution of the decree as against the appellants who were not
            parties to the decree for specific performance.”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
213. This Court in
Sameer Singh and Another v. Abdul Rab and Others
reported in (2015) 1 SCC 379, while deciding what would constitute
      an ‘adjudication’ under Rules 97, 99 and 101 of
Order XXI CPC
respectively, shed some light on how the scheme underlying the
      said rules must be appreciated. It was reiterated that rules 97 to 103
      respectively is a self-contained code which empowers the executing
      court to adjudicate the entire lis and any order passed would be
      deemed to be a decree. The relevant observations are thus:
“20. The submission of the learned counsel for the appellants
            is that if the scheme underlying the said Rules is appositely
            appreciated, it is clear as crystal that the legislature in order
            to avoid multiplicity of proceedings has empowered the
            executing court to conduct necessary enquiry and adjudicate
            by permitting the parties to adduce evidence, both oral and
            documentary, and to determine the right, title and interest of
            the parties and, therefore, such an order has been given the
            status of a decree. As has been put forth by him, a proceeding
            in terms of Rule 97 or Rule 99 is in the nature of a suit and
            the adjudication is similar to that of a suit […]
-xxx-
26. The aforesaid authorities clearly spell out that the court
            has the authority to adjudicate all the questions pertaining to
            right, title or interest in the property arising between the
            parties. It also includes the claim of a stranger who
            apprehends dispossession or has already been dispossessed
            from the immovable property. The self-contained code, as has
            been emphasised by this Court, enjoins the executing court to
            adjudicate the lis and the purpose is to avoid multiplicity of
            proceedings. It is also so because prior to 1976 amendment
            the grievance was required to be agitated by filing a suit but
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 137 of 172
after the amendment the entire enquiry has to be conducted
            by the executing court. Order 21 Rule 101 provides for the
            determination of necessary issues. Rule 103 clearly stipulates
            that when an application is adjudicated upon under Rule 98
            or Rule 100 the said order shall have the same force as if it
            were a decree. Thus, it is a deemed decree. […]
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
214. Giving an order made under Rules 98 and 100 of
Order XXI CPC
respectively, the status of a ‘deemed decree’ for the purpose of an
      appeal has effectively given the parties more reason to agitate
      everything that they would in a separate suit before the executing
      court itself. In light of this, it would be absurd to still say that the
      right to file a separate suit in so far as matters pertaining to Rules 97
      and 99 respectively would still remain alive. There would be no
      purpose in holding so. On the contrary, it would only defeat the
      reasons due to which the legislature thought fit to expand the
      jurisdiction of the executing court under Rule 101 by way of the
      amendment.
215. It was very aptly pointed out by this Court in Sreenath v Rajesh
      reported in (1998) 4 SCC 543 that the courts, within their own
      limitations, have been interpreting the procedural laws so as to
      conclude all possible disputes pertaining to the decretal property
      within the execution proceeding itself, i.e., including what may be
      raised later by way of another bout of litigations through a fresh
      suit. Similarly legislatures equally are also endeavouring by
      amendments to achieve the same objective. Therefore, in
      interpreting   any    procedural     law,    where    more     than    one
      interpretation is possible, the one which curtails the procedure
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                              Page 138 of 172
without eluding justice is to be adopted. The procedural law is
      always subservient to and is in the aid of justice. Any interpretation
      which eludes or frustrates the recipient of justice is not to be
      followed. So, under Order XXI Rule 101 all disputes between the
      decree-holder and any such person is to be adjudicated by the
      executing court. A party is not thrown out to relegate itself to the
      long-drawn-out arduous procedure of a fresh suit. This is to salvage
      the possible hardship both to the decree-holder and the other person
      claiming title on their own right to get it adjudicated in the very
      execution proceedings.
216. This Court in
N.S.S. Narayana Sarma and Others v. Goldstone
      Exports (P) Ltd. and Others
reported in (2002) 1 SCC 662 also
      observed that, by way of the Amendment Act of 1976, the legislature
      has vested wide powers in the executing court to deal with “all
      issues” relating to the suit property. This, in the opinion of the court,
      may have been brought to allay the apprehension in the minds of
      the litigant public that it takes years before the decree-holder can
      enjoy the fruits of the decree. The relevant observations are thus:
“15. […] From the provisions in these Rules which have been
            quoted earlier the scheme is clear that the legislature has
            vested wide powers in the executing court to deal with “all
            issues” relating to such matters. It is a general impression
            prevailing amongst the litigant public that difficulties of a
            litigant are by no means over on his getting a decree for
            immovable property in his favour. Indeed, his difficulties in
            real and practical sense, arise after getting the decree.
            Presumably, to tackle such a situation and to allay the
            apprehension in the minds of litigant public that it takes
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                             Page 139 of 172
years and years for the decree-holder to enjoy fruits of the
            decree, the legislature made drastic amendments in
            provisions in the aforementioned Rules, particularly, the
            provision in Rule 101 in which it is categorically declared
            that all questions including questions relating to right, title
            or interest in the property arising between the parties to a
            proceeding on an application under Rule 97 or Rule 99 or
            their representatives, and relevant to the adjudication of the
            application shall be determined by the court dealing with the
            application and not by a separate suit and for this purpose,
            the court shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary
            contained in any other law for the time being in force, be
            deemed to have jurisdiction to decide such questions. On a
            fair reading of the Rule it is manifest that the legislature has
            enacted the provision with a view to remove, as far as
            possible, technical objections to an application filed by the
            aggrieved party whether he is the decree-holder or any other
            person in possession of the immovable property under
            execution and has vested the power in the executing court to
            deal with all questions arising in the matter irrespective of
            whether the court otherwise has jurisdiction to entertain a
            dispute of the nature. This clear statutory mandate and the
            object and purpose of the provisions should not be lost sight
            of by the courts seized of an execution proceeding. The court
            cannot shirk its responsibility by skirting the relevant issues
            arising in the case.”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
217.
In
Sriram Housing
(supra), it was finally buttressed that rule 101
      effectively does away with the requirement of filing a fresh suit for
      the adjudication of a dispute which could be dealt with under rules
      97 or 99, as the case may be and it was observed as thus:
“26. Now, as stated above, applications under Rule 97 and
            Rule 99 are subject to Rule 101 which provides for
            determination of questions relating to disputes as to right,
            title or interest in the property arising between the parties to
            the proceedings or their representatives on an application
            made under Rule 97 or Rule 99. Effectively, the said Rule
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 140 of 172
does away with the requirement of filing of fresh suit for
            adjudication of disputes as mentioned above.[…]”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
218.
In addition to all the decisions discussed above, a three-judge bench
      of this Court in
Silverline Forum Pvt. Ltd. v. Rajiv Trust and
      Another
reported in (1998) 3 SCC 723 discussed the scope of
      adjudication that is envisioned under Rule 101 and stated that the
      executing court would be obligated to decide such questions that (a)
      have legally arisen between the parties and (b) are relevant for
      consideration and determination between the parties. The
      observations are thus:
12. The words “all questions arising between the parties to a
            proceeding on an application under Rule 97” would envelop
            only such questions as would legally arise for determination
            between those parties. In other words, the court is not obliged
            to determine a question merely because the resister raised it.
The questions which the executing court is obliged to
            determine under Rule 101, must possess two adjuncts. First
            is that such questions should have legally arisen between the
            parties, and the second is, such questions must be relevant for
            consideration and determination between the parties […]
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)


            This observation can be looked at from a different perspective
      for the purpose of the question that we are presently faced with i.e.,
- when the executing court under Rule 101 is anyway required to
      looked at such questions, by way of a strict obligation, then there is
      no reason for a person who can very well fall under the scope of
      Rules 97 or 99, to prefer a separate suit for the adjudication of the
      same claims which the executing court is competent to look into.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                               Page 141 of 172
219. In Shamsher Singh (supra), the application filed under Rule 99 was
      ultimately dismissed after conducting the exercise of determining
      whether the applicant had a right, title or interest in the decretal
      property by way of adverse possession. This Court rejected the
      contention of the applicant that mere prior bona fide possession,
      would require the executing court to restore the possession of the
      applicant. This Court had acknowledged the sea-change brought to
      the Rules 99 to 101 respectively and stated that post the amendment,
      the executing court could only direct that possession be given to the
      applicant under Rule 99 if it is satisfied that he has established his
      right, title or interest and not otherwise. In that context, it was
      observed that “What was earlier to be adjudicated in a suit under
      unamended Rule 103 is now to be adjudicated in Rule 101 itself”.
220. In light of all the aforesaid, we are of the view that there exists no
      option of filing a separate suit for a person who may very well prefer
      an application under Rule 99 of
Order XXI CPC
. To put it simply,
      one cannot file a separate suit as an alternative to an application
      under Rule 99. If such a suit is preferred, it could be said to be non-
      maintainable for the reason that the appropriate course of action
      would have been to prefer an application under Rule 99 instead.
      Hence, amongst the two alternate interpretations to which we had
      alluded at the beginning of our discussion on this aspect, we are
      inclined to adopt the latter.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 142 of 172
221. As a consequence, a question that then arises is whether transferees
      pendente lite of the judgment debtor would have the remedy of filing
      a separate suit considering the bar placed upon them by virtue of
      Rule 102? We are also inclined to answer this in the negative.
222. Before proceeding further, at the outset, we would like to clarify the
      scope of Rule 102 of
Order XXI CPC
. A recent decision of this Court
      in Tahir V. Isani v. Madan Waman Chodankar reported in 2020
      SCC OnLine SC 1962 observed that the bar under Rule 102 applies
      only to a person to whom the judgment-debtor has transferred the
      suit property pendente lite. In other words, if the person has
      received the property from anyone other than the judgment-debtor,
      even pendente lite, then he would be entitled to the benefit under
      Rules 98 and 100 respectively. It was also stated that the object
      underlying Rule 102 is to protect the interest of the decree-holder
      against the attempts of unscrupulous judgment-debtors and their
      subsequent transferees who deprive the decree-holders from taking
      any benefit of the decree passed in their favour. In delineating the
      ingredients that are required to be fulfilled for the application of
      Rule 102, it was stated that it is absolutely necessary for the transfer
      to have been made by the judgment-debtor after the institution of
      the original suit in which the decree was passed. Only then, can the
      protection afforded under Rules 97 to 101 respectively, be denied.
      The relevant observations are thus:
“9. […] In a suit pending between a plaintiff and a defendant
            as to the right to a particular estate, the decision of the court
            in that case shall be binding not only on the litigating parties,
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 143 of 172
but also on those who derive title under them by alienations
            (transfer) made while the suit was pending, whether such
            alienees, i.e. transferees, had or had not notice of the pending
            proceedings. […]

            Therefore, Rule 102 of Order XXI intends to protect the
            interests of the decree-holder against the attempts of
            unscrupulous judgment-debtors and their subsequent
            transferees who indulge in activities and leave no stone
            unturned to deprive the decree-holders from reaping the
            benefits of the decree granted in their favour. The Rule being
            equitable in nature, therefore, estops further creation of rights
            as it explicitly states that nothing in Rules 98 and 100 shall
            apply to the resistance or obstruction being made by the
            transferee pendente lite of judgment-debtor.
-xxx-
11. While it is important to protect the interests of decree-
holders, who hold an enforceable decree in their favour, it
            cannot be gainsaid that such interests cannot be blanketly
            protected. Rule 102 of Order XXI expressly lays down the
            ingredients as to when it can be applied. For a case to fall
            under Rule 102, it is condition precedent that there exists a
            decree for the possession of immovable property. Secondly,
            there must be a resistance or an obstruction in the execution
            of the said decree. Thirdly, such obstruction or resistance
            must be made by a person to whom the judgment-debtor has
            transferred the property. Fourthly, such transfer must have
            occurred after the institution of the original suit, i.e. the one
            in which the decree was passed. If the aforesaid ingredients
            are made out, Rule 102 prohibits the protection of Rules 98
            and 101 to such errant transferee of judgment-debtor.
-xxx-
13. However, Rule 102 of Order XXI applies only to a person
            to whom the judgment-debtor has transferred the immovable
            property which was subject matter of that suit pendente lite.
            If the person who is resisting or obstructing the execution of
            the decree for possession of such property, is not the transferee
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 144 of 172
of judgment-debtor, i.e. he does not trace his title from
            judgment-debtor, bar of Rule 102 does not apply to him. That
            is to say that if the person who is resisting or obstructing the
            decree for possession has received the property from person
            other than the judgment-debtor, such person is competent to
            gain the benefit of Rules 97 to 101 of Order XXI. In fact, he
            is entitled to such benefit even if he had been transferred the
            immovable property pendente lite, i.e. during the pendency of
            the suit, in which the decree was passed.”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
223. Therefore, the bar under Rule 102 must be read correctly; it is very
      specific and must not be unduly expanded.
224. However, what must be carefully noticed is that Rule 102 does not
      say that such a transferee pendente lite of the judgment-debtor would
      not be entitled to even file an application under Rules 97 or 99
      respectively, as the case may be. It reads that “Nothing in rules 98 and
      100 shall apply”. This leads us to arrive at the interference that it is
      not the filing of the application under Rules 97 or 99 respectively,
      per say, which is barred under Rule 102. The bar under Rule 102 is
      with regard to the orders which would come to be passed as a
      consequence of the adjudication of the applications under Rules 97
      or 99, as the case may be. Therefore, it is a bar placed on the
      executing court’s power to afford any relief to the applicant rather
      than a bar on the applicant themselves.
225. In their natural course, the executing court would necessarily have
      to adjudicate the application before them, whether it was made by
      a transferee pendente lite of the judgment-debtor or not. However,
      when an objection is raised that the applicant is barred from
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 145 of 172
obtaining any relief under Order 102, then such an adjudication
      would be confined to whether he is a transferee pendente lite of the
      judgment-debtor or not. If yes, then the executing court would be
      barred from making any further orders under rules 98 and 100
      respectively.
226. The aforesaid is supported by the decision in
Silverline Forum
(supra), wherein it was observed in the context of Rule 97 that, if the
      resistance is being offered by a transferee pendente lite of the
      judgment-debtor as defined in Rule 102, then the scope of the
      adjudication under Rule 101 would be shrunk to the limited
      question of whether the applicant under Rule 97 is such a pendente
      lite transferee. If answered in the affirmative, then such an applicant
      would be held to not be entitled to offer such a resistance based on
      the salutary principle underlying
Section 52
of the Transfer of
      Property Act. The relevant observations are thus:
“10. It is true that Rule 99 of Order 21 is not available to any
            person until he is dispossessed of immovable property by the
            decree-holder. Rule 101 stipulates that all questions “arising
            between the parties to a proceeding on an application under
            Rule 97 or Rule 99” shall be determined by the executing
            court, if such questions are “relevant to the adjudication of
            the application”. A third party to the decree who offers
            resistance would thus fall within the ambit of Rule 101 if an
            adjudication is warranted as a consequence of the resistance
            or obstruction made by him to the execution of the decree. No
            doubt if the resistance was made by a transferee pendente lite
            of the judgment-debtor, the scope of the adjudication would
            be shrunk to the limited question whether he is such a
            transferee and on a finding in the affirmative regarding that
            point the execution court has to hold that he has no right to
            resist in view of the clear language contained in Rule 102.
            Exclusion of such a transferee from raising further
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 146 of 172
contentions is based on the salutary principle adumbrated in
Section 52
of the Transfer of Property Act.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
227.   One might question, what is the reason behind adjudicating an
       application under Rules 97 or 99 respectively, if the passing of an
       order under Rules 98 and 100 respectively is anyway barred? The
       simple reason would be that some judicial forum must arrive at the
       finding that the person(s) in question is a transferee pendente lite of
       the judgment-debtor so as to determine his right, title or interest to
       the suit property or the lack thereof.
228. Again, it is with this background that one must look at the ratio of
       the decision of this Court in
Renjith K.G. and Others v. Sheeba
reported in 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2821, authored by one of us, R.
       Mahadevan, J. Therein, it was stated that an applicant under Rule
       99, who is a stranger to the decree, can very well adjudicate his claim
       of right, title and interest in the decretal property. It was further held
       that this term i.e., “stranger to the decree” would include a pendente
       lite transferee who has not been impleaded in the original suit. The
       relevant observations are thus:
“13. It was the specific plea of the appellants that the
             predecessor of the respondents being a pendente
             lite transferee, is not entitled to file an application under
Order XXI Rule 99 CPC
and raise the question of limitation
             of the Execution Petition, so as to deprive the right of the
             appellants to enjoy the fruits of the decree.
14. On a reading of
Order XXI Rule 99 CPC
, it is lucid that
             where any person other than the judgment debtor is
             dispossessed of immovable property by the holder of a decree
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                              Page 147 of 172
for the possession of such property, or where such property
            has been sold in execution of a decree, by the purchaser
            thereof, he may make an application to the Court complaining
            of such dispossession. It also means that a third party to the
            decree has a right to approach the Court even after
            dispossession of the immovable property, which he was
            occupying. In the case on hand, the predecessor of the
            respondents was not a party to the suit and he was
            dispossessed from the property, in execution of the decree
            passed in the suit and therefore, he who is purported to be a
            stranger to the decree, can very well adjudicate his claim of
            independent right, title and interest in the decretal property
            as per
Order XXI Rule 99 CPC
.
15. In so far as the claim of appellants that the predecessor of
            the respondents, namely Mr. Raghuthaman, being pendent
            lite transferee and hence would have no locus to file the
            application seeking re-delivery, we have already held that
            “any person” not a party to the suit or in other words a
            stranger to the suit can seek re-delivery, after he has been
            dispossessed. The term “Stranger” would cover within its
            ambit, a pendent lite transferee, who has not been impleaded.
[…] The pendent lite purchaser has every right to defend his
            right, title, interest and possession. […]
-xxx-
19. […] the High Court rightly set aside the order passed in
          the Execution Petition and remanded the matter to the trial
          court for fresh consideration, leaving all the issues including
          the independent right, title or interest claimed by the
          respondents in the property in question, to be adjudicated
          therein. Therefore, we do not find any infirmity or illegality
          in the judgment so rendered by the High Court, warranting
          our interference.
(Emphasis supplied)
229.
In
Renjith
(supra), the applicant under Rule 99 was a pendente lite
      transferee of one of the judgement-debtors but was not impleaded
      in the original suit. Although he was not a party to the original suit
      and a stranger to the decree yet, since he derives his right through a
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 148 of 172
transfer made by judgment-debtor during the course of the suit
      proceedings, ultimately, the law would not look at him favorably
      even under an application under Rule 99. This is reflected in Rule
102.
230. Having said so, the conclusion reached in
Renjith
(supra) would still
      hold good because, in light of the decision in
Silverline Forum
(supra), the application under Rule 99 could still be filed by such a
      person for the adjudication of his right, title or interest since he
      would be a stranger to the decree. It is just that the adjudication of
      the same would then be limited to whether he would be a transferee
      pendente lite of the judgment-debtor or not in order to determine
      whether the bar envisaged under Rule 102 would apply to him.
      Therein, the matter was ultimately remanded to the trial court
      leaving all questions under Rule 99 read with 101 open for fresh
      consideration.
Therefore, it was implicit that the trial was to proceed
      in light of the decision given in
Silverline Forum
(supra) and if the
      auction-purchaser or the decree-holder raised a preliminary issue
      that the applicant is a transferee pendente lite of the judgment-
      debtor and hence he cannot be given the benefit of an order under
      Rule 100, that issue would be decided first as a preliminary issue in
      the course of the said proceedings.
231. We have now explained in sufficient detail the scope of the bar
      under Rule 102 and the scope of adjudication under Rule 101 if a
      transferee pendente lite of the judgment-debtor prefers an application
      under Rule 99. This position now begs the question whether such a
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 149 of 172
transferee pendente lite of the judgment-debtor would be allowed to
      file a separate suit, in case he does not prefer an application under
      Rule 99 in view of the bar imposed by Rule 102? As we had
      mentioned at the beginning of our discussion on this aspect, the
      answer must necessarily be an emphatic ‘No’. The same reasoning
      that we had adopted to observe that other persons falling under the
      scope of Rules 97 or 99 would not be able to prefer a separate suit,
      would apply here as well. When the executing court is vested with
      the same power as the court before which a separate suit would be
      filed and Rule 102 bars any relief to a transferee pendente lite of the
      judgment debtor, why should a separate suit wherein an
      adjudication which is akin to that under Rule 101 would be
      conducted, be allowed? One must remember that it is the avowed
      object of
Section 52
of the Transfer of Property Act which has given
      rise to Rule 102. The same section 52 would bar any relief being
      accorded to the transferee pendente lite of the judgment-debtor in the
      separate suit as well. To put it simply, the fate of a transferee pendente
      lite of the judgment-debtor in the separate suit would be the same
      as that of his fate under Rule 101. Therefore, there exists no special
      reason to carve out an exception and allow the filing of a separate
      suit for persons falling within the bar under Rule 102 when the end
      result would be the same.
232. Before we close the discussion on this aspect, with a view to obviate
      any confusion as regards the position of law expounded by us
      above, we wish to advert to Rule 104 which we reproduce as under:
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                             Page 150 of 172
“104. Orders under rule 101 or rule 103 to be subject to
            the result or pending suit.—Every order made under rule
            101 or rule 103 shall subject to the result of any suit that may
            be pending on the date of commencement of the proceeding in
            which such order, is made if in such suit the party against
            whom the order under rule 101 or rule 103 is made has
            sought to establish a right which he claims to the present
            possession of the property.”
233. Rule 104 begins with the phrase “every order made under rule 101 or
      rule 103”. This, in a way, substantiates the discussion made by us
      hereinabove that the determination of the questions referred to in
      Rule 101 may not always lead to an order being passed under Rules
      98 or 100 respectively and a classic example of this scenario would
      be determining these questions in relation to a pendente lite transferee
      of a judgment-debtor. In other words, sometimes an order may be
      passed under rule 101 and it may not be followed with an order
      under rules 98 or 100. This is probably why Rule 104 brings both the
      order under Rule 101 and those under Rule 103 (which collectively
      includes orders under Rules 98 or 100) respectively, within its ambit.
234. Rule 104 then proceeds to say that an order under both Rule 101 and
      103 respectively shall be subject to the result of any suit that may be
      pending on the date of the commencement of the proceeding in
      which such an order is made, i.e., the institution of an application
      under rule 97 or 99 as the case may be, if in such a suit that is
      pending, the party against whom an order is made under Rules 101
      or 103 has sought to establish a right which he claims to the present
      possession of the property. To put it simply, if a person has already
      filed a suit seeking to establish his right over the concerned property
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                Page 151 of 172
including that of possession, before the actual institution of an
      application under rules 97 or 99 or before the cause of action to file
      an application under rules 97 or 99 arose, it is only then that the
      orders which come as a consequence of the application under Rule
      97 or 99, would be made subject to the result of such a previously
      instituted suit.
235. Such was the situation in Shamsher Singh (supra). The applicant
      under Rule 99 who was dispossessed by way of execution of the
      decree had already filed a suit over the same property in which he
      claimed title on the basis of adverse possession.
236. This rule must not be read to mean that once the cause of action to
      file an application under rule 99 has arisen, a party can resort to the
      remedy of a separate suit instead.
V.    Delineating when a third party could file an application under
Order XXI CPC
and when he could resort to a separate suit in
      order to assert his right, title and interest in the said property.
237. Having discussed rules 58, 89 to 92 and 99 to 104 respectively in
      great detail, to avoid any confusion and to provide a more holistic
      picture of when a separate suit praying for the relief of title, amongst
      others, can be filed by a third party, when the property is sold in
      execution of a decree, is elaborated as follows:
i.    Scenario 1 - When Rule 99 is not involved, i.e. when the third
            party filing the separate suit is not a person who has been in
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 152 of 172
possession and subsequently, dispossessed in the course of
              execution of the decree:
Order of
                                                                      confirmation
                                      Order of sale                   of sale

         Progress of
         the execution
         proceedings.
Recourse to a “third party”
                              Recourse to a “third party” to assert         to assert his title through a
                              his title through an application              separate suit against the
                              under Rule 58                                 auction     purchaser,     as
                                                                            indicated under Rule 92(4)
                                                                            which     would       be   in
                                                                            consonance with Rule 58(5)
ii.   Scenario 2 - When Rule 99 is involved and the third party in
              possession is one who has been dispossessed as a
              consequence of the execution proceedings:
Lapse of the 30-day
                                          Order of                                   period for preferring an
                                                             Date of
                                          confirmation                               application under Rule
                                                             Dispossession
                         Order of sale    of sale                                    99 as per
Article 128
Progress of
    the execution
    proceedings.




                                 A                       B                    C                     D
Recourse to a “third party” in possession to assert his rights including
                    A         that of title through an application under Rule 58


                              Recourse to a “third party” in possession to assert his rights including
                    B         that of title through a separate suit against the auction purchaser, as
                              indicated under Rule 92(4) which would be in consonance with Rule
                              58(5)
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                                       Page 153 of 172
Recourse to a “third party” in possession who is dispossessed to assert
                 C     his rights including that of title through an application under Rule 99.
No recourse to a “third party” in possession who is dispossessed to
                 D     assert his rights including that of title, either through an application
                       under Rule 99 or by way of a separate suit due to the expiry of
                       limitation under
Article 128
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
.
238. A pertinent clarification in Scenario 2, especially as regards the
      period referred to as “B” would be that, if a third party who is in
      possession of the property which is the subject-matter of the auction
      sale, obtains knowledge of the auction sale, after the confirmation
      of sale, he needn’t wait until he eventually comes to be dispossessed
      by the auction-purchaser to file an application under Rule 99. Before
      any cause of action to file an application under Rule 97 or 99 arises,
      he may choose to file a separate suit, if he wishes to, in accordance
      with Rule 92(4). However, once there arises an opportunity for such
      third party possessor to obtain appropriate redressal of his
      grievances through an application under Rule 97 or Rule 99, he must
      not be allowed to file a separate suit.
239. We say so also because we are cognizant of the differing views as
      regards whether a third party can make an application under Rule
      97 taken by the decisions of this Court in
Brahmdeo Choudhary
(supra) and
Sriram Housing
(supra) respectively.
Another coordinate
      bench of this Court in
P. Sumathi v. K. Krishna Gounder & Ors
in
      SLP(C) No. 14092 of 2025 has already taken seisin of such conflicting
      views while issuing notice vide its order dated 16.05.2025.
Without
      delving into which interpretation of Rule 97 may be right, we only
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                          Page 154 of 172
wish to point out that in case the view taken by
Sriram Housing
(supra) is held to be the correct view, then the interests of justice
      would demand that a third party in possession who obtains
      knowledge of the confirmation of sale and wishes to assert his right,
      title or interest in the same, must not be allowed to be remediless
      until he comes to be dispossessed, which dispossession is an
      essential ingredient under Rule 99. Therefore, the option of filing a
      separate suit must be made available to him.
240. Another reason why we have taken the view that in the time period
      falling in “B”, the recourse to a separate suit may be available to a
      third party in possession is because of the language employed in
      Rule 104. Rule 104, basically, makes any order under Rules 98, 100
      or 101 subject to the result of any pending suit (which was instituted
      before the commencement of the proceedings under Rules 97 or 99)
      wherein the party against whom the order under Rules 98, 100 or
      101 is made has already sought to establish a right through which
      he claims possession to the property in question. Therefore, Rule 104
      itself indicates that a suit may be instituted by a person in possession
      of the property but before the commencement of the proceedings
      under Rules 97 or 99, with a view to not compel him to needlessly
      wait and agitate his rights only under these rules. In other words,
      Rule 104 also substantiates that in the period referred to as “B” in
      Scenario 2, the third party in possession may choose to file a
      separate suit.
241. However, we must point out that we have come across several
      decisions that refuse to hear the third parties in possession, in an
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 155 of 172
application under Rule 97 or 99, merely owing to the fact that a
      separate suit has already been instituted by them for adjudication
      of the same rights. This would not be the right approach. If the third
      party who is offering resistance to delivery of possession or who has
      been dispossessed has chosen to participate in the proceedings
      under Rule 97 or 99, the executing court would be obligated to
      decide all questions including those of their right, title and interest
      in the concerned property. The fact that Rule 104 would make such
      an order under Rules 98, 100 or 101 subject to the result of the
      previously instituted suit would not be reason enough for the
      executing court to refuse to hear the third party in possession or the
      third party who is dispossessed under Rules 97 or 99, as the case
      may be.
242. One may question as to why there is a stricter treatment under the
      period referred to as ‘D’ in Scenario 2 i.e., why both the option of
      filing a separate suit or an application under Rule 99 becomes
      unavailable upon the lapse of the limitation period as prescribed
      under
Article 128
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
. Such a treatment, in
      our opinion, would not be onerous. Let us look at Scenario 1 to
      substantiate this rationale better. As we have already explained
      previously, the progress of the execution proceedings, at least
      between the order of sale and the order of confirmation of sale is
      continuous and starts running from the date of the order of sale. In
      other words, the cause of action to file an application under Rule 89,
      90 or 91 is not dependent on when a prospective applicant would
      acquire the knowledge of the order of sale. The mere fact that a
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 156 of 172
person acquired knowledge of his property being attached and sold,
      after the confirmation of the sale under Rule 92(1), would not turn
      the clock back in his favour and make available the option to file an
      application under Rules 89, 90 or 91 respectively. Therefore, under
      Scenario 1, the third party’s option to file separate suit after the sale
      is confirmed (albeit on narrower grounds i.e., that the sale was a
      nullity etc.) would be dependent on when he obtains the knowledge
      of his property having been sold and this suit would be governed
      by the general provisions of limitation which would be applicable
      to such suits.
243. On the other hand, the limitation period for filing an application
      under Rule 99 i.e.,
Article 128
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
, which is
      30-days from the date of dispossession is deliberately short because
      it takes into consideration the fact that the date of dispossession
      comes to the immediate knowledge of the dispossessed party. In
      other words, the cause of action to file an application under Rule 99
      and the date of his knowledge that he is dispossessed, is one and the
      same. Even according to the interpretation to dispossession given in
Ashan Devi
(supra), the loss of control over the property which gives
      rise to the cause of action to file an application under Rule 99 would
      be the same date on which the applicant under Rule 99 would obtain
      knowledge of his dispossession. Therefore, although
Article 128
of
      the
Limitation Act, 1962
uses the words “the date of the dispossession”,
      it is implicit that it alludes to the date of the knowledge of
      dispossession considering the nature of the relief envisaged under
      Rule 99 and also considering that it is at the instance of a
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 157 of 172
dispossessed party that the proceedings under Rule 99 come to life.
It is under such circumstances, that a stricter standard is placed on
      such a dispossessed party to move the executing court within the
      limitation period as given under
Article 128
and the option of filing
      a suit after the lapse of the said period is made impermissible under
      the period referred to in ‘D’. Once knowledge of dispossession is
      obtained, the applicant under Rule 99 must act promptly.
      Furthermore, when Rule 99 has been specifically created for the
      purpose of addressing such a situation and is bound by a strict time-
      limit, it would not be appropriate to allow the filing of a separate
      suit for the same relief that the executing court would be competent
      to provide, while also by-passing the limitation prescribed under
Article 128.
244. In light of the expanded scope given to an adjudication under Rule
      101 by the 1976 amendment, it is our view that once an application
      under Rule 99 comes to be allowed and the person dispossessed by
      the auction-purchaser is put back into possession by the executing
      court through an order under Rule 100, Rule 92(5) or at least its
      underlying intent must be carried forward by the executing court
      such that the auction-purchaser, against whom the order under
      Rule 100 would operate is able to take back the purchase-money he
      paid at the auction-sale, with or without interest. This is because
      after the right, title or interest to the property is decided in favour
      of the dispossessed applicant under Rule 99, an auction-purchaser
      would be subjected to a similar, if not an identical hardship insofar
      as getting back his purchase-money is concerned. Especially having
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 158 of 172
elaborated that the jurisdiction afforded to the executing court
      under Rule 101 is wide and all questions relevant to the adjudication
      of the dispute would be decided just as it would be in a separate suit
      and the order passed would be deemed to be a decree, such a
      measure is all the more necessary to alleviate the concerns of the
      auction-purchaser.
245. However, one impediment in seamlessly carrying the intent of the
      Rule 92(5) forward, would be the potential non-impleadment of the
      decree-holder in the proceedings under Rule 99. In a situation
      where the auction-purchaser is the one who is dispossessing the
      third party, the application under Rule 99 may or may not include
      the decree-holder as a party. In case, the decree-holder is not
      impleaded, it would not be possible for the executing court to direct
      the decree-holder to return the purchase money to the auction-
      purchaser. It is suggested that a necessary amendment be brought
      in this regard regarding the impleadment of the decree-holder as a
      necessary party under Rule 99, even in cases where the auction-
      purchaser is the one who is dispossessing the applicant under Rule
99. This would also enable to decree-holder to resume or revive the
      execution proceedings at the stage at which the sale was ordered,
      unless the executing court directs otherwise.
246. In the present factual scenario, where the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively are transferees pendente lite of the judgment-debtor who
      were kept completely unaware of the execution proceedings, as a
      result of which the sale came to be confirmed under Rule 92(1) and
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 159 of 172
the possession was also handed over to the auction-purchaser
      appellants by the executing court, the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively must have preferred an application under Rule 99
      within 30 days of their dispossession i.e., before 24.07.1989. They
      could have raised all their contentions regarding the title that they
      had over the suit property in such a proceeding under Rule 99. The
      fact that no order could have been passed under Rule 100 owing to
      the bar under Rule 102 was, by itself, no reason to allow the filing of
      a separate suit in that regard. This is also because in case the filing
      of such a separate suit praying for the relief of title and possession
      was allowed, that would have also been dismissed for the sole
      reason that the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively are transferees
      pendente lite of the judgment-debtor. In simple terms, their fate in
      the separate suit would also have been the same as under an
      application under Rule 99.
247. To summarize – the relief for declaration of title and possession
      prayed for by the pendente lite transferees of the judgment-debtor i.e.,
      the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, could not have been
      granted in their favour whether it was made in an application under
      Rule 99, in an application under
Section 47
CPC or in a separate suit.
      Apart from the nuances relating to all these provisions which we
      have elaborated in detail, the very reason that their vendor was one
      of the judgment-debtors, would have disentitled them to the
      aforesaid reliefs. In short, since the relief(s) which they would be
      entitled to could only include the recovery of money, irrespective of
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 160 of 172
the provision they invoked, their prayer for the reliefs of declaration
      of title and/or possession could not have been granted to them.
VI.   The decision of this Court in
T. Vijendradas
(supra).
248. Ms. Aparajita Singh, in her submissions, placed heavy reliance on
      the decision of this Court in
T. Vijendradas
(supra) and stated that
the said decision
would squarely cover the issue as regards the
      maintainability of the suit instituted by the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively.
249.
In
T. Vijendradas
(supra), this Court was directly concerned with the
      interpretation of Rule 92(4) of
Order XXI CPC
. Therein, one ‘V’ who
      was the owner of the suit property had transferred his right, title
      and interest in the property in favour of the plaintiff. The factum of
      this sale was not intimated to the Municipal authorities and the
      plaintiff’s name was also not mutated in the revenue records.
      Property tax had not been paid in respect of the said property for a
      period of three years, both by V before transfer to the plaintiff and
      by the plaintiff after the transfer in her favour. With a view to
      enforce a statutory charge on the property, the Municipality
      instituted a suit under the relevant legislation against ‘V’. The
      plaintiff was not made a party therein. The said suit was decreed
      and in execution, the property was put up for auction. Initially, since
      no buyer was available, the upset price was reduced twice and
      subsequently, the property was sold to the auction-purchaser, who
      was the wife of ‘V’. The sale was also confirmed. It was alleged that,
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 161 of 172
during the first instance of reduction of the upset price, notice was
      not issued to the judgment-debtor in accordance with Rule 66 of
Order XXI CPC
and during the second instance, no order for
      reduction of upset price was even passed. It was only after the
      confirmation of sale that the plaintiff obtained knowledge of the
      execution proceedings and the resultant sale thereof. Therefore, she
      filed a suit for declaration and possession against ‘V’ and the
      auction-purchaser respectively. During the pendency of this suit,
      the auction-purchaser further sold the said property to one ‘R’ who
      then sold it in favour of the appellants therein. Both ‘R’ and the
      appellants, were impleaded in the said suit. However, the decree-
      holder-Municipality being a necessary party as per Rule 92(4), was
      not impleaded. Despite the same, the said suit was decreed in
      favour of the plaintiff.
250. In the plaint, the plaintiff alleged that ‘V’ had committed fraud i.e.,
(a) he had not intimated the transfer of the property in favour of the
      plaintiff while initially appearing in the suit instituted by the
      Municipality, (b) the notice which was eventually sent to the
      plaintiff was deliberately made to the wrong address, (c) ‘V’ had
      voluntarily suffered an ex-parte decree, (d) ‘V’ did not object to the
      reduction of the upset price during the sale in execution of the
      decree, (e) ‘V’ participated in the auction sale through his wife and
      subsequently, sold it to ‘R’ who in turn, sold it to the appellants.
251. What we understand to be the essence of the plaintiff’s case in
T.
      Vijendradas
(supra) is that the original decree which was directly
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 162 of 172
concerned with her property was not binding on her inasmuch as
      the same was a nullity and without jurisdiction, having been passed
      without impleading her as a party despite the fact that the property
      had already been transferred in her favour before the institution of
      the suit by the Municipality. In other words, she was not a pendente
      lite transferee of the judgment-debtor-‘V’ but was a bona fide
      purchaser for value who was not hit by the doctrine of lis pendens.
      Therefore, not having an opportunity to assert her title either in the
      original suit or in an application under Rule 58 of
Order XXI CPC
for the want of knowledge, she was a “third party” as indicated
      under Rule 92(4). Being neither a party to the original suit, nor a
      representative of the judgment-debtor-‘V’, her suit would not be hit
      by
Section 47
CPC either.
252. We are aware that the plaintiff therein seems to have raised several
      contentions as regards the reduction of the upset price, non-service
      of notice etc. as well. However, for reasons that we have elaborated
      upon in the preceding parts of this judgment, those are grounds that
      could only be raised in an application under Rule 90 within the
      prescribed limitation period under
Article 127
of the
Limitation Act,
      1963
. Therefore, even in
T. Vijendradas
(supra) these grounds falling
      with the scope of Rule 90, referred to by the plaintiff, must not be
      understood to have motivated this Court in holding the suit
      maintainable. The crux of the arguments of the plaintiff was only
      that the original decree was without jurisdiction and not binding on
      her.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 163 of 172
253. A crucial question in
T. Vijendradas
(supra) was whether the non-
impleadedment of the decree-holder-municipality would be
      detrimental to the suit instituted by the plaintiff. When there was
      enough material to infer that the original decree was a nullity, this
      Court did not wish to non-suit the plaintiff only based on the
      ground that the decree-holder-municipality was not made a party
      to the suit instituted by her as per Rule 92(4). Moreover, it was not
      the Municipality themselves who had raised the issue of their non-
      impleadment; such an issue was raised by the appellants who were
      pendente lite transferees. It was in such a background that this Court
      had exercised its jurisdiction under
Article 142
of the Constitution
      of India with a view to do complete justice between the parties and
      the suit was held to be maintainable. The relevant observations are
      thus:
“Conclusion
33. The appellants and their predecessors, therefore, are also
              guilty of suppressio veri. Ordinarily a statute shall prevail
              over the common law principle. However, in a case of this
              nature, in the event of any conflicting interest, this Court in
              exercise of its equity jurisdiction under
Article 142
of the
              Constitution of India is to weigh the effect of a fraud and the
              consequence of non-impleadment of a necessary party. We
              would hold that the scale of justice weighs in favour of the
              person who is a victim of fraud and, thus, we should not
              refuse any relief in his favour, only because he might have
              been wrongly advised. The purport and object for which
              Order 21 Rule 92(5) was enacted furthermore would be better
              subserved if it is directed that the respondents shall pay the
              amount which the court paid to the Municipality out of the
              amount of auction.
34. We have noticed hereinbefore that one of the objects
              sought to be achieved in amending Order 21 Rule 92 was to
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 164 of 172
do complete justice to the parties so as to enable the auction-
purchaser to get back the amount from the decree-holder and
            revive the execution proceedings so that the decree-holder
            may proceed against the judgment-debtor for realisation of
            the decretal amount. In this case, the plaintiff-respondents
            had not claimed any relief against the Municipality. The
            Municipality's right to realise the amount of property tax
            together with interest, if any, is not in dispute. Although the
            liability of Venugopal in terms of the 1920 Act to pay the
            property tax continued, it has been accepted at the Bar that
            the plaintiff-respondents were also liable to pay the amount
            of property tax after the date of sale. In a case of this nature,
            therefore, the plaintiff-respondents can be directed to pay the
            amount of property tax by way of redemption of mortgage in
            favour of the Municipality.
35. If any amount is available with the court out of the
            amount received from the auction-sale, the same may be paid
            to the appellants. The appellants would also be otherwise
            entitled to file an appropriate suit as against Manickam and
            others.”
254. The aforesaid decision in
T. Vijendradas
(supra) would not help the
      case of the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively herein. As opposed
      to the respondent nos.
1 and 2 respectively herein, the plaintiff in
T.
      Vijendradas
(supra) was a “third party” who was not a transferee
      pendente lite of the judgment-debtor and whose suit was not hit by
      the bar under
Section 47
CPC. Furthermore, not having been
      dispossessed in the course of the execution proceedings, there was
      no question of availing the remedy under Rule 99 either. Hence, the
      suit instituted by the plaintiff therein fell under Scenario 1 (as we
      have illustrated above). Her suit was otherwise maintainable, and
      the only impediment in her way was the non-impleadment of the
      original decree-holder-municipality. In the unique facts and
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                                 Page 165 of 172
circumstances of case therein, this Court had exercised its plenary
      powers to only overcome the non-impleadment of such a necessary
      party in the separate suit. Along with that, with a view to keep the
      intent underlying Rule 92(5) intact, the plaintiff therein was directed
      to pay the property tax to the decree-holder Municipality and the
      appellants were held to be entitled to any amount remaining from
      the auction-sale, along with the filing an appropriate suit for
      recovery of money against their vendors.
255. The facts and circumstances that we are faced with are entirely
      different and goes to the very root of the maintainability of the suit
      instituted by the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively. Their suit is
      non-maintainable not merely because of the failure to implead a
      necessary party but owing to the bar to a suit under
Section 47
CPC
      and Rule 99 of
Order XXI CPC
respectively. Moreover, they are
      transferees pendente lite of the judgment-debtor, which fact, by itself,
      renders them ineligible to obtain any relief of declaration of title
      and/or possession.
G.    CONCLUSION
256. A conspectus of the aforesaid detailed discussion on the position of
      law as regards the doctrine of lis pendens along with Rules 58, 89 to
      92, 99 to 104 of
Order XXI CPC
respectively and
Section 47
CPC is
      as follows:
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                           Page 166 of 172
(i.)      Section 52 of the 1882 Act embodying the doctrine of lis
               pendens would apply to suits where any right to the property
               in question is directly and specifically in issue. Whether any
               right in the property was directly and specifically in
               question in the suit would depend on the facts and
               circumstances of each case. The doctrine cannot blindly be
               made inapplicable to suits in which the plaint contains a
               specific averment that the mortgaged property be attached
               and sold in lieu of the decree or a charge be created on the
               property. If interpreted so, any judgment-debtor can render
               the decree incapable of execution by transferring his interest
               in the property during the pendency of such a suit.
(ii.)     Rule 89 of
Order XXI CPC
provides an opportunity to any
               person claiming an interest in the property sold or a person
               acting for or on behalf of the persons having such interest,
               another opportunity to save the property from the clutches
               of the sale. A sine qua non for setting aside the sale under this
               rule would be the payment of the deposit as prescribed
               therein within a period of sixty days from the date of the
               sale. For the purposes of this rule, a pendente lite transferee of
               the judgment-debtor would also fall under the ambit of the
               phrase “person claiming an interest in the property sold”.
(iii.)    Rule 90 of
Order XXI CPC
provides that the sale shall be set-
aside if there exists any material irregularity or fraud in
               publishing or conducting the sale. Furthermore, such
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                              Page 167 of 172
material irregularity or fraud must cause a substantial
               injury to the applicant under Rule 90. In other words, there
               must be a direct nexus between the material irregularity or
               fraud and the substantial injury caused to the applicant.
(iv.)     The words “material irregularity in publishing or conducting it”
               in Rule 90 would include any material irregularity or fraud
               occurring at a stage prior to the proclamation of sale as well,
               provided that the applicant did not have an opportunity to
               raise or could not have raised such a grievance at the
               appropriate time. Furthermore, the mere absence of or any
               defect in the attachment, by itself, cannot be a ground for
               setting aside the sale under Rule 90, unless substantial
               injury is proved. The applicant must make specific
               averments as regards the alleged irregularities or fraud, and
               convince the executing court that a substantial injury has
               been caused to him as a consequence.
(v.)      The absence of a saleable interest on the part of the
               judgment-debtor to the suit property cannot be brought in
               as a ground under Rule 90 of
Order XXI CPC
. Such a ground
               would squarely fall within the ambit of Rule 58 of
Order XXI
               CPC
, if the sale is yet to be confirmed.
(vi.)     Rule 92(3) of
Order XXI CPC
states that no person against
               whom an order under Rule 92 is made (either confirming
               the sale under Rule 92(1) or setting it aside under Rule 92(2))
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 168 of 172
can institute a separate suit in that regard. However, there
               is a very narrow scope for a person to file a separate suit
               despite the bar under Rule 92(3). The reason for such a
               separate suit must be that the execution proceedings and the
               sale was without jurisdiction and therefore, a nullity and not
               binding on the plaintiff who has instituted a separate suit.
(vii.)    Having said so, before holding such a separate suit
               instituted by a plaintiff alleging that the entire execution
               proceedings was without jurisdiction and therefore, the sale
               was a nullity, maintainable, courts must be vigilant in
               ensuring that the plaintiff was not a party to the original
               decree or a representative of a party to the original decree,
               as stated in
Section 47
CPC. If so, instead of filing a separate
               suit, such persons must prefer an application under
Section
               47
CPC. Upon any failure to do so, their separate suit would
               be hit by the bar contained in
Section 47
CPC which
               specifically uses the words “and not by a separate suit”.
(viii.)   The term “third party” under Rule 92(4) would mean a
               party other than the judgment-debtor, decree-holder or the
               auction-purchaser and would refer to a party who has not
               had his right, title or interest vis-à-vis the property in
               question adjudicated under Rule 58, Rule 97 or Rule 99 of
Order XXI CPC
respectively. To put it very simply, the term
               “third party” under Rule 92(4) would refer to a party who
               is extraneous to the original suit proceedings and the
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 169 of 172
proceedings under
Order XXI CPC
, and who either has not
               had his right, title or interest adjudicated or having the
               opportunity to have his right, title or interest adjudicated,
               has not availed such a remedy within the required time.
               Such a “third party” would also be someone who falls
               outside the scope of
Section 47
CPC.
(ix.)     Rule 92(4) is not a provision which confers any right to the
               third party to institute a suit for challenging the title of the
               judgment-debtor to the property which is subject to the
               execution proceedings. It is merely a procedural provision
               which states that such a suit must be instituted against the
               auction-purchaser, where the decree-holder and judgment-
               debtor would be necessary parties.
(x.)      When a party other than the judgment-debtor, including a
               third party, is dispossessed during the course of execution
               of a decree, the only remedy for such a dispossessed party
               would lie in filing an application under Rule 99 complaining
               of its dispossession. In such an application, all questions
               including that of the right, title and interest of the parties in
               the proceeding, to the property, would be examined by the
               executing court.
(xi.)     The words “may” used in Rule 99 along with the words “and
               not by a separate suit” used in Rule 101, must not be read to
               mean that a party who has been dispossessed has two
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                             Page 170 of 172
options i.e., to either prefer an application under Rule 99 or
               to file a separate suit, the moment they are dispossessed.
               This would defeat the underlying object of the amendment
               made to the scheme of Rules 99 to 104 respectively wherein
               the executing court has been specifically empowered to look
               into the questions relating to the right, title and interest of
               the parties, quite akin to that which would have been done
               by way of a separate suit. Once the period of limitation for
               preferring an application under Rule 99 lapses, the person
               who has been dispossessed in the course of the execution of
               the decree, including a third party, cannot file a separate suit
               to circumvent or by-pass the said prescribed period of
               limitation.
(xii.)    Rule 102 prevents the executing court from passing any
               order under Rule 100 if it is found that the applicant under
               Rule 99 is a transferee pendente lite of the judgment-debtor.
               This again, cannot be construed as giving leeway to such a
               person to institute a separate suit. We say so for the simple
               reason that, even in the separate suit, the law would not look
               favorably upon a pendente lite transferee, and no relief of
               declaration of title and/or possession would be granted to
               him. His fate would be the same as under an application
               under Rule 99.
(xiii.)   Therefore, - First, the separate suit instituted by the
               respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively would be non-
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 171 of 172
maintainable because they are representatives of the
               judgment-debtor and the bar envisaged under
Section 47
CPC would squarely apply to their case. Secondly, having
               not availed the remedy under Rule 99 of
Order XXI CPC
within time, the separate suit instituted for the same relief(s)
               would be barred. Thirdly, even if the aforesaid two reasons
               assigned by us could be said to not affect the suit instituted
               by the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, they would still
               not be entitled to the reliefs claimed owing to them being
               pendente lite transferees of the judgment-debtor whose
               transaction would be hit by the doctrine of lis pendens.
257. In light of the aforesaid, the High Court in its impugned judgment
      could be said to have committed an error by preoccupying itself
      with the allegations of fraud made by the respondents nos. 1 and 2
      respectively and ignoring the true essence of the provisions under
      Section 47 and
Order XXI CPC
respectively, in holding the suit to be
      maintainable. If the approach taken by the impugned decision i.e.,
      that fraud vitiates everything, is endorsed, especially in the context
      of an auction sale conducted by the executing court, then Rule 90 of
Order XXI CPC
which is time-bound and which deals with the very
      same aspect i.e., material irregularities or fraud in conducting or
      publishing the sale, would be rendered obsolete. Courts must be
      vigilant as to when the plaintiff is invoking grounds which
      otherwise could be said to fall under the scope of Rule 90 of
Order
      XXI CPC
and when the grounds raised by the plaintiff are such that
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                            Page 172 of 172
the entire execution proceedings and the consequent sale suffered
      from the want of jurisdiction and/or was a nullity.
258. The impugned judgment also seems to have missed the key aspect
      that the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively are transferees pendente
      lite of one of the judgment debtors.
259. In the result, the appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed.
260. Before we close the present matter, we consider it apposite to point
      out that the peculiarity of the facts and circumstances of this case
      has not escaped our attention. We have given a considerable
      amount of thought and we believe that we should put all the
      disputes between the parties herein to rest, once and for all. We
      seriously considered whether we could grant any other relief to the
      respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, at this stage.
261. What has predominantly weighed with us is that the sale deeds in
      favour of the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively were executed by
      their vendor in the year 1985. We are now in the year 2025. More
      than 40 years have passed by. It would be a long and taxing battle
      for respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively to recover the sale
      consideration paid by them to the respondent no. 3.
262. We have taken note of the fact that the original vendor i.e.
      respondent no. 3 before us, was one of the judgment-debtors. We
      are also cognizant of the fact that appellants-auction purchasers
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 173 of 172
before us are none other than the nephews of the original vendor
      i.e., respondent no. 3. Amongst assigning several other reasons, we
      have already indicated that the factum of such a relationship
      between the auction-purchasers and judgment-debtor(s) could not
      have been raised as a ground to make the separate suit instituted by
      the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively, maintainable. All such
      allegations may constitute material irregularity or fraud in
      publishing or conducting the sale, which would instead fall within
      the purview of Rule 90 of
Order XXI CPC
and such an application
      has to be made in a timely manner before the executing court.
      However, in the course of assessing whether we could direct the
      payment of any amount from the respondent no.3-vendor, the
      counsel for the appellants-auction purchasers fairly conceded that
      since his clients are the nephews of the vendor, they would be
      willing to pay a fair amount to the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively.
263. In such circumstances
referred to above
, we do not wish to subject
      the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively to a fresh yet arduous
      round of litigation for the limited relief of recovery of money from
      the original vendor i.e., respondent no.3.
264. In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case and with
       a view to do substantial justice, we direct that the appellants pay a
       sum of Rs. 75,00,000/- to the respondent nos. 1 and 2 respectively,
       within a period of 6 months from the date of this judgment. The
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                          Page 174 of 172
failure to pay the aforesaid sum within such a period would attract
       an interest at the rate of 12% per annum till the date of payment.
265. In the event of any default by the appellants herein in complying
      with the aforesaid directions, the respondent nos. 1 and 2
      respectively, would be at liberty to move to this Court.
266. Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
267. Registry shall circulate one copy each of this judgment to all the
      High Courts.
………………………..J.
                                                     (J. B. PARDIWALA)




                                                  ………………………...J.
                                                     (R. MAHADEVAN)



New Delhi,
15th December, 2025.
SLP(C) No. 14461 of 2019                                         Page 175 of 172