[Cites
42
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of West Bengal vs Anil Kumar Dey on 10 December, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
,
Sanjay Karol
2025 INSC 1413




                                                                            REPORTABLE



                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 5373             OF 2025
                                        (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 1003/2025)




                            THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL                 … APPELLANT(S)


                                                            VERSUS


                            ANIL KUMAR DEY                           … RESPONDENT(S)




                                                        JUDGMENT
For ease and clarity, this judgment is divided as follows:
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
RAJNI MUKHI
Date: 2025.12.10
17:36:33 IST
Reason:
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                Page 1 of 38
INDEX


QUESTION TO BE CONSIDERED..........................................2
FACTUAL AND LEGAL BACKDROP....................................3
IMPUGNED JUDGMENT.........................................................8
RELEVANT PROVISIONS.....................................................10
BRIEF SUBMISSIONS............................................................15
CONSIDERATION...................................................................18
CONCLUSION.........................................................................36


SANJAY KAROL, J.
Leave granted.
QUESTION TO BE CONSIDERED
2.       The short but significant question that arises in this
appeal is whether, when proceedings initiated against a person
are only under the provisions of the
Prevention of Corruption
Act
19881, would it be open for the investigating authorities
(police) to freeze the accounts of the accused persons under
Section 102
of the Code of Criminal Procedure 19732. In other
words, are the powers under
Section 18A
of the PC Act, which
prescribes the application of the Criminal Law Amendment
Ordinance, 19443 insofar as the proceedings of attachment are
1 Hereinafter referred to as ‘
PC Act
’
2 Hereinafter referred to as ‘
CrPC
’
3 Hereinafter referred to as ‘Ordinance ‘
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                                           Page 2 of 38
concerned, and the power under
Section 102
Cr.P.C., i.e., the
power of a police officer to seize certain property, co-existent or
mutually exclusive.
FACTUAL AND LEGAL BACKDROP
3.       The facts in which the question framed above arises are
that:
a)      Kalyan Mandal, Sub-Inspector of Police posted at
        the Directorate of Anti-Corruption Branch, West Bengal,
        conducted a preliminary enquiry against the Respondent’s
        son, Mr. Prabir Kumar Dey Sarkar, and asked, vide
        complaint dated 30th July 2019 addressed to the
        Superintendent of Police, Directorate of Anti-Corruption
        Branch, West Bengal, that a case be registered under
Section 13(2)
read with 13(1)(b) of the
PC Act
. The
        relevant extracts thereof are extracted hereinbelow:
“…During enquiry, it could be revealed that Sri
               Prabir Kumar Dey Sarkar, S/O- Sri Anil Kumar
               Dey Sarkar residing at GA-130, Rajdanga Main
               Road, PS-Kasba, Kolkata-700107 had joined as
               Constable of Police in 1979 and was promoted to
               the rank of Wireless Operator in the year 1984.
               Subsequently, he joined as Sub Inspector in the
               year 1991 and was promoted to the rank of
               Inspector of Police in the year 2011. During his
               tenure at different Police Stations, he earned huge
               illegal money thereby creating enormous
               movable/immovable properties, channelizing the
               said illegal money in the name of his relatives
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                         Page 3 of 38
which have been found disproportionate to his
               known sources of income.
He, being a Police Officer (SI in 1991) had drawn
               net salary for the check period from 2007 to 2017
               to the tune of Rs.40,08,090/- (approximately) and
               kitchen expenditure for the said check period will
               be 1-3rd of his Net Salary i.e., Rs. 13,36,030/-.
               Thus, his likely savings for the said check period
               could be Rs. 26,72,060/-
But during the enquiry, available documents
               revealed that the total movable/immovable
               properties acquired by Sri Prabir Kumar Dey
               Sarkar in his name as well as in the name of his
               relatives, together with the expenditure incurred
               during the said check period, comes around Rs.
               1,49,18,628/- [One Crore Forty-enine lakh
               eighteen thousand six hundred & twenty-eight].
               The said amount of Rs. 1,49,18,628/- comprises
(a) construction cost, labour cost and KMC fees
               of building (G+3) OF GA-130, Rajdanga Main
               Road, (b) liquid cash seized from the premises of
               GA-130, Rajdanga Main Road, (c) value of gold
               ornaments seized from the residence of P.K. Dey
               Sarkar at GA-130, Rajdanga Main Road, (d) cost
               of a Flat at P.Majumdar Road, (e) landed properly
               at Chak Kalar Khal measuring abut four cottahs,
(f) premium for LICI and (g) fees paid to the
               Heritage School for his daughter.
During calculation the valuation of : (I) the five
               storied building at BF-11, Rajdanga Main Road,
(ii) three storied building at GA-97, Rajdanga
               Main Road, (iii) GB-50, Rajdanga Main Road
               have not been taken into consideration which may
               further compound the valuation of the total assets.
               Considering his income, expenditure, likely
               savings, Sri Prabir Kumar Dey Sarkar prima-
               facie, has possessed huge assets disproportionate
               to his known sources of income…”
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                        Page 4 of 38
b)         Pursuant to the complaint, FIR No. 09/19 came to
       be registered. During investigation, certain fixed deposits
       held by the Respondent (father of the main accused) were
       frozen. An application was filed before the City Sessions
       Court, Calcutta4 seeking de-freezing of the said accounts.
       The same came to be rejected by order dated 28 th March
       2023. The operative portion is thus:
“..The petitioner by filing his petition has stated
                  that his fixed deposits have been freezed by the
                  police. He is 93 years old and is suffering from
                  various ailments. He has prayed for defreezing
                  the fixed deposits standing in his name.
                  Ld. Spl. P.P. vehemently opposes the petition. A
                  written objection is filed against the petition by
                  the I.O through Ld. Spl. P.P.
                  It is submitted by Ld. Spl. P.P. that Prabir Kr. Dey
                  Sarkar acquired movable and immovable
                  properties in his name and also in the name of his
                  relatives. The amount he acquired is abnormally
                  disporportaiton to his income. That apart, he has
                  also acquired to Benami properties standing in the
                  name of his nearest relatives. This petitioner has
                  six fixed deposits in Axis Bank, Cosba Branch.
                  He also has six fixed deposits in SBI, Rubi Park
                  branch. It is submitted that those are not standing
                  only in his name. Those are standing either jointly
                  in thename of this petitioner and Deepa Dey
                  Sarkar or in the name of this petitioner and
                  Subrata Dey Sarkar or in the name of this
                  petitioner and other rleatives of his family. The
                  petitioner could not give appropriate source of his
                  income where from he deposited this huge
                  amount of money jointly with others. It is further
                  submitted that in course of investigation it
4 Hereinafter referred to as ‘Trial Court’
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                            Page 5 of 38
revealed that the son of this petitioner has
               acquired huge disproportionate property. The
               prosecution apprehends that the same is kept by
               his son in the name of this petitioner and others.
               Therefore, according to the prosecution if the
               fixed deposits are allowed to be defreezed the
               prosecution will suffer irreparable loss to prove
               the case.
I have considered the submissions made by Ld.
               Spl. P.P. and Ld.
               Advocate appearing on behalf of this petitioner. I
               have examined the CD carefully. I also do not
               find any CD that the petitioner has bee able to
               show the source of his income where from he
               fixed the amounts. As the investigation is still in
               progress, I am unable to entertain the prayer of
               the petitioner.
The petitioner dated 16.03.2023 filed on behalf of
               the petitioner, Anil Kr Dey Sarkar to defreeze the
               fixed deposits is rejected…”
c)        The     Home      and    Hill    Affairs     Department,
      Government of West Bengal, by order dated 22 nd April
      2024, by order of the Hon’ble Governor, granted sanction
      for prosecution against the son of the respondent.
d)      Upon completion of the investigation, chargesheet
      was presented on 13th May 2024 which named a total of 4
      accused persons: Prabir Kumar Dey Sarkar (main accused
      and son of Respondent herein); Dipa Dey Sarkar (wife of
      main accused); Anil Kumar Dey Sarkar (Respondent
      herein); and Subir Kumar Dey Sarkar (brother of main
      accused and son of Respondent herein). Some of the
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                              Page 6 of 38
observations made in the chargesheet against the instant
      respondent, inter alia, are:
“…Investigation further revealed that business
               income and house property income of Dipa Dey
               Sarkar and Anil Kumar Dey Sarkar could not be
               substantiated in the instant case….
               …The circumstances and evidences collected so
               far in the case substantiated that the construction
               at BF-11 was solely attributed on Prabir Kumar
               Dey Sarkar apart from Anil Kumar Dey Sarkar…
               …Besides, huge number of Fixed Deposits in the
               name of accused Anil Kumar Dey Sarkar….
               …Investigation revealed that there had been
               thirty eight nos. of FD accounts lying in the name
               of Anil Kumar Dey Sarkar, Dipa Dey Sarkar,
               Subrata Dey Sarkar, Papiya Dey Sarkar and
               Supriyo Dey Sarkar. Out of thirty eight nos. of
               FD accounts, twelve FD accounts were still live
               and twenty six nos. of FD accounts were opened
               and closed within the check period and benefit of
               interest of the same was given to the accused
               persons in case of sixteen nos. of FDs, but in case
               of ten nos. of FDs, maturity benefit of the same
               was not provided to the accused persons because
               those     matured      FDs     were      re-invested.
               Investigation revealed that prior to the creation of
               the following FDs were re-invented. Investigation
               revealed that prior to the creation of the following
               FDs, there was huge deposition of unexplained
               cash in the SB accounts of accused persons. Such
               type of huge deposition of cash in the SB
               accounts of accused of persons was not in
               conformity with the legal source of income of
               accused person. Moreover, neither Dipa Dey
               Sarkar nor Anil Kumar Dey Sarkar was in
               position to explain the deposition of huge cash in
               their accounts. Therefore, Dipa Dey Sarkar being
               house wife and Anil Kumar Dey Sarkar being the
               pension holder of scanty amount was dependent
               on Prabir Kumar Dey Sarkar. So evidence
               collected so far substantiated that Prabir Kumar
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                          Page 7 of 38
Dey Sarkar played major role in the creation of
               the following FDs.”
e)        The City Sessions Court, Calcutta took cognizance
      on the basis of the chargesheet by order dated 14 th May
      2024 against the above said persons.
IMPUGNED JUDGMENT
4.      The order of the Trial Court rejecting the application for
de-freezing of accounts was challenged before the Calcutta
High Court5. The Judgment and Order dated 4th October 2024,
delivered therein setting aside the findings of the learned Trial
Court and directing de-freezing of the accounts, has been
challenged before us by the State. The relevant paras of the
order are:
“…13. In other words, an attachment/freezing of
               the bank accounts in connection with an offence
               under the 1988 Act is to be made in accordance
               with
section 18A
of the Act. Admittedly the bank
               accounts of the petitioner have been frozen by the
               opposite party in exercise of power under
section 102
of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
14. Diverse views have been taken by the High
               Courts of Madras and Patna with regard to
               applicability of section 102 of the Code in seizure
               and freezing of bank accounts in a criminal case
               registered under the 1988 Act. The Madras High
               Court has held in favour of such application
               whereas the Patna High Court has held that such
5 CRR No. 4511 of 2023
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                        Page 8 of 38
seizure and freezing can be made only under
section 18A
of the Act and not under section 102
               of the Code.
15. The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in the authority
               in Ratan Babulal (supra) has examined the
               question whether attachment of bank accounts is
               sustainable in exercise of powers under section
               102 of the Code. The Hon'ble Court has held that
               it is not possible to sustain freezing of the bank
               accounts taking recourse to section 102 of the
               Code as
The Prevention of Corruption Act
is a
               Code by itself. The freezing was accordingly set
               aside by the Hon'ble Court leaving open to the
               respondents/State to take such recourse in law as
               may be permissible.
16.
Section 18A
of the Act envisages that
               attachment, administration of attached property,
               execution of order of attachment and confiscation
               of money or property procured by means of an
               offence under the Act shall be governed by
section 18A
. Since admittedly the bank accounts
               of the petitioner were frozen by the opposite party
               by invoking section 102 of the Code and not by
               procedure under
section 18A
of the Act, the said
               freezing cannot be sustained.
17. In view of the fact that the bank accounts in
               question were not frozen in accordance with law,
               this Court does not find it necessary to deal with
               the prayer for de-freezing the same and objection
               raised thereto on merits.
18. Accordingly, freezing of the bank accounts of
               the petitioner is set aside.
19. The opposite party is directed to de-freeze the
               said accounts within seven days from date.
…”
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                        Page 9 of 38
RELEVANT PROVISIONS
5.      Before proceeding further, it would be important to take
note of the relevant provisions.
Section 13
of the PC Act

               “13. Criminal misconduct by a public servant.
               —1 [(1) A public servant is said to commit the
               offence of criminal misconduct,—
(a) if he dishonestly or fraudulently
                   misappropriates or otherwise converts for his
                   own use any property entrusted to him or any
                   property under his control as a public servant
                   or allows any other person so to do; or
(b) if he intentionally enriches himself illicitly
                   during the period of his office.
Explanation 1.—A person shall be presumed
                   to have intentionally enriched himself illicitly
                   if he or any person on his behalf, is in
                   possession of or has, at any time during the
                   period of his office, been in possession of
                   pecuniary        resources    or      property
                   disproportionate to his known sources of
                   income which the public servant cannot
                   satisfactorily account for.
Explanation 2.—The expression ‘‘known
                   sources of income’’ means income received
                   from any lawful sources.]
                   (2) Any public servant who commits criminal
                   misconduct shall be punishable with
                   imprisonment for a term which shall be not
                   less than [four years] but which may extend to
                   [ten years] and shall also be liable to fine.”
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                           Page 10 of 38
Section 18A
of the PC Act

               “18A. Provisions of Criminal Law Amendment
               Ordinance, 1944 to apply to attachment under
               this Act.—(1) Save as otherwise provided under
               the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002
(15 of 2003), the provisions of the Criminal Law
               Amendment Ordinance, 1944 (Ord. 38 of 1944)
               shall, as far as may be, apply to the attachment,
               administration of attached property and execution
               of order of attachment or confiscation of money
               or property procured by means of an offence
               under this Act.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the provisions of
               the Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1944
               (Ord. 38 of 1944) shall have effect, subject to the
               modification that the references to “District
               Judge” shall be construed as references to
               “Special Judge”.]”
Section 102
, CrPC
               “102. Power of police officer to seize certain
               property.—(1) Any police officer may seize any
               property which may be alleged or suspected to
               have been stolen, or which may be found under
               circumstances which create suspicion of the
               commission of any offence.
(2) Such police officer, if subordinate to the
               officer in charge of a police station, shall
               forthwith report the seizure to that officer.
               (3)Every police officer acting under sub-section
               (1) shall forthwith report the seizure to the
               Magistrate having jurisdiction and where the
               property seized is such that it cannot be
               conveniently transported to the Court, [or where
               there is difficulty in securing proper
               accommodation for the custody of such property,
               or where the continued retention of the property
               in police custody may not be considered
               necessary for the purpose of investigation,] he
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                        Page 11 of 38
may give custody thereof to any person on his
               executing a bond undertaking to produce the
               property before the Court as and when required
               and to give effect to the further orders of the
               Court as to the disposal of the same:
Provided that where the property seized under
               sub-section (1) is subject to speedy and natural
               decay and if the person entitled to the possession
               of such property is unknown or absent and the
               value of such property is less than five hundred
               rupees, it may forthwith be sold by auction under
               the orders of the Superintendent of Police and the
               provisions of sections 457 and 458 shall, as
               nearly as may be practicable, apply to the net
               proceeds of such sale.]”
Section 109
, IPC
               “109. Punishment of abetment if the act
               abetted is committed in consequence and when
               no express provision is made for its
               punishment.
Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act
               abetted is committed in consequence of the
               abetment, and no express provision is made by
               this Code for the punishment of such abetment,
               be punished with the punishment provided for the
               offence.
Explanation.—An act or offence is said to be
               committed in consequence of abetment, when it is
               committed in consequence of the instigation, or in
               pursuance of the conspiracy, or with the aid
               which constitutes the abetment.”
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                       Page 12 of 38
Sections of the Criminal Law
               (Amendment) Ordinance 1944
3. Application for attachment of property
               “(1) Where the [State Government or, as the case
               may be, the Central Government], has reason to
               believe that any person has committed (whether
               after the commencement of this Ordinance or not)
               any scheduled offence, the [State Government or,
               as the case may be, the Central Government]
               may, whether or not any Court has taken
               cognizance of the offence, authorise the making
               of an application to the District Judge within the
               local limits of whose jurisdiction the said person
               ordinarily resides or carries on business, for the
               attachment, under this Ordinance of the money or
               other property which the [State Government or, as
               the case may be, the Central Government]
               believes the said person tohave procured by
               means of the offence, or if such money or
               property cannot for any reason be attached, or
               other property of the said person of value as
               nearly as may be equivalent to that of the
               aforesaid money or other property.
(2) The provisions of Order XXVII of the First
               Schedule to
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (5
               of 1908), shall apply to proceedings for an order
               of attachment under this Ordinance as they apply
               to suits by the Government.
(3) An application under sub-section (1) shall be
               accompanied by one or more affidavit, stating the
               grounds on which the belief that the said person
               has committed any scheduled offence is founded,
               and the amount of money or value of other
               property believed to have been procured by
               means of the offence. The application shall also
               furnishany information available as to the
               location for the time being of any such money or
               other property, and shall, if necessary, give
               particulars, including the estimated value, of
               other property of the said person;the names and
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                       Page 13 of 38
addresses of any other persons believed to have
               or to be likely to claim, any interest or title in the
               property of the said person.
4. Ad interim attachment
               (1) Upon receipt of an application under
section
               3
, the District Judge shall, unless for reasons to be
               recorded in writing he is of the opinion that there
               exist no prima facie grounds for believe that the
               person in respect of whom the application is
               made has committed any scheduled offence or
               that he has procured thereby any money or other
               property, pass without delay an ad interim order
               attaching the money or other property alleged to
               have been so procured, or if it transpires that such
               money or other property is not available for
               attachment, such other property of the said person
               of equivalent value as the District Judge may
               think fit: Provided that the District Judge may if
               he thinks fit before passing such order, and shall
               before refusing to pass such order, examine the
               person or persons making the affidavit
               accompanying the application.
(2) At the same time as he passes an order under
               sub-section (1), the District Judge shall issue to
               the person whose money or other property is
               being attached, a notice, accompanied by copies
               of the order, the application and affidavits and of
               the evidence, if any, recorded, calling upon him to
               show cause on a date to be specified in the notice
               why the order of attachment should not be made
               absolute.
(3) The District Judge shall also issue,
               accompanied by copies of the documents
               accompanying the notice under sub-section (2), to
               all persons represented to him as having or being
               likely to claim, any interest or title in the property
               of the person to whom notice is issued under the
               said sub-section calling upon each such person to
               appear on the same date as specified in the notice
               under the said sub-section and make objection if
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                           Page 14 of 38
he so desires to the attachment of the property or
               any portion thereof on the ground that he has an
               interest in such property or portion thereof.
               (4) Any person claiming an interest in the
               attached property or any portion thereof may,
               notwithstanding that no notice has been served
               upon him under this section, make an objection as
               aforesaid to the District Judge at any time before
               an order is passed under sub-section (1) or sub-
               section (3), as the case may be, of
section 5
.”


BRIEF SUBMISSIONS
6.    We have heard Mr. Shadan Farasat and Mr. Siddharth
Agarwal, learned senior counsel for the State and the
Respondent, respectively. We have also perused the written
submissions. The State’s position is that the High Court’s
reliance on
Ratan Babulal Lath v. State of Karnataka6
which
observes that the
PC Act
is a Code complete in itself, is not
justified, for it does not lay down any authoritative position in
law, binding under
Article 141
of the Constitution of India. The
two provisions, i.e.,
Section 18A
of the PC Act and
Section 102
Cr.P.C., operate in distinct and/or complementary spheres and
are not mutually exclusive. This seizure of property may or
may not culminate in attachment. The purpose of the former is
to secure the property as evidence during investigation, and
that by itself does not constitute attachment. The power of
attachment/ad interim attachment given under
Sections 3
and
4
6(2022)
16
SCC 287
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                       Page 15 of 38
of the Ordinance are not akin to the power of seizure given
under
Section 102
, Cr.P.C. The latter is a power to be exercised
by the police, which does not require prior judicial approval
and so, is effective in securing evidence, even if it is also
suspected, tainted property, whereas the latter has to be
supported by grounds set out in affidavits, inherently making it
a deliberative process. This means that both powers cannot be
construed as inconsistent with the other or barring the exercise
of the other. It was, as such, submitted that the High Court had
erred in its conclusion.
Per contra, the Respondent’s position is that
Ratan
Babulal Lath
(supra) does in fact constitute binding precedent
as evidenced by the fact that it has been relied on by this Court
in The State of Bihar & Ors. v. Sukhdani Devi Etc. Etc.7as
also by other High Courts. The purpose of the power under
Section 102, CrP.C. is, to serve investigative needs. The
account, having been frozen by the police, does not serve any
such investigative need as the banks have already supplied
detailed statements regarding the same, and the Respondent
has also disclosed the source of funds in his replies to the
authorities. Further, it is the State’s case that the action of
reason has been taken since the funds found in these bank
accounts are disproportionate to the known sources of income.
7 Order dated 14.10.24 in Criminal Appeal Nos.4232-4234 of 2024
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                       Page 16 of 38
In other words, the same was done, not for any investigative
purpose. In effect, the freezing has been done to prevent the
funds suspected of being disproportionate, from being
withdrawn/transferred, which is the object of attachment. This
Court in
State of Maharashtra v. Tapas D. Neogy8
, permitted
the freezing of bank accounts under
Section 102
, Cr.P.C. In that
case, the Respondent, such as in the present case, was also a
public servant, given that, at the relevant point in time there
was no provision for attachment under the
PC Act
. This lacuna
was addressed and cured by the 2018 amendment to the
PC
Act
, and so, the procedure provided therein has to be followed.
[Ref:
Opto Circuit India Ltd v Axis Bank & Ors
9]. Lastly, it
has been submitted that the allegations of disproportionate
assets have been responded to by the Respondent before the
Police, however, the same has not been reflected in the
chargesheet, nor have they been considered in their proper
light, i.e., retirsl benefits, profits from the sale of lands
belonging to his wife, rental income, etc. The said seizure was
not reported to the concerned Magistrate, in accordance with
Section 102(3)
, Cr.P.C. In the above terms, the conclusion of
the High Court was submitted to be correct in law.
8 (1999) 7 SCC 685
9 (2021) 6 SCC 707
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                      Page 17 of 38
CONSIDERATION
7.      In light of the afore-stated submissions, let us now
consider the question as framed in paragraph 2.
8.      Section 102, which appears in Chapter VI of the
Cr.P.C
.
titled as ‘Processes to Compel Appearance’ and more
particularly Part ‘D’ thereof, which                       is headlined as
‘Miscellaneous', uses the word 'seizure’ and Sections under the
Ordinance, which
Section 18A
applies to the
PC Act
, uses the
word ‘confiscation’ and ‘attachment’. The meaning of these
two words, which obviously would indicate the similarities
and/or differences, acquires importance. Seize means to “to
take something quickly and keep or hold it10” Merriam Webster
defines ‘seizure’ as “the act, action, or process of seizing : the
state of being seized or the taking possession of person or
property by legal process”11. Black’s Law Dictionary describes
‘seize’ as “To put in possession, invest with fee simple, be
seized of or in, be legal possessor of, or be holder in fee
simple.” Seizure is “to take possession of forcibly, to grasp, to
snatch, or to put in possession.12 P. Ramanatha Aiyar’s
Advanced Law Lexicon defines ‘seizure’ as “ In general
“seizure” is a forcible taking possession. The legal definition
10
11 https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/seizure#:~:text=seizure-,noun,the
%20brain%20(as%20in%20epilepsy)
12 Henry Cambell Black, Black’s Law Dictionary, 4th Edition.
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                                     Page 18 of 38
of the word “seizure” is the taking possession of property by
an officer under legal process.”13 Confiscate, then means
“to officially take private property away from someone, usually
by legal authority”14           Black’s   Law   Dictionary   defines
‘confiscate’ as “To appropriate property to the use of the state.
To adjudge property to be forfeited to the public treasury; to
seize and condemn private forfeited property to public use”
Now moving to attachment, the Cambridge Dictionary,
describes attachment, in law, as “the act of arresting a person
for failing to obey the order of a court, or of officially taking
their property because they have failed to pay money that they
owe”15 Black’s Law Dictionary defines attachment as “The act
or process of taking, apprehending, or seizing persons or
property, by virtue of a writ, summons, or other judicial order,
and bringing the same into the custody of the law; used either
for the purpose of bringing a person before the court, of
acquiring jurisdiction over the property seized, to compel an
appearance, to furnish security for debt or costs, or to arrest a
fund in the hands of a third person who may become liable to
pay it over. Also, the writ or other process for the
accomplishment of the purposes above enumerated, this being
the more common use of the word. A remedy ancillary to an
action by which plaintiff is enabled to acquire a lien upon
13 3rd Edition, 2009
14
15
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                          Page 19 of 38
property or effects of defendant for satisfaction of judgment
which plaintiff may obtain.”

        Having referred to and understood the meaning of the
terms, we move forward.
9.      The text of
Section 102
, Cr.P.C., has already been
reproduced supra. From a studied analysis of the judgments of
this    Court      involving    this   provision,   the   following
principles/aspects can be highlighted:
9.1 Under this Section, property that is alleged/suspected
       to be stolen; is the object of crime; has a direct link to the
       commission of the offence, can be seized. [See:
M.T.
       Enrica Lexie v. Doramma16
]

       9.2 The police have the power to seize passports and bank
       accounts under this Section.
[See:
Tapas D. Neogy
(supra),
Suresh Nanda v. CBI17
, Teesta Atul Setalvad v.
State of Gujarat18.
9.3 Orders of freezing issued under this Section, can only
       be in effect to aid investigation. [See:
Jermyn Capital
       LLC v. CBI19] Once
the investigation is complete, that
       ipso facto, does not entitle the person whose bank

16 (2012) 6 SCC 760
17 (2008) 3 SCC 674
18 (2018) 2 SCC 372
19 (2023) 7 SCC 810
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                           Page 20 of 38
accounts have been frozen, to have them released. It shall,
      however, be open to them to apply to the concerned
      authority for the same, and the authority shall consider the
      same in accordance with law.
[See:Teesta Atul Setalvad
      (supra)]

      9.4 The police do not have the power to seize any
      immovable property. It cannot dispossess someone who is
      in possession of the immovable property.
[See:
Nevada
      Properties (P) Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra20
]

      9.5 It is not an enabling provision under which the police
      may, to do justice, seize the property and hand it over to
      whom they believe to be the rightful owner thereof.
[See:
Nevada Properties (P) Ltd.
(supra)]
10.     In order to understand attachment, i.e., what is
prescribed in the
PC Act
, let us look at the procedure given in
the Ordinance, as also other legislations where attachment of
property is a consequence, to appreciate, in particular, the
procedure of the Ordinance, as also attachment as employed in
other statutes.
10.1 The Ordinance prescribes the following procedure:
 Step 1: Application under
Section 3
20 (2019)
20
SCC 119
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                        Page 21 of 38
o State or authorised agency files an
            application before the District Judge.
o Must be supported by affidavit(s) stating
            grounds of belief that the accused committed
            a scheduled offence and giving details/value
            of property believed to be procured.
o Prior cognizance of the offence by a
            criminal court is not required. (
Ravi Sinha v.
            State of Jharkhand, Kamal Malik
case).
       Step 2: Ad-interim attachment (
Section 4
)
            o On receiving the application, the District
            Judge ordinarily passes an ad-interim order
            of attachment without delay.
o This order prevents alienation or disposal
            of the property pending further proceedings.
       Step 3: Notice and Opportunity to Show Cause
            o The person whose property is attached is
            given notice.
o They must be given a fair opportunity to
            show cause why the attachment should not
            be made absolute.
Step 4: Making the Order Absolute (
Section 5
)
            o After hearing objections, the Judge may
            confirm the order and make the attachment
            absolute.
o Ownership objections and claims about
            the lawful source of acquisition are
            considered judicially. (AIR 2018 SC (Cri)
164).
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                Page 22 of 38
 Step 5: Execution and Enforcement
            o The attachment order is carried out “so far
            as may be practicable” under
the Code of
            Civil Procedure
, 1908.
o This may include seizure, freezing of
            assets, or appointment of a receiver.
 Step 6: Security in lieu of Attachment (Section
8)
            o The affected person may apply to provide
            security in place of attachment.
o If the Judge finds security sufficient, the
            attachment can be lifted or not enforced.
       Step 7: Appeal / Revision (
Section 11
)
            o Orders making attachment absolute (or
            other specified orders) are appealable under
Section 11
.
o Appeal must be filed before            the
            appropriate forum within limitation.
10.2 Now, moving to other statutes.
The Prevention of
      Money Laundering Act, 2002
, dedicates an entire chapter,
      i.e., Chapter III, to these processes.
Sections 5
and
8
thereof, provide for the procedure to be followed. A
      perusal of
Section 5
(Attachment of property involved in
      money-laundering) reveals these sequential steps:
1. Director/Authorised Officer forms 'reason
            to believe'.
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                    Page 23 of 38
2. Provisional Attachment Order issued
            (max 180 days).
3. Order + material sent to Adjudicating
            Authority (sealed envelope).
4. Within 30 days → Complaint filed before
            Adjudicating Authority.
5. Adjudicating Authority holds hearing
            (
Section 8
).
6. Order under
Section 8(3)
: Confirm or
            Release attachment.
7. If confirmed → Property continues
            attached until trial ends.
8.    Final outcome: Confiscation to
            Government OR Release.
Section 8
, (Adjudication) also prescribes detailed steps:
1. Receipt of complaint (u/s 5(5)) or
            application (u/s 17(4) or 18(10)).
2. Adjudicating Authority forms 'reason to
            believe' (person committed offence
u/s 3
or
            possesses proceeds of crime).
3. Notice issued (≥ 30 days) to such person
            → requiring explanation of sources of
            income/assets + evidence.
• If property held on behalf of another
                → notice is also served to that person.
• If property is jointly held → notice to
                all holders.
4. Adjudicating Authority considers:
(a) Reply to notice,
(b) Hearing of aggrieved person &
                Director (or authorised officer),
(c) All relevant material on record.
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                     Page 24 of 38
5. Order recorded: Finding whether property
            is involved in money laundering.
• If claimed by a third party →
                 opportunity of hearing is given.
6. If property involved → Attachment /
            Retention / Freezing is confirmed (u/s 8(3)).
• Continues during investigation (≤ 365
                 days) or pendency of proceedings.
• Becomes final upon confiscation
                 order (u/s 8(5)/(7), 58B, 60(2A)).
• Period of stay by the Court is
                 excluded from 365 days.
7. After confirmation → Director/Authorised
            Officer takes possession of property (u/s
            8(4)).
8. Trial before Special Court:
• If money laundering proved →
                 property      confiscated     to   Central
                 Government (u/s 8(5)).
• If not proved → property released to
                 entitled person (u/s 8(6)).
• If trial cannot be concluded
                 (death/proclaimed offender/other reason)
                 → Court decides confiscation or release
                 (u/s 8(7)).
9. Restoration to Claimants:
• If property confiscated → Special
                 Court may restore to the claimant with
                 legitimate interest who suffered
                 quantifiable loss (u/s 8(8)).
• Conditions: claimant acted in good
                 faith, took precautions, not involved in
                 laundering.
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                 Page 25 of 38
• Court may even consider restoration
                 during trial (Proviso to
s. 8(8)
).
10.3
The Income Tax Act, 1961
, provides for provisional
      attachment to protect the interests of the revenue. A
      perusal of Section 281B makes clear the following steps:
1. Proceeding pending for assessment/
            reassessment       /    escaped     assessment;
Assessing Officer (AO) forms an opinion
            that provisional attachment is necessary to
            protect revenue.
2. AO obtains previous approval from the
            relevant higher authority (Principal Chief
            Commissioner/Chief               Commissioner;
Principal        Commissioner/Commissioner;
            Principal Director General/Director General;
            Principal Director/Director).
3. On approval, AO issues a written order
            provisionally attaching the assessee's
            property in the manner provided in the
            Second Schedule.
4.     Initial period of provisional attachment
            is six months from the date of the order.
5. The higher authority may extend the
            provisional attachment (reasons recorded),
            but total extension cannot exceed two years
            or sixty days after the date of
            assessment/reassessment, whichever is later.
6. Assessee may furnish a bank guarantee
            from a scheduled bank for an amount not less
            than the fair market value (FMV) of the
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                    Page 26 of 38
attached property. If accepted, the AO shall
            revoke the attachment.
7.        AO may refer the matter to the
            Valuation Officer (s.142A) to determine
            FMV — report due within 30 days.
8.     AO must revoke the provisional
            attachment within 45 days of receiving the
            guarantee if a Valuation Officer reference
            was made; otherwise, within 15 days.
9.    If a notice of demand specifying a sum
            is served and the assessee fails to pay, the
            AO may invoke the bank guarantee (wholly
            or partly) to recover the amount.
10. The AO shall invoke the guarantee if
            the assessee fails to renew the guarantee 15
            days before its expiry.
11. Amount realized by invoking the
            guarantee is adjusted against existing
            demand; any balance is deposited in the
            Personal Deposit Account (PDA) of the
            Principal Commissioner/Commissioner.
12. If AO is satisfied that the guarantee is
            no longer required, the AO shall release the
            guarantee forthwith.
11.     A detailed analysis of the provisions concerning
attachment given in the Ordinance as also the other Acts, the
steps of which have been detailed above, is an effort to
juxtapose the procedure
laid down in
different statutes, showing
that attachment is a consequence which is given effect to after
due application of mind and compliance with procedure. It is not
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                      Page 27 of 38
a decision that can be taken on the spur of the moment. It is not
a decision that can be taken by a single person. The situation
prevalent on the ground and in response to the situation as it
may be developing, has to be considered. Instead, the law
provides detailed steps and procedures to be complied with
before someone's property can be attached. Now, contrasting
this with the power contained under
Section 102
Cr.P.C., it is
clear from the text reproduced supra that it allows ‘any police
officer’ to ‘seize any property’, and in order to balance the
scales, requires that once such a seizure is done, information
thereof has been sent forthwith to the concerned Magistrate.
This requirement of communication to the Magistrate forthwith
received consideration in a recent judgment of this Court in
Shento Varghese v. Julfikar Husen21
, the conclusions of which
are as below:
“26. From the discussion made above, it would
               emerge that the expression “forthwith” means “as
               soon as may be”, “with reasonable speed and
               expedition”, “with a sense of urgency”, and
               “without any unnecessary delay”. In other words,
               it would mean as soon as possible, judged in the
               context of the object sought to be achieved or
               accomplished.
27. We are of the considered view that the said
               expression must receive a reasonable construction
               and in giving such construction, regard must be
               had to the nature of the act or thing to be
               performed and the prevailing circumstances of the

21 (2024) 7 SCC 23
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                       Page 28 of 38
case. When it is not the mandate of the law that
               the act should be done within a fixed time, it
               would mean that the act must be done within a
               reasonable time. It all depends upon the
               circumstances that may unfold in a given case and
               there cannot be a straitjacket formula prescribed
               in this regard. In that sense, the interpretation of
               the word “forthwith” would depend upon the
               terrain in which it travels and would take its
               colour     depending     upon     the     prevailing
               circumstances which can be variable.
28. Therefore, in deciding whether the police
               officer has properly discharged his obligation
               under
Section 102(3)
CrPC, the Magistrate would
               have to, firstly, examine whether the seizure was
               reported forthwith. In doing so, it ought to have
               regard to the interpretation of the expression,
               “forthwith” as discussed above. If it finds that the
               report was not sent forthwith, then it must
               examine whether there is any explanation offered
               in support of the delay. If the Magistrate finds
               that the delay has been properly explained, it
               would leave the matter at that. However, if it
               finds that there is no reasonable explanation for
               the delay or that the official has acted with
               deliberate disregard/wanton negligence, then it
               may direct for appropriate departmental action to
               be initiated against such erring official. We once
               again reiterate that the act of seizure would not
               get vitiated by virtue of such delay, as discussed
               in detail hereinabove.”


        While it is undoubted that in ordinary circumstances,
information is to be sent to the Magistrate, in certain
circumstances, if that is not done, even then the seizure will not
be vitiated. This indicates the width of the power granted to the
police with the sole aim of smooth facilitation of the
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                         Page 29 of 38
investigation. As evidenced by the procedure given in the
Ordinance, it is sequential and has to be compliant with
principles of natural justice, for it to survive scrutiny. It is
necessarily time consuming and deliberative. The difference
between the two processes is, therefore, clearly exhibited. In
essence, we hold that the power of seizure and attachment are
separate and distinct, even if, to the naked eye it may so appear,
that the effect is same/similar which is, that the property is taken
into custody of, by the authority, either investigative or judicial.
Consequentially, the conclusion to be drawn is that the powers
under
Section 18A
of the PC Act and Section 102, CrP.C. are not
mutually exclusive. Mr Farasat’s submission to this extent
merits acceptance and is so done accordingly.
12.     The next submission to be weighed is whether
Ratan
Babulal Lath
(supra) constitutes a binding precedent in as much
as it declares the
PC Act
to be a ‘code in itself’, thereby ruling
out the application of the
Cr.P.C
. or any other law to any
proceedings which emanates therefrom. There have been several
instances where this Court has declared a particular statute to be
a self-contained Code or, a Code in itself. Reference to some of
these instances is as follows:
12.1
The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
, which
         N.L.Untwalia J., writing for this Court in
Premier
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                          Page 30 of 38
Automobiles Ltd. v. Kamlekar Shantaram Wadke
22,
          observed to be an act providing for “investigation and
          settlement        of    industrial   disputes,   which   means
          adjudication of such disputes…" is one such example. In
          para 8 of this judgment, the learned Judge gives a
          glimpse of the width and expanse of the powers provided
          therein. Krishna Iyer J., in Rohtas Industries Ltd. v.
Rohtas Industries Staff Union23, called it a Code for it
          “… it speaks and the enforcement of rights created
          thereby can only be through the procedure laid down
          therein. Neither the civil court nor any other tribunal or
          body can award relief.” What is seen from the Act is that
          its references to other procedural laws are only limited to
          certain extents, which have been clearly laid down for
          example,
Section 11
thereof provides that every Board,
          Court constituted thereunder shall have the powers under
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908, insofar as the four
          aspects mentioned therein are concerned.
12.2 The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 24 is
          another example. The name itself professes that this
          legislation is a Code. [See:
Ebix Singapore (P) Ltd. v.
          Educomp Solutions Ltd. (CoC
) 25] Various judgments
22 (1976) 1 SCC 496
23 (1976) 2 SCC 82
24 Hereinafter referred to as ‘IBC’
25 (2022) 2 SCC 401
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                              Page 31 of 38
since its enactment have underscored its self-contained
         nature.
In
Pratap Technocrats (P) Ltd. v. Reliance
         Infratel Ltd. (Monitoring Committee
)26, this Court
         expressly rejected the importation of the guarantees of
         non-arbitrariness and fair procedure into the Court
         holding that the Code defines in itself what is fair and
         equitable treatment “constituting a comprehensive
         framework”. It was also noted that the same is compliant
         with the “Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law” given
         by UNCITRAL.
In
E.S. Krishnamurthy v. Bharath Hi-
         Tecch Builders (P) Ltd.27
, it was observed that the IBC
         “confers jurisdiction” and “structures, channelises and
         circumscribes the ambit of such jurisdiction”.
V.
         Nagarajan v. SKS Ispat & Power Ltd.28
, held that the
         Code overrides its inconsistencies as they may be with
         other laws.
12.3 Two further examples.
The Land Acquisition Act,
         1894
, was held in
State of Bihar v. Dhirendra Kumar
29,
         to be a complete code in itself since it details the
         complete procedure to be followed by the State when it
         exercises      the     power   of   eminent   domain.   The
         Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets
26 (2021) 10 SCC 623
27 (2022) 3 SCC 161
28 (2022) 2 SCC 244
29 (1995) 4 SCC 229
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                          Page 32 of 38
and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002
has been
            termed as a code in itself since it provides the procedure
            to be followed by a secured creditor and also the
            aggrieved party including borrower.
[See:
Raj Kumar
            Shivhare v. Directorate of Enforcement30
]
13. Analysing            the    judgments    referred   to   immediately
hereinabove, the following factors can be deduced as essentials
of a code being self-contained or complete in all respects:
I.              A Code should be comprehensive, dealing with
            all aspects arising directly out of or, ancillary to, the
         main issue addressed in the statute.
       II.   It should lay down, clearly, when dealing with
            criminal laws, the offence, its punishment, and when
            dealing with civil laws, the rights and liabilities of the
            parties.
III.               Addressing the above, the procedure provided
            therein should be all-encompassing. This includes, for
            instance, adjudication of grievances, and appeals from
            findings recorded by authorities. In other words, the
            reliance of the statute upon general laws with reference
            to the offences/ punishments or, rights/liabilities should
            be limited as far as possible.
30 (2010) 4 SCC 772
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                              Page 33 of 38
14.     With utmost respect to the learned Judges and the
conclusion in
Ratan Babulal Lath
(supra), we would state that
in the absence of a detailed discussion made of the scheme of
the Act, its provisions and its interactions with other substantive
or procedural laws, as far as they may be applicable, it cannot be
stated that the conclusion arrived at therein constitutes ratio
decidendi and, therefore, would be binding on all Courts as per
the effect of
Article 141
of the Constitution of India.
We draw
support for our conclusion from a judgment of this Court in
MCD v. Gurnam Kaur31
:
“11. Pronouncements of law, which are not part
               of the ratio decidendi are classed as obiter dicta
               and are not authoritative. With all respect to the
               learned Judge who passed the order in Jamna
               Das case [ Writ Petitions Nos. 981-82 of 1984]
               and to the learned Judge who agreed with him,
               we cannot concede that this Court is bound to
               follow it. It was delivered without argument,
               without reference to the relevant provisions of the
               Act conferring express power on the Municipal
               Corporation to direct removal of encroachments
               from any public place like pavements or public
               streets, and without any citation of authority.
               Accordingly, we do not propose to uphold the
               decision of the High Court because, it seems to us
               that it is wrong in principle and cannot be
               justified by the terms of the relevant provisions
               …So far as the order shows, no argument was
               addressed to the court on the question whether or
               not any direction could properly be made
               compelling the Municipal Corporation to
               construct a stall at the pitching site of a pavement
               squatter. Professor P.J. Fitzgerald, editor of
31 (1989) 1 SCC 101
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                         Page 34 of 38
the Salmond on Jurisprudence, 12th Edn.
explains the concept of sub silentio at p. 153 in
               these words:
A decision passes sub silentio, in the technical
               sense that has come to be attached to that phrase,
               when the particular point of law involved in the
               decision is not perceived by the court or present
               to its mind. The court may consciously decide in
               favour of one party because of point A, which it
               considers and pronounces upon. It may be shown,
               however, that logically the court should not have
               decided in favour of the particular party unless it
               also decided point B in his favour; but point B
               was not argued or considered by the court.
In
               such circumstances, although point B was
               logically involved in the facts and although the
               case had a specific outcome, the decision is not
               an authority on point B. Point B is said to pass
               sub silentio.”
                                             (Emphasis supplied)
        In the same vein, a reference can also be made to
Jayant
Verma v. Union of India32
wherein R.F Nariman J, writing for
the Court, referred to the dissenting opinion of A.P. Sen, J.
who set out in
Dalbir Singh v. State of Punjab33
what is the
ratio decidendi of a judgment, in the following terms:
“22. … According to the well-settled theory of
            precedents every decision contains three basic
            ingredients:
‘(i) findings of material facts, direct and inferential.
            An inferential finding of facts is the inference which
            the Judge draws from the direct or perceptible facts;
(ii) statements of the principles of law applicable to
            the legal problems disclosed by the facts; and
32 (2018) 4 SCC 743
33 (1979) 3 SCC 745
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                          Page 35 of 38
(iii) judgment based on the combined effect of (i)
            and (ii) above.”
15.
In our considered view,
Ratan Babulal Lath
(supra) does
not constitute binding precedent for want of (ii) and (iii) since it
does not discuss the facts of the matter. Granted, inference can
be made as to the facts of the case, and the background in which
the order came to be passed. However, Courts ought not to be
expected to follow judgments and orders of this Court as
binding precedents when, the facts, in light of which the
conclusion arrived at, are not properly disclosed and discussed,
for law is not always applicable as the black letter of the law and
is instead applied to the facts of each case. It may be clarified
here that our observations regarding the
PC Act
do not hold,
either way, as to its status as a code.
They are only confined to
the precedential value of
Ratan Babulal Lath
(supra).
CONCLUSION
16.     Having decided the points of law, as above, let us now
turn to the facts of this case. The respondent is the father of the
main accused. Although he had submitted certain responses to
the source of the money present in his accounts, the same was
not found to be a justifiable explanation by the investigating
authorities and as such, seizure was effected. The release of the
funds so seized was rejected by the Trial Court but later
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                          Page 36 of 38
accepted by the High Court on the premise that the same had
been carried out on an erroneous interpretation of the law. We
do not agree. We have held as above that
Section 102
, Cr.P.C.,
being distinct from the powers and procedures as detailed under
Section 18-A
of the PC Act, would apply to the case. Generally,
with the setting aside of the order of the High Court, the matter
would have ended there, but since the investigation has been
completed and the final report already stands presented in the
case, the freezing of the accounts, of which fixed deposits are
undoubtedly a part, may or may not be required. Considering
that in light of the principles enunciated in para 9 of this
judgment, we may observe that as per this Court’s order issuing
notice dated 27th January 2025, we had stayed the operation of
the impugned judgment which was dated 4th October 2024.
This may result into two situations, viz.,         (a) where the
amount stands released; and (b) is yet to be released. If the
situation is the former, then the respondent herein would either
re-deposit the amount or furnish tangible security / bank
guarantee of the like amount. This shall be done positively
within three weeks from today. Rights of the parties emanating
from the statute whether in situation (a) or (b) for follow up
action are left open to be adjudicated in appropriate proceedings
before the appropriate court.
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                       Page 37 of 38
17.     The appeal is allowed as aforesaid.
Pending application(s), if any, shall be disposed of.
…………….......................………J.
                                         (SANJAY KAROL)



                                …….......................………….……J.
                                (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)
New Delhi;
December 10, 2025
Crl.A @ SLP(Crl) 1003 of 2025                                        Page 38 of 38