[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd vs Bcl Secure Premises Pvt. Ltd on 9 December, 2025
2025 INSC 1401                                                      REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                              CIVIL APPEAL NO.14647 OF 2025
                     (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 25803 of 2025)


             Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd.                   …Appellant(s)

                                                 Versus

             BCL Secure Premises Pvt. Ltd.                        …Respondent(s)

                                             JUDGMENT
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.              Leave granted.
2.              The present appeal calls in question the correctness of

             the judgment and order dated 07.04.2025 passed by the

             learned Single Judge of the High Court of Judicature at

             Bombay in Comm. Arbitration Application No.125/2025. By

             the said order, the learned Single Judge allowed the Section

             11(4)-Application filed under the Arbitration and Conciliation
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Act, 1996 (for short the “A&C Act) of the respondent-BCL
   CHANDRESH
   Date: 2025.12.09
   13:40:28 IST
   Reason:
Secure Premises Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as the
Page 1 of 33
“BCL”) and appointed an arbitrator to adjudicate upon the

disputes and differences between the parties herein.
Aggrieved, the appellant-Hindustan Petroleum Corporation

Ltd. (for short ‘Corporation’) is in appeal.
3.   The facts giving rise to the appeal are as follows:
4.   The appellant-Corporation floated a tender for design,

supply, installation, integration, testing, commissioning and

post-commissioning warranty support services of Tank Truck

Locking System (for short the “TTLS”).
5.   The tender conditions had a specific clause stating that

the contractor shall not be entitled to sublet, transfer or assign,

the work under the contract without the prior consent of the

owner obtained in writing. The relevant clauses of the tender

conditions are set out hereinbelow:-
“2.6 The “Contract” between the Owner and the Contractor
     shall mean and include all documents like enquiry, tender
     submitted by the contractor and the purchase order issued
     by the owner and other documents connected with the issue
     of the purchase order and orders, instruction, drawings,
     change orders, directions issued by the Owner/Engineer-in-
     Charge/Site-in-Charge for the execution, completion and
     commissioning of the works and the period of contract
     mentioned in the Contract including such periods of time
Page 2 of 33
extensions as may be granted by the owner at the request of
the contractor and such period of time for which the work is
continued by the contractor for purposes of completion of the
work.
3.17 Contractor shall not be entitled to sublet, subcontract or
assign; the work under this Contract without the prior consent
of the Owner obtained in writing.
5.c SUBLETTING OF WORK
5.c.1 No part of the contract nor any share or interest thereof
shall in any manner or degree be transferred, assigned or
sublet, by the Contractor, directly or indirectly to any firm or
corporation whatsoever without the prior consent in writing
of the Owner.
14. ARBITRATION
14.1 All disputes and differences of whatsoever nature,
whether existing or which shall at any time arise between the
parties hereto touching or concerning the agreement,
meaning, operation or effect thereof or to the rights and
liabilities of the parties or arising out of or in relation thereto
whether during or after completion of the contract or whether
before after determination, foreclosure, termination or
breach of the agreement (other than those in respect of which
the decision of any person is, by the contract, expressed to
be final and binding) shall, after written notice by either party
to the agreement to the other of them and to the Appointing
Authority hereinafter mentioned, be referred for
adjudication to the Sole Arbitrator to be appointed as
hereinafter provided.
14.9 Subject to the aforesaid, the provisions of the
Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996
or any statutory modification or re-
enactment thereof and the rules made thereunder, shall
apply to the Arbitration proceedings under this Clause.
Page 3 of 33
14.10 The Contract shall be governed by and constructed
     according to the laws in force in India. The parties hereby
     submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Courts situated at
     Mumbai for all purposes. The Arbitration shall be held at
     Mumbai and conducted in English language.”
6.   On 20.08.2013, the appellant issued a purchase order in

favour of the successful tenderer-M/s AGC Networks Ltd (for

short “AGC”) (presently known as Black Box Limited) and

AGC duly accepted the purchase order by a letter of

acceptance on 21/22.08.2013. On 08.09.2016, the appellant

issued a notice to AGC with regard to non-functioning of

Electro Magnetic Locking System [for short ‘EMLS’] at Pilot

locations of Vashi and Manmad. Further, on 02.02.2017, the

appellant issued a show cause notice to AGC for unsatisfactory

performance of EMLS at the said two locations.
7.   On 14.06.2018, the respondent-BCL informed the

appellant that they were working as sub-vendor of AGC and

were entitled to receive 94% of the payment due.                      On

25.06.2018, appellant informed AGC that since it could not

complete the project successfully, no payment was due to

them. On 26.06.2018, appellant informed respondent-BCL in
Page 4 of 33
reply to BCL’s letter dated 14.06.2018 stating that the

appellant had not entered into any contract with BCL and as

such no payments are due to BCL from the appellant.

Thereafter, a series of proceedings ensued between the

respondent-BCL and the AGC.
8.   On 27.07.2018, a civil suit came to be filed by BCL against

AGC before Patiala House Court at New Delhi seeking

injunction against AGC from invoking the bank guarantee

submitted by BCL. The appellant was not a party to this suit.

Thereafter, a Section 9-Petition under the Insolvency and

Bankruptcy Code, 2016 was filed by BCL against AGC. The

Section 9-Petition came to be rejected on 17.07.2019.
9.   In 2020, BCL filed its first claim (No. 1446/2020) with the

Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) Facilitation

Council, Haryana against AGC for the payment of outstanding

dues. The matter was referred to arbitration and here again

the appellant was not a party. On 20.06.2020, the respondent

BCL withdrew the claim from the Arbitral Tribunal in view of

the amicable settlement with AGC.             On 17.07.2020,
Page 5 of 33
respondent-BCL withdrew the civil suit filed against AGC.
10. In 2021, respondent-BCL filed its second claim (No.

2411/2021) against AGC with the MSME Facilitation Council.

The matter was referred to arbitration and here again the

appellant was not a party.
11. On 25.11.2022, the second claim was rejected by the

arbitrator as not maintainable due to relinquishment of rights

by BCL under the 20.06.2020 settlement.
12. On 25.03.2023, third claim was filed against AGC by BCL

in MSME Facilitation Council, Haryana and this was rejected

as not maintainable.
13. On 28.08.2024, respondent-BCL issued a notice to the

appellant invoking arbitration under
Section 21
of the A&C

Act, setting out the following:-
A. After AGC was awarded a purchase order, AGC entered

    into an agreement dated 15.01.2014 on back-to-back basis

    with BCL wherein entire performance concerning the

    supply of TTLS was to be undertaken by BCL.
Page 6 of 33
B. That as per the said contractual arrangement of

   15.01.2014, BCL was obligated to perform the services

   and AGC was merely an intermediary since 96% of the

   total amount payable by HPCL was accruing in favour of

   BCL. The relevant clauses of the contractual arrangement

   between BCL and AGC are set out hereinbelow:-
“And whereas “AGC” wishes to engage “BCL” and “BCL”
   has agreed to supply install integrate test commission and
   warranty and post-warranty support services of HPCL TTLS
   (Tank Truck Locking System) to “AGC” on a back-to-back
   basis and more specifically described in the referred Tender
   as per Annexure - I forming an integral part of this Agreement
   BCL has reviewed all the annexures, fully understood HPCL’s
   requirement and has agreed to bear all costs take full
   responsibility and to Indemnify AGC in case of this Pilot
   Project not being successful and resultant cancellation of
   contract by HPCL.
4. OBLIGATIONS OF “BCL”
   4.1 “BCL” shall provide a Project Manager at its own cost
   and towards the successful completion of the entire HPCL
   TTLS project The Project Manager shall be responsible
   for the communication and co-ordination between
   BCL/AGC/HPCL.         However, the Project Manager
   mentioned herein above shall not make any such
   communication/co-ordination with HPCL without
   obtaining the prior written approval from AGC.”
11. ARBITRATION
   Any and all dispute(s) or difference(s) between the parties
   hereto arising out of or relating to this agreement and which
Page 7 of 33
is not amicably settled between the parties within 60 (Sixty)
    days from the date of such dispute or difference, the same
    shall be referred for arbitration to such person as may be
    appointed by the parties hereto and the same shall be
    adjudicated in accordance with the Arbitration and Re-
Conciliation Act
1996 and its latest amendments.

    The cost of any such Arbitration shall be solely borne by the
    defending party. The place of arbitration shall be jurisdiction
    of New Delhi/Mumbai Court. The language of the arbitration
    shall be English. Award of Arbitration shall be final and
    binding on both the parties.”
                                             (Emphasis supplied)

C. That after the resolution of disputes between BCL and

   AGC, a Settlement-cum-Assignment Agreement was

   signed by AGC and BCL on 31.10.2023, to assign the

   receivables of AGC against HPCL to BCL. Relevant clauses

   read as under: -
“2. ASSIGNMENT OF RECEIVABLES
     2.1 The present Agreement further records the existing
     position that all claims and counter-claims of Parties against
     each other have been settled, relinquished, closed and
     Parties are discharged against each other for all future
     claims and liabilities. However, it is understood that BCL
     may be desirous of proceeding against HPCL. by filing the
     necessary application/petition before the competent
     authority or court for recovery of purported dues arising out
     of the HPCL PO. It is however agreed by BCL that, Black Box
     shall not be impleaded or joined as a party to any such legal
     action or litigation/proceedings that may be initiated by
     BCL and such actions of BCL shall not result in any adverse
Page 8 of 33
action or cause any prejudice to Black Box.
2.2 Subject to compliance of the reciprocal obligations
     under this Agreement by the BCL Black Box hereby
     represents and warrants that any amount/receivables
     accruing to Black Box as a result of the
     litigation/proceedings initiated by BCL against HPCL shall
     stand transferred/assigned to, BCL in entirety. Black Box
     shall not retain any amount/receivable that may accrue to it
     in terms of the order/direction of the competent authority or
     court in any such litigation/proceedings initiated against
     HPCL.
3.20 GOVERNING LAW, DISPUTE RESOLUTION AND
     JURISDICTION:
This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in
     accordance with the laws of India and shall be subject to the
     exclusive jurisdiction of the competent courts in New Delhi
     only.
Both Parties agree that all disputes and/or differences
     arising out of or relating to or under this Agreement
     between the Parties shall, unless amicably resolved within
     30 days of mutual discussions, be finally settled by
     reference to arbitration in accordance with the
Arbitration
     and Conciliation Act, 1996
read with its subsequent
     amendments and the Rules framed thereunder. The
     Arbitration shall be conducted at New Delhi.             The
     Arbitration proceedings shall be conducted in English
     language. The decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be
     binding on the Parties.”



D. That BCL has entered into the position of AGC and can

   agitate all pending claims with the appellant and a claim
Page 9 of 33
was raised to the tune of Rs. 3,00,01,810/- along with 18%

   interest.
14. The Arbitration Clause for Indian Bidders issued in the

tender of the appellant was invoked vide legal notice dated

28.08.2024.
15. On 26.09.2024, appellant sent a reply denying the

contentions made by BCL setting out the following grounds:-
A. There was no privity of contract between the appellant

   and BCL.
B. The claim amount and assignment agreement were

   unfounded, false and denied.
C. That the purported assignment agreement was not valid in

   law as no prior written consent was obtained from HPCL

   by AGC.
D. There was no valid purchase order between HPCL and

   BCL.
16. BCL issued another notice dated 12.11.2024 and followed

it up with a petition under
Section 11(4)
of the A&C Act before

the High Court of Judicature at Bombay dated 28.02.2025. The
Page 10 of 33
appellant-Corporation objected by raising all the contentions

set out in their reply along with the additional contention that

the application was time-barred.
17. By the judgment dated 07.04.2025, the High Court

allowed the Section 11-Application with the following

reasoning:-
“3. This to my mind raises a clear capacity for the
     Respondent to file an application under
Section 16
of the Act,
     whereby the arbitral tribunal should decide the arbitrability
     of the disputes. In the peculiar facts of this case, while
     allowing this
Section 11
Application by making a reference to
     the arbitral tribunal, it is directed that the arbitrability of the
     disputes should be decided as preliminary issue upfront by
     the arbitral tribunal, so that the interests of the parties are
     well balanced and protected and unnecessary time is not
     wasted, should the arbitral tribunal reach a conclusion that
     the arbitration agreement would not bind the Respondent
     with the assignee of AGC Networks Limited.
4.    Being satisfied that an arbitration agreement is in
     existence but taking into account the objection raised by the
     Respondent that the Respondent had a right to approve the
     counter-party prior to the assignment of rights of the
     Applicant, this aforesaid request to the Arbitral Tribunal,
     asking for the
Section 16
Application to be decided first as a
     preliminary issue is being made.”
18. Aggrieved, the appellant-Corporation is before us.
19. We have heard Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor
Page 11 of 33
General and Mr. Sanjay Kapur, learned counsel for the

appellant. We have also heard Mr. Nalin Kohli, learned senior

counsel for the respondent. We have perused the records.


CONTENTIONS OF THE APPELLANT:-
20. Mr. Tushar Mehta, the learned Solicitor General,

appearing for the appellant contends that there is no legal

relationship between the appellant and the respondent

inasmuch as there was no privity of contract between them.

Learned Solicitor General contends that, at no stage, BCL was

ever involved either in the preliminary negotiation or at the

execution stage. It is further contended that there is no

material/document which discloses that the appellant had the

knowledge of BCL participating in the performance of the

underlying contract. Learned Solicitor General contended

that the respondent had entered into series of litigation with

AGC, and the court below had not made any reference to it in

the impugned order. Learned Solicitor General contends that

the claim was also ex facie time-barred and it is manifest from
Page 12 of 33
the record. Learned Solicitor General contends that at the
Section 11
stage that the court has an obligation to prima facie

examine whether the dispute is arbitrable and even applying

that limited test, the records reveal that the dispute was not

arbitrable. Learned Solicitor General extensively relied on

Clauses 3.17 and 5 of the General Terms and Conditions of

Works Contract to contend that there was express prohibition

to sub-let, sub-contract or assign the work or any share of

interest thereof without the prior consent of the owner

obtained in writing.
21. Refuting the submissions, Mr. Nalin Kohli, learned Senior

Advocate, appearing for the respondent contended that the

test whether a non-signatory would be bound by an

arbitration   agreement    entails   a   fact-intensive    inquiry

involving a mixed question of fact and law and, therefore, the

arbitral tribunal would be the more appropriate forum to carry

out the said inquiry. Mr. Kohli, learned Senior Advocate,

further contends that the appellant had knowledge of the sub-

letting agreement between the respondent and AGC,
Page 13 of 33
presently known as Black Box Limited. Mr. Kohli, learned

Senior Advocate, referred to the agreement signed between

the respondent and the AGC dated 15.01.2014; the purchase

orders issued to the respondent by AGC, the escrow account

opened by AGC; the monies transferred to the escrow account

by the appellant. Mr. Kohli also referred to certain email

communications, copies of which are marked to the appellant.

Mr. Kohli further referred to the Settlement-cum-Assignment

Agreement     dated   31.10.2023   assigning    the   right    to

receivables and AGC giving up its rights and invoked the

veritable party doctrine to sustain the impugned order. Mr.

Kohli, learned Senior Advocate, prayed for the dismissal of the

appeal.
22. We have considered the rival submissions and perused

the records of the case.
QUESTION FOR CONSIDERATION: -
23. The question that arises for consideration is whether the

High Court, on facts, was justified in referring the parties to
Page 14 of 33
arbitration by allowing the
Section 11(4)
petition filed by the

respondent?
24. The scope of jurisdiction of the referral court hearing a

Section 11-Petition when faced with an issue of joinder of a

non-signatory to the arbitration agreement has been lucidly

set out by the five-judge Bench of this Court in
Cox and Kings

Limited vs. Sap India Private Limited and Another1
. Though

said in the context of considering the Group of Companies

doctrine
,
the said judgment
has a great bearing for the

present case. This Court, speaking through Chief Justice D.Y.

Chandrachud, held as under:-
“84. It is presumed that the formal signatories to an
           arbitration agreement are parties who will be bound by it.
           However, in exceptional cases persons or entities who have
           not signed or formally assented to a written arbitration
           agreement or the underlying contract containing the
           arbitration agreement may be held to be bound by such
           agreement. As mentioned in the preceding paragraphs, the
           doctrine of privity limits the imposition of rights and liabilities
           on third parties to a contract. Generally, only the parties to an
           arbitration agreement can be subject to the full effects of the
           agreement in terms of the reliefs and remedies because they
           consented to be bound by the arbitration agreement.
           Therefore, the decisive question before the Courts or
1
(2024) 4 SCC 1
Page 15 of 33
tribunals is whether a non-signatory consented to be bound
by the arbitration agreement. To determine whether a non-
signatory is bound by an arbitration agreement, the Courts
and tribunals apply typical principles of contract law and
corporate law. The legal doctrines provide a framework for
evaluating the specific contractual language and the factual
settings to determine the intentions of the parties to be bound
by the arbitration agreement. [Gary Born, International
Arbitration Law and Practice, (3rd Edn., 2021) at p. 1531.]
101. A formalistic construction of an arbitration agreement
would suggest that the decision of a party to not sign an
arbitration agreement should be construed to mean that the
mutual intention of the parties was to exclude that party from
the ambit of the arbitration agreement. Indeed, corporate
entities have the commercial and contractual freedom to
structure their businesses in a manner to limit their liability.
However, there have been situations where a corporate
entity deliberately made an effort to be not bound by the
underlying contract containing the arbitration agreement,
but was actively involved in the negotiation and performance
of the contract. The level of the non-signatory party's
involvement was to the extent of making the other party
believe that it was a veritable party to the contract, and
the arbitration agreement contained under it. Therefore,
the Group of Companies doctrine is applied to ascertain
the intentions of the parties by analysing the factual
circumstances         surrounding        the      contractual
arrangements. [Gary Born, International Arbitration Law
and Practice, (3rd Edn., 2021) at p. 1568.]
126. Evaluating the involvement of the non-signatory party in
the negotiation, performance, or termination of a contract is
an important factor for a number of reasons. First, by being
actively involved in the performance of a contract, a non-
signatory may create an appearance that it is a veritable
Page 16 of 33
party to the contract containing the arbitration
agreement; second, the conduct of the non-signatory may
be in harmony with the conduct of the other members of
the group, leading the other party to legitimately believe
that the non-signatory was a veritable party to the
contract; and third, the other party has legitimate reasons
to rely on the appearance created by the non-signatory
party so as to bind it to the arbitration agreement.
169. In case of joinder of non-signatory parties to an
arbitration agreement, the following two scenarios will
prominently emerge : first, where a signatory party to an
arbitration agreement seeks joinder of a non-signatory party
to the arbitration agreement; and second, where a non-
signatory party itself seeks invocation of an arbitration
agreement. In both the scenarios, the referral court will
be required to prima facie rule on the existence of the
arbitration agreement and whether the non-signatory is a
veritable party to the arbitration agreement. In view of
the complexity of such a determination, the referral court
should leave it for the Arbitral Tribunal to decide whether
the non-signatory party is indeed a party to the arbitration
agreement on the basis of the factual evidence and
application of legal doctrine. The Tribunal can delve into
the factual, circumstantial, and legal aspects of the matter to
decide whether its jurisdiction extends to the non-signatory
party. In the process, the Tribunal should comply with the
requirements of principles of natural justice such as giving
opportunity to the non-signatory to raise objections with
regard to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal. This
interpretation also gives true effect to the doctrine of
competence-competence by leaving the issue of
determination of true parties to an arbitration agreement to
be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal under
Section 16
.


170.12. At the referral stage, the referral court should leave it
Page 17 of 33
for the Arbitral Tribunal to decide whether the non-signatory
     is bound by the arbitration agreement.”
                                              (Emphasis supplied)
25. A careful reading of the above passage reveals that the

referral court should be prima facie satisfied that there exists

an arbitration agreement and as to whether the non-signatory

is a veritable party. It further holds that even if the referral

court prima facie arrives at the satisfaction that the non-

signatory is a veritable party, the Arbitral Tribunal is not

denuded of its jurisdiction to decide whether the non-

signatory is indeed a party to the arbitration agreement on the

basis of factual evidence and application of legal doctrine.

The Court further reinforces this proposition by holding that

as to whether the non-signatory is bound would be for the

Arbitral Tribunal to decide.
26. But what is primordial is that it should be demonstrated

prima facie before the referral court that the non-signatory is

a veritable party.      According to the “Illustrated Oxford

Dictionary (Revised Edition 2003)” the word:
“veritable” means “real; rightly so called
Page 18 of 33
(a veritable feast)”,

In substance, it means truly, genuinely or for all intended

purposes. The referral court under
Section 11
is not deprived

of its jurisdiction from examining whether the non-signatory is

in the real sense a party to the arbitration agreement. The

answer thereof will depend on the facts and circumstances of

each case after examining the documents pertaining thereto.
27. As was held in In Re: Interplay Between Arbitration

Agreements under
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
& Stamp Act, 18992, since the scope of referral court has to

be within the parameter of
Section 11
(6-A), the exercise

carried thereon is “examination of the existence of an

arbitration agreement”.             While “examination” does not

contemplate a laborious or a contested inquiry there is an

obligation in the referral court to “inspect and scrutinize” the

dealings, if any, between the parties. Para 167 of Interplay

(supra) reads as under:-
“167.
Section 11
(6-A) uses the expression “examination of
2
(2024) 6 SCC 1
Page 19 of 33
the existence of an arbitration agreement”. The purport
           of using the word “examination” connotes that the
           legislature intends that the Referral Court has to inspect
           or scrutinise the dealings between the parties for the
           existence of an arbitration agreement. Moreover, the
           expression “examination” does not connote or imply a
           laborious or contested inquiry. [P. Ramanatha Aiyar, The
           Law Lexicon (2nd Edn., 1997) 666.] On the other hand,
Section 16
provides that the Arbitral Tribunal can “rule” on
           its jurisdiction, including the existence and validity of an
           arbitration agreement. A “ruling” connotes adjudication of
           disputes after admitting evidence from the parties.
Therefore, it is evident that the Referral Court is only
           required to examine the existence of arbitration agreements,
           whereas the Arbitral Tribunal ought to rule on its jurisdiction,
           including the issues pertaining to the existence and validity
           of an arbitration agreement. A similar view was adopted by
           this Court in
Shin-Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd. v. Aksh Optifibre Ltd.
,
           (2005) 7 SCC 234]”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
28. This principle was reiterated lucidly in SBI General

Insurance Company Limited vs. Krish Spinning3, wherein

this Court (speaking through one of us, J.B. Pardiwala J.)

observed as under:-
113. The scope of examination under
Section 11
(6-A) is
           confined to the existence of an arbitration agreement on the
           basis of
Section 7
. The examination of validity of the
           arbitration agreement is also limited to the requirement of
           formal validity such as the requirement that the agreement
           should be in writing.
3
(2024) 12 SCC 1
Page 20 of 33
114. The use of the term “examination” under
Section
          11
(6-A) as distinguished from the use of the term “rule”
          under
Section 16
implies that the scope of enquiry under
Section 11
(6-A) is limited to a prima facie scrutiny of the
          existence of the arbitration agreement, and does not
          include a contested or laborious enquiry, which is left for
          the Arbitral Tribunal to “rule” under
Section 16
. The
          prima facie view on existence of the arbitration
          agreement taken by the Referral Court does not bind
          either the Arbitral Tribunal or the Court enforcing the
          arbitral award.
115. The aforesaid approach serves a twofold purpose —
          firstly, it allows the Referral Court to weed out non-existent
          arbitration agreements, and secondly, it protects the
          jurisdictional competence of the Arbitral Tribunal to rule on
          the issue of existence of the arbitration agreement in depth.”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
29. Elaborating further as to the broad features to determine

whether a party is a veritable party or not, this Court in Ajay

Madhusudan Patel and others vs. Jyotrindra S. Patel and

others4 (wherein one of us, J.B. Pardiwala J.) held as under:-
“81. The fact that a non-signatory did not put pen to paper
            may be an indicator of its intention to not assume any rights,
            responsibilities or obligations under the arbitration
            agreement. However, the courts and tribunals should not
            adopt a conservative approach to exclude all persons or
            entities who intended to be bound by the underlying
            contract containing the arbitration agreement through their
            conduct and their relationship with the signatory parties.
4
(2025) 2 SCC 147
Page 21 of 33
The mutual intent of the parties, relationship of a non-
signatory with a signatory, commonality of the subject-
     matter, composite nature of the transactions and
     performance of the contract are all factors that signify the
     intention of the non-signatory to be bound by the arbitration
     agreement.”
30. Applying the above law to the present set of facts, we find

that even prima facie the respondent has not been able to

establish that it was a veritable party to the contract between

HPCL and AGC. HPCL has no privity at all with the respondent

BCL. Admittedly, to the documentation between AGC and

BCL, HPCL was not a party. After obtaining the contract from

HPCL, AGC appears to have engaged BCL to supply, install,

integrate, test, commission and grant warranty and post-

warranty support services to AGC. In fact, Clause 4 of the

contractual arrangement of 15.01.2014 expressly proscribes

the Project Manager of the respondent-BCL to not make any

communication/coordination with HPCL without obtaining

prior written approval from AGC.
31. Further, the Settlement Agreement of 31.10.2023 also is

between AGC and BCL and between them there is an

arrangement that any receivable accruing to AGC from HPCL
Page 22 of 33
shall stand transferred/assigned to the respondent BCL. This

does not mean that there is an arbitration agreement existing

between HPCL and BCL or that BCL was a veritable party to

the agreement between HPCL and AGC.
32. On the facts of this case, it is clear that the appellant and

the respondent have been operating on separate orbits. It has

not been established even prima facie that there was any

intention to bind BCL to the contract between HPCL and AGC.
33. Mr. Nalin Kohli, learned Senior Advocate, made a

strenuous effort to sustain the impugned judgment by relying

on the judgment of this Court in ASF Buildtech Private

Limited vs. Shapoorji Pallonji and Company Private

Limited5, to contend that the Referral Court should leave the

matter to the Arbitral Tribunal to decide the issue.
We have

carefully examined the judgment of this Court in ASF

Buildtech (Supra), authored by one of us J.B. Pardiwala J. We

hold that the judgment of this Court in ASF Buildtech (Supra)
5
(2025) 9 SCC 76
Page 23 of 33
is in harmony with the judgments of this Court in Interplay

(Supra), Krish Spinning (Supra),
Cox & Kings
(Supra), Ajay

Madhusudan Patel (Supra) and ASF Buildtech (Supra) does

not sing any discordant note.
For the sake of convenience, the

following crucial Paragraphs in ASF Buildtech (Supra) are

extracted hereinbelow: -
“110. Even if it is assumed for a moment that the Referral
     Court in its jurisdiction under
Section 11
of the 1996 Act has
     the discretion to determine whether a non-signatory is a
     veritable party to the arbitration agreement or not, by virtue
     of
Cox & Kings (1) [Cox & Kings Ltd. v. SAP (India) (P) Ltd.
,
     (2024) 4 SCC 1, the Referral Court should only refrain but
     rather loathe the exercise of such discretion. Any discretion
     which is conferred upon any authority, be it Referral Courts
     must be exercised reasonably and in a fair manner. Fairness
     in this context does not just extend to a non-signatory's
     rights and its apprehension of prejudice, fairness also
     demands that the arbitration proceedings is given due time
     to gestate so that the entire dispute is holistically decided.
Any determination even if prima facie by a Referral Court on
     such aspects would entail an inherent risk of frustrating the
     very purpose of resolution of dispute, if the Referral Courts
     opine that a non-signatory in question is not a veritable
     party. On the other hand, the apprehensions of prejudice
     can be properly mitigated by leaving such question for the
     Arbitral Tribunal to decide, as such party can always take
     recourse to
Section 16
of the 1996 Act and thereafter in
     appeal under
Section 37
, and where it is found that such
     party was put through the rigmarole of arbitration
     proceedings vexatiously, both the Tribunal and the courts,
     as the case may be, should not only require that all costs of
     arbitration insofar as such non-signatory is concerned be
     borne by the party who vexatiously impleaded it, but the
     Arbitral Tribunal would be well within its powers to also
Page 24 of 33
impose costs.
113.Cox & Kings (1) Cox & Kings Ltd. v. SAP (India) (P)
Ltd.
, (2024) 4 SCC 1, further observed that in case of
joinder of non-signatory parties to an arbitration
agreement, the Referral Court will be required to prima
facie rule on the existence of the arbitration agreement
and whether the non-signatory is a veritable party to the
arbitration. However, it further clarified that, due to the
inherent complexity in determining whether the non-
signatory is indeed a veritable party, the Referral Court
should leave this question for the Arbitral Tribunal to
decide as it can delve into the factual and circumstantial
evidence along with its legal aspects for deciding such
an issue. The relevant observations read as under: (SCC
p. 90, paras 168-69)

   “168. … Thus, when a non-signatory person or entity is
   arrayed as a party at
Section 8
or
Section 11
stage, the
   Referral Court should prima facie determine the validity
   or existence of the arbitration agreement, as the case
   may be, and leave it for the Arbitral Tribunal to decide
   whether the non-signatory is bound by the arbitration
   agreement.
169. In case of joinder of non-signatory parties to an
   arbitration agreement, the following two scenarios will
   prominently emerge: first, where a signatory party to an
   arbitration agreement seeks joinder of a non-signatory
   party to the arbitration agreement; and second, where a
   non-signatory party itself seeks invocation of an
   arbitration agreement. In both the scenarios, the Referral
   Court will be required to prima facie rule on the
   existence of the arbitration agreement and whether the
   non-signatory is a veritable party to the arbitration
   agreement. In view of the complexity of such a
   determination, the Referral Court should leave it for the
   Arbitral Tribunal to decide whether the non-signatory
   party is indeed a party to the arbitration agreement on
   the basis of the factual evidence and application of legal
   doctrine. The Tribunal can delve into the factual,
   circumstantial, and legal aspects of the matter to decide
Page 25 of 33
whether its jurisdiction extends to the non-signatory
        party. In the process, the Tribunal should comply with
        the requirements of principles of natural justice such as
        giving opportunity to the non-signatory to raise
        objections with regard to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral
        Tribunal. This interpretation also gives true effect to the
        doctrine of competence-competence by leaving the
        issue of determination of true parties to an arbitration
        agreement to be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal under
Section 16
.”
114. Thus, even if it is assumed for a moment, that the
     question whether a non-signatory is a veritable party to the
     arbitration agreement is intrinsically connected with the
     issue of “existence” of arbitration agreement, the Referral
     Courts should still nevertheless, leave such questions for the
     determination of the Arbitral Tribunal to decide, as such an
     interpretation gives true effect to the doctrine of
     competence-competence enshrined under
Section 16
of the
     1996 Act.
115. This hands-off approach of Referral Courts in relation
     to the question of whether a non-signatory is a veritable
     party to the arbitration agreement or not was reiterated
     in
Cox & Kings (2) [Cox & Kings Ltd. v. SAP (India) (P) Ltd.
,
     (2025) 1 SCC 611, wherein one of us, (J.B. Pardiwala, J.),
     observed that once an Arbitral Tribunal stands constituted,
     it becomes automatically open to all parties to raise any
     preliminary objections, including preliminary objections
     touching upon the jurisdiction of such tribunal, and to seek
     an early determination thereof.
Consequently, the issue of
     impleadment of a non-signatory was deliberately left for the
     Arbitral Tribunal to decide, after taking into consideration
     the evidence adduced before it by the parties and the
     principles enunciated under
Cox & Kings (1) [Cox & Kings
     Ltd. v. SAP (India) (P) Ltd.
, (2024) 4 SCC 1.”
34.
In fact, ASF Buildtech (Supra) expressly notices the

holding in
Para 169 of Cox & Kings
(Supra) to conclude that
Page 26 of 33
the Referral Court was required to prima facie rule on the

existence of the arbitration agreement and whether the non-

signatory was a veritable party. All that it holds further in

reiteration of the earlier line of judgments is that even if the

Court holds that prima facie a party is a veritable party that

will not foreclose the Arbitral Tribunal from concluding to the

contrary after an intensive inquiry.
35. This does not mean that where the Referral Court finds

prima facie a party is not a veritable party still the matter is left

to the Arbitral Tribunal. To hold so, would relegate the

Referral Court to the status of a monotonous automation.

Further, to countenance such an extreme proposition would

lead to disastrous consequences, where absolute strangers

could walk into the Referral Court and contend that the matter

has to perforce go to the Arbitral Tribunal for a decision on the

veritable nature of the party. We are not prepared to accept

such an extreme proposition.
36. It could happen that one party having undertaken a

contract from the other may engage one or more third parties
Page 27 of 33
like in the present case. In such a scenario, if there is nothing

even prima facie to show that there was any semblance of an

intent to effect legal relationship between that party and the

party originally granting the contract and/or to indicate that

such a third party was a veritable party, such parties cannot

be found to be veritable parties. The following pertinent

observations from
Cox and Kings
(Supra) are relevant: -
“117. ….However, we clarify that mere presence of a
    commercial relationship between signatory and non-
    signatory parties is not sufficient to infer ‘legal relationship’
    between and among the parties. If this factor is applied solely,
    any related entity or company may be impleaded even when
    it does not have any rights or obligations under the underlying
    contract and did not take part in the performance of the
    contract. The group of companies doctrine cannot be applied
    to abrogate party consent and autonomy….”

As pointed out earlier, on the facts of the present case, we hold

that the parties operated on separate orbits.
37. We are not impressed with the argument that the

respondent had a right to invoke the arbitration clause for the

Indian Bidders in the tender issued by the appellant, despite

being a non-signatory, since the respondent was a person
Page 28 of 33
claiming through or under AGC.           Reliance placed in this

regard on
Cox and Kings
(supra) is completely unjustified.
As

held in
Cox and Kings
(supra), mere legal or commercial

connection is not sufficient for a non-signatory to claim

through or under a signatory party.
Para 140 of Cox and Kings
(supra) is extracted hereinbelow :-
“140. An analysis of the cases cited above establishes the
    following propositions of law : first, the typical scenarios
    where a person or entity can claim through or under a party
    are assignment, subrogation, and novation; second, a person
    “claiming through or under” can assert a right in a derivative
    capacity, that is through the party to the arbitration
    agreement, to participate in the agreement; third, the
    persons claiming through or under do not possess an
    independent right to stand as parties to an arbitration
    agreement, but as successors to the signatory parties’
    interest; and fourth, mere legal or commercial connection is
    not sufficient for a non-signatory to claim through or under a
    signatory party.”
38. Apart from the above, not only has the respondent not

shown any consent for assignment as required under clause

3.17 of the tender document, nothing even prima facie has

been shown to establish that there was any semblance of an

intent to effect legal relationship between the respondent and

the party originally granting the contract and/or to indicate
Page 29 of 33
that the respondent was a veritable party.
39. It will be apt to refer to the judgment of this Court in
Khardah Company Limited vs. Raymon & Co.6
wherein this

Court held as under:-
“The law of the subject is well settled and might be stated in
          simple terms. An assignment of a contract might result by
          transfer either of the rights or of the obligations thereunder.
          But there is a well-recognised distinction between these two
          classes of assignments. As a rule obligations under a contract
          cannot be assigned except with the consent of the promise,
          and when such consent is given, it is really a novation
          resulting in substitution of liabilities. On the other hand rights
          under a contract are assignable unless the contract is
          personal in its nature the rights are incapable of assignment
          either under the law or under an agreement between the
          parties.”
40. Applying the consensual theory or the non-consensual

theory, the respondent has not established its case to show

even prima facie the existence of an arbitration agreement

between HPCL and the respondent. Reference to copies of

group emails being marked to HPCL or the creation of an

escrow account on account of the contract between AGC and
6
1963 3 SCR 183
Page 30 of 33
the respondent BCL, fall far short of making out of a prima

facie case.            We have also perused the Settlement-cum-

Assignment Agreement between AGC and respondent-BCL

dated 31.10.2023, and particularly clause 2.2 thereto. Under

this clause, AGC (Black Box) has represented and warranted

that any amount/receivables accruing to AGC (Black Box) as

a result of litigation/proceeding initiated by BCL against the

HPCL was to be transferred to BCL.              Here again, the

respondent fails the prima facie test of being a veritable party

to the arbitration agreement between HPCL and AGC. As to

what is the legal status otherwise of clause 2.2 of the

Settlement Agreement dated 31.10.2023 is not for us to

comment in the present proceeding.
41. The judgment in
Pravin Electricals Private Limited vs.

Galaxy Infra & Engineering Private Limited7
, cited by Mr.

Nalin Kohli, learned Senior Advocate, has no relevance to the

present case. There was a dispute between employer and the
7
(2021) 5 SCC 671
Page 31 of 33
tendering party directly and the dispute was as to whether

there existed any agreement between them.
Hence, Pravin

Electricals
(Supra) is also of no help to the respondent.
Equally, the reliance on
Cox & Kings Ltd. (2) vs. SAP (India)

Pvt. Ltd.8
, does not carry the case of the respondent any

further. That case turned on its own facts. As is clear from

para 34 of
the said judgment
, this Court felt that in view of the

complexities involved in the determination of the question as

to whether the respondent No.2 therein was a party to the

arbitration agreement or not, the matter was felt best left to the

arbitral tribunal to take a call.
Unlike in
Cox & Kings
(2)

(supra), the situation here is simple, leaving us with no

difficulty in arriving at the conclusion that we indeed have

arrived at.
42. In view of our holding on the issue of the non-existence

of an arbitration agreement between the parties herein, we

are not required to go into the issue of whether the claim was
8
(2025) 1 SCC 611
Page 32 of 33
ex-facie time-barred.
43. For the reasons stated above, we allow the appeal and set

aside the judgment and order dated 07.04.2025 passed by the

Learned Single Judge of the High Court of Judicature at

Bombay in Comm. Arbitration Application No.125/2025.

Comm. Arbitration Application No.125/2025, on the file of the

High Court of Judicature at Bombay, shall stand dismissed. If

the respondent has any other remedy available in law, it is at

liberty to pursue the same. If any such proceedings are

resorted to, they have to be decided in accordance with law

and on their own merits. No order as to costs.
……….........................J.
                                        [J.B. PARDIWALA]


                                      ……….........................J.
                                     [K. V. VISWANATHAN]

New Delhi;
9th December, 2025
Page 33 of 33