[Cites
19
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Jyoti Builders vs Chief Executive Officer on 2 December, 2025
2025 INSC 1372                                                                          REPORTABLE

                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 14512 OF 2025
                                        (arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 3405 of 2025)


                            JYOTI BUILDERS                                      …APPELLANT(S)

                                                              VERSUS

                            CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER & ORS.                      …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                         JUDGMENT
J.B. PARDIWALA, J. :
1.     Leave granted.
2.     This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the

                            High   Court   of    Judicature   at   Bombay   (Original   Ordinary   Civil

                            Jurisdiction) dated 18.12.2024 by which the writ petition filed by the

                            appellant herein seeking to challenge the orders passed by the

                            respondent No. 1 herein dated 03.10.2022 and respondent No. 3 herein

                            dated 07.10.2024 respectively came to be dismissed.
3.     Over and above the challenge to the two orders referred to above,

                            the appellant also prayed before the High Court for a writ of mandamus

                            directing the respondent Nos. 1 and 3 herein respectively to implement

                            the order dated 26.02.2015 passed by the respondent No. 1 herein i.e.

                            the Chief Executive Officer, Slum Rehabilitation Authority (CEO-SRA).
4.     This litigation has a chequered history.       The facts are quite
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by      complicated. In such circumstances, we need to give a fair idea about
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.12.02
15:29:56 IST
this litigation which, according to the High Court, was a third round of
Reason:
litigation between the parties.
1
FACTUAL MATRIX
5.        The dispute in the present case relates to a parcel of land

admeasuring 2,005 sq. mts. bearing CTS No.620/A/1A/1(Part) (now

renumbered as CTS No. 620/A/1A/1B/1 and 620/A/1A/1B/2) of

Village Malad in Taluka Borivali, Mumbai Suburban District (“Subject

Property”).
6.        The Subject Property was originally owned by F.E. Dinshaw

Trust. Since there were hutments on the Subject Property and the same

had no proper hygiene and sanitation, it was declared as a slum on 26th

November, 1987 under
Section 4
of the Maharashtra Slum Areas

(Improvement, Clearance and Redevelopment) Act, 1971 (for short “
Slum

Act
”).
7.        On 25th March, 1991, the Development Plan of 1991 for Mumbai

was published, wherein the Subject Property was reserved for

Recreational Ground (“RG”). The Subject Property even today is reserved

for RG.
8.        The respondent No. 5, i.e., Phuldai R. Yadav claims to have

purchased the Subject Property from the Trust on 18th September, 1991

under a distressed sale for an amount of Rs. 1,06,000/-. Within a period

of 6 months from the date of purchase, the respondent No. 5 is said to

have entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) dated

9th February, 1992 (“1992 MOU”) for sale of the Subject Property with the

appellant’s    predecessor   in   interest   viz.   Harishree   Enterprises

(“Harishree Enterprises”). The respondent No. 5 is said to have granted
2
her consent to Harishree Enterprises for redevelopment. It is the case of

the appellant that such act on the part the respondent No. 5 is a pointer

that she was not interested in developing the property herself or in any

case, had waived her preferential right, if any, to redevelop the slum land

i.e. the Subject Property way back in the year 1992.
9.     Initially, Harishree Enterprises propounded the slum scheme on

a larger property consisting of seven plots of land, admeasuring 19456.7

sq. mts. (“Larger Property”). The Subject Property is one of the said seven

plots. The 1992 MOU was considered as grant of consent by the owner

for the proposed redevelopment as per the prevailing law. The other six

plots of land are either owned by the appellant’s predecessor (and

thereafter the appellant) or the development rights/consent for the slum

scheme had been given for the same.
10.    Accordingly, a survey was undertaken to identify the number of

slum dwellers. As per the survey, 34 slum dwellers were found to be

residing on the Subject Property.
11.    On 30th January 1997, Certified Annexure-II (“Annexure II”) was

issued by the SRA in respect of the slum dwellers of the Larger Property

including the Subject Property. Annexure II contains a plan on which

slum scheme is to be implemented. The plan annexed to Annexure II

includes the Subject Property and contain names/details of 34 slum

dwellers who had their hutments on the Subject Property.
3
12.    On 3rd September, 1997, a Letter of Intent (“1997 LOI”) was

issued in favour of Harishree Enterprises for implementation of the Slum

Scheme on Larger Property, which includes the Subject Property.
13.    In the meantime, there was an agreement between Harishree

Enterprises and one M/s. Vikas Housing Ltd. (“Vikas Housing”) for joint

development. This led to a dispute, which, in turn, was ultimately

resolved through Consent Terms dated 3rd August, 2000. In accordance

with the consent terms, Vikas Housing became entitled to develop

12606.7 sq. mts. (“Project Property”), which includes the Subject

Property. The said Consent Terms came to be subsequently registered.

In the present appeal we are not concerned with the balance portion of

the Larger Property which came to Harishree Enterprises’s share as per

the Consent Terms.
14.    The appellant claims to have acquired its rights from Vikas

Housing for Project Property. On 9th August, 2005, a revised LOI came to

be issued in favour of the appellant thereby sanctioning slum scheme on

Project Property and Annexure II was certified. The plan includes the

Subject Property. The 34 slum dwellers whose hutments were on the

Subject Property were included in the Annexure II issued to the

appellant.
15.    A Public Notice dated 8th June, 2004 was issued by the SRA

intimating the public at large that a Letter of Intent with respect to the

Project Property including the Subject Property had been issued to
4
Harishree Enterprises for rehabilitation and redevelopment of slum

dwellers.
16.     Thereafter   four   Rehabilitation   Buildings   were   constructed

between the year 2005 and 2011 and the Occupation Certificate (OC) for

the fifth Rehabilitation building was issued by the SRA in the year 2022.
17.     On 26th February, 2015 (“2015 Order”), a detailed order came to

be passed by the CEO-SRA after giving notice to and hearing to all the

concerned including the respondent No. 5 (Phuldai, the then owner) inter

alia holding that the Slum Scheme of the appellant had substantially

been implemented on the entire area covering the Project Property

admeasuring 12,606 sq. mts. (including the Subject Property) and that a

substantial number of slum dwellers had already been accommodated

and in furtherance of the slum scheme, the Subject Property was liable

to be acquired in the interest of the slum scheme and the slum dwellers

on the Subject Property had to be rehabilitated by the appellant. It

further states that the respondent No. 5 (Phuldai) would be entitled to

monetary compensation amount after acquisition. The 2015 Order never

came to be challenged by the respondent No.5 (Phuldai) and thus, has

attained finality.
18.     Accordingly, on the application filed by the society of the slum

dwellers, a survey for demarcation of the Subject Property was carried

out by the Officers of SRA and requests were made by the Slum Societies

for acquisition of the Subject Property from time to time as per the 2015

Order. It is the case of the appellant that the Full Occupation Certificate
5
for the sale building in favour of the appellant was not granted on the

ground that the Subject Property of the respondent No. 5 (Phuldai) was

yet to be acquired under
Section 14
of the Slum Act and handed over to

MCGM.
19.    On 26th March, 2022, the respondent No. 5 (Phuldai) sold the

Subject Property to the respondent No. 4 (“Alchemi Developers”).

According to the appellant, it was sold on the pretext that there are slum

dwellers on the Subject Property who are required to be rehabilitated. It

is alleged by the appellant that the subject property was sold with the

knowledge that the slum scheme had already been implemented.

However, the respondent No. 4 (Alchemi Developers) has now floated its

own scheme giving a list of 34 persons, most of whom, according to the

appellant, have already been rehabilitated.
20.    The subject matter of the present dispute is only to the extent of

2005 sq. mts. i.e. the Subject Property which was owned by the

respondent No. 5 (Phuldai) and which has belatedly been acquired by

another builder, i.e. respondent No. 4 (Alchemi Developers) on 26th

March, 2022 with knowledge that the Slum Scheme on the area of

12606.7 sq. mts., i.e. the Project Property, including Subject Property,

had fully been implemented by rehabilitating 498 slum dwellers. It is the

case of the appellant that the SRA has changed its earlier consistent

stand till the issuance of letter dated 14th March, 2022 only after the

respondent No. 4 (Alchemi Developers) acquired rights from the

respondent No. 5 (Phuldai), i.e. after March 2022.
6
21.     In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant invoked

the writ jurisdiction of the High Court and questioned the legality and

validity of the orders passed by the respondent No. 1 (CEO-SRA) granting

sanction to the respondent No. 4 (Alchemi Developers) and refusal to

implement the 2015 Order referred to above.
JUDGMENT OF THE HIGH COURT
22.     The High Court first looked into
Section 14(1)
of the Slum Act.
Section 14
relates to the power of State Government to acquire land.
Section 14
of the Slum Act reads thus:-
“14. Power of State Government to acquire land
      (1) Where on any representation from the Competent Authority
      it appears to the State Government that, in order to enable the
      Authority to execute any work of improvement or to redevelop
      any slum area or any structure in such area, it is necessary
      that such area, or any land within adjoining or surrounded by
      any such area should be acquired the State Government may
      acquire the land by publishing in the Official Gazette, a notice
      to the effect that the State Government had decided to acquire
      the land in pursuance of this section:
Provided that, before publishing such notice, the State
      Government, or as the case may be, the Competent Authority
      may call upon by notice the owner of, or any other person who,
      in its or his opinion may be interested in, such land to show
      cause in writing why the land should not be acquired with
      reasons therefor, to the Competent Authority shall, with all
      reasonable despatch, forward any objections so submitted
      together with his report in respect thereof to the State
      Government and on considering the report and the objections,
      if any, the State Government may pass such order as it deems
      fit.
1(A) The acquisition of land for any purpose mentioned in sub-
      section (1) shall be deemed to be a public purpose.
      (2) When a notice as aforesaid is published in the Official
      Gazette, the land shall, on and from the date on which the
      notice is so published, vest absolutely in the State Government
      free from all encumbrances.”
7
23.    The High Court took notice of the proviso to
Section 14
of the

Slum Act which imposes an obligation on the State Government to

consider the SRA’s report as well as the objections that might have been

raised by the owner as regards the acquisition. Based on such material,

the State Government would thereafter proceed to pass an appropriate

order as it may deem fit. The High Court observed that the State could

have proceeded with the acquisition subject to the conditions prescribed

in the proviso contained under
Section 14
of the Slum Act referred to

above. The High Court recorded that indisputably the State Government

had failed to take steps contemplated under
Section 14(1)
referred to

above despite the order dated 26.02.2015. However, according to the

High Court, it was too late in the day now for Jyoti Builders (appellant

herein) to assert that the State Government should be directed to acquire

the subject property. In other words, the finding returned by the High

Court is that the respondent No. 5 (Phuldai) was never called upon to

develop the subject property in accordance with
Section 14
of the Slum

Act. The High Court noted that Jyoti Builders (appellant herein) had

failed to take necessary steps for a period of seven years i.e. between

2015 and 2022. The High Court had also returned the finding that the

attempt now being made by Jyoti Builders is to acquire the subject

property by back door entry. If Jyoti Builders at all intended to acquire

the subject property, it could have purchased it. It is when Jyoti Builders

failed to purchase the subject property, then respondent No. 4 (Alchemi

Developers purchased it.
8
24.     The High Court thereafter considered the question whether the

respondent No. 4 herein (Alchemi Developers) had submitted a scheme

for the subject property. According to the appellant herein, the

respondent No. 4 (Alchemi Developers) is responsible for dragging one

and all to this litigation. The appellant has levelled serious allegations

against the respondent No. 4 alleging that it managed with the authority

concerned. However, the High Court returned the finding that since the

rights of respondent No. 5 (Phuldai), the owner of the subject property,

were yet to be adjudicated upon, the respondent No. 4 (Alchemi

Developers) would be entitled to submit its scheme for redevelopment.
25.     The third issue that the High Court addressed itself was whether

the subject property was included in the slum scheme. In this regard,

the High Court returned the finding that subject property is not included

in the slum redevelopment scheme.
26.     In such circumstances referred to above, the final conclusion

arrived at by the High Court reads thus:-
“14) Additionally, even as per Jyoti the benefits of subject
      property were excluded. Furthermore, in light of Citispace vs.
      State of Maharashtra (“Citispace”) Order dated 31" July 2002
      in Writ Petition No 1152 of 2002 read together with the Order
      dated 25th July 2014, no new scheme could be implemented
      on the land reserved for garden. This was the view of the CEO
      SRA in Order dated 26th February 2015 where he noted the
      following:
“Further with regard to the land owned by
          Respondent No. 2 viz. Shrimati Phuldai R Yadav, the
          record shows that the said land is reserved for
          recreation ground and therefore the same cannot be
          developed in view of the order dated 31-7-2002
          passed by the Honourable High Court at Bombay in
Writ Petition No. 1152 of 2002 [Citispace v State of
9
Maharashtra
]. However since the land is occupied
     and encroached by the Slum Dwellers, they are
     required to be rehabilitated as Project Affected
     Persons and it is the responsibility of the developer
     to handover the RG plot of land to MCGM.”
   It was only after 1st March 2022 that an owner could
propose a scheme for such property. Therefore, the question of
Phuldai attempting to propound a scheme post SRA's order of
26th February 2015 does not arise.
15) Regarding the contention of Mr. Kadam that, the CEO SRA
whilst passing the Order dated 3rd October 2022 had reviewed
the Order dated 26th February 2015, - we reject it outrightly.
We clarify that the CEO SRA acted solely in compliance with
the Court's directive to examine the contentions raised by Jyoti
and Alchemi in Jyoti's Petition itself, which opposed the
implementation of S R Scheme on the subject property by
Alchemi. The CEO SRA’s role was limited to addressing the
rival contentions and did not involve reopening or
reconsidering the earlier decision. Therefore Mr Kadam's claim
that the CEO SRA “reviewed” the matter is unfounded and is
hereby rejected. Consequently, the judgements of Kapra
Mazdoor Ekta Union (supra), Deoki Nandan Parashar (supra)
and Chiranjilal Shrilal Goenka (supra) cited by Mr. Kadam will
render no assistance to the Petitioner.
16) We agree with Mr. Chinoy’s argument that Jyoti has
already benefitted from accommodating the slum dwellers
under the scheme by receiving necessary FSI under the Rules.
Therefore, the cost of relocation has effectively been
compensated to Jyoti.
17) The AGRC has rightly asked the SRA to ‘look into’ the
matter. We now expect that the SRA will not adopt a contrary
stance, especially after recording that the slum dwellers on
Phuldai’s plot have been already allocated apartments.
18) Considering the case from another perspective, in our view,
first Harishree and now Jyoti's intent appears on usurping
Phuldai’s land in some form or manner and to deprive her of
her legitimate benefit under the law.
18.1) It is undisputed that prior to the slum scheme proposed
by Harishree, a MoU was entered into between Phuldai and
Harishree with the intent to purchase Phuldai’s land for
consideration. For reasons unknown, that MOU failed.
However, Harishree proceeded with the slum scheme,
assuming they would acquire Phuldai’s land at a later stage.
A significant portion of the plot (approximately 1905 sq. mtrs.)
remained vacant, as evidenced by the MOU. The LoI’s issued
from time-to-time further confirm this fact.
10
19) A comparison of LoI dated 4th June 2004 and 9th August
2005 reveals that not only was the area of the plot reduced,
but the number of slum dwellers slated for rehabilitation was
also reduced from 574 to 472. It is undisputed that the
conditions outlined in the LoIs required Harishree - and later
Vikas - to produce title documents and clear the land
concerning Phuldai Yadav’s plot. Since this was not
accomplished, the utilization of the FSI was kept in abeyance.
20) Pausing here for a moment, we ask ourselves: what
remained on the plot apart from FSI? There were only 34 slum
dwellers on a specific portion of the subject property that
needed rehabilitation. It is undisputed that this plot was
reserved for garden and HD purposes, meaning that the land
had to remain open and vacant. The FSI was, therefore, the
only component to be utilised - either on the same plot or
elsewhere.
21) As the FSI of the said plot was kept in abeyance, it raised
a significant question about the land’s inclusion in the scheme.
The LoIs clearly demonstrate that the SRA was not convinced
about Harishree’s or Jyoti’s title to the subject property. Even
the CEO SRA’s order dated 26th February 2015 noted that
Jyoti will have to give clear title to MCGM. In our view it meant
that Jyoti was required to acquire it and that which its
predecessors had intended and based on which proposed the
scheme.
22) We believe that Harishree and now Jyoti, assumed they
would purchase the land from Phuldai and, in anticipation
relocated the slum dwellers. However, the critical question is,
if someone decides to relocate and clear the slum dwellers
from someone else's plot, can they subsequently claim
beneficial rights of the plot? In our view, the answer is in the
negative. Notably, Phuldai was never called upon to develop
the subject property as per
Section 14(1)
of the Slums Act.
There is an inexplicable delay in enforcing the 26th February
2015 Order.
23) What Jyoti did during seven years between 2015 to 2022?
In our opinion, seeking acquisition now appears to be an
attempt at a backdoor entry. If Jyoti intended to acquire the
property, they could have purchased it. They did not and
Alchemi did. Therefore, any benefit or loss concerning the
property rightfully belongs to Alchemi alone.
24) Jyoti cannot claim a right over the property simply because
they rehabilitated the slum dwellers. At best, they are entitled
to compensation, which, in our view, has already been
provided by granting them an equivalent and/or adequate
area for sale.
11
25) We reiterate that we find no error or illegality in the AGRC’s
       findings that would warrant setting them aside. We thus
       concur with the findings of the AGRC. In view of the above
       deliberation, we find no merits in the Petition and therefore
       dismiss it.”
27.      In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant is here

before this Court.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
28.      Mr. Shyam Divan, the learned senior counsel appearing for the

appellant, broadly submitted the following:-
(a) Subject   Property    is   not   excluded    from   the   appellant’s

      predecessor’s slum scheme of 1997 and the same continues to be an

      integral part of the appellant’s slum scheme till date.
(b) No new slum scheme could have been propounded and/or

      sanctioned in favour of the respondent No. 4 (Alchemi Developers) as

      there are no slum dwellers to be rehabilitated.
(c) The SRA does not have jurisdiction to entertain or approve the

      respondent No. 4’s scheme.
(d) As per the appellant’s scheme, the entire subject property is

      required to be handed over to the MCGM as a Recreational Ground

      (i.e. open green land), whereas the respondent No. 4 (Alchemi

      Developers) has applied for slum rehabilitation scheme under DCPR

      2034 and, if the same is approved, then the respondent No. 4 would

      construct upon 65% of the RG area and would keep only 35% vacant

      as RG. As per the learned senior counsel, this would lead to reduction

      of RG in the city of Mumbai which already has been very low per
12
capita green spaces. In such circumstances, the respondent No. 4’s

scheme ought not to have been accepted.
(e) A slum scheme in Mumbai was implemented as per
Regulation

33(10)
of DCR 1991 till 2018 and thereafter as per
Regulation 33(10)
of DCPR 2034 (both provisions are in pari materia). Appendix (IV) of

DCR 1991 and DCPR 2034 allows redevelopment of slum properties

by slum dwellers (self-redevelopment), through a developer, owner,

public authorities or NGOs. Thus, consent of owner is not mandatory

for implementation of slum scheme. In the event the owner does not

consent or redevelop the property, it can be acquired by the State

Government on the recommendation of the SRA. The owner gets

compensation as per
Section 17
of the Slum Act.
(f) By 2015 Order, the CEO-SRA could be said to have adjudicated

the lis between the respondent No. 5 (Phuldai) and the appellant.
After hearing the respondent No. 5 (who belatedly objected to the

continuation of implementation of slum scheme), and considering the

rival contentions between the parties, by the 2015 Order, the CEO-

SRA held that the slum scheme of appellant has progressed

substantially and therefore the Subject Property cannot be excluded

from the scheme. The CEO-SRA saying so issued directions to the

Dy. Collector SRA to take steps for acquiring the Subject Property

under
Section 14
of the Slum Act for the effective implementation of

the appellant’s slum scheme. There was no challenge to the 2015

Order; the same attained finality; and as such, could not have been
13
revisited either by the parties or slum authorities respectively. The

      respondent Nos. 4 (Alchemi Developers) and 5 (Phuldai) respectively

      were aware that the 2015 Order is binding on them. To overcome

      this, they have gone to the extent of misinterpreting the 2015 Order

      by misconstruing the words ‘carve out’. The words ‘carve out’ have to

      be read in the context of the finding and conclusion of the 2015

      Order, which is to include the same and not exclude from the slum

      scheme. As such, the purport of 2015 Order is that the property

      should be “demarcated” i.e. carved out for the purpose of acquisition

      and handing over the same to BMC. The demarcation was already

      undertaken on 6th October, 2016. The 2015 Order does not in any

      manner suggest “taking out” the Subject Property out of the

      appellant’s scheme.
(g) In such circumstances referred to above, the power of the SRA

      under
Section 14
of the acquisition is also coupled with duty to

      acquire the Subject Property.
Such a duty has been recognized by

      this Court in the case of (
i) State of Uttar Pradesh v. Jogendra

      Singh
, 1963 SCC OnLine SC 96, and (ii) State of Tamil Nadu v.

      Governor of Tamil Nadu & Anr., 2025 SCC OnLine SC 770.
29.      Mr. Divan, the learned senior counsel further highlighted the

SRA’s diametrically opposite stance before and after the respondent No.

4 proposed its alleged illegal scheme which, according to him, is evident

from the following:-
14
(a)    From the year 1997 to 2022:
The SRA’s stand prior to Alchemi Developers coming in

picture is as follows:
(i) All the LOIs issued by the SRA clearly show that the

Subject Property is part of the appellant’s slum scheme.
(ii) The SRA included 34 slum dwellers on the Subject

Property in the Annexure II of the appellant’s slum scheme.
(iii) The SRA directed rehabilitation of the said 34 slum

dwellers in the rehab component of the appellant’s slum

scheme.
(iv) By an Order dated 26th February, 2015, the SRA directed

acquisition of the Subject Property and stated that the

respondent No. 5 (Phuldai) would be entitled to monetary

compensation after the acquisition.
(v) In pursuance of 2015 Order, the Subject Property was

demarcated by CTS Officer on 6th June, 2015.
(vi) When the appellant requested for grant of Occupation

Certificate in respect of the Sale Building No. 4, the SRA

(respondent No.1) vide its letter dated 14th March ,2022

stated that the request for Occupation Certificate cannot be

granted as RG is not handed over and that the Subject

Property is yet to be acquired under
Section 14(1)
of the Slum

Act.
15
(vii) On 20th April, 2022 the Tehsildar from the office of SRA

      gave an opinion stating that necessary steps towards

      acquisition should be taken with respect to the Subject

      Property as per 2015 Order and in fact enclosed a draft Notice

      to be issued under
Section 14 (1)
of the Slum Act and sent

      the same to the CEO-SRA for further process.
(viii) On 27th May, 2022 the Chief Legal Consultant of SRA

      gave his opinion and stated that the Subject Property be

      acquired as per 2015 Order.
(ix) From 2015 till 2022, it was a consistent stand of the SRA

      that the Subject Property forms part of the appellant’s

      scheme and thus was required to be acquired under
Section

      14(1)
of the Slum Act for the benefit of the Slum Scheme of

      the appellant.
(b) Events post Alchemi Developers – respondent No. 4 coming

into picture:-
30.         According to Mr. Divan, the moment another builder i.e.

respondent No. 4 came into picture and started pursing its slum

scheme on the Subject Property, the office of SRA made a complete

volte face which can be seen from the following:
(i) On 26th March, 2022 the respondent No. 5 (Phuldai) sold the

 Subject Property to the respondent No. 4 (Alchemi Developers).
16
(ii) Thereafter, in March-April 2022, the respondent No. 5 applied

      for implementation of the Slum Scheme on the Subject Property

      based on fraudulent list of slum dwellers (persons who were already

      rehabilitated by the appellant). The true and correct status of list of

      the slum dwellers submitted by the respondent No. 5 in its scheme

      is set out by the appellant. This list, relied upon by the appellant at

      every stage, from CEO-SRA to this Court, has not been denied by

      the respondent No. 4.
(iii) After respondent No. 4 started pursuing its slum scheme, the

      SRA made a complete volte face and started contending that the

      Subject Property is excluded from the slum scheme and 2015 Order

      need not be implemented, and the Subject Property should form

      part of the respondent No. 5’s scheme, despite holding that all the

      slum dwellers had already been rehabilitated.
(iv) After the new developer came into picture, the respondent No. 1

      (SRA) has taken a stance which is contradictory to the order dated

      26th February, 2015 and the same amounts to review of its own

      order i.e. order of his predecessor.
31.     According to Mr. Divan, the CEO-SRA (respondent No. 1) could

not have taken the orders passed by his predecessor in review as no such

power is provided under the statute. He would submit that the order

dated 03.10.2022 passed by the CEO-SRA holding that acquisition of the

Subject Property as per the 2015 Order need not be undertaken amounts

to review of the 2015 Order directing acquisition of the Subject Property.
17
32.    He would thereafter contend that the findings returned by the

High Court to the effect that the appellant had already availed the FSI

benefit insofar as rehabilitation of 34 slum dwellers is concerned could

be said to be perverse. In this regard, he submitted that a perusal of the

LOI would indicate that the entire FSI benefit arising out of the Subject

Property is kept in abeyance. He would submit that the slum scheme is

implemented by the developer under the
Slum Act
. The developer gets

dual benefit - first rehabilitating the slum dwellers and secondly

entitlement to FSI for implementation of slum scheme. He strongly

contended that the entire FSI for the Subject Property has been kept in

abeyance. He asserted that, on the other hand, the respondent No. 4

(Alchemi   Developers)   seeks   benefit   of   the   entire   FSI   without

implementing the slum scheme or the clearing slum. According to Mr.

Divan, this is something absolutely illegal.
33.    In the last, Mr. Divan contended that the respondent Nos. 4

and 5 respectively have misled this Court by submitting that 34 slum

dwellers on the subject property have been rehabilitated as Project

Affected Persons i.e. PAPs. According to him, the slum dwellers of the

subject property are part of Annexure II issued to the appellant and

therefore they have been rehabilitated in rehab component under the

slum scheme and cannot be rehabilitated as PAPs as per the orders and

directions of the respondent No. 1.
34.    In such circumstances referred to above, Mr. Divan, the learned

senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant herein submitted
18
that there being merit in his appeal, the same may be allowed and

appropriate relief may be granted.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NOS. 1 and 2
35.      Mr. Siddharth Dharmadhikari, the learned counsel appearing for

the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively vehemently submitted that no

error, not to speak of any error of law, could be said to have been

committed by the High Court in passing the impugned judgment and

order.
36.      It was submitted that the subject property does not form part of

the appellant’s slum scheme. As per
Regulation 33(10)
of DCR 1991 and

Guidelines issued in the year 1997, a slum scheme could have been

submitted only with the consent of the “owner” or after acquiring the

same in accordance with
Section 14(1)
of the Slum Act.
37.      It was argued that indisputably the true and correct position in

tabular format is as under:-
Sr.      Plot No.                     Map   Area          Purpose
No.                                   @ pg. Sq. m.
1004
CTS No. 620/A/1A/1A/3        Dark    2700        Owned      by
1.                                    Green               appellant &
                                                          included in
                                                          Scheme.
                                                          Satisfies the
                                                          RG
                                                          requirement.
2.       CTS No. 620/A/1A/1B/1        Light   2005        Owned by R4
         CTS No. 620/A/1A/1B/2        Green               and
                                                          excluded
                                                          from scheme
                                                          on
19
04.04.2000
                                                           on request of
                                                           predecessor
                                                           of appellant
38.    It was argued that indisputably the respondent No. 5 namely

Phuldai was the owner of the subject property. According to the learned

counsel, the predecessor in title of the appellant had misrepresented to

have obtained the consent from the owner i.e. Phuldai on the basis of an

unregistered MOU between the appellant’s predecessor (Harishree

Enterprises) and the respondent No. 5 (Phuldai). It was pointed out that

the records reveal that the respondent No. 5 (Phuldai) had terminated

the unregistered MOU in 1995 itself. Such termination was challenged

by Harishree Enterprises before the Civil Court by filing Civil Suit No.

1514 of 1995 which later came to be dismissed.
39.    In so far as obtaining occupation certificate for the Final Sale

Building in Slum Scheme is concerned, the learned counsel submitted

that the appellant is not required to hand over the subject property. It

was submitted that it is absolutely incorrect on the part of the appellant

to say that the appellant has been put to a specific condition to acquire

or hand over the Light Green portion i.e. subject property (2005 sq. m.)

for further compliance of Full Occupation Certificate.
40.    It was vehemently submitted by the learned counsel appearing

for the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively that since the subject

property stood excluded from its Slum Scheme, the respondent No. 1

could not have insisted on any such condition for the purpose of issuing
20
the occupation certificate. However, it was clarified that the appellant

was liable to hand over the Dark Green Portion admeasuring 2700 sq.

mts. as Recreational Ground (RG).
41.    It was argued that in accordance with the direction issued by the

respondent No. 1 vide order dated 26.02.2015 the appellant had declared

the 34 slum dwellers residing on the subject property as Project Affected

Persons (PAPs). In lieu of the appellant handing over PAP’s to SRA, the

appellant has been compensated in accordance with the policy with

equivalent FSI for Sale Component. The appellant had already utilised

such FSI generated against PAP and had constructed its Final Sale

Building.
42.    It was next submitted that the appellant had at no point of time

ever challenged the directions issued by the CEO-SRA to rehabilitate the

34 slum dwellers as PAPs. It was argued that the subject property has

now been purchased by the respondent No. 4 (Alchemi Developers) from

the respondent No. 5 (Phuldai) i.e. the original owner of the subject

property and thus, the respondent No. 4 has a vested right to have the

first choice to undertake a slum rehabilitation scheme and only upon

failure to do so, the State Government may acquire the land. The learned

counsel submitted that the respondent No. 4 (Alchemi Developers) as the

lawful owner had already exercised its preferential right and was

implementing the scheme by including the subject property as part of its

scheme. In such circumstances referred to above, there is no question

at this point of to acquire the subject land.
21
43.    In such circumstances referred to above, the learned counsel

appearing for the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 prayed that there being no

merit in the present appeal, the same may be dismissed.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NO. 4
44.    Mr. Vikas Singh, the learned senior counsel appearing for the

respondent No. 4 (Alchemi Developers) vehemently submitted that the

subject property has been lawfully purchased by Alchemi Developers for

a valuable consideration. It is alleged that the appellant is trying to usurp

the subject property without paying any consideration. It was argued

that the 34 slum dwellers were part of the scheme in 1996-97. However,

they came to be excluded in 2000. The mere existence of the 34 slum

dwellers in the Annexure II would not establish anything. Further, the

SRA had expressly directed the appellant to rehabilitate them as PAPs.
45.    It was further argued that if there are no slums on the subject

property, the SRA would not have any jurisdiction to acquire the subject

property with a view to hand over the same to MCGM. In the last, it was

submitted that the subject property was never a part of the scheme of

the appellant. The appellant on its own and without any permission from

the planning authority rehabilitated the slum dwellers. The appellant

should not be permitted to take advantage of its own wrong.
46.    In such circumstances referred to above, the learned senior

counsel prayed that there being no merit in the present appeal, the same

may be dismissed.
22
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NOS. 6 AND 8
RESPECTIVELY
47.    Ms. Pallavi Sharma, the learned counsel appearing for the

respondent No. 6 - Gokuldham Ekta SRA Co-operative Housing Society

Limited and the respondent No. 8 - Shree Gokuldham Durgadevi Vikas

SRA Co-op Housing Society Ltd. respectively (“Slum Societies”) submitted

that the 34 slum dwellers who were in the subject property owned by the

respondent No. 5 (Phuldai) and also other slum dwellers on the larger

property which was being developed by Harishree Enterprises had given

their consent for slum rehabilitation scheme by the Harishree

Enterprises.   The slum dwellers had also executed agreements for

permanent alternate accommodation with Harishree Enterprises. The

respondent No. 5 (Phuldai) had never approached the slum dwellers to

redevelop the subject property.
48.    It was pointed out that the appellant herein acquired the rights

to redevelop the property admeasuring 12,606 sq. mts. including the

subject property. All the slum dwellers on the property admeasuring

12,606 sq. mts. have been rehabilitated in the rehab building

constructed by the appellant herein. The main concern expressed by the

Slum Societies is with respect to the loss of the open recreational ground.

According to the Slum Societies, the subject property is reserved for

recreational ground. The slum scheme of the appellant under the 1991

DCR envisages the subject property which is in front of the slum

rehabilitation building entirely as open space for recreation as RG.
23
49.    However, according to the learned counsel, as per the scheme of

the respondent No. 4 (Alchemi Developers) which is under DCPR 2034,

the respondent No. 4 proposes to construct on 65% of the subject

property. If the respondent No. 4’s scheme is allowed, the 498 slum

dwellers and even general public would loose 65% of recreational ground

i.e. about 1,303 sq. mts. out of the subject property. This would cause

grave prejudice to the slum dwellers. According to the learned counsel,

this aspect is not considered by the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively

including the High Court.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NO. 5 (ORIGINAL
OWNER OF SUBJECT PROPERTY)
50.    Mr. K. Parameshwar, the learned senior counsel appearing for the

respondent No. 5 (Phuldai) fully supported the respondent No. 4 (Alchemi

Developers). It was argued that the respondent No. 4 as a purchaser of

the subject property from the respondent No. 5 has a preferential right

to redevelop the subject property and the SRA is obliged under law to

invite the respondent No. 4 (Alchemi Developers) to come forward with a

redevelopment proposal. It was argued that the State should not have

ordered to acquire the subject property before extinguishment of the

preferential right. It was argued that each of the LOIs specifically

excluded the subject property or, in other words, the subject property is

not reflected in any manner as a part of the scheme. It has been

admittedly confirmed by the SRA. The learned counsel provided us with

the details of the LOIs as under:-
24
“a) LOI dt. 03.09.1997 which was revised (pursuant to
      complaints by R5) and a fresh LOI dt. 02.08.1999 was issued
      in favour of Harishree Enterprises for slum development of the
      larger property.
b) Revised LOI dt. 04.06.2004 was issued in favour of
      Harishree Enterprises, superseding earlier LOI dt. 02.08.1999
      (cl. 39) - see cl. 23, 25, and 35. Cl. 35 is extracted:
“35. That you shall not claimed FSI of plot
            adm. 2005.00 sq. mts. Kept in abeyance till
            the dispute between Harishree & Smt.
            Phulday Yadav is decided by Court.”
c) LOI dt. 09.08.2005 - see cl. 33:
“33. You shall not claim FSI of plot
            admeasuring 2005.00 sq. mt. kept in
            abeyance till the dispute between M/s Vikas
            Housing Ltd. & M.s Harishree Enterprises &
            Smt. Phuldai Yadav is decided by Court.”
d) LOI dt. 28.09.2017 in favour of the appellant (i.e., present
      developer) makes no mention of the subject property, as a part
      of the scheme. A copy of this LOI, however, is conspicuously
      absent and suppressed by the appellant in the present
      pleadings.”
51.     It was submitted that the fact that the subject property does not

figure in the last LOI dated 28.09.2017 has been taken note of by the

High Court in its impugned judgment. The appellant having acted on this

very LOI that excluded the subject property to implement its slum

redevelopment scheme cannot now seek to contest the right qua the same

subject property as it was owned by the respondent No. 5 and later

purchased by the respondent No. 4.
52.     In the last, it was submitted that the SRA vide letter dated

04.01.2008 had directed the appellant to submit a revised scheme after

excluding the subject property. It was pointed out that the appellant vide

its letter dated 15.01.2008 had stated in so many words that it was not
25
utilising or taking benefit of the subject property and therefore there was

no need to submit a revised scheme.
53.     In such circumstances referred to above, the learned senior

counsel submitted that there being no merit in the present appeal, the

same may be dismissed.
ANALYSIS
54.     Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and

having gone through the materials on record, we would like to address

ourselves on three pivotal issues namely:-
(i) Whether we should issue a mandamus to the State

      Government to acquire the subject property in accordance with
Section 14(1)
of the Slum Act keeping in mind the order dated

      26.02.2015 passed by the Chief Executive Officer-Slum

      Rehabilitation Authority?
(ii) Whether the appellant is entitled to full Occupation

      Certificate for the final sale building in the slum scheme upon

      handing over the portion of land admeasuring 2700 sq. mts.

      meant for Recreational Ground (RG) identified as the dark green

      portion?
(iii) Whether the appellant has been fully compensated by

      granting an equivalent and/or adequate area (FSI) for sale by

      the State Government?
26
55.      Before adverting to the rival submissions canvassed on either

side, we must look into few relevant provisions of the
Maharashtra

Regional Town Planning Act, 1966
(for short, “MRTP Act”) and the
Slum

Act
respectively.
56.      Section 2(19) of the MRTP Act reads thus:-
“2(19) “Planning Authority” means a local authority; and
       shall include:-
(a) a Special Planning Authority constituted or appointed or
       deemed to have been appointed under
section 40
; and
(b) in respect of slum rehabilitation area declared under
section 3C
of the Maharashtra Slum Areas (Improvement,
       Clearance and Redevelopment) Act, 1971, the Slum
       Rehabilitation Authority appointed under section 3A of the
       said Act.”
57.     Proviso to Section 152 of the MRTP Act provides as under:-
“152. Powers of Planning Authority or Development
       Authority to be exercised by certain officers.-
x            x            x            x
        ..... Provided further that, the State Government may by a
       notification in the Official Gazette, delegate any of the powers
       exercisable under sections 44, 45, 46, 51, 53, 54, 55, 56, 135
       and 136 of this Act by the Slum Rehabilitation Authority
       appointed under the
Maharashtra Slum Act
(Improvement,
       Clearance and redevelopment) Act, 1971 acting as Planning
       Authority, to the Chief Executive Officer of the Slum
       Rehabilitation Authority.”
58.
Section 3B
of the Slum Act reads thus:-
“3B. Slum Rehabilitation Schemes.- (1) The Slum
       Rehabilitation Authority concerned, with the previous sanction
       of the State Government, shall prepare or amend the general
       Slum Rehabilitation Scheme for the areas specified under sub-
       section (1) of section 3A, for rehabilitation or relocation of
       protected occupiers and other occupiers of the building in such
       areas.
27
(2) The general Slum Rehabilitation Scheme prepared or any
amendment to it under sub-section (1), shall be published in
the Official Gazette, by the concerned Slum Rehabilitation
Authority, as draft general Slum Rehabilitation Scheme or
draft amendment to general Slum Rehabilitation Scheme, for
the area specified under sub-section (1) of section 3A, for the
information of general public, inviting objections and
suggestions, giving reasonable period of not less than thirty-
days but not more than forth-five days, for submission of
objections and suggestions, if any, in respect of the Scheme.

(3) The Chief Executive Officer of the concerned Slum
Rehabilitation Authority shall, within sixty days consider the
objections and suggestions, if any, received within the
specified period in respect of the said draft general Slum
Rehabilitation Scheme or any draft amendment to the general
Slum Rehabilitation Scheme and after considering the same
and after carrying out such modification as deemed fit or
necessary, finally publish said general Slum Rehabilitation
Scheme or such amendment to it, with the approval of the
State Government, in the Official Gazette.
(4) The general Slum Rehabilitation Scheme published under
sub-section (3) shall be deemed Development Control
Regulations under the provisions of
Chapter III of the
Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966
(Mah.
XXXVII of 1966), for the said area and the provisions of the
general Slum Rehabilitation Scheme shall prevail over the
Development Control Regulations, published under the
Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966
(Mah.
XXXVII of 1966).
(5) The Slum Rehabilitation Scheme so notified under sub-
section (3) shall, generally lay down the parameters for
declaration of any land as the Slum Rehabilitation Area and
indicate the manner in which rehabilitation of the occupants of
the area declared as Slum Rehabilitation Area shall be carried
out. In particular, it shall provide for all or any of the following
matters, that is to say,-
(a) the parameters or guidelines for declaration of land as
     the Slum Rehabilitation Area;
(b) basic and essential parameters of development of
     Slum Rehabilitation Area under the Slum Rehabilitation
     Scheme;
(c) provision for obligatory participation of the owners,
     landholders and occupants of the land declared as the
28
Slum Rehabilitation Area under the approved Slum
    Rehabilitation Scheme in the implementation of such
    Scheme;
(d) provision relating to transit accommodation or
    entitlement of compensation in lieu of transit
    accommodation to the slum dwellers pending
    development of the Slum Rehabilitation Area;
(e) provision relating to allotment of tenements either in-
    situ or otherwise, on development free of cost to the
    protected occupiers of the building in such Slum
    Rehabilitation Area;
(f) provision relating to allotment of tenements either in-
    situ or otherwise, on ownership or on rent, to the other
    non-protected occupiers up to the 1st January 2011,
    subject to the availability of tenements as per the terms
    and conditions and guidelines so notified in the Official
    Gazette, by the Chief Executive Officer with the prior
    approval of the State Government;
(g) scheme for development of the Slum Rehabilitation
    Areas under the Slum Rehabilitation Scheme by the
    landholders and occupants by themselves or through a
    developer and the terms and conditions of such
    development; and the option available to the Slum
    Rehabilitation Authority for taking up such development
    in the event of non-participation of the landholders or
    occupants;
(h) provision regarding sanction of Floor Space Index and
    transfer of development rights, if any, to be made
    available to the developer for development of the Slum
    Rehabilitation Area under the Slum Rehabilitation
    Scheme;
(i) provision regarding non-transferable       nature    of
    tenements for a certain period, etc.

(6) The Chief Executive Officer of the Slum Rehabilitation
Authority, with prior approval of the State Government shall,
regulate procedure for appointment and registration of
developers for implementation of the Slum Rehabilitation
Scheme as per the rules prescribed by the State Government,
from time to time. The Chief Executive Officer or the Slum
Rehabilitation Authority, as the case may be, may register any
person or an association of persons registered under the
Partnership Act, 1932
(9 of 1932) or a company registered
29
under the
Companies Act, 2013
(18 of 2013), as a developer
  in the prescribed manner for the implementation of Slum
  Rehabilitation Scheme.”
59.
Section 4
of the Slum Act reads thus:-
“4. Declaration of slum areas:-(1) Where the Competent
  Authority is satisfied that-
(a) any area is or may be a source of danger to the health,
  safety or convenience of the public of that area or of its
  neighbourhood, by reason of the area having inadequate or
  no basic amenities, or being insanitary, squalid, overcrowded
  or otherwise; or
(b) the buildings in any area, used or intended to be used for
  human habitation are-
(i) in any respect, unfit for human habitation; or
(ii) by reasons of dilapidation, overcrowding, faulty
     arrangement and design of such building, narrowness or
     faulty arrangement of streets, lack of ventilation, light or
     sanitation facilities or any combination of these factors,
     detrimental to the health, safety or convenience of the
     public of that area,
  the Competent Authority may, by notification in the Official
  Gazette, declare such area to be a slum area. Such
  declaration shall also be published in such other manner (as
  will give due publicity to the declaration in the area) as may
  be prescribed.
Explanation.- For the purposes of clause (b), the expression
  “buildings” shall not include,-
(a) cessed buildings in the island City of Mumbai as defined
  in clause (7) of
section 2
of the Maharashtra Housing and
  Area Development Act, 1976 (Mah. XXVIII of 1977), or old
  buildings belonging to the Corporation;
(b) buildings constructed with permission of the relevant
  authority at any point of time;
(c) any building in an area taken up under the Urban
  Renewal Scheme.
(2) In determining whether buildings are unfit for human
  habitation for the purposes of this Act, regard shall be had to
  the condition thereof in respect of the following matters, that
  is to say,-
(a) repairs;
30
(b) stability;
(c) freedom from damp;
(d) natural light and air;
(e) provision for water-supply;
(f) provision for drainage and sanitary conveniences;
(g) facilities for the disposal of waste water;
and the building shall be deemed to be unfit as aforesaid, if,
and only if, it is so far defective in one or more of the said
matters that it is not reasonably suitable for occupation in
that condition.
(3) Any person aggrieved by a declaration made under sub-
section (1) may, within thirty days after the date of such
declaration in the Official Gazette, appeal to the Tribunal. No
such appeal filed after the expiry of thirty days as aforesaid
shall be entertained.
(4) When an appeal is presented under sub-section (3), the
Tribunal shall, by a public notice published in a newspaper
in the Marathi language circulating in the local area in which
the slum area situated and also displayed at some
conspicuous place in the slum area, call upon the residents
of the slum area to file their objections, if any, to the appeal
within a period of fifteen days from the date of publication of
such public notice in the newspaper as aforesaid, either by
themselves or through any association of residents in the
slum area of which they are members.
(5) On expiry of the period of fifteen days as aforesaid the
Tribunal shall fix a day for hearing the appeal and inform the
appellant about the same by letter under certificate of posting
and the residents of the slum area by displaying the notice
of hearing at some conspicuous place in the slum area and
upon hearing the appellant and the residents or
representative of their association in the slum area, if
present, or on considering the written objections, if any, made
by such residents or association, if absent, the Tribunal may,
subject to the provisions of sub-section (6), make an order
either confirming, modifying or rescinding the declaration;
and the decision of the Tribunal shall be final.
Explanation.- For the purposes of sub-section (4) and this
sub-section, the expression “any association of residents in
the slum area” means a society, if any, of such residents
registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860
(XXI of
1860) or under the
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act,
1960
(Mah. XXI of 1961).
31
(6) While deciding the appeal the Tribunal shall ignore the
      works of improvement executed in such slum area by any
      agency of the Government or any local authority after the
      declaration thereof as such slum area by the Competent
      Authority under sub-section (1).”
60.     The scheme of the
Slum Act
indicates that it is a beneficial

legislation and emphasizes on the protection of the occupiers (slum

dwellers) by making a provision for redevelopment and rehabilitation.

Accordingly,
Section 4
of the Slum Act contemplates for an area to be

declared as a ‘slum area’. Section 3B contemplates a Slum

Rehabilitation Authority (“SRA”) to prepare a Slum Rehabilitation

Scheme, which shall be deemed to be the Development Control

Regulations made under the MRTP Act.
61.     The MRTP Act has been amended to provide that the SRA shall

be treated as a Planning Authority for areas declared as slums

Accordingly,
Regulation 33(10)
of DCR 1991 has been framed to deal

with SRA Schemes.
62.     The DCR 1991, i.e.
Regulation 33(10)
read with Appendix IV

thereto provides for the redevelopment of the slum dwellers through the

owners/developers/cooperative societies of slum dwellers, whereby

70% consent of the slum dwellers is to be obtained ‘in a viable stretch

at one place to join a rehabilitation scheme’ (Clause 1.15. of Appendix

IV). In lieu of the developer clearing slums, constructing and handing

over flats to the slum dwellers, it is entitled to an incentive FSI which

can     be   commercially   utilized   by   the   developer   undertaking
32
redevelopment by constructing buildings/buildings for sale in open

market known as ‘free sale component’.
63.   This Court in Tarabai Nagar Co-Op. Hog.
Society (Proposed) v.

State of Maharashtra & Ors.
reported in 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1795

considered the entire scheme of the
Slum Act
and held that the owner

possesses a preferential right to redevelop the SR Area; that the SRA is

duty-bound to invite the owner to submit a SR Scheme, and that any

acquisition is not warranted until such right stands extinguished. The

relevant extracts are as follows:
“82. [...] the owner has a preferential right over other
      stakeholders to develop an SR Area. If the owner then
      chooses to exercise this right by submitting and
      implementing a valid SR Scheme, issues involving rights
      over the property would not arise. It is, thus, not fathomable
      that when the landowner is implementing an SR Scheme on
      its own, a necessity to acquire the land could arise.
83. Rather, any process to acquire the land shall have to be
      kept in abeyance till such time as the owner's preferential
      right to develop it stands extinguished. Since it is open to
      the owner to file its own SR Scheme within a reasonable
      time and the proposal of the owner, if valid and complete,
      would take primacy, it cannot be said that there is any legal
      necessity to acquire the land. If acquisition is allowed to
      take place at this stage, it will jeopardise the preferential
      right of the landowner. It is only when the owner declines
      to undertake development or to support any third-party
      development, thereby foregoing its preferential right, that
      such a necessity would actually arise. There can thus be no
      doubt that, as long as the owner is willing to undertake
      development in exercise of its preferential right, the
      acquisition cannot proceed.
84. This can also be harmoniously read in conjunction with
      the requirement for a notice-cum-invitation to the owner, as
      set out in
Section 13
.46 Until the SRA has invited the owner
      to submit an SR Scheme, the owner's right to develop the
      land cannot be said to have closed. In such a case, the
      subsisting preferential right cannot be frustrated or
      undermined by initiating the acquisition process.
33
x             x            x             x
87. When an SR Area has been notified under Section 3C(1)
       of Chapter I-A51 and its development through an SR
       Scheme is conceptualised, whereunder there is an inbuilt
       preferential right of an owner to carry out redevelopment,
       the power of acquisition under Section 1452 would not
       operate in an independent silo; rather, it must derive
       meaning and effect from the principles prevailing
       throughout the legislative scheme of Chapter I-A”.
64.    Following the decision in Tarabai (supra), this Court in

Saldanha Real Estate Pvt. Ltd. v. Bishop John Rodrigues & Ors.,

reported in 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1794 reiterated these principles. The

relevant paragraphs are extracted for convenience:
“26. This Court in Tarabai (supra) has unequivocally
       established that: (i) the private owner of an SR Area has a
       preferential right to develop it; (ii) the SRA must invite the
       landowner to come forward with a redevelopment proposal
       and give them reasonable time to do so before the said
       preferential right extinguishes; and (iii) the State or the SRA
       cannot move to acquire the land before the preferential right
       of the owner is extinguished. These principles will also apply
       mutatis mutandis to the case in hand.
27. Consequently, there vests a preferential right in favour of
       the Church Trust, over and above the SRA, occupants, or
       other stakeholders, to develop the Subject Land. The Trust
       ought to have been invited by the SRA to submit a proposal
       and undertake such redevelopment after the declaration
       dated 29.12.2020 was issued. Thus, the SRA cannot proceed
       for acquisition of the Subject Land unless (i) such a notice-
cum-invitation is extended, and (ii) thereafter, the right of the
       Church Trust is extinguished if it fails to submit a
       redevelopment scheme within the prescribed period of 120
       days.
28. The High Court has held that there was no compliance of
       these preconditions by the SRA before initiating the
       acquisition, and the entire process was liable to be
       invalidated. The High Court has further found from the
       conduct of the Appellants that the acquisition proceedings
       arose from an exercise of power in bad faith. We, therefore,
       now proceed to examine whether the High Court was right in
       drawing such a conclusion.
x             x            x             x
34
32. The inevitable consequence of the SRA's omission to issue
       a separate notice under Section 1329 is that the Church
       Trust's preferential right to redevelop the Subject Land
       remains intact. In the absence of a valid notice or opportunity,
       there existed no legal basis to extinguish this right. The
       acquisition was, therefore, vitiated in law, falling afoul of the
       prescribed procedure.”
65.    It is not in dispute that in the development plan issued by the

Town Planning Authority, the subject property was reserved for the

purpose of Recreational Ground. One order passed by the Bombay High

Court dated 31.07.2002 in Writ Petition No. 1152 of 2002 titled
Citispace & Ors. v. State of Maharashtra
was brought to our notice.

The order reads thus:-
“Heard parties.
2.     Respondent No. 2 is directed to file an affidavit
       disclosing necessary information as claimed in prayer
       clauses (c)(i) to (xiii) of the writ petition.
3.     Adjourned for four weeks. In the meantime, until
       further orders, no new rehabilitation scheme be sanctioned
       without the permission of this Court in respect of open
       spaces which are reserved for gardens, parks,
       playgrounds,        recreational     spaces,     maidans,
       no-development       zones,    pavements,    roads     and
       carriageways.”
66.   Thus, it appears that the High Court had passed an order of

 injunction
referred to above
on use of lands reserved inter alia for

 Recreation   Ground     meant     for   the   implementation      of      Slum

 Rehabilitation Scheme. This very fact is also recorded in the order dated

 26.02.2015 passed by the CEO-SRA. Such injunction continued till

 01.03.2022. In such circumstances, there was no occasion for the

 respondent No. 1 SRA to acquire the subject property. This fact has

 been acknowledged by the appellant and the same is evident from the
35
letter dated 07.03.2022 addressed by the appellant i.e. within 7 days

from the date the injunction
referred to above
came to be vacated. In

such circumstances, it is clear that till 01.03.2022 nothing could have

been done.
67.   In the meantime, the respondent No. 5 namely Phuldai

transferred her title rights in the subject property in favour of the

respondent No. 4 (Alchemi Developers). The respondent No. 4 (Alchemi

Developers) submitted its proposal for implementation of the slum

rehabilitation scheme. It is also not in dispute that the respondent No.

4 (Alchemi Developers) submitted its proposal for development of the

subject property on 05.04.2022 and the same was accepted in

accordance with law as there was no slum scheme proposal on the

subject property.
68.   In such circumstances
referred to above
, the appellant for the

first time on 25.07.2022 filed a Writ Petition (L) No. 23703 of 2022

seeking a mandamus for the purpose of acquisition of the subject

property relying on the CEO-SRA’s order dated 26.02.2015.
69.   We should also take notice of the fact that the respondent No. 5

(Phuldai) had executed a Memorandum of Understanding dated

09.02.1992 with Harishree Enterprises (predecessor developer) to sell

the subject property and granting consent to redevelop the same. This

MoU came to be terminated in 1995. The termination of the MoU led to

filing of a suit being Suit No. 1514/1995 by Harishree Enterprises on

the original side of the Bombay High Court for specific performance of
36
the MoU. This suit came to be dismissed for default on 06.04.2000 by

the Bombay High Court and thus attained finality. On 26.03.2022, the

respondent No. 5 (Phuldai) executed a registered conveyance deed in

favour of the respondent No. 4 (Alchemi Developers) for the subject

property.
70.   We are of the view that it is too late in the day, or to put it in other

words, it will be too much if we at this point of time direct the authority

concerned to acquire the land under
Section 14
of the Slum Act on the

basis of the CEO-SRA’s order dated 26.02.2015.
71.   In such circumstances
referred to above
, we decline to grant any

relief to the appellant insofar as the prayer for acquisition of the subject

property is concerned.
72.    It is well settled that the power of the State Government to

acquire land under
Section 14
read with
Section 3D(c)(i)
of the Slum Act

is subject to preferential right, if any, of the owner. This issue has been

set at rest by this Court in Tarabai Nagar Co-Op. Hog.
Society
(supra). In the said case, exactly the very same argument was canvassed

by Mr. Shyam Divan, the learned senior counsel appearing for the

appellant therein that even if there is a preferential right in favour of

the owner, the same would not militate against the power of the State

to acquire the land under
Section 14
of the Slum Act. This Court while

negativing such contention observed as under:-
“77. In this context, we deem it appropriate to clarify at this
      stage that Section 1445 empowers the State Government to
      acquire land if necessary to enable the SRA to carry out
37
development under the SR Scheme. It is writ large on the
text of
Section 14
that the State can invoke its power to
acquire the land, if it is necessitated, as per the SRA, for the
implementation of a Scheme.
78. To explicate, the SRA, in line with the scheme envisaged
by the
Slums Act
, is not only authorised but also responsible
for ensuring that development is undertaken in SR Areas. In
furtherance of this objective, it invites developers to submit
SR Schemes. In the event no developer comes forward, the
SRA can take over the development itself. To achieve this, it
would undoubtedly need to utilise the land in the SR Area
for various purposes, such as preparing temporary or
permanent transit residences, construction work, setback
area, and access roads.
79. However, when tasked with such an endeavour, the
SRA may face instances where the owner is unwilling to
accede to the redevelopment of the land. In such situations,
as per the 1997 Guidelines and
Regulation 33(10)
, a
consent or no-objection certificate from the owner is
mandatory for any proposal to be considered. By
withholding such consent, the landowner has the ability to
perpetually stall the entire redevelopment.
80. This instance illustrates how it may become necessary
for the State to acquire land using its eminent domain for
the purpose of facilitating slum rehabilitation. E.3.2
Interplay with the Owner’s Rights
81. Given the above backdrop, what becomes important for
us to ascertain is whether such necessity can arise before
the landowner’s preferential right to redevelop is
extinguished.
82. As already held, the owner has a preferential right over
other stakeholders to develop an SR Area. If the owner then
chooses to exercise this right by submitting and
implementing a valid SR Scheme, issues involving rights
over the property would not arise. It is, thus, not fathomable
that when the landowner is implementing an SR Scheme on
its own, a necessity to acquire the land could arise.
83. Rather, any process to acquire the land shall have to be
kept in abeyance till such time as the owner’s preferential
right to develop it stands extinguished. Since it is open to
the owner to file its own SR Scheme within a reasonable
time and the proposal of the owner, if valid and complete,
would take primacy, it cannot be said that there is any legal
necessity to acquire the land. If acquisition is allowed to
take place at this stage, it will jeopardise the preferential
right of the landowner. It is only when the owner declines
38
to undertake development or to support any third-party
development, thereby foregoing its preferential right, that
such a necessity would actually arise. There can thus be no
doubt that, as long as the owner is willing to undertake
development in exercise of its preferential right, the
acquisition cannot proceed.
84. This can also be harmoniously read in conjunction with
the requirement for a notice-cum-invitation to the owner, as
set out in
Section 13
. Until the SRA has invited the owner to
submit an SR Scheme, the owner’s right to develop the land
cannot be said to have closed. In such a case, the subsisting
preferential right cannot be frustrated or undermined by
initiating the acquisition process.
85. This Court in Murlidhar Teckchand Gandhi (supra) held
that
Sections 13
and
14
, as they were couched in the
original framework, are independent provisions, which can
be invoked separately. Mr. Divan, on this premise, urged
that a similar independent power to acquire the land was
traceable under Chapter I-A also. However, such a
contention would merit acceptance only if the object and
scope of acquisition under
Section 14
, as contained in
Chapter V of the original framework, are similar, if not
identical, to the scope and power of acquisition conferred
under the same provision when proceeding under the
Chapter I-A framework. In this context, it becomes crucial to
analyse the differences herein.
86. Firstly, the original framework and the cited judgement
do not confer or provide any preferential right in favour of
the owner to develop the land, whereas there exists a
definite primacy of the owner’s right to develop the SR Area
under Chapter I-A. Secondly and more importantly, the
scope of acquisition under
Section 14
(within Chapter V) in
the original framework48 is much broader than that in
Chapter I-A.49 In the former, the power of acquisition is
wide enough to include improvement works and specific
structures, whereas in the latter, it is restricted only to the
implementation of an SR Scheme. Thirdly, in Murlidhar
Tekchand Gandhi (supra), this Court had no occasion to
evaluate the scope of Chapter I-A, to which we are
concerned in the present matter. The perceived power to
proceed under
Section 14
without responding to the rights
and powers created under
Section 13
,50 cannot, thus, be
applied mutatis mutandis in a case of an SR Scheme to be
given effect under Chapter I-A. Given these stark
differences, comparing the interpretation of the original
framework and the Chapter I-A framework is akin to
matching apples with oranges. The High Court has thus
39
rightly distinguished this decision in the Impugned
      Judgement.
87. When an SR Area has been notified under Section 3C(1)
      of Chapter I-A51 and its development through an SR
      Scheme is conceptualised, whereunder there is an inbuilt
      preferential right of an owner to carry out redevelopment,
      the power of acquisition under Section 1452 would not
      operate in an independent silo; rather, it must derive
      meaning and effect from the principles prevailing
      throughout the legislative scheme of Chapter I-A.”
                                             (Emphasis supplied)
73.   Insofar as the issue of Occupation Certificate is concerned, the

respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively have made their stance very clear

that the appellant is entitled to the Occupation Certificate for the final

Sale Building in the slum scheme. Of course, such issuance of

Occupation Certificate for the final sale building in the slum scheme is

subject to the appellant handing over the Dark Green Portion

admeasuring 2700 sq. mts. reserved for Recreational Ground (RG).
74.   In the aforesaid context, we direct that the respondent Nos. 1

and 2 respectively to issue the Occupation Certificate for the final Sale

Building in the slum scheme within a period of four weeks from today

subject to the appellant handing over the Dark Green Portion

admeasuring 2700 sq. mts. reserved for Recreational Ground (RG). For

the sake of clarity and for easy identification, we set out herein below a

coloured map which carries the “dark green portion CTS No.

620/A/1A/1A/3”, which the appellant shall handover to the MCGM:-
40
41
75.    As regards the third issue, it appears from the materials on

record that the respondent No. 1 vide its order dated 26.02.2015 had

directed the developer to include 34 slum dwellers who were residing

on the subject property as Project Affected Persons (PAPs). In lieu of the

developer handing over the PAP’s to SRA in accordance with the policy,

the developer was compensated with equivalent FSI for sale component.

The materials on record indicate that the FSI generated in the sale

component is equivalent to the Rehab Component which include the

Project Affected Persons (PAPs). The appellant has already utilised such

FSI generated against the PAP and has completed the construction on

the final sale building.   Even otherwise, the LOI dated 28.09.2017

makes it clear that the subject land is not a part of the scheme.
76.   We make it abundantly clear that no construction shall be made

on the subject property of any nature and the same shall be utilized

only as a Recreational Ground (RG). In this regard, a clear statement

was made by the learned counsel appearing for the respondent Nos. 1

and 2 respectively that no construction of any nature would be

permitted on the subject property. We direct the Respondent No. 4

(Alchemi Developers) their successors and assigns that they shall not

put up any type of construction on the subject property and the same

shall be utilized only as a recreational Ground (RG).
42
77.   Our final conclusion is as under:-
(1)    The power of the State Government under
Section

      14
read with
Section 3D(c)(i)
of the Slum Act is subject to

      preferential right, if any, of the owner. This being the

      position of law, no case is made out by the appellant for a

      writ of mandamus to be issued to the State Government to

      acquire the subject property under
Section 14
of the Slum

      Act.
(2)    The   appellant    is   entitled   to   the   Occupation

      Certificate for the Final Sale Building in the slum scheme

      on the appellant handing over the Dark Green Portion

      admeasuring 2700 sq. mts. reserved for Recreational

      Ground (RG).
(3)    The appellant has been fully compensated by

      granting adequate area/FSI for sale.
(4)    We direct the Respondent No. 4 (Alchemi Developers) their

      successors and assigns that they shall not put up any type of

      construction on the subject property and the same shall be

      utilized only as a recreational Ground (RG).
78.   In view of the aforesaid discussion, nothing further is required to

be looked into in the matter.
79.   The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
43
80.   The parties are left to bear their own costs.
81.   Pending application, if any, also stands disposed of.
…………………………………………J
                                     (J.B. PARDIWALA)




                               …………………………………………J
                                    (K.V. VISWANATHAN)


NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 2, 2025
44