[Cites
18
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Nayan Bhowmick vs Aparna Chakraborty on 15 December, 2025
Author:
Rajesh Bindal
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
2025 INSC 1436                                                                   REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5167 OF 2012




            NAYAN BHOWMICK                                                    .…. APPELLANT



                                                   VERSUS



            APARNA CHAKRABORTY                                               ..…RESPONDENT



                                                 JUDGMENT
MANMOHAN, J.
1.              The present Appeal has been filed challenging the judgment dated 13th

            April 2011 passed by the Gauhati High Court (Shillong Bench), whereby the

            appeal filed by the Respondent-wife was allowed and the judgment and decree

            dated 9th March 2010 dissolving the marriage on the ground of desertion by the

            Respondent-wife passed by the Additional Deputy Commissioner (Judicial),

            Shillong was set aside.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEETU KHAJURIA
Date: 2025.12.15
16:56:12 IST
Reason:
Civil Appeal No. 5167/2012                                                  Page 1 of 14
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
2.      Briefly stated, the relevant facts are that the marriage between Appellant

and Respondent was solemnized according to Hindu rites and rituals on 04 th

August 2000 at Shillong. The parties knew each other prior to their marriage as

they had been working together since 1992 as Development Officers under Life

Insurance Corporation of India Ltd..
3.      According to the Respondent-wife, though the Appellant-husband knew

the nature of Respondent’s duty and responsibility in their office even before their

marriage, yet the Appellant and his family members demanded the Respondent

give up her job ignoring the fact that she had to financially look after her old and

ailing mother, her brother and other dependents. It is the Respondent-wife’s case

that due to the continuous ill-treatment meted out by the Appellant and his family,

Respondent-wife was compelled to leave her matrimonial home in 2001.
4.      In 2003, Appellant-husband instituted a suit for divorce before the

Additional Deputy Commissioner (Judicial), Shillong for dissolution of the

marriage under Section 13(1)(i-b) of the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
(“the Act”).

However, the suit was dismissed by the learned Additional Deputy Commissioner

(J), Shillong as premature vide judgment dated 18th May 2006.
5.      The Appellant preferred RFA No. 9(SH) of 2006 before the High Court

challenging the judgment dated 18th May 2006, but the same was withdrawn by
Civil Appeal No. 5167/2012                                                Page 2 of 14
the Appellant vide order dated 22nd November 2007 with liberty to file a fresh

suit.
6.      The suit being MAT Divorce Suit No.13(T) of 2007, underlying the present

proceedings was filed by the Appellant-husband on 29th November 2007 under
Section 13(i)
(i-a))(i-b) of the Act contending that the Respondent had deserted

the Appellant-husband with wilful intent of not returning to the matrimonial

home.
7.      The Additional Dy. Commissioner, Shillong vide judgment dated 9th March

2010 dissolved the marriage observing that Appellant-husband has been able to

prove his case under
Section 13(1)
(i-b) of the Act namely desertion.
8.      The Respondent-wife feeling aggrieved by the judgment and decree dated

9th March 2010 filed a First Appeal being RFA No. (SH) 1 of 2010 before the

High Court. Vide judgment dated 13th April 2011, High Court allowed the appeal

filed by Respondent-wife observing that there was no intent to permanently

forsake and abandon the Appellant-husband. The High Court in paragraph 6 and

7 of the impugned judgment dated 13th April 2011 has held as under :–

             “6. The question which falls for consideration in this appeal is whether there is
             an intentional permanent forsaking and abandonment of one spouse by the other
             without the other's consent and without reasonable cause? It is a well settled
             proposition of law that in proceedings for divorce the plaintiff must prove the
             offence of desertion, like and other matrimonial offence, beyond all reasonable
             doubt [see Bipinchandra Saisinhbhai (supra)]. In my opinion, the respondent is
             unable to clinchingly establish that the appellant has deserted him. The evidence
             led by him are absolutely insufficient to prove desertion. According to his
             evidence, after the appellant deserted his house, he along with his family
             members and some of his friends tried to patch up their differences in which she
             had proposed that if he would not keep his mother with him, then and then only
Civil Appeal No. 5167/2012                                                           Page 3 of 14
she could come back to him, which he refused to oblige. This evidence of the
             respondent, who examined himself as PW 7, is conspicuous by the absence of
             details such as the date, time and place when such reconciliation attempt was
             made by him. If the appellant had made her return to her matrimonial home
             conditional upon the abandonment by the respondent of his mother as alleged
             by him, this could amount to an unreasonable refusal on the part of the appellant
             to go back to her husband. But none of the six witnesses examined by him
             corroborated him on this point. Desertion is matter of inference to be drawn from
             the facts and circumstances of each case. Not an iota of evidence has been
             adduced by the respondent to show the attempt made by him for reconciliation
             with the appellant. On the contrary, he appears to be quite content in the
             appellant leaving his house on 29-11-2001 after a month of the death of his father
             and did not return. All that he did was to send a letter to her on 12-11-2002 i.e.
             one year after she left his house. The contents of this letter, which is at Annexure
             I, is undisputed, are not only revealing but also make an interesting reading. In
             the first place, the letter did not mention anything about the many attempts
             allegedly made by him for reconciliation. Secondly, his statements that "I know
             you might dislike so many things of our family at the time of you left my house.
             You might dislike my stand also" corroborate the case of the appellant that she
             had been forced to leave her matrimonial house as he and his family wanted her
             to confine herself as a housewife and to give up her job. Assuming that this part
             of the contents of the letter was a sincere attempt on his part to reconciliate with
             her also, the last sentence seems to convey the idea that the letter, in substance,
             is an ultimatum. In my judgment, this cannot be construed to be a sincere attempt
             on the part of the respondent to welcome her back to her matrimonial home: this
             is merely eyewash. On the contrary, it is difficult to believe that a husband
             longing for the return of his wife to him in his right mind could send such a letter,
             which is an ultimatum in nature. Therefore, the absence of reconciliatory attempt
             by him for almost a year and the contents of the aforesaid letter lead me to one
             and one conclusion, i.e., there is no intentional permanent forsaking and
             abandonment of the respondent by the appellant and that there is sufficient
             evidence of conduct on the part of the respondent and his family giving
             reasonable cause to her for leaving her matrimonial home. There is evidence to
             show that the appellant continues to affirm her marriage and is ready and willing
             to resume her married life with the respondent. The respondent is, on the other
             hand, trying to take advantage of his own wrong or disability for the purpose of
             the relief contemplated under
Section 23(1)
of the Act. As observed by the Apex
             Court in Savitri Pandey (supra), no party can be allowed to carve out the
             grounds for destroying the family which is the basic unit of the society. The
             foundation of the family rests on the institution of a legal and valid marriage.
             Approach of the court should be preserve the sanctity of marriage and be
             reluctant to dissolve the marriage on the asking of one of the parties.
Civil Appeal No. 5167/2012                                                               Page 4 of 14
7. ….That apart, even if it is assumed for the sake of argument that this Court also
             has the power "conflicting decisions are galore in this behalf" I cannot lose sight
             of the proven conduct of the respondent in rushing to the Court on earlier occasion
             without waiting for the expiry of the minimum period of two years prescribed by
Section 13(l)
(i-b) of the Act, which was rightly withdrawn by him later on, a
             conduct which lends credence to the contention of the appellant that he has never
             been serious about welcoming her back to this house. He is thus demonstrably
             interested only in creating a hostile atmosphere at home to discourage the return
             of the appellant to his house and then take advantage of his own wrong to obtain a
             decree of divorce by falsely projecting that she has deserted him….”
9.      The present appeal has been filed by the Appellant-husband challenging

the judgment dated 13th April 2011 passed by High Court in RFA No. (SH) 1 of

2010.
SUBMISSION ON BEHALF OF APPELLANT-HUSBAND
10.     Learned counsel for the Appellant-husband submitted that the parties are

living separately since 29th November 2001 and there is no possibility of

reconciliation despite sincere efforts. He contended that the marriage between the

parties has irretrievably broken down which is evident from the fact that both the

parties are working as Development Officers in Life Insurance Corporation of

India Ltd in the same branch but they do not interact with each other.
11.     He further stated that the Respondent-wife had categorically admitted in

her cross-examination that she had received two letters dated 12th November 2002

and 2nd December 2002 whereby the Appellant-husband had requested the

Respondent-wife to join the matrimonial home, but despite the receipt of the said

letters, Respondent-wife did not reply to any of them and continued to stay with
Civil Appeal No. 5167/2012                                                            Page 5 of 14
her parents which further proves that Respondent-wife has no inclination to join

the matrimonial home.
12.     He further contented that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the

ingredients of desertion i.e. (i) the factum of separation (ii) intent to bring

cohabitation to an end, were proved which had been rightly appreciated by the

Trial Court while granting a decree of divorce.
SUBMISSION ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT-WIFE
13.     Per contra, learned counsel for the Respondent-wife submitted that

Respondent-wife did not leave the matrimonial home with intent to desert the

Appellant-husband. He stated that Respondent-wife was forced to leave her

matrimonial home because of constant abuse and humiliation by Appellant-

husband and his family members.
14.     He stated that the Respondent-wife had categorically informed the

Appellant-husband about her responsibility towards her family. However, after

marriage, the Appellant-husband in league with other members of his family had

started pressurizing her to resign from her job on the specious plea that Appellant-

husband’s father did not like a working woman. Respondent-wife could not agree

to the same as that would have rendered her parental family destitute.
15.     He further stated that the letters dated 12th November 2002 and 2nd

December 2002 are nothing but an eye-wash as no sincere effort had been made

by the Appellant-husband to resume matrimonial life with the Respondent-wife.
Civil Appeal No. 5167/2012                                                Page 6 of 14
16.      He submitted that the rush and hurry shown by the Appellant-husband in

filing a divorce suit in 2003 clearly indicated his intent to bring about an end to

the matrimonial relationship.
17.      He placed reliance on the judgment of this Court in
Savitri Pandey vs.

Prem Chandra Pandey
, (2002) 2 SCC 73 wherein it has been held as under:-
“17. The marriage between the parties cannot be dissolved only on the averments
      made by one of the parties that as the marriage between them has broken down, no
      useful purpose would be served to keep it alive….”
18.      He further placed reliance on the judgment of this Court in
Prabhavathi @

Prabhamani vs. Lakshmeesha M.C. [Civil Appeal No.
8790/2024] wherein it has

been held as under :-
“6.…. The boggy of irretrievable breaking down of marriage cannot be used to the
      advantage of a party who is solely responsible for tearing down the marital
      relationship.”
19.      He lastly submitted that the Respondent-wife continues to affirm her

marriage and is ready and willing to resume her matrimonial life with Appellant-

husband.
REASONING
IN THE PRESENT CASE THERE IS LONG PERIOD OF SEPARATION
WITHOUT ANY HOPE FOR RECONCILIATION
20.      Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, the admitted position that

emerges is that matrimonial litigation between the parties commenced within two

(2) years of marriage i.e. 2003 and has been pending for last twenty-two (22)

years.
Civil Appeal No. 5167/2012                                                       Page 7 of 14
21.     It is pertinent to mention that the parties have been living separately for

twenty-four (24) years and there is no child from the wedlock. Despite repeated

efforts by Courts, there has been no reconciliation between the parties. At the

stage of admission of appeal, this Court had referred the parties to mediation vide

order dated 26th March 2012. However, mediation was unsuccessful which is

evident from the Mediation report dated 10th April 2012. No efforts have been

made since then, by either of the parties, to reconcile their matrimonial

differences.
22.     In a multitude of cases, this Court has had the opportunity to deal with

situations where parties have been living separately for a considerable time and

it has been consistently held that long period of separation without any hope for

reconciliation amounts to cruelty to both the parties.
23.     A coordinate bench of this Court in the case of
Rakesh Raman vs. Kavita
[(2023) 17 SCC 433], has observed that where the parties have been living

separately for the past twenty-five (25) years, marriage is only on paper and such

relationship must be taken to have broken down irretrievably long back. It was

further observed that such a marriage spells cruelty to both the parties and is

therefore a ground for dissolution of marriage under
Section 13(1)
(i-a) of the Act.

The observations of the coordinate bench of the Court are squarely applicable to

the facts of the present case, as even in the case at hand, the parties have been

living separately for better part of their lives i.e. twenty-four (24) years without

any hope for reconciliation.
Civil Appeal No. 5167/2012                                                Page 8 of 14
THE SPOUSES’ STRONGLY HELD VIEWS AND THEIR REFUSAL TO
ACCOMMODATE EACH OTHER AMOUNTS TO CRUELTY TO ONE
ANOTHER
24.     In the case at hand, spouses have strongly held views with regard to the

approach towards matrimonial life and they have refused to accommodate each

other for a long period of time. Consequently, their conduct amounts to cruelty

to each other. This Court is of the view that in matrimonial matters involving two

individuals, it is not for the society or for the Court to sit in judgment over which

spouses’ approach is correct or not. It is their strongly held views and their refusal

to accommodate each other that amounts to cruelty to one another.
25.     A three-Judge Bench of this Court in the case of
Naveen Kohli v. Neelu

Kohli
(2006) 4 SCC 558 has observed that an unworkable marriage, which has

ceased to be effective, is futile and bound to be a source of great misery to the

parties. It was further observed that where there has been a long period of

continuous separation, it can fairly be surmised that the matrimonial bond is

beyond repair and in such cases, it would be unrealistic for the law not to take

notice of that fact, and it would be harmful to society and injurious to the interests

of parties.
26.     Another three-Judge Bench of this Court in the case of
Samar Ghosh vs.

Jaya Ghosh
(2007) 4 SCC 511 observed that where there has been a long period

of continuous separation, it may fairly be concluded that the matrimonial bond is

beyond repair. Marriage becomes a legal fiction supported by a legal tie and
Civil Appeal No. 5167/2012                                                  Page 9 of 14
refusal to sever such a tie does not serve the sanctity of marriage, but may lead to

mental cruelty.
27.     Further, the judgment of this Court in
Prabhamani
(supra) relied on by

the learned counsel for Respondent-wife is not applicable to the present matter as

it is not a case where the “boggy of irretrievable breakdown of marriage” is being

used by the Appellant-husband.
Also, the order of this Court dated 14th November

2025 in
Dr. Anita vs. Indresh Gopal Kohli, Civil Appeal No.
13616/2025 (i.e.

after reservation of the judgment in the present case) offers no assistance to the

Respondent-wife as in the present case, there is cogent evidence that the parties

have refused to cohabit with each other due to a fundamental difference in their

approach towards matrimonial life.
THE POWER TO DO ‘COMPLETE JUSTICE’ UNDER
ARTICLE 142(1)
IS NOT
FETTERED BY THE DOCTRINE OF FAULT AND BLAME
28.     In any event, this Court in exercise of power to do “complete justice” under
Article 142(1)
of the Constitution of India has the discretion to dissolve the

marriage on the ground of irretrievable breakdown.
29.     A constitution Bench of this Court in
Shilpa Sailesh vs. Varun

Sreenivasan
, (2023) 14 SCC 231 has held that the power to do ‘complete justice’

is not fettered by the doctrine of fault and blame, applicable to petitions for

divorce under
Section 13(1)
(i-a) of the
Hindu Marriage Act
. While dealing with

the power to grant divorce under
Article 142(1)
of the Constitution of India inspite

of the other spouse opposing the prayer, this Court has held as under:-
Civil Appeal No. 5167/2012                                                Page 10 of 14
“52. …An unworkable marriage, which has ceased to be effective, is futile and
        bound to be a source of greater misery for the parties. The law of divorce built
        predominantly on assigning fault fails to serve broken marriages. Under the
        fault theory, guilt has to be proven, and therefore, the courts have to be
        presented with concrete instances of adverse human behaviour, thereby
        maligning the institution of marriage. Public interest demands that the
        marriage status should, as far as possible, be maintained, but where the
        marriage has been wrecked beyond the hope of salvage, public interest lies in
        recognising the real fact. No spouse can be compelled to resume life with a
        consort, and as such, nothing is gained by keeping the parties tied forever to
        a marriage which has, in fact, ceased to exist.
xxxx                          xxxx                         xxxx
56. We have referred to the judgment in Owens [Owens v. Owens, 2018 AC
        899 : (2018) 3 WLR 634 : 2018 UKSC 41 (SC)], which applies the then law in
        England and Wales, not as a precedent, but to highlight that even two perfectly
        gentle and pleasant individuals having incompatible and clashing
        personalities can have a miserable and morose married life. In such cases,
        fault theory in the pure form requiring apportionment of guilt and blame, is
        a difficult, if not an impossible task, whereas in practical reality the situation
        is appalling and unnerving. The marriage is irretrievably broken down and
        dead. We would not read the provisions of the
Hindu Marriage Act
, their
        underlying intent, and any fundamental specific issue of public policy, as
        barring this Court from dissolving a broken and shattered marriage in exercise
        of the constitutional power under
Article 142(1)
of the Constitution of India.
If at all, the underlying fundamental issues of public policy, as explained in the
        judgments of
V. Bhagat [V. Bhagat
v.
D. Bhagat, (1994) 1 SCC 337] , Ashok
        Hurra [Ashok Hurra v. Rupa Bipin Zaveri
, (
1997) 4 SCC 226], and Naveen
        Kohli [Naveen Kohli v. Neelu Kohli
, (2006) 4 SCC 558] , support the view that
        it would be in the best interest of all, including the individuals involved, to give
        legality, in the form of formal divorce, to a dead marriage, otherwise the
        litigation(s), resultant sufferance, misery and torment shall continue.
57. Therefore, apportioning blame and greater fault may not be the rule to
        resolve and adjudicate the dispute in rare and exceptional matrimonial
        cases, as the rules of evidence under the
Evidence Act
are rules of procedure.
        When the life-like situation is known indubitably, the essence and objective
        behind
section 13(1)
(i-a) of the
Hindu Marriage Act
that no spouse should be
        subjected to mental cruelty and live in misery and pain is established…..
xxxx                        xxxx                        xxxx
Civil Appeal No. 5167/2012                                                        Page 11 of 14
76. …This Court, in exercise of power under
Article 142(1)
of the Constitution
        of India, has the discretion to dissolve the marriage on the ground of its
        irretrievable breakdown. This discretionary power is to be exercised to do
        “complete justice” to the parties, wherein this Court is satisfied that the facts
        established show that the marriage has completely failed and there is no
        possibility that the parties will cohabit together, and continuation of the formal
        legal relationship is unjustified…”
                                                                    (emphasis supplied)
30.     It is pertinent to mention that the judgment in
Savitri Pandey
(supra), has

been read down by this Court in
Shilpa Sailesh
(supra) in the context of the power

of this Court under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India to do ‘complete

justice’.
31.     Further, a coordinate bench of this Court in
Pradeep Bhardwaj v. Priya
(2025) SCC OnLine SC 1436 exercised its power under
Article 142
of the

Constitution to dissolve the marriage between the parties while observing that

due to complete detachment and the prolonged estrangement, there has been an

irretrievable breakdown of the marital bond which cannot be mended by any

means. It was further observed that the institution of marriage is rooted in dignity,

mutual respect and shared companionship, and when these foundational aspects

are irreparably lost, forcing a couple to remain legally bound serves no purpose.
32.
In another case of
Kumari Rekha v. Shambhu Saran Paswan
(2025) SCC

OnLine SC 1032, this Court observed that non-availability of grounds for

dissolution of Hindu marriage is not a bar for this Court to exercise its powers

under
Article 142
of the Constitution especially when the Court is satisfied that it

is a case of irretrievable breakdown of marriage.
Civil Appeal No. 5167/2012                                                       Page 12 of 14
THERE IS NO SANCTITY LEFT IN THE MARRIAGE AND RAPPROCHEMENT
IS NOT IN THE REALM OF POSSIBILITY
33.     This Court is conscious of the view that approach of the Courts should be

to preserve the sanctity of marriage and the Court should be reluctant to dissolve

the marriage at the mere asking of one of the parties. But, in the present case, the

parties have lived separately for far too long a period of time and there is no

sanctity left in the marriage. Also, rapprochement is not in the realm of

possibility. Grant of divorce in the present proceedings would not have a

devastating effect on any third party, as there are no children from the wedlock.
34.     This Court is also of the view that pendency of matrimonial litigation for a

long duration only leads to perpetuity of marriage on paper. It is in the best

interest of parties and the society if ties are severed between parties in cases where

litigation has been pending for a considerably long period of time. Consequently,

this Court is of the opinion that no useful purpose shall be served by keeping the

matrimonial litigation pending in Court without granting relief to the parties.
RELIEF
35.     Consequently, this Court is of the view that marriage between the parties

has irretrievably broken down and, therefore, in exercise of its power under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India dissolves the marriage between the

parties. Accordingly, the order of the Additional Deputy Commissioner (Judicial)

Shillong, insofar as, it grants a decree of divorce to the parties is upheld and the
Civil Appeal No. 5167/2012                                                 Page 13 of 14
impugned order of the High Court is set aside. With the aforesaid observations,

the appeal stands allowed.
……………….J.
                                                              [MANMOHAN]




                                                          ……………….J.
                                                     [JOYMALYA BAGCHI]

New Delhi;
December 15, 2025
Civil Appeal No. 5167/2012                                           Page 14 of 14