[Cites
21
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Manojbhai Jethabhai Parmar (Rohit) vs The State Of Gujarat on 15 December, 2025
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
2025 INSC 1433




                                                             REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023

                            MANOJBHAI JETHABHAI
                            PARMAR (ROHIT)                                        ….APPELLANT(S)


                                                             VERSUS

                            STATE OF GUJARAT                                 ….RESPONDENT(S)


                                                       JUDGMENT
Mehta, J.
1.     Heard.
2.     A grave and distressing case of brutal sexual
                            assault upon a four-year old girl1 stands before this
                            Court, enveloped in layers of investigative apathy and
                            procedural infirmities. The First Information Report,
                            despite        the       informant’s           professed     complete
                            knowledge of the incident, is bereft of even the most
                            rudimentary details, neither the name of the accused
                            person (appellant herein) nor those of the purported
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2025.12.15
16:19:18 IST
Reason:                  1 Hereinafter, being referred to as ‘child victim’.
1
witnesses of the last seen together circumstance find
mention.     What        followed    was    an    investigation
hopelessly botched and a trial conducted with a
pedantic rigidity that obscured, rather than unveiled,
the truth. The highly unnatural conduct of the
witnesses,      marked      by      gross   insensitivity/rank
apathy, contradictions and apparent concoctions
raises serious doubts about the reliability of the
prosecution’s case. Yet, in face of this disturbing
matrix, the accused-appellant stands convicted and
has remained behind bars for nearly thirteen long
years.
3.    This Court cannot remain oblivious to the
sobering reality that such handling of criminal cases
leaves scars not merely upon the individuals involved
but      upon    the      justice    system      itself.    When
investigations are carried out in a manner that
betrays    their    foundational purpose, and                   trials
become mechanical exercises divorced from the quest
for truth, the resulting miscarriage of justice
reverberates       far   beyond      the    confines       of     the
courtroom. It erodes public faith, instils uncertainty
in victims, and sends a chilling message to society at
large that the pursuit of justice may falter not at the
2
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
altar of complexity but at the hands of indifference.
The criminal law, which must stand as a bulwark
protecting            the   vulnerable,        risks   becoming   an
instrument of unintended cruelty when procedural
lapses      and        institutional negligence overshadow
substantive justice. With this prelude, we now
proceed to examine the factual matrix of the case.
4.      The appellant-Manojbhai Jethabhai Parmar2
was arraigned as an accused in connection with FIR
bearing Crime No. I-68 of 2013 registered at Kalol
Police Station for the offences punishable under
Sections 363
,
376(2)(i)
and
201
of the Indian Penal
Code, 18603 and Sections 3 and 4 of the Protection of
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 20124. He was
subjected to trial before the learned Additional
Sessions and Special Judge, Panchmahal, Godhra5 in
Special Case No. 08 of 2014 (POCSO). Vide judgment
of conviction and order of sentence dated 3rd
November,             2015,      the       accused-appellant      was
convicted and sentenced as below:
2 Hereinafter, referred to as the accused-appellant.
3 For short, ‘
IPC
’.
4 For short, ‘
POCSO Act
’.
5 Hereinafter, referred to as ‘trial Court’.
3
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
     i.       For    offence      under
Section    363
IPC-
Rigorous imprisonment for 3 years and fine
              of Rs. 5,000/- and in default of payment of
              fine, to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 3
              months.
ii.      For offence under
Section 376(2)(i)
&
201
IPC-    Life     imprisonment         and    fine     of
Rs.5,000/- and in default of payment of fine,
              to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 6
              months.
iii.     For offence under
Section 3
/
4
of POCSO
              Act-    Life     Imprisonment         and    fine     of
Rs.5,000/- and in default of payment of fine,
              to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 6
              months.
5.          The appeal6 preferred by the accused-appellant
for assailing the judgment of the trial Court stands
rejected by the Division Bench of the High Court of
Gujarat7 vide judgment dated 5th April, 2016 which
is subjected to challenge in this appeal by special
leave.
6 Criminal Appeal (Against Conviction) No. 448 of 2016.
7 Hereinafter, being referred to as ‘High Court’.
4
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
Brief facts:
6.    On 13th June, 2013, the complainant, Nazir
Mohammed (PW-1), had taken his dinner and was
resting with his family members in the open
courtyard of his house. At about 11 o’clock in the
night, he saw three to four boys going from the front
of his house with the child victim who did not have a
stitch of cloth on her body. The complainant stopped
them and made an inquiry as to where they were
taking the child, on which one of the boys replied that
they suspected the child to be from the Nayak
community and that she might have gone missing
and thus, they were taking her to the Nayak Faliya
for making an inquiry.
7.    The complainant (PW-1) thereupon brought the
child victim under some light in order to identify her.
He judged that the child was aged about four years
and    saw     blood   dribbling   down   her   legs.   He
accompanied the boys to Nayak Faliya and made
inquiries from two to three people, however, no
information was forthcoming regarding her family.
8.    The complainant (PW-1) tried to inspect the
body of the child victim closely, on which, he found
that she was bleeding continuously from her nether
5
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
regions. He suspected that some untoward incident
had happened with the child victim. He, therefore,
asked the boys as to where they had brought the
child victim from, on which, they replied that the
child victim was found nearby a house situated in
front of pan stall of Jafrubhai situated at Oad Faliya.
9.     The complainant (PW-1) thereupon informed his
friend Karimbhai Mogal over the phone. Persons from
vicinity gathered there, amongst whom one was
Vivekbhai Suthar8 (PW-2), a journalist. Vivekbhai
tried to make an inquiry from the child victim who
did not respond, on which, an ambulance was called,
and she was taken to the hospital.
10. The complainant (PW-1) and Vivekbhai (PW-2)
followed the ambulance to the Kalol Government
Hospital where the child victim was admitted, and
her treatment started. The treating Doctor, Ms.
Shakuntala Parmar (PW-10) examined the victim and
opined that the child victim had been sexually
assaulted and due to that reason, she was bleeding
from her private parts. After gathering the above
information, Nazir Mohammed (PW-1) lodged a


8 Hereinafter, being referred to as ‘Vivekbhai’.
6
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
complaint at the Kalol Police Station which was
registered as Crime Report No. 68 of 2013 against
unknown persons for the offences punishable under
Sections 376(1)(i)
and
201
of the IPC.
11. For sake of ready reference, the complaint (Exh.
10) is reproduced hereinbelow in its entirety: -
“I, hereby, state the facts of my complaint in person
    that I reside with my family at the aforementioned
    address and I earn my living by doing door-to-door
    plumbing and electrical work in Kalol town. I have
    been residing in a rented house in Kalol for the past
    twelve years. Presently, I reside on rent in the
    house of of Shahbuddin Maiyuddin Shaikh. I know
    most of the persons living in Kalol town.
On 13/06/2013, yesterday, I was spending leisure
    time with my family at around 9 pm. When I was
    playing game in my mobile by lying on my cot
    outside my home at around 11 pm, I saw 3-4 boys
    coming from Ode Faliya and passing by my house.
    I stopped them and asked about the situation and
    the little girl they were carrying. One of them
    responded that the girl seemed to have lost; she did
    not have any clothes on her body; she seemed to
    belong to Nayak community and therefore they
    were taking her to Nayak Faliya for more details. I
    tried to identify the girl by bringing her to light. I
    found that she had no clothes on her body. She
    seemed to me of around four years. She was
    bleeding on her legs. I went with the boys to Nayak
    Faliya. We inquired around by waking 3-4 persons
    up. However, we did not have get any details. When
    the girl was being inspected with the torch, I noted
7
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
    that she was bleeding from the private part. As she
    was still bleeding slowly at that time, I felt that
    something untoward had happened with the girl.
    When asked the boys where they found the girl,
    they responded that she was found at the house,
    located opposite to the Jafarbhai’s Pan Stall at the
    offside of Ode Faliya. Subsequently, I informed my
    friend Karimbhai Mogal by making a call. People
    residing nearby gathered around in a while.
    Vivekbhai Suthar who resides at Kalol also arrived
    by that time. He observed the girl. We asked the girl
    about her name and whereabouts. She did not
    utter her name and stated ‘from Chowkdi
    (crossroads)’. As the girl was bleeding, Vivekbhai
    made a call to 108 ambulance. After handing over
    the girl to the ambulance, Vivekbhai and I went to
    Government Hospital, Kalol on a motorcycle. The
    girl was immediately given medical treatment.
    Doctor told me that the girl was bleeding from the
    private part because somebody had raped her. I
    then moved out of the hospital. Other people also
    gathered around by that time. Therefore, Vivekbhai
    and I are here at the Kalol Police Station for lodging
    the complaint.
Therefore, I, hereby, lodge my complaint for
    investigation of an incident of rape which has taken
    place with a four-year old unknown girl by an
    unknown person at an unknown place at any
    time before 11 pm, yesterday, on 13/06/2013.
    My witnesses are the persons mentioned in my
    complaint and others as and when found in the
    police investigation.
My complaint is as per my dictation before the
    police and true. I have appended by signature
8
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
      herein below after reading and understanding it
      thoroughly.”
                                  (Emphasis supplied)
12. Investigation was conducted by Hareshbhai
Pallacharya (PW-15) Inspector of Police, Kalol Police
Station who recorded the statements of the witnesses
concerned. Medical examination of the child victim
was conducted. The four boys who had brought the
child victim to Nayak Faliya were identified as
Arifkhan        (PW-3),   Shahejadkhan    (PW-4),       Bilal
Ahemad (PW-5) and Mohsin Gafurkhan (PW-6).
13. These four boys were examined under
Section
161
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19739, on 14th
June, 2013, and they claimed that they had seen the
accused-appellant pushing the child victim out of his
house.
14. The accused-appellant was arrested, and his
house was inspected from where blood-stained
clothes of the child victim were allegedly recovered.
The bedding lying in the house as well as the floor of
the house were also bearing blood stains. These
articles were seized for forensic examination. Finding
sufficient evidence against the accused-appellant,

9 For short, ‘
CrPC
’.
9
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
chargesheet was filed against him in the Special
Court. The Special Judge framed charges against the
accused-appellant for the offences punishable under
Sections 363
,
376(2)(i)
and
201
of the IPC and
Sections 3
and
4
of the POCSO Act, who abjured his
guilt and claimed trial.
15. The prosecution examined 18 witnesses and
exhibited 19 documents and presented certain
material objects in order to prove its case.
16. The accused-appellant was confronted with the
circumstances       appearing       against   him    in   the
prosecution evidence by way of questions put under
Section 313
CrPC which he denied and claimed to be
innocent. He also stated that he had been falsely
implicated in the case.
17. The trial Court, after hearing the arguments
advanced by the learned Public Prosecutor and the
defence counsel, and upon appreciation of evidence
on   record,     came     to      the   following   pertinent
conclusions: -
i. That the testimony of witnesses Arifkhan (PW-3)
and Shahejadkhan (PW-4) provided strong evidence
pertaining to the circumstance of last seen together.
10
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
ii. The accused-appellant kidnapped the child victim
from the guardianship of her parents; forcibly took
her to his house where he subjected her to gruesome
sexual assault causing numerous injuries to the
private parts of the child victim.
iii. The allegation of forcible sexual assault was
thoroughly corroborated by the evidence of Dr.
Shakuntala Parmar (PW-10) who also took note of an
injury on the private parts of the accused-appellant
thereby,    providing       strong   corroboration    to   his
involvement in the crime.
iv. The Investigating Officer, Hareshbhai Pallacharya
(PW-15), who conducted spot inspection of the house
owned by the accused-appellant claimed to have
recovered significant incriminating material viz.
blood-stained bedsheets, mattress and curtains from
the said house. Legging and t-shirt of the child victim
and mobile, handkerchief, night pant, lining t-shirt
and underwear of the accused-appellant were also
seized from the house allegedly owned by him.
v.    These      articles      including    the      personal
belongings/apparels of the child victim were analyzed
11
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
at the Forensic Science Laboratory10, and tested
positive for “A” blood group which was same as that
of the child victim.
vi.    The circumstance of last seen together spoken
to by Arifkhan (PW-3) and Shahejadkhan (PW-4) was
corroborated           in     material   particulars   by   the
incriminating recoveries effected from the house of
the accused-appellant. The FSL report established
the presence of semen in the viscera collected from
the private parts of the child victim.
18. The trial Court observed that there was no
occasion for the witnesses to falsely implicate the
accused-appellant in such a gruesome case. As per
the trial Court, the prosecution proved the complete
and unbroken chain of incriminating circumstances
by leading unimpeachable evidence and proceeded to
convict and sentence the accused-appellant as noted
above11.
19. The appeal preferred by the accused-appellant
to the High Court for assailing the judgment of the
trial Court stands dismissed vide final judgment and



10 Hereinafter, referred to as ‘FSL’.
11 Para 4.
12
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
order dated 5th April, 2016 which is assailed in this
appeal by Special Leave.
Discussion and Findings
20. We have heard and considered the submissions
advanced by learned counsel appearing for the
accused-appellant and the learned standing counsel
Ms. Swati Ghildiyal representing the State of Gujarat
and have also gone through the impugned judgments
passed by the High Court and the trial Court. We
have also carefully scrutinized the original trial Court
record.
21. Admittedly there is no direct evidence in the
present case, and the case of the prosecution rests
entirely on circumstantial evidence, to be specific, in
form      of     last   seen      together   circumstance,
incriminating recoveries and medical evidence.
22. The law with regard to conviction based on
circumstantial evidence has been crystallized by this
Court in the case of
Sharad Birdhichand Sharda
v. State of Maharashtra12
, wherein it was held:
“153. A close analysis of this decision would show
     that the following conditions must be fulfilled
     before a case against an accused can be said to be
     fully established:
12 (1984) 4 SCC 116.
13
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
    (1)    The circumstances from which the
    conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be fully
    established.
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that
    the circumstances concerned “must or should” and
    not “may be” established. There is not only a
    grammatical but a legal distinction between “may
    be proved” and “must be or should be proved” as
    was held by this Court in
Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade
    v. State of Maharashtra
[(1973) 2 SCC 793] where
    the observations were made: [SCC para 19, p. 807]

         “Certainly, it is a primary principle that
         the accused must be and not merely may
         be guilty before a court can convict and
         the mental distance between ‘may be’ and
         ‘must be’ is long and divides vague
         conjectures from sure conclusions.”

    (2)    The facts so established should be
    consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt
    of the accused, that is to say, they should not
    be explainable on any other hypothesis except
    that the accused is guilty.
(3)   The circumstances should           be   of   a
    conclusive nature and tendency,


    (4)   They should exclude every possible
    hypothesis except the one to be proved, and

    (5)   There must be a chain of evidence so
    complete as not to leave any reasonable ground
    for the conclusion consistent with the
    innocence of the accused and must show that in
14
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
    all human probability the act must have been
    done by the accused.
(Emphasis supplied)
23. Having noted the principles governing a case
based purely on circumstantial evidence, we shall
now analyse the evidence led by the prosecution in
order to bring home the charges against the accused-
appellant.
24. Firstly, we shall proceed to consider the
evidence on last seen together circumstance.
25. The prosecution has sought to prove this
circumstance              stating          that           the
informant/complainant, Nazir Mohammed (PW‑1),
saw four boys taking the child victim to Nayak Faliya
at around 11:00 P.M., and that these four boys were
later identified as Arifkhan (PW‑3), Shahejadkhan
(PW‑4), Bilal Ahemad (PW‑5) and Mohsin Gafurkhan
(PW‑6). These four boys were the ones who saw the
accused-appellant pushing the child victim from his
house.
26. It may be noted that Bilal Ahemad (PW-5) and
Mohsin Gafurkhan (PW-6) did not support the
prosecution case during their deposition at the trial
and were declared hostile. However, Arifkhan (PW-3)
15
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
and Shahejadkhan (PW-4) tried to pose as witnesses
of last seen together circumstance during their
deposition.
27. We find that the evidence of these witnesses is
absolutely unconvincing and that they seem to have
cooked up the last seen together theory so as to
somehow implicate the accused-appellant in the case
for oblique motives. Rather, we feel that the entire
story is dubitable and there exist grave doubts
regarding the identity of these witnesses and the
credibility of their evidence.
28. We shall now analyze the evidence of the
material witnesses and assign reasons for discarding
their testimony. The relevant excerpts from the
evidence of the complainant, Nazir Mohammed (PW-
1) are extracted hereinbelow for ready reference: -
“Examination-in-chief
    ……At that time at around 10:30-11:00 pm, I saw
    four boys carrying a little girl with them. I asked
    them about the situation and the place there were
    heading to. They responded that the girl was from
    Nayak community, lost, and was bleeding from the
    private part. I joined them and went to the the place
    where Nayaks reside. I woke them up and enquired
    about girl’s family. They all stated that the girl did
    not belong to them. ……I asked the boys who were
    carrying the girl about the place where they found
    the girl. They stated that they saw Manoj Jethabhai
16
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
    Parmar ousting the girl from his house. Names of
    these four boys were (I) Arifkhan and (2) Sartaj; I
    am unable to recall names of the remaining two.
    However, I said all names in the police station.
    Having seen the girl bleeding from the private part,
    I made a call to my journalist friend, Karimbhai
    Mogal. He could not come. Bilalbhai was present
    with me at this time. He called a journalist,
    Vivekbhai Suthar. He reached at our place in 10
    minutes. He also looked at the girl. Looking at the
    condition of the girl, we felt like someone has
    established physical relation with her.
    ……I registered a police complaint then. I am being
    shown the complaint vide Mark 5/4; which has my
    signature on it and I recognize the same. It is given
    Exhibit 10. Police, after registering the complaint
    the same night, recorded my special statement. I
    told police the name of the accused from the talks
    with the four boys.
Cross-examination: for the accused
    …..I did not seek for help from neighbors when
    the boys were bringing the girl. My family
    consists of my wife and four daughters. They
    also did not come outside at that time. I did not
    call my wife for coming out for inspection of the
    girl who was in difficult situation. My wife or
    daughter did not come out of home until Vivekbhai
    Suthar arrived. Further, none of my neighbors or
    anyone from Ashiyana Society came out; nor did I
    call anyone for help. Around 30-45 minutes lapsed
    from the boys brought the girl and the girl was
    taken to the hospital in a mobile van. During this
    time, I did not feel like informing my neighbors
    about this incident. It is not true that the fact that
    the accused Manoj Jethabhai was ousting the girl
17
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
    from his house was told only to me by the four boys.
    I did not mention anything in the complaint
    such as the four boys had told the fact in
    presence of other people. It is not true that the
    four boys did not tell me the fact that they saw the
    accused Manoj Jethabhai ousting the victim from
    his house. It is true that I did not state about my
    doubt on Manoj Jethabhai when I made a call to
    the journalist. When I made a call to Vivekbhai
    Suthar and then Vivekbhai made a call to the
    police, the fact of having doubt regarding the
    incident on Manoj Jethabhai was not mentioned.
    …..It did not strike my mind to call my wife for
    examination. The girl was without any clothes
    when I saw her for the first time. I did not cover
    her up with shawl or bed sheet. Nayak Faliya is
    about 300-350 feet away from my house. I did not
    happen to visit Nayak Faliya.
.…After examination with the torch, bleeding from
    the private part was ascertained. I am aware of the
    fact that such type of cases are dealt by the police.
    I did not inform the police immediately after
    Bilalbhai examined with the torch. It is not true
    that I did not know the four boys who brought
    the victim. I did not mention the names of these
    four boys. My special statement was recorded at
    10 am on the next day of registering the complaint.
It was not recorded at night of registering the
    complaint. The police did not ask me to identify
    the four boys. It is true that I never mentioned
    the names of four boys to the police. It did not
    happen that the four boys left after handing over
    the victim to me at my house. Two out of four boys
    carried the victim to the Nayak Faliya. The clothes
    of the boys did not have blood marks. I have not
18
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
    dictated the description of four boys in either
    complaint or special statement.
…..It is not true that while we reached the Nayak
    Faliya, the four boys who brought the victim
    showed their doubt but did not name the person.
    When I went to register the complaint, the accused
    was not present at the police station. Further, I did
    not meet the accused before. The four boys did
    not tell me the name of the accused, Manoj. I
    did not mention the name of the accused in the
    complaint. It is not true that I did not mention the
    name of the accused in my special statement.
    ……I went inside the police station. It is not true
    that persons waiting outside were Jafarubhai,
    Rafiqbhai, Sikandarbhai and Amanbhai. These
    four persons were not in the hospital too. I know all
    the four persons. The four boys who brought the
    victim are the sons of the said four persons.
    ……It is true that Manojbhai, father of the
    accused, had earlier filed a police complaint
    against six persons i.e. aforesaid four persons
    and two others.
It is not true that the four boys abducted the victim
    with intention to rape her. It is not true that in
    order to save the four boys, they were allowed to
    flee from the spot because they belonged to our
    Muslim community. It is not true that their names
    were not dictated while registering the complaint
    for saving them. It is not true that I registered the
    complaint on being asked by Jafurbhai for the
    same. The statements of these four boys were not
    recorded by the police in my presence. I stayed at
    the hospital for around 20 minutes. It is not true
    that in order to save these four boys, I filed a false
    complaint or am giving false deposition.
19
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
       It is true that neither in the complaint nor in
       the police statement did I mention that when
       asked the four boys, they stated to have seen
       Manoj Jethabhai Parmar ousting the girl from
       his home.…..”
                                     (Emphasis supplied)
29. In      his   testimony,      the   complainant,   Nazir
Mohammed (PW-1), stated that the four boys whom
he had seen taking the child victim, told him that
they had seen the accused-appellant pushing the
child victim out of his house. On receiving this
information, Nazir Mohammed (PW-1) made a call to
the reporter Vivekbhai (PW-2) who, in turn, called the
108 Ambulance so that the child victim could be
taken for treatment to the hospital. Thereafter, Nazir
Mohammed (PW-1) lodged the complaint (Exhibit-
10).
30. Thus, going by the evidence of Nazir Mohammed
(PW-1) (supra), well before the FIR (Exh. 10) was
lodged by him, he had complete knowledge of all the
relevant facts including the identity of the four boys
who were seen taking the child victim to Nayak Faliya,
and the most crucial fact that these boys had seen the
accused‑appellant pushing the child victim out from
his house.
20
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
31. We may reiterate that the FIR of the case (Exh.
10) was lodged on the basis of the written complaint
of Nazir Mohammed (PW-1). In the complaint,
neither the names nor description of the four
boys who were seen by Nazir Mohammed (PW-1),
taking the child victim in a denuded state finds
a mention. It is also significant to note that the
witness Vivekbhai (PW‑2), who along with Nazir
Mohammed (PW-1) was instrumental in lodging the
complaint, is a reporter.         This fact heightens the
expectation that all the relevant facts known to the
complainant would have been set out in the complaint.
32. Had there been any iota of truth in these
allegations, there was no chance that the complainant
(PW-1) would have missed or omitted to mention the
following vital/crucial facts in the complaint: -
(i)    The identity of the four boys who were seen
             taking the child victim with them.
(ii)   The fact that these boys had seen the
             accused-appellant pushing the child victim
             out of his house.
21
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
33. The omission of these material facts in the FIR
brings the entire case of the prosecution under a
grave cloud of doubt.
34. This Court in
Amar Nath Jha v. Nand Kishore
Singh13
dealt with a similar issue regarding non
reporting of essential facts in the FIR, wherein it was
observed as follows: -
“10. The third circumstance which we need to
     concentrate on concerns non-reporting of
     essential facts which were known to the
     informant in the FIR. The High Court while
     appreciating the entire materials on record has
     affirmatively concluded that PWs 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 10
     and 12 belong to the same family of the deceased
     and reside in the same house. It may be of some
     significance to note that PW 9 (the informant) of
     this case is the nephew of the deceased who lives
     in an adjacent house to that of the deceased. In the
     FIR, PW 9 has failed to mention the name of PW
     1, is a significant person as per the prosecution
     as he had allegedly identified the accused Nand
     Kishore Singh and Maheshwar Singh, who were
     the dacoits responsible for the aforesaid crime.
     It has come out from the cross-examination of PW
     9 that he was aware of the presence of PW 1 during
     the incident but he failed to mention his name in
     the FIR. Such non-mentioning of presence of PW
     1, who was a material witness in this case,
     creates further suspicion on the hypothesis
     portrayed by the prosecution.
11. The High Court on appreciation of detailed
     evidence has for the right reasons concluded
     that the informant (PW 9) was aware of the

13 (2018) 9 SCC 137
22
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
     names of dacoits who had killed the deceased
     but failed to name them in the FIR. In this
     context we may note that the incident is alleged to
     have taken place in the intervening night of 21-4-
1999 and 22-4-1999, whereas the FIR came to be
     registered at 3.15 a.m., after a lapse of 3 hours.
     Despite sufficient time for the informant to
     gather necessary information, which he did, the
     names of two accused-respondents have
     conspicuously been missing, which also formed
     an additional factor for the High Court to acquit
     the accused-respondents. Although we accept
     that the FIR need not be an encyclopaedia of
     the crime, but absence of certain essential
     facts, which were conspicuously missing in the
     present FIR, point towards suspicion that the
     crime itself may be staged.”
                                    (Emphasis supplied)
35. Similarly, the effect of a vital omission in the
first information report was considered by this Court
in the case of
Ram Kumar Pandey v. State of M.P14
,
the relevant observations from
the said judgment
are
quoted hereinbelow: -
“8. The abovementioned first information report
      was lodged at Police Station Ganj on March 23,
      1970 at 9.15 p.m. The time of the incident is
      stated to be 5 p.m. The only person mentioned as
      an eye-witness to the murder of Harbinder Singh
      is Joginder Singh. The two daughters Taranjit
      Kaur, PW 2, and Amarjit Kaur, PW 6, are
      mentioned in the FIR only as persons who saw the
      wrapping of the chadar on the wound of


14 AIR 1975 SC 1026.
23
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
      Harbinder Singh. What is most significant is that
      it is nowhere mentioned in the FIR that the
      appellant had stabbed Harbinder Singh at all. It
      seems inconceivable that by 9'15 p.m. it would not
      be known to Uttam Singh, the father of Harbinder
      Singh, that the appellant had inflicted one of the
      two stab wounds on the body of Harbinder Singh.
9. No doubt, an FIR is a previous statement
      which can, strictly speaking, be only used to
      corroborate or contradict the maker of it. But,
      in this case, it had been made by the father of
      the murdered boy to whom all the important
      facts of the occurrence, so far as they were
      known up to 9-15 p.m. on March 23, 1970,
      were bound to have been communicated. If his
      daughers had seen the appellant inflicting a
      blow on Harbinder Singh, the father would
      certainly have mentioned it in the FIR. We
      think that omissions of such important facts,
      affecting the probabilities of the case, are
      relevant under
Section 11
of the Evidence Act
      in judging the veracity of the prosecution case.
10. Even Joginder Singh, PW 8, was not an
      eyewitness of the occurrence. He merely proves an
      alleged dying declaration. He stated that
      Harbinder Singh (described by his pet name as
      “Pappi”) rushed out of his house by opening its
      door, and held his hand on his chest with blood
      flowing down from it. He deposed that, when he
      asked Pappi what had happened, Pappi had
      stated that Suresh and Pandey had injured him.
      It is clear from the FIR that Joginder Singh had
      met Uttam Singh before the FIR was made. Uttam
      Singh did not mention there that any dying
24
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
      declaration, indicating that the appellant had also
      injured Harbinder Singh, was made by Harbinder
      Singh. The omission to mention any injury
      inflicted on Harbinder Singh by the appellant
      in the FIR seems very significant in the
      circumstances of this case. Indeed, according to
      the version in the FIR, Joginder Singh, who was
      in the lane, is said to have arrived while Harbinder
      Singh was being injured. Therefore, if this was
      correct, the two injuries on Harbinder Singh must
      also have been inflicted in the lane outside.
      ………
17. As regards the second and third points, we
      are unable to give credence to the version of
      the three alleged eyewitnesses as they were
      not mentioned as eyewitnesses in the FIR
      made in the circumstances indicated above.
18. Lastly, the alleged dying declaration is also
      not mentioned in the FIR On the other hand, the
      FIR, mentions Joginder Singh who tried to prove
      the dying declaration only, as an eyewitness.
      ……
21. Consequently, we allow this appeal and set
      aside the conviction and sentence of the
      appellant under
Section 302
/
34
, IPC If the
      appellant has already served the sentence
      awarded under
Section 324
IPC, as it stated on
      his behalf, he will be released forthwith.”
                                    (Emphasis supplied)
36. Therefore, the attempt of prosecution in posing
through the complainant Nazir Mohammed (PW-1)
that Arifkhan (PW‑3), Shahejadkhan (PW‑4), Bilal
25
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
Ahemad (PW-5) and Mohsin Gafurkhan (PW-6) were
the four boys whom he had seen with the child victim
or that these boys had seen the accused-appellant
pushing the child victim out of his house is a clear
embellishment and significant omission, as these
vital facts were not set out in the complaint. This
crucial   omission     effects     the   credibility   of   the
complaint itself.
37. Furthermore, the introduction of the witnesses
namely Arifkhan (PW‑3), Shahejadkhan (PW‑4), Bilal
Ahemad (PW-5) and Mohsin Gafurkhan (PW-6) for
proving the last seen together circumstance is a clear
afterthought, as manifested by the fact that their
names cropped up for the first time on 14th June,
2013 i.e. the day after the incident.
38. A lame reason was assigned by the trial Court
to brush aside this serious flaw and effect of the grave
omission on the prosecution’s case observing that no
fact had come on record to show that the Nazir
Mohammed          (PW-1),         Arifkhan    (PW‑3)        and
Shahejadkhan (PW‑4) bore any enmity against the
accused-appellant due to which, they would make an
attempt to falsely implicate the accused-appellant.
26
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
This, in our opinion, could not have been a logical
ground to ignore this material omission.
39. The Journalist, Vivekbhai (PW-2), also tried to
take a similar stance as the complainant Nazir
Mohammed (PW-1) in his deposition. Relevant
excerpts from the deposition of Vivekbhai (PW-2) are
extracted hereinbelow for ready reference: -
“The incident occurred on 13/06/2013. I was at
    Godhra in morning and returned Kalol at around
    12:30 hrs after finishing my work by staying half
    and hour there. As being native of Kalol, I was
    present at my home that day. I was present at my
    home in evening after taking dinner. I received a
    call from Bilalbhai at around 11:30 pm. Bilalbhai
    is my consulting. Bilalbhai told me that a girl was
    bleeding from the lower part and something had
    happened. I went through a road to river which is
    opposite to the police station. Bilalbhai, 5-6 other
    friends, and a four-year girl without clothes were
    there. The girl was sitting with her legs wide and
    others were standing. I speculated the case of rape.
    At first, I made a call to Kalol PSI on his mobile. He
    was on leave. He said he would inform the police
    station. I made a call to 108 mobile van thereafter.
    It took the girl to the Government Hospital, Kalol
    for treatment. We did not know the name and
    whereabouts of the girl. We arranged for her
    primary treatment. In-charge P.S.I. Pallacharya
    and C.P.I. Vajpai arrived at the hospital. In view of
    limitation of treatment at Kalol Hospital, the girl
    was referred to the Godhra Hospital. By this time,
    the parents of the girl arrived at the hospital
27
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
    due to police efforts. The doctor during the
    treatment at Kalol Hospital asserted about rape
    with the victim. When I was there during the
    treatment at Kalol Hospital, my friends who
    brought the girl went to the police station for
    lodging a complaint.
The four boys who brought the girl told me the fact
    at the Kalol Hospital that the accused, Manoj, had
    raped the girl. The boys told me that the
    accused, Manoj, ousted the victim without any
    clothes from his house when they were sitting
    at the stall near Manoj’s house. The girl without
    clothes was walking on the way towards river. The
    police were searching for the family of the victim
    when she was being treated at the Kalol Hospital.
    Parents and younger brother of the victim were
    found during the exercise. They asserted about the
    victim being their daughter. Police recorded my
    statement in connection with the incident. I did not
    know the accused before the incident. I know the
    accused after the incident. He is present in the
    court today.
Cross-examination: for the Accused
    ….When I reached at the river-slope, around 50
    people gathered there.
…..P.S.I. Pallacharya arrived at the hospital within
    2 minute of our arrival. C.P.I. Vajpai arrived in 10
    minute. At around 12 at night, P.S.I. Pallahcharya
    and C.P.I. Vajpai were present at the hospital.
Parents of the victim arrived at the hospital at
    round 12:00-12:15 am.
…..I was the only one present during the
    treatment. I did not go outside the room even
    after the arrival of girl’s parents. Bilalbhai and
    Najirbhai were talking to the police outside the
28
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
    treatment room. I did not suggest police to inquire
    the four boys who brought the girl.
…..Najirbhai registered a complaint at the police
    station; not at the hospital.
It is not true that Najirbhai went to police station
    for registering the complaint when I was engaged in
    the treatment in the hospital. It is not true that the
    four boys who brought the victim talked to me in
    the hospital. It is a true fact that the four boys
    told me at the Kalol Hospital that accused,
    Manoj, raped the girl. It is true that I did not
    dictate this fact before the police during recording
    the statement. It is true that I did not dictate the
    fact before the police while recording the statement
    that the boys told us that when they were sitting at
    the stall near the house of accused, Manoj, the
    accused, Manoj, ousted the girl without clothes
    from his home and the girl without clothes was
    walking towards the way to river.
I came to know the names of the four boys on
    the next day of the incident. I did not tell the
    P.S.I. the fact that I had doubts on the said four
    boys. I came to know that the four boys were from
    Muslim community. It is not true that the grave act
    was done by the four boys and they were sent to
    their homes from the hospital with a view to save
    them.”
40. The witness (PW-2) testified that he had been
called to the place of occurrence at about 11:30 P.M.
where he saw one Bilalbhai and four to five boys with
a minor girl aged about four years in a nude
condition. The witness (PW-2) called the ambulance
29
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
for taking the child victim to the hospital. The witness
(PW-2) tried to create an entirely new story that with
the efforts of the police, the parents of the child victim
came to the Kalol Hospital on the same night. This
theory was not stated by any other witness including
the police officers (PW-14 and PW-15) in their
respective testimonies.
41. The witness (PW-2) categorically stated that the
boys who had brought the child victim, stated to him
at the hospital that they were sitting nearby the
house of the accused-appellant and had seen him
throwing the child victim out of the house in a nude
condition.
42. This assertion of Vivekbhai (PW-2) makes his
entire testimony nothing but a bundle of lies. It is the
admitted case of the prosecution that these boys did
not accompany Nazir Mohammed (PW-1) and the
child victim to the hospital. Thus, when the four boys
never came to the hospital, there could not have been
any occasion for Vivekbhai to make any enquiries or
receive information from them about the incident at
the hospital.
43. Had there been any iota of truth in the version
of Vivekbhai (PW-2), then there was no reason
30
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
whatsoever as to why the police officers from the
Kalol Police Station who had reached the hospital,
would not have made immediate inquiries from these
boys and would have left a serious lacunae in the
case by accepting a sketchy complaint having no
details whatsoever of the alleged assailant and also
about the identity of the material witnesses of the last
seen together circumstance, who were allegedly
present in the hospital.
44. A very important admission was made by
Vivekbhai (PW-2) in his cross-examination that he
came to know the names of the four boys on the day
after the incident. We find the testimony and conduct
of Nazir Mohammed (PW-1) and Vivekbhai (PW-2) to
be highly suspicious. It seems highly probable that
both connived together to protect and cover up for the
four boys belonging to the community of Nazir
Mohammed by putting the blame on the head of the
accused-appellant. The claim of the witnesses that
they took over the charge of the child victim from the
four boys being the alleged witnesses of the last seen
together circumstance and then took her to the
hospital without making any effort whatsoever to
provide her some clothes further fortifies our
31
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
conclusion that the conduct of these witnesses viz.
Nazir Mohammed (PW-1) and Vivekbhai (PW-2) was
highly unnatural all along. Their suspect actions
would give rise to a strong inference that they were
trying to protect the true assailants of the ghastly
sexual assault. The fact that Nazir Mohammed’s wife
was in the house and in spite thereof, he did not call
her out and made no effort whatsoever to provide a
decent coverage to the victimised girl, adds further
succour, to our conclusion, regarding the suspicious
conduct of Nazir Mohammed (PW-1) and Vivekbhai
(PW-2).
45. It is very surprising and rather shocking that
neither Nazir Mohammed (PW-1) and Vivekbhai (PW-
2) and so also the police officials present at the
hospital were completely in the dark about the
identities of the most crucial witnesses to the ghastly
crime when the report of the incident was lodged.
46. Since two of the four witnesses of the last seen
together circumstance, namely, Bilal Ahemad (PW-5)
and Mohsin Gafurkhan (PW-6) did not support the
prosecution case and were declared to be hostile, we
shall discuss the evidence of Arifkhan (PW-3) and
32
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
Shahejadkhan (PW-4), who, in their depositions, tried
to assert the claim of being witnesses of last seen
together circumstance.
47. The relevant excerpts from the evidence of
Arifkhan (PW-3) and Shahejadkhan (PW-4) are
reproduced hereinbelow: -
Deposition of Arifkhan (PW-3)
    “Examination-in-chief
    About three months ago I was sitting at the Pan
    Parlour of my uncle Jaffarulla Khan, where my
    brother Aiyaz, Nephew Shehzaad and Sartaaj were
    also present. At around 11-11:30 in the night,
    when we saw the girl departing from the accused
    Manoj’s home, whose age was about four-five
    years, who was in a naked condition and came
    towards us crying. She was bleeding at her private
    parts, seeming to be of Nayak community, we
    inquired further, but as she could not say anything,
    we four took her to the Nayak Vas. On our way to
    Nayak Faliya, we met Nazirbhai near Ashiyana
    Society. We informed Nazirbhai that the girl was
    found near Manojbhai’s house and handed her over
    to him. Thereafter we four as well as Nazirbhai as
    well as the girl, were standing near Nayakvas Tekra,
    when Nazirbhai called Bilalbhai, who arrived, and on
    seeing the girl said that she doesn’t seem to be of our
    locality, so he called Vivekbhai. Thereafter, on
    inquiring about her parents in the Nayakvas, it was
    found that she doesn’t belong there. Vivekbhai was
    present at the spot, when after talking to Bilalbhai,
    he called Police Station. While Vivekbhai and
    Bilalbhai were talking, we were standing away with
33
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
    the victim. When Bilalbhai and Vivekbhai came to
    the spot, the child was bleeding at her private parts,
    and thereafter Vivekbhai called Police Station, who
    told us to dial 108 and take her to the dispensary.
    On dialling, 108 mobile van arrived and the victim
    was taken to hospital. Thereafter, we reached home
    via Police Station. We came to know the fact that the
    girl is of a traveller, the next day. I saw when the
    accused threw out the victim from the home. Police
    took my statement with this regard.
Cross-Examination for the Accused
    …..The owner Jaffarulla Khan is aged forty to fifty
    years. I saw the victim approaching the parlour while
    crying, from about fifty to sixty feet away. It is not
    true that we did not saw the girl before she came to
    the parlour. We did not inform Jaffarulla Khan about
    the fact that the girl was bleeding from her private
    parts. I did not wake people from my home, a person
    from Ode community came, whom I know, but name
    is not known to me. Apart from my uncle Jaffarulla
    Khan, a person named Suhanben also came.
    ……It is not true that we were taking the victim from
    the parlour to the Ashiyana Society by lifting, but as
    I said, we walked her towards Ashiyana Society.
    During this time, we did not wrap any cloth to
    the girl, while the victim was still bleeding.
    ….Few other people sitting outside their homes,
    whose names I cannot recall, asked what happened
    to the girl. Such thing did not happen that on
    handing over the victim to Nazirbhai, we went to our
    home. When we reached Ashiyana society, Nazirbhai
    asked us where are we taking her. Then as Nazirbhai
    approached us and saw the girl, she was bleeding at
    her private part. It is not true that Nazirbhai told
    us to go home. Nazirbhai’s wife was about to
34
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
    deliver, so he went to the Hospital and there was
    nobody at his home.
In my statement before the police, I stated that on
    meeting Nazir Mohammad Malek and Bilal Vaghela
    at the Ashiyana society, as they thought the girl to
    be of Nayak community, asked to hand over the girl
    in order to search for her parents in the Nayak
    Faliya. On handing over the girl, we went to our
    homes. It is not true that we did not go to Nayak
    Tekra from Nazir’s home. We four did not go to
    Kalol Hospital. It is not true that on handing over
    the girl to Nazirbhai, near his house, we went to our
    homes.
On seeing the girl at the Pan parlour, I didn’t go
    to Manojbhai’s home, nor did we call the accused
    Manojbhai outside. It is not true that the I cannot
    say with surity whether the house from which the
    girl came out, belongs to Manojbhai. It is not true
    that I did not see the accused Manojbhai throwing
    the girl from home and I am giving false deposition.
    I know the accused’s father Jethabhai, who had
    lodged a police complaint against my uncle
    Jaffarulla Khan in the year 2006, which included
    my father’s name in the accused, who was not
    arrested. I am unaware of the proceedings of that
    case. It is not true that after the complaint against
    my father was registered in 2006, we have
    displeasure with the accused as well as his family.
    There was no dispute between the accused and his
    brother, and our family on March 2006. It is not true
    that I am giving false deposition because father of
    the accused had lodged police complaint against my
    father and my uncle. It is not true that me as well as
    my friends, committed rape against the victim girl
    and threw her near Nazirbhai’s house.
35
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
    It is true that till we reached Nayak Faliya,
    Nazirbhai was knowing where the girl came from,
    because I had conveyed that fact to him, which
    he also conveyed to Bilalbhai when he came.
    Similiarly when Vivekbhai arrived, he was
    conveyed the fact by Bilalbhai and Nazirbhai
    where the girl was found. It did not happen that
    I told the fact to Nazirbhai, Bilalbhai and
    Vivekbhai. When we were heading towards our
    home from the Police Station, the victim was
    being thrown away from the house by Manojbhai,
    such fact we did not convey to the Police.
    …..We reached our home at about 12-12:15 p.m.
    Police inquired us the next morning.
    …..It is not true that Nazirbhai has given false
    complaint to save us as he knows me, and I am
    giving false deposition for the sake of same. It is not
    true that I did not see the victim thrown out of the
    house by the accused, and it did not happen that the
    girl approached us while crying, and it did not
    happen that we headed towards Ashiyana Society.”
                           xxxxxxx

    Deposition of Shahejadkhan Khan (PW-4)
    “Examination-in-chief
    The incident took place about 5 months ago, when
    there was a Chhakda, in which I, Arif, Sartaj and
    Aiyaz were sitting, at about 10 in the night. At
    this time the accused sent a girl outside the
    home, who approached us while crying and she
    seemed to be of Nayak Faliya, so we took her to
    the Nayak Faliya and asked everybody whose
    girl is this, but was denied by all. Hence, we came
    back to the Ashiyana Society, where Arifbhai and
    Bilalbhai came, and 108 Ambulance was called as
    she was bleeding through her private parts, and
36
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
    taken to the Hospital for treatment. Bilalbhai took
    the girl to the Hospital, while we four proceeded
    to our homes. The next day, we got to know that
    the accused Manojbhai raped the girl. The fact that
    the accused Manojbhai threw the girl out of home
    was witnessed by me, and the same was given in
    the complaint by Nazirbhai. I identify the accused
    who is present before the court.
Cross-Examination for the Accused
    …..When we saw the girl for first time, she was
    crying at about 5-6 feet away from the Chhakda,
    so our attention was drawn to her cry.
    …..Few people of the Faliya gathered, whose name
    I do not know. My home is 3-4 feet away from the
    parlour, where I live with my parents and brother.
    I did not call my parents or brother on seeing the
    crying girl coming towards us.
It is not true that we four boys carried the girl with
    us to the Nayak Faliya, which is about a km away
    from our house. After crossing the Ashiyana
    Society, we traversed through the pukka road. On
    our way from the place of incident to the Nayak
    Faliya, we did not meet anybody. We woke people
    of Nayak Faliya and asked about the girl. As they
    refused, we went towards Ashiyana Society with
    the girl, when Nazirbhai met us. All this time, the
    girl was walking with us and was bleeding.
    Nazirbhai met us and told us to leave the girl
    there, and we went towards our homes, leaving
    the girl there. I have no knowledge of what did
    Nazirbhai do thereafter, and when did Police and
    ambulance reach. Nazirbhai is present in the court
    today, who met me today. With me are my other
    friends, whose parents were not called. We
    feared whether our parents would doubt us on
37
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
    seeing the girl bleeding. Such did not happen that
    Police took recorded our statement on the day of
    incident. It is true that I did not tell anybody
    whom I met that I have seen Manojbhai
    throwing the girl out of the home. We did not see
    when, how and with whom the girl came there. In
    my statement before the police, recorded at 12 in
    the afternoon, I did not inform about 7-8 people
    reaching during the incident, nor that I can identify
    their houses.
….The fact that I saw the accused Manoj
    keeping the girl outside home, was not told to
    anybody before it was firstly stated in my
    statement before the police. Neither did I asked
    Nazirbhai about what happened the next day,
    nor did he call me before 12 in the noon. While
    handing over the girl to Nazirbhai, we did not
    give our name and address to him. Nazirbhai do
    not identify me by name, but identifies on
    seeing.
…..It is not true that she was raped by someone
    from amongst us. It is not true that we lodged a
    false complaint through Nazirbhai, in order to
    avoid any case against us. It is not true that I
    am giving false deposition. It is true that Police
    did not conduct any medical examination of us, nor
    did they seize our clothes. It is not true that I am
    giving false deposition on Nazirbhai’s insistence,
    and identifying the accused wrongly.”
                                   (Emphasis supplied)
48. The highlighted part from the evidence of these
witnesses give rise to the following irrefutable
inferences: -
38
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
      i.     The   four    witnesses   after   seeing   the
             accused-appellant pushing out the child
             victim from his house, casually took the
             girl in their charge; made no effort to
             provide clothes to the child victim; and
             started walking with the child victim in a
             denuded state towards Nayakvas without
             even having the faintest of idea about her
             identity or place of residence.
ii.    These witnesses claimed to be having an
             idea that the child victim belonged to
             Nayak community and, therefore, they
             were taking her to Nayak Faliya. This
             could not have been possible unless they
             were privy to the incident. As there was no
             clue regarding the identity of the child
             victim by the time her parents were
             located, it is very strange that these four
             witnesses had knowledge regarding the
             community to which the child victim
             belonged.
iii.   Nazir Mohammed (PW-1) did not command
             a position of significance in the society or
             community.       Inspite thereof, the boys
39
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
            casually handed over the girl to Nazir
            Mohammed (PW-1) near the Ashiana
            society, after telling him that she had been
            found     near   the       accused    Manojbhai’s
            house.
iv.   The boys, who were four in number and
            the owner of the Pan Parlour, namely,
            Jafarulla Khan, who was also closely
            known to them, would, in the natural
            course of events, be expected to confront
            Manojbhai i.e. the accused-appellant, had
            they actually seen the child victim coming
            out from his house in a naked condition as
            claimed. This would be expected from any
            human being with the bare minimum
            sense of decency, empathy and awareness.
      v.    Arifkhan      (PW-3)        stated    that     Nazir
            Mohammed’s wife was about to deliver,
            and she was admitted at the hospital and
            nobody     was        at   home.     This    fact   is
            contradicted by the evidence of Nazir
            Mohammed (PW-1) who did not make any
            such averment in his deposition and
            rather stated that he did not call his wife
40
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
             out for inspecting the child victim who was
             in a very bad shape and was bleeding from
             her nether regions. If, at all, these persons
             had any empathy and were not the
             offenders    themselves,   looking   at   the
             compromised condition of the girl, natural
             human conduct demanded           that they
             should, at the outset, made an attempt to
             provide clothes to cover the body of the
             child victim and to involve some lady to
             ease her misery.
vi.    Arifkhan (PW-3) admitted that Jethabhai,
             the father of the accused-appellant had
             lodged a complaint against Jaffarulla
             Khan in the year 2006 and his father was
             also arraigned as an accused in the said
             case. Thus, there was a clear state of
             animosity between Arifkhan (PW-3) and
             the accused-appellant owing to the said
             criminal case.
vii.   Arifkhan (PW-3) stated that the incident
             took place around 11:00-11:30 at night.
             On the other hand, Shahejadkhan (PW-4)
41
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
            stated that the incident took place at 10
            o’clock in the night.
viii. Shahejadkhan (PW-4) stated that they
            became aware of the child victim for the
            first time, when he heard her crying at a
            distance of about 5-6 feet away from the
            Chhakda, and thus, their attention was
            drawn to her. Admittedly, the house of the
            accused-appellant was 40 to 50 feet away
            from pan parlour. Thus, the witnesses
            sensed the presence of the child victim for
            the first instance, when she was at a
            distance to 5-6 feet away from the place
            where they were sitting. Hence, there was
            hardly any possibility that in the dead of
            the night, they could have seen the child
            victim being pushed out from the house by
            the accused-appellant.
ix.   A very candid admission was made by
            Shahejadkhan          (PW-4)   in   his   cross-
examination wherein he stated that he and
            his other friends, did not call their parents
            because they feared that their parents
            would doubt them on seeing the child
42
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
            victim    bleeding.   The   witness   further
            admitted that he did not tell anybody who
            he met that he had seen the accused-
appellant pushing the child victim out of
            the home. This fact was stated by him, for
            the first time, to the police when his
            statement was recorded. He did not ask
            Nazir Mohammad (PW-1) as to what had
            transpired after handing over of the child
            victim to him. He also admitted that while
            handing over the child victim to Nazir
            Mohammad (PW-1), they did not share
            their names and address to him.
49. These facts make it clear that by the time the
FIR was lodged, there was no material whatsoever to
establish the identity of the four witnesses of last
seen together theory or that they had actually seen
the child victim being pushed out by the accused-
appellant from his house. As per Shahejadkhan (PW-
4) they did not tell anybody that they had seen the
accused-appellant pushing the child victim out of his
home. There is a significant discrepancy regarding
43
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
the time of the incident in the versions of PW-3 and
PW-4 as mentioned supra.
50. Since the identity of the witnesses of last seen
together circumstance was not known to anyone, it
becomes a matter of grave doubt as to how they were
pinpointed and called to the police station on the day
next to the incident for recording their statements
under
Section 161
CrPC.
51. In juxtaposition with these embellishments, the
crucial fact borne out from the statement of Nazir
Mohammed (PW-1) that the four boys did not tell him
the name of Manojbhai (accused-appellant) and that
he did not mention in the complaint, or his statement
(sic) under
Section 161
CrPC that these witnesses
had seen Manojbhai (accused-appellant) pushing the
child victim from his house, makes it clear that the
entire story implicating the accused-appellant for the
crime was cooked up after consultations and
deliberations on the day next to the incident. The
effect of this grave embellishment on the prosecution
case was not considered in the correct perspective
either by the trial Court or the High Court.
44
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
52. The rank indifference shown by these four
witnesses i.e. Arifkhan (PW-3), Shahejadkhan (PW-4),
Bilal Ahemad (PW-5) and Mohsin Gafurkhan (PW-6)
in taking any steps whatsoever either to report the
matter to the police or to make the efforts for taking
the child victim to the hospital and instead trying to
take her to Nayak Faliya reaffirms our doubt that
they might have been the perpetrators of the offence
and by way of self-preservation, threw the blame on
to the accused-appellant stating that they had seen
the accused-appellant pushing the child victim from
his house and that they were trying to take her to
Nayak Faliya. Thus, we reiterate that the evidence of
Arifkhan (PW-3) and Shahejadkhan (PW-4) is totally
unworthy of credence.
53. At this stage, it would be fruitful to refer to the
testimony of the two Investigating Officers i.e.
Pankajkumar        Darji    (PW-14)    and   Hareshbhai
Pallacharya (PW-15).
54. The relevant excerpts from the evidence of
Pankajkumar        Darji     (PW-14)   are   reproduced
hereinbelow for ready reference: -
“Examination-in-chief
45
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
    ……The name of Mr. Manojbhai Jethabhai as
    accused was revealed during the investigation.
    Therefore, the investigation was conducted.
    When the accused person was found, he was
    arrested in this offence after making physical
    examination. The accused did not co-operate in
    timelimit regarding clothes worn at the time of
    incident, he was produced before the court and
    remands were obtained. The accused person has
    willingly stated about the clothes worn at the time
    of incident during remand and same were seized.
    The statement of witness Bilal Ahmed Waghela was
    dictated. The collected sample of the victim and the
    accused during medical investigation were sent in
    F.S.L. to analyse and Medical Certificate was
    received. The process of preparing map of the
    incident place was done due to serious nature of
    offence. The sufficient evidence were found to frame
    chargesheet against the arrested accused person
    therefore the chargesheet was prepared and sent to
    the Hon’ble Court. The accused persons are same
    who present before the court.
Cross examination: for the accused
    I came to know the fact while receiving the
    complaint that three to four boys took the
    victim to the complainant. Thereafter, I saw the
    said four boys during investigation. I did not
    conduct any medical check up of these boys. I have
    neither collected sample of boys’ sperm and blood.
    No panchnama of dog tracking was drawn.
    …..I did not feel that the victim was found from four
    boys and conduct their medical check up.”
                                     (Emphasis supplied)
46
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
55. The witness (PW-14) stated that the name of the
accused-appellant cropped up during investigation
and thus, he was arrested and various other steps of
investigation were carried out. In cross examination,
the witness admitted that he met the four witnesses
of last seen referred to in the complaint during
investigation. However, he did not explain as to how
the identity of these witnesses was established.
56. Now, we come to the evidence of the other
Investigating Officer, Hareshbhai Pallacharya (PW-
15).     The relevant excerpts of his deposition are
reproduced hereinbelow for ready reference: -
Cross examination: for the accused
       “…..I was at home at that time. I left in Government
       vehicle to reach Kalol. Entry is not made in Station
       Diary when I left to go Kalol. First of all, I went to
       Kalol Police Station and thereafter went to the
       hospital, where the victim was taken. I reached
       Kalol Police Station at around 11-00 to 11-30
       hours. I do not remember as to who told me from
       Police Station that the victim is in the hospital.
       ……I do not remember as to whether Najirbhai
       was present there or not. I did not record
       statement of the person who brought this girl to
       the hospital.
……I reached hospital at about 12-30 to 1-00
       hours. When I reached hospital, I saw Najirbhai.
       ……Najirbhai was sitting there and as I reached
       there, complaint was given to me. Other
47
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
    persons were also sitting with Najirbhai. It is
    true that Najirbhai dictated in his complaint
    that four boys were bringing the victim and
    these persons handed over the victim to
    Najirbhai. I did not ask Najirbhai as to who these
    four boys were. Names of these four boys were
    revealed during my course of investigation.
    ……I did not seize any document showing that
    house to be of the accused. When I went there,
    nobody was present in the house. It is not true that
    the house, which I visited, was not the house of the
    accused. It is not true that Muddamal, which I had
    shown, was seized from the house of the accused.
    It is not true that I also recorded statements of the
    persons present around. I took complaint at police
    station. It has not happened that complainant had
    given complaint in the hospital. It is not true that I
    have not written the statement as dictated by
    Mohasinkhan. I did not record statement of Bilal
    Ahmed. I do not remember exactly as to whether
    Bilal Ahmed was present at the time when
    Najirbhai came to lodge complaint. Statement of
    Vivekbhai was recorded on 14/06/2013. Vivekbhai
    was also present at Police Station. I handed over
    charge to Darji sir at around 10-30 hours in the
    morning. Panchnama of crime scene was
    completed at that time. It is not true that I have not
    drawn any panchnama in presence of panchas. It
    is not true that statements of witnesses were
    written as dictated by them. It is not true that the
    victim and four boys were handed over to Najirbhai
    and despite the fact that they were present there,
    their statements were not recorded. Semen, blood
    or nails of these four boys were not collected to
    send to FSL.”
                                      (Emphasis supplied)
48
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
57. In his cross-examination, the witness (PW-15)
stated that he reached Kalol Police Station at about
11.00 p.m. to 11.30 p.m., proceeded to the hospital,
and found that other police officials of Kalol Police
Station and Vejalpur Police Station were present
there from before. He admitted that he did not
record the statements of the persons who brought
the child victim to the hospital, nor did he record
the statement of Vivekbhai (PW-2). He further
stated that Nazir Mohammed (PW-1) was present
at the hospital and handed over the complaint to
him, in which there was a reference to four boys;
however, he candidly admitted that he did not ask
Nazir Mohammed (PW-1) for the names of those
four boys and that their identity was allegedly
revealed     during     the       investigation.   He   also
admitted that when the panchnama of the house
where the incident took place was drawn, he did
not collect any documentary evidence regarding
ownership of the house.
58. The trial Court has observed that the accused-
appellant was apprehended from inside the house,
however, as is evident from the testimony of the two
49
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
Investigating Officers i.e. Pankajkumar Darji (PW-14)
and Hareshbhai Pallacharya (PW-15), neither of them
uttered a single word regarding presence of the
accused-appellant in the house when the search was
undertaken. Neither of the Investigating Officers
bothered to prove the arrest memo of the accused-
appellant. Memorandum statement of the accused-
appellant under
Section 27
of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, leading to the recovery of his blood-stained
clothes was not proved by proper evidence.
59. The material facts as elicited during the
evidence      of   the     two    investigating   officers
Pankajkumar        Darji    (PW-14)   and    Hareshbhai
Pallacharya (PW-15) make it abundantly clear that
the entire prosecution story has been woven on a
fabric of lies by introducing the four boys as self-
acclaimed witnesses to the last seen together
circumstance.
60. Hareshbhai Pallacharya (PW-15) admitted in his
cross-examination that he did not record the
statements of the persons who brought the child
victim to the hospital. Although the complaint
referred to four boys who had accompanied the child
50
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
victim and handed her over to the complainant (PW-
1), no effort was made by the Investigating Officers to
ascertain their identities at the earliest opportunity.
A vague explanation was furnished that the names of
these four boys cropped up during investigation.
However, the record contains no statement or any
other credible material that could convince the Court
that the identity of these four boys was ever
established by any cogent evidence.
61. We further find the conduct of the police officers
who conducted the investigation of the case to be
highly pedantic and gravely negligent.
62. After Nazir Mohammed (PW-1) had filed the
complaint and the child victim had been medically
examined, the facts presented a case of grave sexual
assault on the minor child victim aged four years. In
such a situation, any vigilant police officer would be
immediately expected to proceed to the crime scene;
try to locate the witnesses of the last seen together
circumstance by establishing their identity and make
efforts to apprehend the accused. However, after
perusing    depositions     of both the   Investigating
Officers (PW-14 and PW-15), it is evident that neither
51
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
of them showed any intent or interest to conduct
these vital steps of investigation at the earliest
opportunity.
63. The investigation was casually proceeded with.
The   so-called    witnesses of     last   seen   together
circumstance,         namely,      Arifkhan       (PW-3),
Shahejadkhan (PW-4), Bilal Ahemad (PW-5) and
Mohsin Gafurkhan (PW-6) somehow popped up and
presented themselves before the Investigating Officer
on the next day of the incident. The police officers
casually proceeded to the house of the accused-
appellant on 14th June, 2013. The incriminating
material viz. blood stain clothes, bedsheet, curtain,
etc. were lying scattered in the house as if to serve
the incriminating evidence to the Investigating Officer
on a platter.
64. On a perusal of material on record, it is evident
that the site map plan of the place of incident (Exh.
42) was prepared by the Circle Officer, Bharatkumar
Mahajan (PW-12), with the panch witnesses being
Krunalkumar       (PW-7)     and   Pintukumar.     If   the
prosecution intended to fortify its allegation that the
accused-appellant was seen pushing the child victim
52
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
out of the house by the witness of last seen together
theory, it was imperative that at least one of these
four     witnesses,      namely,        Arifkhan       (PW-3),
Shahejadkhan (PW-4), Bilal Ahemad (PW-5) and
Mohsin Gafurkhan (PW-6), be associated as a panch
witness to the preparation of the site map plan.
However, no such step was taken by the Investigating
Officers. This omission, coupled with the rank failure
of the Investigating Officers in collecting any evidence
whatsoever to link the possession or ownership of the
house in question to the accused-appellant, further
dilutes the credibility of the prosecution case.
65. In the present case, it is manifest that the
Investigating Officer had ample opportunity to secure
and preserve crucial forensic material, particularly by
securing samples necessary for conducting DNA
profiling of the child victim and the accused-
appellant. Such scientific examination, now an
integral component of modern criminal investigation,
would have provided objective corroboration and
materially    assisted     in     ascertaining   the    truth.
However, no effort was made to obtain or preserve
such forensic material. This omission, whether
53
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
arising from negligence or otherwise, assumes
significance in light of the seriousness of the
allegations. The failure to pursue an available and
reliable scientific avenue not only weakens the
prosecution’s case but also raises a legitimate
apprehension that the investigation may not have
been carried out with the requisite fairness and
diligence. In the circumstances, the possibility that
such inaction was intended, or at least operated, to
shield the actual perpetrators of the offence cannot
be ruled out. Such lapses ex facie undermine the
credibility of the prosecution’s case and strike at the
foundational requirement that every investigation
must be fair, diligent, and oriented solely towards the
discovery of truth.
66. The admitted sequence of facts narrated above
clearly indicates something very fishy and unnerving
in the manner in which, the entire prosecution story
has been unfolded. In face of such grave allegations,
the rank apathy of the Investigating Officers in not
conducting expeditious and diligent investigation,
should have been sufficient to put the Courts below
on guard and become cognizant of the fact that
something was really amiss in the case presented for
54
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
trial. However, sadly, neither the trial Court nor the
High Court, adverted to these glaring shortcomings
in the case and mechanically accepted the case of
prosecution even though the conduct of the material
witnesses (of last seen together circumstance) was
sufficient to raise a strong suspicion that they might
have been the actual perpetrators of the crime.
67. It is imperative to state that during the trial, the
child victim was herself examined as (PW-18)
however, she could not give any evidence whatsoever
to connect the accused-appellant with the crime. She
could not even identify the accused-appellant as the
assailant. She further stated that she was tutored by
her mother. Hence, this significant point was also
missed by the trial Court before convicting the
accused-appellant.
68. Adverting       to   the      aspect   of   incriminating
recoveries, we find that the recoveries allegedly
effected from the house of the accused-appellant
included     a   blood-stained        bedsheet,    mattress,
curtain, leggy, handkerchief, light green colour t-
shirt and night pant. The seizure of this forensic
material was carried out by Hareshbhai Pallacharya
55
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
(PW-15), who stated that he recorded the statements
of the concerned witnesses and prepared the
panchnama of the place of occurrence in the presence
of the independent panchas and the FSL Officer.
However, in his deposition, the witness remained
conspicuously silent regarding the recovery of any
legging of the child victim, which was later projected
as a crucial piece of evidence. These articles, upon
being subjected to chemical examination, gave
positive test for blood group “A”, alleged to be that of
the child victim. Yet neither of the two investigating
officers (PW-14 and PW-15) gave any evidence
regarding the safe keeping of these incriminating
materials from the time of seizure until they reached
the forensic laboratory. In their entire evidence, both
police officers failed to state anything regarding the
sealing of the seized articles, their deposit in the
police station malkhana or the manner of their
transmission to the FSL. This vital link evidence,
necessary to establish the sanctity of the muddamal
articles was therefore never provided. Consequently,
neither the recoveries nor the forensic reports can be
read in evidence.
56
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
69. The trial Court relied on the testimony of panch
witnesses     i.e.,   Krunalkumar    (PW-7)     and      Altaf
Husenbhai (PW-8) to accept the recoveries. It is to be
noted that Krunalkumar (PW-7) in his testimony
stated that the recoveries of bloodstained mattress,
bedsheet and leggings of child victim were made from
the house of the accused-appellant on 14th June,
2013. However, in his cross-examination the witness
made the following admissions: -
“When I went to the place of offense at night,
    police was already present there. When I
    departed for my home, police was still present.
    About 50 people assembled at the place of offense.
    No article was seized at the night. Police went
    to the house which was the place of offense, but
    we did not go inside. We do not know what did
    police do inside the house, which was the place
    of offense.”                 (Emphasis supplied)
70. Hence, what comes out from the evidence of the
witness (PW-7) is that when he went to the place of
offence at night, the police were already present; that
about 50 people had assembled; that no article was
seized in his presence, and that the police entered the
house     without      the   panchas.    This    seriously
undermines the credibility of the alleged recoveries.
57
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
71. Altaf Husenbhai (PW-8), in contrast, stated that
he acted as a panch on 17th June, 2013, that the
accused-appellant was found sleeping inside the
house in an intoxicated condition, and the clothes
of the child victim and blood-stained articles were
recovered on that day along with the accused’s t-shirt
and night pant. When the evidence of Krunalkumar
(PW-7) and Altaf Husenbhai (PW-8) is read in
juxtaposition to that of Hareshbhai Pallacharya (PW-
15), stark contradictions emerge. The witness (PW-
15) never specifically mentioned about the recovery
of the child’s clothing from the house of the accused-
appellant. The trial Court overlooked the fact that
Krunalkumar        (PW-7)       admitted    in   his     cross-
examination that no recovery was effected in his
presence on 14th June, 2013 and that the police
entered the house on their own, raising serious
suspicion    whether      the     alleged   recoveries    were
genuine or were planted ones.
72. In stark contradiction, Altaf Husenbhai (PW-8)
stated that the accused-appellant was arrested on
17th June, 2013, and the recoveries were also affected
58
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
on the same day. Thus, the entire sequence of arrest
and recoveries is absolutely unacceptable.
73. It must further be noted that the only persons
who could have identified the child victim’s clothes
were her parents i.e. Veenaben Pagi (PW-16) and
Ranchhodbhai Pagi (PW-17). However, they were
never made to do so either during investigation or at
the trial.
74. The prosecution also failed to establish that the
house at Oad Faliya belonged to or was in the
possession of the accused-appellant. Hareshbhai
Pallacharya (PW-15) admitted in his evidence that he
did not collect any evidence proving ownership.
Pankajkumar Darji (PW-14) also admitted the same
and even the Circle Officer, Bharatkumar Mahajan
(PW-12) conceded that he did not verify who occupied
the   premises.      No    revenue   records,   bills,   or
statements of neighbours were produced to establish
ownership or possession on the house. Without proof
of exclusive possession, recovery from the premises
cannot be treated as incriminating.
75. The contradictions between the depositions of
panch witnesses Krunalkumar (PW-7) and Altaf
59
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
Husenbhai (PW-8), and Investigating Officer (PW-15);
the absence of proof regarding the ownership of the
house; the lack of a proper chain of custody of seized
items; and the medical evidence negating the
presence of semen on the child victim, casts grave
doubt on the genuineness of the recoveries. The
attempt of the prosecution to rely on the FSL report
despite these grave infirmities is unacceptable. Since
the seizures itself were tainted and the ownership of
the house remains unproven, the FSL results hold no
evidentiary value. The trial Court and High Court
overlooked these critical flaws and the possibility of
planting evidence, thereby committing serious error
in recording the conviction.
76. Thus, we are convinced that the entire story of
the prosecution wherein it has been claimed that the
accused-appellant was seen throwing out the child
victim in a denuded condition after committing
forcible sexual assault upon her is not established by
any credible or reliable evidence. Rather, we find the
conduct of the complainant, Nazir Mohammed (PW-
1), Journalist Vivekbhai (PW-2), witnesses of last
seen together circumstance, Arifkhan (PW-3) and
60
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
Shahejadkhan (PW-4) and also of the concerned
Investigating Officers (PW-14 and PW-15) to be highly
unnatural, suspicious, full of improbabilities, and
self-contradictions.
77. Therefore, it is firmly established that the
prosecution     case    is   clearly   missing   the   key
component of an unbroken chain of incriminating
circumstances to convict the accused-appellant on
the basis of last seen together circumstance.
78. Having made a thorough analysis of the
evidence on record, and for the reasons stated above,
we find that the impugned judgment do not stand to
scrutiny. As a result, the judgment of conviction and
order of sentence dated 3rd November, 2015, rendered
by the trial Court and the impugned judgment dated
5th April, 2016, rendered by the High Court are
hereby set aside. The appellant stands acquitted of
the charges. He is in custody and shall be released
forthwith, if not wanted in any other case.
79. The appeal thus succeeds and is allowed.
80. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand
disposed of.
61
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
81. Before parting with the present case, we would
like to highlight that the judgments of the trial Court
as well as the High Court in the instant case have
indeed appended charts of witnesses and documents
in their respective judgments. However, we are of the
considered view that a more structured and uniform
practice must be adopted to enhance the legibility of
criminal    judgments.      Accordingly,   to   ensure   a
systematic presentation of evidence that enables
efficient appreciation of the record, we issue the
following directions to all trial Courts across the
country. These directions aim to institutionalize a
standardized      format    for   cataloguing   witnesses,
documentary evidence, and material objects. This
will serve to facilitate better comprehension and
immediate reference for all stakeholders, including
the Appellate Courts. Hence, we are passing the
following directions, which shall be adhered to by all
trial Courts across the country.
82. Preparation of Tabulated Charts in all the
judgments:
82.1 All trial Courts dealing with criminal matters
shall, at the conclusion of the judgment, incorporate
tabulated charts summarizing: -
62
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
    a. Witnesses examined,
    b. Documents exhibited, and
    c. Material objects (muddamal) produced and
        exhibited.
82.2. These charts shall form an appendix or
concluding segment of the judgment and shall be
prepared      in     a   clear,   structured     and      easily
comprehensible format.
83. Standardized Chart of Witnesses
83.1. Each criminal judgment shall contain a witness
chart with at least the following columns:
a. Serial Number
    b. Name of the Witness
    c. Brief Description/Role of the Witness, such
        as:        Informant,     Eye-witness,           Medical
        Jurist/Doctor,       Investigating     Officer    (I.O.),
        Panch Witness, etc.

83.2. The description should be succinct but
sufficient to indicate the evidentiary character of the
witness. This structured presentation will allow quick
reference to the nature of testimony, assist in locating
the witness in the record, and minimize ambiguity.
63
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
83.3. Specimen Chart for Witnesses Examined
  Prosecution        Name of             Description
  Witness No.        Witness
1                 Mr. X           Eye-witness
2                 Mr. Y           Witness of last         seen
                                  circumstance
3                 Ms. Z           Medical Jurist
4                 Mr. A           Investigating Officer
5                 Mr. B           Complainant/First
                                  Informant
84. Standardized Chart of Exhibited Documents
84.1 A separate chart shall be prepared for all
documents exhibited during trial. This chart shall
include:
a. Exhibit Number;
b. Description of document;
c. The Witness who proved or attested the
        document.
84.2    Illustratively, the description may include:
FIR, complaint, panchnamas, medical certificates,
FSL reports, seizure memos, site plans, dying
declarations, etc.
84.3. The requirement of specifying the witness who
proved the document ensures traceability of proof
64
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
and assist the Court in appreciating compliance with
the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
/Bharatiya Sakshya
Adhiniyam, 2023.
84.4. Specimen Chart for Exhibited Documents
    Exhibit      Description of the      Proved
      No.             Exhibit         by/Attested by
1             Inquest                 PW-1
              Panchnama/Memo

2             Recovery                PW-2
              Panchnama/Memo

3             Arrest Memo             PW-3

4             Post-mortem Report      PW-4

5             FSL Report              PW-5
85. Standardized             Chart    of     Material
Objects/Muddamals

85.1 Whenever material objects are produced and
marked as exhibits, the trial Court shall prepare a
third chart with:
a. Material Object (M.O.) Number;
b. Description of the Object;
65
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
     c. Witness who proved the Object’s Relevance
        (e.g., weapon, clothing, tool, article seized
        under panchnama, etc.)

85.2. This enables clarity regarding the physical
evidence relied upon.
85.3.Specimen     Chart                  for         Material
Objects/Muddamals

     Material       Description of the            Proved
    Object No.           Exhibit               by/Attested by
1                 Weapon of Offence        PW-1
2                 Clothing               of PW-2
                  accused/victim
3                 Mobile                   PW-3
                  Phone/Electronic
                  Object
4                 Vehicle                  PW-4

5                 Purse/earrings/identity PW-5
                  card


86. Special Provisions             for   Cases      Involving
Voluminous Evidence
86.1. In complex cases, such as conspiracies,
economic offences or trials involving voluminous oral
or documentary evidence, the list of witnesses and
exhibits may be substantially long. Where the
number of witnesses or documents is unusually
66
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
large, the trial Court may prepare charts only for the
material, relevant, and relied-upon witnesses and
documents, clearly indicating that the chart is
confined to such items. This ensures that the charts
remain     functional    reference   tools    rather   than
unwieldy compilations.
87. Application         to   Defence    Witnesses      and
Evidence

87.1. The aforesaid directions shall apply, mutatis
mutandis, to all witnesses examined and all evidence
adduced by the defence.
88. Adoption     of   Specimen               Format    and
Permissible Deviations

88.1.    The specimen charts provided herein shall
ordinarily serve as the standard format to be followed
by trial Courts across the country.
89. Observations Regarding Applicability to Civil
Proceedings

89.1. While these directions are primarily intended
to streamline criminal trials, we leave it open to the
High Courts to consider, wherever appropriate, the
adoption of similar tabulated formats in civil matters
as well, particularly in cases involving voluminous
67
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023
documentary or oral evidence, so as to promote
clarity, uniformity, and ease of reference.
90. The High Court may consider incorporating the
above directions in their respective rules governing
the procedure of trial Courts.
91. Registry shall forthwith transmit a copy of this
judgment to the Registrar General of all the High
Courts to ensure due compliance with the directions
issued by this Court in paragraph Nos. 81-90 (supra).
….……………………J.
                                   (VIKRAM NATH)


                                  ...…………………….J.
                                   (SANDEEP MEHTA)
NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 15, 2025.
68
CRL. APPEAL NO(S). 2973 of 2023