[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sanjay Kumar Upadhyay vs The State Of Jharkhand on 16 December, 2025
Author:
J.K. Maheshwari
Bench:
J.K. Maheshwari
REPORTABLE
 2025 INSC 1445



                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 14046 OF 2024


          SANJAY KUMAR UPADHYAY                                     …..APPELLANT


                                                VERSUS


          STATE OF JHARKHAND AND ORS.                            …..RESPONDENTS


                                            JUDGEMENT
J.K. Maheshwari J.
1.             Arising out of the judgement dated 30.03.2022 passed in LPA

          No. 269 of 2012 wherein the judgement dated 14.12.2011 of the

          learned Single Judge in W.P. (S) No. 5743 of 2005 was set-aside by

          Division Bench of the High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi, the

          present appeal has been preferred by the Employee. The dispute

          between the parties herein relates to grant of higher pay scale to the

          Employee after removal of anomalies in pay scale, on parity with
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NIDHI AHUJA
Date: 2025.12.16
18:30:38 IST
other similarly situated persons who have been already granted the
Reason:
said benefit by the Respondent – Employer.
1
2.    The learned Single Judge relying upon judgement of High Court

of Patna in
Nagendra Sahani v. State of Bihar1
and
Alakh Kumar

Sinha v. State of Bihar2
, in the Writ Petition had directed the

Respondent – Employer to revise the pay scale of the Employee with

effect from the date of his appointment in the pay scale of Rs. 1600 –

2780 along with other consequential benefits, i.e., arrears of salary

etc. On filing a Letters Patent Appeal by the Respondent – Employer,

it came to be allowed by the impugned order, setting aside the

directions of the learned Single Judge, hence, the present appeal.

FACTUAL BACKDROP
3.    Shorn of unnecessary details, the present appeal arises out of

the recruitment process initiated by the State of Bihar for filling up

Graduate-level Non-gazetted Class-III vacancies of sixteen posts in

various departments, including the post of Industries Extension

Officer    (hereinafter    ‘IEO’),   by   way   of   common   competitive

examination conducted by the Bihar State Subordinate Services

Selection Board in the year 1981. The Appellant participated in the
1 CWJC No. 8419 of 1992
2 CWJC No. 12301 of 2004
2
said process, was duly selected, and came to be appointed as IEO by

order dated 27.05.1992, in the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600.
4.   It is not in dispute that appointments for all sixteen posts were

made pursuant to a common examination and the allocation to

different departments was done purely by way of administrative

allotment without any option exercised by the candidates. It is also

not in dispute that prior to the 4th Pay Revision in April, 1981 all

these posts were placed in same pay-scale. However, after the 4th pay

revision, an anomaly arose when ten out of these sixteen posts were

accorded a higher revised pay scale of Rs. 850-1360, while six of

these posts were placed in the lower pay scale of Rs. 296-460. This

anomaly was considered by the 4th Pay Anomalies Committee in

1987, which recommended the same scale of pay for similarly

situated posts, but the Industries Department did not place the case

of Industries Extension Officers before the Committee, resulting in

the continuance of the lower scale.
5.   Upon the implementation of the 5th Pay Commission in

December, 1989, the disparity persisted as ten posts were placed in

the higher pay scale of ₹1600-2780, while the remaining six posts

continued in the pay scale of ₹1500-2750. This differential treatment,
3
despite the common recruitment examination sans allotment based

on merit-cum-preference method, became the subject of litigation

before the Patna High Court in
Nagendra Sahani
(Supra), wherein

by judgment dated 22.09.1993 the Division Bench of High Court of

Judicature at Patna held that there was no reasonable classification

to justify the disparity caused by fixing two different pay scale for

these similarly situated persons recruited on the same posts and

directed that all incumbents of these sixteen posts be placed in the

higher pay scale of ₹1600-2780 with effect from 01.01.1986. It was

also observed that similarly situated persons need not approach the

Court individually for the same relief. Relevant paragraphs of the

same is reproduced as under –

     “We do not find any reasonable nexus in fixing two revised scales of
     pay for the aforesaid 16 types of posts. It is true that the State
     Government could have made out a case that its decision is not
     arbitrary or discriminatory. It could have also come out with a case
     making reasonable classification in relation to the aforesaid 16 types
     of posts, but no such attempt has been made on behalf of State as
     would appear from the counter affidavit. In view of these facts, we
     are clearly of the view that the persons who are working on 16 types
     of posts, enumerated in Annexure 1, are entitled to the scale of Rs.
     1600-2780/- with effect from 01.01.1986 and as decided by State
     Government, while accepting the recommendations of the Fifth Pay
     Revision Committee, they will be entitles to monetary benefits in the
     scale with effect from 01.03.1989. Since the petitioner have been
     appointed on the post or the other, enumerated in Annexure 1, they
     are entitled to the said scale. It is stated that some of the petitioners
     were appointed on 07.10.1988 and some after 01.03.1989. We direct
     that those persons who were appointed on 07.10.88 will be granted
     the scale of Rs. 1600-2790 with effect from that date but the benefit
4
of this scale will be given to them with effect from 01.03.1989. We
       further direct that those persons who were appointed after
       01.03.1989 will be granted the scale of Rs. 1600-2780/- from the date
       of their appointment. We also direct that pursuant to this order,
       arrears amount must be paid to the petitioners within a period of three
       months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order by Junior
       Counsel to learned Standing Counsel No. 4.
We are told that there are several other persons whose case are
       similarly situated but they have not moved this court. We are of the
       view that if cases of those persons are similarly situated, they are not
       required to move this court, but they shall be also granted the same
       scale with similar monetary benefits within the aforesaid time. This
       writ application is accordingly allowed.”
6.     In the meantime, the Fitment Appellate Committee headed by

Hon’ble Mr. Justice (Retd.) Aftab Alam, on 15.01.2000, examined the

anomaly afresh and recommended the uniform revised scale of

₹5000-8000 for all sixteen posts. Relying on the judgment in
Nagendra Sahani
(Supra) and the Fitment Appellate Committee’s

report, the Appellant addressed representations to the Respondent -

Employer, on 01.04.2001 and 27.04.2002, seeking grant of the

higher scale of pay from the date of his appointment. However, these

representations were rejected vide letter dated 13.09.2004. In the

meantime, by promulgation of the
Bihar Reorganisation Act, 20003
,

the State of Jharkhand was carved out of the territory of the State of
3 Act No. 30 of 2000.
5
Bihar, and the services of the Appellant, who was earlier appointed

by the State of Bihar were allocated to the State of Jharkhand.
7.   The Appellant filed W.P.(S) No. 5743 of 2005 before the High

Court of Jharkhand praying for issuance of an appropriate writ to

the Respondent-Employer to grant him pay scale as genuine in place

of anomaly in pay scale in parity with other similarly situated

persons. Vide judgment dated 14.12.2011, the learned Single Judge

of the High Court of Jharkhand, Ranchi allowed the writ petition,

holding that the case was squarely covered by the judgements of the

Patna High Court in
Nagendra
(Supra) and
Alakh Kumar Sinha
(Supra) and directed the State to revise the Appellant’s pay scale

accordingly from the date of his appointment, with arrears and

consequential benefits.
8.   Aggrieved by the judgement of the Single Judge, Respondent -

Employer preferred LPA No. 269 of 2012. The said LPA was initially

dismissed in default on 05.02.2015, however, later restored on

03.09.2015 upon condonation of delay.
9.   Vide impugned judgment dated 30.03.2022, the Division Bench

of the High Court allowed the intra-court appeal and set aside the
6
judgement of the learned Single Judge. Relevant paragraphs of the

impugned judgement are reproduced as under –

            “8. …..in the said order except recording the stand taken by
     the respondent No.1 which was primarily based on the order passed
     in CWJC No. 12301 of 2004 and “Nagendra Sahani and others v.
     State of Bihar and others” we do not find any reference as regards
     objection taken by the State of Jharkhand. From the counter-affidavit
     filed before the writ Court records of which are attached along with
     the present Letters Patent Appeal, we find that the representation
     made by the respondent was rejected by the department of industries
     vide letter dated 13th September 2004, however, the said order was
     not impugned in WP(S) No. 5743 of 2005. We further observe that the
     writ petitioner after more than 20 years of entering into the service
     claimed the benefit from the date of appointment and, therefore, the
     writ petition suffered from inordinate delay for which there was no
     explanation offered by the respondent No.1 before the writ Court. The
     direction issued by the writ Court to grant pay scale of Rs.1600-
     2780/- to the respondent No.1, that is, from the year 1992 is wholly
     wrong as the order has been passed without taking into consideration
     the cascading effect that the said order may have on the entire cadre.
9.    We further find that the respondent decided to approach
     this Court only after the judgment was delivered in CWJC No. 12301
     of 2004 and “Nagendra Sahani and others v. State of Bihar and
     others”. The orders passed by the Hon'ble Patna High Court may have
     persuasive value when a similar issue is dealt with by this Court, but
     then, there would be several other considerations which would weigh
     with the Court while making a final decision in the case, such as,
     whether the matter pertains to some policy decision of the State of
     Jharkhand.
10. For the aforesaid reasons, order dated 14th December
     2011 passed in WP(S) No. 5743 of 2005 is set-aside.”
10. The Division Bench reasoned that the writ petition suffered from

inordinate   delay    of   20   Years      after   the   respondent’s     initial

appointment, the learned Single Judge’s judgment had not addressed

the objections taken by Respondent-Employer in the Counter
7
Affidavit, and that the relief granted could have a cascading effect on

the entire cadre. It was also observed that the judgment of High Court

of Patna in
Nagendra
(Supra) may have a persuasive value when a

similar issue is involved, however, several other considerations would

also have to be weighed in while making a final decision in a case

involving policy decisions of the State.
ARGUMENTS ADVANCED BY THE APPELLANT - EMPLOYEE
11. Learned counsel for the Appellant – Employee, Mr. S.S. Pandey,

contended that the Appellant’s case is squarely covered by the

judgment of the Patna High Court in
Nagendra Sahani
(Supra) and
Alakh Kumar Sinha
(Supra), wherein it was held that all 16

categories of posts arising from the same recruitment process were

entitled to the higher revised pay scale of ₹1600–2780 with effect from

01.01.1986. Additionally, it was held therein that similarly situated

persons need not individually approach the Court for the same relief.
To buttress the said argument, he relied on the judgement of this

Court in
Suprita Chandel v. Union of India4
.
12. It was urged that the Appellant, being identically placed, was

entitled to parity in pay scale from the date of his appointment.


4 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3664
8
Reliance was also placed on the recommendations of the Fitment

Appellate Committee headed by Hon’ble Mr. Justice (Retd.) Aftab

Alam, which recommended uniform revised pay scale for all 16 posts.

It was submitted that the rejection of the Appellant’s representation

on 13.09.2004 was arbitrary and contrary to the law
laid down in
Nagendra Sahani
(Supra). Moreover, the claim did not suffer from

delay or laches inasmuch as the right to parity in pay scale is a

continuing cause of action, and in any case, similarly situated

employees had already been granted such benefits. The counsel

emphasized that the Division Bench erred in observing that there was

a delay of 20 years and ignoring the binding effect of the earlier

judgments while setting aside the well-reasoned judgement of the

learned Single Judge.
ARGUMENTS ADVANCED BY THE RESPONDENT - EMPLOYER
13. Learned Counsel for the Respondent - Employer, Mr. Kumar

Anurag Singh, supported the impugned judgment of the Division

Bench, contending that the Appellant had approached the Court after

an inordinate and unexplained delay of over two decades from the

date of his appointment in 1992, seeking retrospective monetary
9
benefits from the said date. It was urged that such belated claims, if

allowed, would have a cascading financial repercussion on the entire

cadre and upset the settled position of service benefits. It was

submitted that the
Nagendra Sahani
(Supra) judgment of the Patna

High Court, delivered in a different factual context and against the

State of Bihar, could at best have persuasive value, and could not be

automatically applied to the State of Jharkhand without examining

relevant policy considerations. It was also pointed out that the

rejection of the Appellant’s representation in 2004 was never

challenged in the writ petition, and thus had attained finality. The

counsel contended that the learned Single Judge overlooked these

objections and granted relief without considering the State’s stand or

the potential administrative repercussions, which was rightly

interfered with by the Division Bench.
ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS
14. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the rival

submissions and examined the record in detail. The central issue for

determination is whether the Appellant, appointed as Industries

Extension Officer pursuant to a common competitive examination in the

year 1981 and allocated to the State of Jharkhand upon state
10
reorganization in the year 2001, is entitled to removal of anomalies in

his pay scale from the date of his appointment, on parity with other

similarly situated employees and, whether the Division Bench was

justified in reversing the Single Judge’s judgement which granted such

relief?
15. The order impugned was passed mainly on the ground that

except for recording the stand taken by employee, which was

primarily founded upon the decision
Nagendra Sahani
(Supra),

there is no reference therein to any of the objections raised by the

Respondent - Employer. It also weighed to the mind of Division Bench

that the representation of the Appellant had, in fact, been rejected by

the Department of Industries vide letter dated 13th September 2004,

however, the said rejection order was never assailed in WP(S) No.

5743 of 2005. The Appellant approached the writ court after a lapse

of more than two decades from the date of initial appointment,

seeking benefits retrospectively from that very date, without offering

any explanation for the inordinate delay. Consequently, the writ

petition was clearly hit by laches.
It was also observed that the

respondent approached this Court only after the pronouncement of
Nagendra Sahani
(supra) and, while the decisions of the Patna High
11
Court may have persuasive value, they are not binding precedents on

the Jharkhand High Court, particularly when the controversy

concerns a policy decision of the State of Jharkhand.
16.
In view of the foregoing, the main issue raised in the present

appeal may be examined with ancillary issues i.e., whether the

judgment of the Patna High Court in
Nagendra Sahani
(Supra), as

affirmed in subsequent proceedings, was binding upon the State of

Jharkhand in respect of present Appellant-Employee allocated to it

under the Bihar Re-organization Act, 2000? And whether the

Appellant’s writ petition was liable to be dismissed on account of delay

and laches?
17. The first question that arises for consideration is whether the

judgment in
Nagendra Sahani
(Supra) would be binding upon the

State of Jharkhand in respect of employees who were originally

appointed by the State of Bihar but subsequently allocated to

Jharkhand under the
Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000
. In this

respect,
Section 34
of the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000 assumes

significance, which is reproduced as thus –
34. Transfer of proceedings from High Court at Patna to High
     Court of Jharkhand.— (1) Except as hereinafter provided, the High
12
Court at Patna shall, as from the appointed day, have no jurisdiction
     in respect of the transferred territory.
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court at Patna immediately
     before the appointed day as are certified, whether before or after that
     day, by the Chief Justice of the High Court, having regard to the
     places of accrual of the cause of action and both other circumstances,
     to be proceedings which are ought to be heard and decided by the
     High Court of Jharkhand shall as soon as may be after such
     certification, be transferred to the High Court of Jharkhand.

     (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2) of
     this section or in
section 27
, but save as hereinafter provided, the High
     Court at Patna shall have, and the High Court of Jharkhand shall not
     have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals,
     applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for
     review and other proceedings where any such proceedings seek any
     relief in respect of any order passed by the High Court at Patna before
     the appointed day:
Provided that if after such proceedings have been entertained
     by the High Court at Patna, it appears to the Chief Justice of the High
     Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of
     Jharkhand, he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such
     proceedings shall thereupon be transferred accordingly.
(4) Any order made by the High Court at Patna—
(a) before the appointed day, in any proceeding to the High
     Court of Jharkhand by virtue of sub-section (2), or
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court at
     Patna retains jurisdiction by virtue of sub-section (3) shall for all
     purposes have effect, not only as an order or the High Court at Patna,
     but also as an order made by the High Court of Jharkhand.
18. It is apparent that Section 34 of Bihar Re-organization Act, 2000

provides for procedure to be adopted while transferring the

proceedings from High Court at Patna to High Court of Jharkhand.
Section 34(1)
provides that the High Court at Patna would have no
13
jurisdiction in respect of the transferred territory with effect from the

appointed day, subject to certain exceptions.
Section 34(2)
empowers

the Chief Justice of the High Court at Patna to certify and transfer

pending proceedings to the High Court of Jharkhand having regard

to the place of accrual of cause of action and other circumstances.
Section 34(3)
creates exceptions preserving the jurisdiction of the

High Court at Patna to deal with appeals, applications for leave to

appeal, review applications, and other proceedings seeking relief in

respect of orders passed by it before the appointed day, though even

such proceedings could be transferred to the High Court of

Jharkhand if the Chief Justice so directed.
19. Most significantly,
Section 34(4)
provides for the dual effect of

orders passed by the High Court at Patna. It stipulates that any order

made by the High Court at Patna, whether before the appointed day

in proceedings subsequently transferred to the High Court of

Jharkhand under sub-section (2), or in proceedings with respect to

which the High Court at Patna retained jurisdiction under sub-

section (3) "shall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order of

the High Court at Patna, but also as an order made by the High Court

of Jharkhand."
14
20. The legislative intent behind this provision was to ensure

continuity of judicial authority and prevent any vacuum arising from

the re-organisation of the State. As a corollary, the deeming provision

under
Section 34(4)
operates to treat those judgments or orders as

those of the High Court of Jharkhand, entitled to the same respect,

obedience, and implementation as any order passed by the High

Court of Jharkhand.
21. This deeming provision is of seminal importance to the present

case. The judgment in
Nagendra Sahani
(supra), though rendered

by the High Court at Patna on 22.09.1993 i.e., before the State re-

organization, nonetheless, it must be treated by virtue of
Section

34(4)
as binding precedent of the High Court of Jharkhand.
22. From perusal of the impugned order, it appears that this aspect

of law was not taken into account by the Division Bench. Once the

provision of law deems that all the orders and judgements of the High

Court of Patna shall have same effect as an order passed by

Jharkhand High Court, the Division Bench had limited options qua

manner in which it could have treated the judgement in
Nagendra

Sahani
(Supra) - one, to follow the said judgement as a binding

precedent or, two, in case it considered the said judgement to be bad
15
in eyes of law, it could have referred the said matter to a larger bench

for further adjudication.
This position of law is also reflected by a

recent judgement of this court in
Mary Pushpam v. Telvi

Curusumary5
, wherein it was observed as thus –

         “1.    The rule of “Judicial Discipline and Propriety” and the doctrine
         of precedents has a merit of promoting certainty and consistency in
         judicial decisions providing assurance to individuals as to the
         consequences of their actions. The Constitution Benches of this Court
         have time and again reiterated the rules emerging from judicial
         discipline. Accordingly, when a decision of a coordinate Bench of the
         same High Court is brought to the notice of the Bench, it is to be
         respected and is binding subject to right of the Bench of such co-equal
         quorum to take a different view and refer the question to a larger
         Bench. It is the only course of action open to a Bench of co-equal
         strength, when faced with the previous decision taken by a Bench
         with same strength.”                              (emphasis supplied)
23.
In other words, the Division Bench could not have ignored the

ratio of
Nagendra Sahani
(Supra) while stating it to have merely a

persuasive value. Once it is established that the factual matrix is

identical and the legal issue involved is the same, the principle of

judicial discipline demands that similar relief be granted to similarly

situated persons.
24. The next question is whether the writ petition filed by the

Appellant in the year 2005 suffered from delay and laches, having

been instituted approximately 13 years after his appointment in the
5
(2024) 3 SCC 224
16
years 1992. It is well-established that in matters involving pay scale

parity based on removal of anomalies, the cause of action continues

from month to month as long as the anomaly persists. Every month

when the employee receives lesser pay than his similarly situated

counterparts constitutes a fresh cause of action.
In
M.R. Gupta v.

Union of India6
, while adjudicating on the issue of whether claim of

correct pay-fixation was barred by delay and limitation, this court

observed as follows –

         “6. The Tribunal misdirected itself when it treated the appellant's
         claim as “one time action” meaning thereby that it was not a
         continuing wrong based on a recurring cause of action. The claim to
         be paid the correct salary computed on the basis of proper pay
         fixation, is a right which subsists during the entire tenure of service
         and can be exercised at the time of each payment of the salary when
         the employee is entitled to salary computed correctly in accordance
         with the rules. This right of a government servant to be paid the correct
         salary throughout his tenure according to computation made in
         accordance with the rules, is akin to the right of redemption which is
         an incident of a subsisting mortgage and subsists so long as the
         mortgage itself subsists, unless the equity of redemption is
         extinguished. It is settled that the right of redemption is of this kind.
(See
Thota China Subba Rao v. Mattapalli Raju
[AIR 1950 FC 1 : 1949
         FCR 484 : 50 Bom LR 181 : (1950) 1 MLJ 752] ).”(emphasis supplied)
25. In the present case, Appellant filed writ petition before High

Court praying for issuance of an appropriate writ to the Respondent-

Employer to grant him pay scale as genuine in place of anomaly in

pay scale in parity with other similarly situated persons. Therefore,
6
(1995) 5 SCC 628
17
the claim having a continuous cause of action, the plea of limitation

or laches cannot be sustained in this case.
26. Furthermore, the Appellant had made representations to the

employer on 01.04.2001 and 27.04.2002, which were rejected only

on 13.09.2004. The writ petition was filed on 30.09.2005, within a

reasonable time after the rejection of his representations. While

observing that the writ-petitioner claimed the benefits after 20 years

of entering into service, the Division Bench failed to appreciate that

the Appellant was not sleeping over his rights but was pursuing the

remedies available to him through appropriate representations before

approaching the Court.
27. Additionally, we also note that the respondents did not produce

any material on record to show that the case of the present Appellant

is different from those with whom he seeks parity. Therefore, when

other similarly situated employees have already been granted the

benefit through judicial pronouncement, it would be grossly unjust

to deny the same relief to the Appellant. This conclusion is further

substantiated by judgement in
Suprita Chandel
(Supra), wherein

this court observed as thus -
“14.      It is a well settled principle of law that where a citizen
        aggrieved by an action of the government department has approached
18
the court and obtained a declaration of law in his/her favour, others
        similarly situated ought to be extended the benefit without the need for
        them to go to court. [See
Amrit Lal Berry v. Collector of Central Excise,
        New Delhi
, (1975) 4 SCC 714]”
28. The principle laid down is that similarly situated persons

should be extended the benefit of judicial declarations without

approaching the court individually finds full application in the

present case. To hold otherwise would be to encourage multiplicity of

litigation and deny the beneficial effect of judicial pronouncements to

those who are entitled to it.
29. The Division Bench, in our considered view, erred in failing to

appreciate the binding nature of the
Nagendra Sahani
(Supra)

judgment on identically placed employees while also erroneously

applying the doctrine of delay and laches to a continuing cause of

action. Moreover, it gave undue weightage to financial considerations

while ignoring constitutional principles and failed to examine the

merits of the case and the recommendations of various committees

that had acknowledged the anomaly.
The judgment of the learned

Single Judge, on the other hand, correctly applied the ratio of
Nagendra Sahani
(Supra) to the Appellant's case and granted

appropriate relief. The Division Bench's interference with such well-

reasoned judgment was unwarranted and legally unsustainable.
19
CONCLUSION
30. In view of the foregoing detailed discussion, we are of the

considered opinion that the principle of equality enshrined in
Article

14
of the Constitution of India, 1950 brooks no discrimination

between persons who are similarly situated, and any differential

treatment must be based on intelligible differentia having a rational

nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
In the present case, it

is undisputed that the Appellant was appointed pursuant to the same

competitive examination as other employees who have been granted

the higher pay scale on basis of the recommendations of the Fitment

Committee,    Fitment   Appellate    Committee    and   directions   in
Nagendra Sahani
(Supra). The allocation of all the similarly placed

persons along with the Appellant to different departments was purely

administrative and did not involve any merit-based selection or

differentiation in qualifications although their selection was based on

a Common Examination.
31. The statutory provisions of the
Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000
,

particularly
Section 34(4)
, mandate that judicial orders of the Patna

High Court continue to bind the Successor State. The judgment in
Nagendra Sahani
(Supra), which granted identical relief to similarly
20
situated employees inducted through a common recruitment process

that took place in erstwhile Bihar, therefore has binding effect to an

employee of the same recruitment allocated to the State of Jharkhand

in respect of the Appellant.
32. The plea of delay and laches cannot be sustained in a case

involving continuing violation of rights that too in the light of the

nature of directions issued in rem. The Appellant's consistent pursuit

of his claim through representations and the timely filing of the writ

petition after their rejection shows that he was not sleeping over his

rights.   Moreover,   financial   implications   and   administrative

convenience cannot override constitutional guarantees against

arbitrary discrimination. The State, being the model employer,

cannot plead its own inefficiency or negligence to deny legitimate

rights to its employees. The recommendations of various committees

acknowledging the anomaly only reinforces the constitutional

obligation to remove the discrimination.
33. Accordingly, we allow this appeal and set aside the impugned

judgment of the Division Bench dated 30.03.2022, restoring the

judgment of the learned Single Judge dated 14.12.2011. The

directions as contained in the judgement of the learned Single Judge
21
be now complied within three months from the date of this

judgement. The appellant is also entitled to the cost of litigation as

per rules.
34. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
…….…………….…………J.
                                           (J.K. MAHESHWARI)



                                           …….…………….…………J.
                                           (VIJAY BISHNOI)

NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 16, 2025.
22