[Cites
20
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
North Eastern Development Finance ... vs M/S. L Doulo Builders And Suppliers Co. ... on 16 December, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Aravind Kumar
,
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 1446                                                                       REPORTABLE



                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6492 OF 2024




            NORTH EASTERN DEVELOPMENT
            FINANCE CORPORATION LTD. (NEDFI)                                   … APPELLANT

                                                           VS.

            M/S L. DOULO BUILDERS AND SUPPLIERS
            CO. PVT. LTD.                                                     … RESPONDENT




                                                    JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
FACTS
1.          On or about 13th December, 2000, the respondent-Company1

                            approached the appellant-Corporation2 for financial assistance to set

                            up a cold storage unit in the District of Dimapur, Nagaland.
2.          The Corporation agreed to offer financial assistance. To secure the

                            said loan, particularly in view of the provisions of law prevalent in the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
rashmi dhyani pant
State of Nagaland, a couple of agreements were executed on 11th May,
   Date: 2025.12.16
   18:59:59 IST
   Reason:
1
Company, hereafter
2
Corporation, hereafter
1
2001. The first one was a loan agreement3 between the Corporation and

         the Company, the second was an agreement4 between the 5th Model

         Village Council5 and Sh. K. Doulo (Director of the Company), and the

         third was a deed of guarantee by which the Council stood as guarantor

         for the loan disbursed to the Company by the Corporation.
3.   The loan agreement executed by and between the Company and the

         Corporation contained several terms and conditions, which formed

         part of Articles (I) to (VI) and Schedules (I) to (IV) thereto. Relevant

         terms and conditions from such loan agreement read as follows:
ARTICLE III

                                        SECURITY

               3.1       SECURITY FOR THE LOAN
               (A)       The Loan together with all interest, liquidated damages,
               premia on prepayment or on redemption, costs, expenses and other
               monies whatsoever stipulated in this Agreement shall be secured by:-
(a) a first mortgage and charge in favour of the Lenders in a form
                   satisfactory to the Lenders or all the Borrower’s immovable
                   properties, both present and future; and
(b) a first charge by way of hypothecation in favour of the Lenders
                   of all the Borrower’s movables (save and except book debts),
                   including movable machinery, machinery spares, tools and
                   accessories, present and future, subject to prior charges created
                   and/or to be created:-
(i) in favour of the Borrower’s Bankers on the Borrower's stocks
                     of raw materials, semi-finished and finished goods, consumable
                     stores and such other movables as may be agreed to by the
                     Lenders for securing the borrowings for working capital
                     requirements in the ordinary course of business; and
               (B)       The Borrower shall make out a good and marketable title to its
               properties to the satisfaction of the Lenders and comply with all such
               formalities as may be necessary or required for the said purpose.
3.2       CREATION OF ADDITIONAL SECUIRTY
               If, at any time during the subsistence if this Agreement, the Lenders
               is of the opinion that the security provided by the Borrower has
               become inadequate to cover the balance of the Loans then
3
loan agreement, hereafter
4
Second agreement, hereafter
5
Council, hereafter
2
outstanding, then, on the Lenders’ advising the Borrower to that
          effect, the Borrower shall provide and furnish to the Lenders, to their
          satisfaction such additional security as may be acceptable to the
          Lenders to cover such deficiency.
3.3 ACQUISITION OF ADDITIONAL IMMOVABLE PROPERTIES
          So long as any monies remain due and outstanding to the Lenders,
          the Borrower undertakes to notify them in writing of its acquisition of
          immovable properties and as soon as practicable thereafter to make
          out a marketable title to the satisfaction of the Lenders and charge
          the same in favour of Lenders by way of first charge in such form and
          manner as may be decided by the Lenders.
3.4     AGREEMENT OF GUARANTEE
          The Borrower shall procure irrevocable and unconditional personal
          guarantee(s) from Shri Lhoupenyi Doulo and Shri Kevechutso Doulo,
          the main promoters, in favour of the Lenders for the due repayment
          of the Loan and the payment of all interest and other monies payable
          by the Borrower in the form prescribed by the Lenders and to be
          delivered to the Lenders before any part of the loan is advanced. The
          Borrower shall not pay any guarantee commission to the said
          Guarantors.
SCHEDULE – I

                                       THE PROJECT

          The project is to set up a cold storage unit at Model Village, 5th Mile,
          Dimapur, in the state of Nagaland at an estimated cost of Rs.346.00
          lakh.
SCHEDULE – IV

                                  SPECIAL CONDITIONS

          (A)   PRE-DISBURSEMENT CONDITIONS
          Before seeking disbursement of any portion of the assistance, the
          Borrower shall to the satisfaction of the Lenders:
***
(vii)   create security for the total loan sanctioned.
4.   Since, in the State of Nagaland, transfer of any property by any tribal

     in favour of a non-tribal including juristic person is not permitted

     under the extant law, the second agreement came to be executed

     between the Council and Sh. K. Doulo, representing the Company.
3
Having regard to the fact that availing loan from any financial

institution or corporation without placing any property on mortgage

in favour of such institution or corporation is not possible as per the

existing norms, the Council had worked out modalities for Model

Village citizens to avail loan facility from any financial institution or

corporation. Accordingly, the agreement executed by and between

Council and Sh. K. Doulo was executed, inter alia, with the following

agreed clauses:
AGREEMENT

                                         ****
4. In consideration of this agreement and in consideration of Model
      Village Council to stand as surety and guarantor for refund of the said
      loan to North Eastern Development Finance Corporation Ltd., said M/s
      L. Doulo Builders & Suppliers Company Pvt. Ltd. as the beneficial
      owner, do hereby grant, transfer, convey unto the said Model Village
      Council all the assets fully described in the schedule below to hold
      the same absolutely and for ever and/or further to seize and dispose
      off all the mortgaged assts for realisation of the said loan with
      interests, to appoint auditors for examination of all accounts, balance
      sheet and profit and loss accounts of the business of the said M/s L.
      Doulo Builders & Suppliers Company Pvt. Ltd.
5. The term and conditions of this agreement shall not be affected by
      any change in the constitution of the Model Village council nor on the
      death of said K. Doulo representing M/s. L. Doulo Builders & Suppliers
      Company Pvt. Ltd.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto have set and subscribed
      their respective hands and seals the day, month and year first above
      written.
Schedule of the property
       Sl.   Name of the assets           Measurement              Value/Amount
       No.                                                         (in Rs.)
       1     Residential    2      storyed   Area 20,000 sq. ft.   45,00,000
             Building Model Village

       2     Project    site,   Developed    Area 1,07,700 sq.     30,00,000
             Model Village                   ft.
4
3     Residential Plot, Developed   Area 15,000 sq. ft.     10,00,000
                 Model Village

                                            Total                      85,00,000
                               (Rupees Eighty five lakhs only)
5.   Insofar as the deed of guarantee is concerned, the recitals of such

     deed reflect what we have noted above. Inter alia, it was agreed by

     and between the Council and the Corporation as follows:
DEED OF GUARANTEE


                                          ***
          Now this deed witnesses as follow:-
1.      In consideration of North Eastern Development Finance
          Corporation Ltd. having agreed to provide term loan to the extent of
          Rs.200 lakh (Rupees Two hundred lakhs) only to said M/s. L. Doulo
          Builders & Suppliers Company Pvt. Ltd. for the purpose herein above
          indicated, the Model Village Council do hereby guarantee that in case
          the aforesaid Company fail and / or neglect to repay the said loan
          with interests in accordance with the terms and conditions contained
          in the Loan Agreement dated 11th day of May, 2001 mentioned above,
          the Model Village Council shall repay to the North Eastern
          Development Finance Corporation Ltd. such amounts as they may be
          called upon to pay.
2.      This guarantee of the Model Village Council shall be effective
          immediately upon the disbursement of the said loan from the North
          Eastern Development Finance Corporation Ltd. to said M/s. L. Doulo
          Builders Suppliers Company Pvt. Ltd. and shall continue in force until
          and unless the entire amount of loan with interests and other charges
          is fully repaid by said M/s. L. Doulo Builders & Suppliers Company
          Pvt. Ltd.
3. The guarantee hereinbefore mentioned shall not be affected be
          any change in the constitution of the Model Village Council nor on the
          death of said Sri. K. Doulo of M/s. L. Doulo Builders & Suppliers
          Company Pvt. Ltd.
IN WITNESS WHERE OF the parties hereto have set and subscribe
          their respective hands and seals the day, month and year first above
          written.
Schedule of the property
           Sl.   Name of the assets              Measurement           Value/Amount
           No.                                                         (in Rs.)
           1     Residential 2 storyed Building   Area 20,000 sq.      45,00,000
                 Model Village                    ft.

           2     Project site, Developed Model    Area      1,07,700   30,00,000
                 Village                          sq. ft.
5
3     Residential Plot,   Developed   Area 15,000 sq.    10,00,000
                     Model Village                   ft.
                                                     Total              85,00,000
                                   (Rupees Eighty five lakhs) only
6.   Such being the position with regard to the agreements by and

         between the parties, the loan was disbursed to the Company by the

         Corporation. According to the Company, instead of the term loan of

         Rs.2,00,00,000/,    the   Corporation       had   actually    disbursed    Rs.

         1,49,63,580/-. This is denied by the Corporation. According to it,

         upon an application for working capital made by the Company for

         Rs.1,65,00,000/-, over and above Rs.2,00,00,000/-, a further sum

         of Rs.1,00,00,000/- was sanctioned. Unfortunately, the Company ran

         into rough weather and defaulted in honouring its obligation under

         the loan agreement, resulting in initiation of action by the Corporation

         under the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and

         Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 20026.
7.   On 31st August, 2010, the Corporation issued a loan recall notice

         informing the Company that a sum of Rs. 3,44,58,174/- was due and

         payable. The Company was called upon to make payment within 15

         days, failing which appropriate steps were threatened for enforcing

         the securities and realising the dues. The Company failed to respond

         to the notice dated 31st August, 2010, whereupon a demand notice
6
SARFAESI Act
6
dated 30th June, 2011 was issued under
Section 13(2)
of the

         SARFAESI Act, claiming Rs.3,85,28,571/- with interest.
8.   What happened immediately thereafter is not too clear from the

         records. It could be so that the Company sought for time to repay

         the debt which did not find favour with the Corporation. Be that as it

         may, more than 7 years after the notice dated 30th June, 2011 was

         issued, the Corporation preferred to file an original application7 before

         the Debts Recovery Tribunal, Guwahati8 under the Recovery of Debts

         and Bankruptcy Act, 1993 seeking recovery of Rs.7,64,35,358/-.
9.   While such application had proceeded to final hearing upon the

         Company being set ex parte by the DRT, Guwahati (the said order

         was later recalled), the Corporation was successful in obtaining an

         order under
Section 14
of the SARFAESI Act from the Deputy

         Commissioner, Dimapur9. The order dated 16th March, 2019 of the

         Commissioner empowered the Sub-Divisional Officer (C) Sadar,

         Dimapur, to oversee the process of taking over physical possession

         of the assets mentioned therein.
10.      Armed with the order of the Commissioner, on 23rd March, 2019, the

         Corporation took over physical possession of the assets of the

         Company including the cold storage as well as the properties

         belonging to the Directors of the Company.
7
O.A. No.163/2018
8
DRT, Guwahati, hereafter
9
Commissioner, hereafter
7
11.      It was at this stage that the Company invoked the writ jurisdiction of

         the Gauhati High Court by applying under
Article 226
of the

         Constitution of India, 1950. In the writ petition10, the Company

         prayed for quashing of arbitrary and illegal action of the Corporation

         in taking over possession pursuant to the possession notice dated

         23rd March, 2019. A mandamus was also claimed directing the

         Corporation to hand over possession of the properties of the

         Company and the personal properties of its Directors.

OUTCOME OF THE WRIT PETITION
12.      The writ petition was heard by a Division Bench of the High Court.
Vide a judgment and order dated 6th March, 2020, the High Court

         allowed the writ petition and held the notices dated 30 th June, 2011

         and 23rd March, 2019 as well as the order dated 16th March, 2019 as

         wholly illegal and without jurisdiction and, accordingly, set aside the

         same. While the properties, possession of which had been taken over

         by the Corporation in terms of the order of the Commissioner was

         directed to be restored in favour of the Company within 15 days from

         date, the Division Bench clarified that its determination was limited

         to the question of validity of the action initiated by the Corporation

         by invoking the
SARFAESI Act
in the facts and circumstances, and the

         same would not impinge upon the Corporation’s right to recover its

         dues from the Company in accordance with law. Also, such order

         would not come in the way of the Corporation to pursue the
10
W.P(C) No.9241/2019
8
proceedings pending before the DRT, Guwahati for recovery of the

      unpaid debt from the Company or the Council.
13.   Perusal of the impugned order reveals that the High Court did not

      find that any right, title or interest had been validly created in favour

      of the Corporation over any of the tangible and intangible asset of

      the Company. It was also noted that counsel for the Corporation was

      unable to invite the Court’s attention to any such document or

      instrument which created semblance of a right, title or interest of the

      Corporation qua the immovable properties or assets of the

      Corporation or the Council. The reason for which the High Court held

      in favour of the Company and allowed the writ petition, despite

      availability of an alternative remedy under
Section 17
of the

      SARFAESI Act, is that the Corporation failed to establish that any

      security interest was created in its favour either by the Company

      (borrower) or the Council (guarantor) and/or that the Corporation

      was a “secured creditor” within the meaning of
Section 2(1)(zd)
thereof. The High Court reasoned that the deed of guarantee dated

      11th May, 2011 executed by the Council was “merely a guarantee

      agreement without creating any right, title or interest of the lender

      over any of the immovable properties mentioned in the impugned

      notice dated 30.06.2011 or the order dated 16.03.2019. If that be

      so, there is no ‘security agreement’ in this case”. In paragraph 34,

      the High Court held as follows:
“34. In the case in hand, it appears that having realized the bar in
            transfer of ownership of land created by
Article 371A
, the respondent
9
had resorted to a via media for extending the term loan to the writ
             petitioner and had allowed the Model Village Council to accept the
             mortgage of the properties of one of the Directors of the writ
             petitioner company and also to stands as a guarantor of the loan. The
             power of the Village Council to provide security under
Section 12(6)
of the Act of 1978, is limited to providing security for repayment of
             loan obtained by any permanent resident of the village. However, a
             guarantee provided under
section 12(6)
would not amount to a
             “security agreement” under
section 2(zb)
unless such interest is
             created in favour of a secured creditor by following the procedure
             prescribed by the Act of 2002.”


THE APPEAL
14.   Special leave to appeal having been granted on 14th May, 2024, the

      judgment and order dated 6th March, 2020 is assailed by the

      Corporation on multiple grounds which have been canvassed by Dr.

      Manish Singhvi, learned senior counsel for the Corporation.

THE QUESTION
15.   A couple of questions could arise for our determination. However, the

      first question that we are tasked to decide is whether provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
could at all have been invoked by the Corporation against

      the Company by issuing the notice dated 30th June, 2011 under
Section

      13(2)
thereof, seeking to recover of Rs.7,64,35,358/-. Should the

      answer be in the negative, that would mark the end of the lis at least at

      the stage the same has reached.
ANALYSIS
16.   Although, it is recorded in the impugned judgment that learned

      counsel for the Company had not canvassed the plea that action

      taken under
Section 13
of the SARFAESI Act by the Corporation

      contravenes
Article 371A
of the Constitution of India, we find a
10
specific averment in the counter affidavit filed before this Court by

      the Company to the effect that provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
were

      not applicable in the State of Nagaland when the Corporation had set

      in motion the recovery process. In the additional counter affidavit

      too, a plea has been raised that the observation made by the Division

      Bench in paragraph 37 of the impugned judgment and order to the

      effect that the plea of contravention of
Article 371A
was not

      canvassed in course of hearing, though raised in the pleadings, is not

      correct.
17.   We need not examine in depth whether any such plea was raised

      before the High Court for the simple reason that (non)applicability of

      the provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
in the State of Nagaland strikes

      at the root of the matter and being a pure question of law, it can be

      raised even at the appellate stage before this Court.
18.
Section 35
of the SARFAESI Act, though gives overriding effect to the

      provisions   thereof   notwithstanding   anything    to   the   contrary

      contained in any other enactment for the time being in force or any

      instrument having effect by virtue of any such law, the same cannot

      and does not override any provision of the Constitution, to wit,
Article

      371A
thereof in this case which contains special provisions for the

      State of Nagaland.
19.
Article 371A
of the Constitution, to the extent relevant, reads as

      follows:
11
Article 371-A. Special provision with respect to the State of
           Nagaland.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
(a) no Act of Parliament in respect of—
(i) religious or social practices of the Nagas,
(ii) Naga customary law and procedure,
(iii) administration of civil and criminal justice involving decisions
           according to Naga customary law,
(iv) ownership and transfer of land and its resources,
           shall apply to the State of Nagaland unless the Legislative Assembly
           of Nagaland by a resolution so decides;
20.
SARFAESI Act
does envisage transfer of property by auction sale or

      otherwise for realising the secured asset, i.e., the property on which

      security interest is created. Our attention has been drawn to a

      notification dated 10th December, 2021 issued by the Officer on

      Special   Duty,   Finance,    published     in   the   Nagaland      Gazette

      Extraordinary of even date. The notification reads as follows:
“No.FIN/GEN/SLBC/12/2012 (PART-I)::   Dated Kohima, the 10th December, 2021.
In conformity with the special provision conferred by
Article 371A (1)
(a) (iv) of the Constitution of India, the Governor of Nagaland is pleased
         to notify the implementation of the
Securitisation and Reconstruction of
         Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002
(SARFAESI Act, 2002
) in Nagaland with effect from the date of this
         notification.
In so far as the sale of secured assets taken over by the banks and
         financing institutions is concerned, it can be sold only to indigenous
         inhabitants of Nagaland in accordance with provisions of the Nagaland
         Land and Revenue Regulations (Amendment) Act, 2002.”
21.   Bare perusal of the aforesaid notification leads one to the conclusion

      that provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
could be implemented in the

      State of Nagaland with effect from 10th December, 2021, i.e., more

      than two decades after the Company availed loan granted by the

      Corporation.
12
22.      Notably, the SARFAESI Act itself became operational from 21st June,

         2002. Having regard to the statutory ordainment contained therein,

         a secured creditor when faced with a challenge to an action taken by

         it under
Section 13
read with the provisions of the Security Interest

         (Enforcement) Rules, 200211 against a borrower, broadly, must

         satisfy the adjudicator that the borrower has defaulted in payment of

         the secured debt owed by him/it to the secured creditor, that the

         borrower’s account has been classified as a non-performing asset in

         accordance with parameters laid down by the Reserve Bank of India

         and other relevant provisions, that there being an actionable debt,

         the borrower was called upon to discharge the debt within 60 (sixty)

         days by issuance of a notice under sub-section (2), that the security

         interest created in respect of the secured asset in favour of the

         secured creditor has become enforceable in the eye of law with the

         borrower’s objection to the demand notice having failed under sub-

         section (3A) and he/it having not cleared his/its debt within the

         period prescribed, that measures [of the nature specified in sub-

         section (4)] have been taken either invoking
Section 14
or without

         invoking it, and that the secured asset has been dealt with in

         accordance with the Rules.
23.      Since the loan agreement in this case was executed on 11th May, 2001

         and the
SARFAESI Act
became operational from 21st June, 2002,

         question of the Corporation resorting to the provisions of such
11
Rules
13
enactment in respect of a loan agreement executed prior in point of

         time has definitely to be viewed with some degree of caution and

         circumspection in view of a couple of precedents to which our

         attention was drawn. According to Dr. Singhvi, based on these

         decisions (which we propose to deal with a little later) the writ

         petition of the Company should have been dismissed by the High

         Court.
24.      We can take judicial notice of certain accepted banking practices. A

         security agreement may not be contained in a single document.

         Typically,   it   is   a   collection   of   agreements   including   loan,

         hypothecation, guarantee and mortgage agreements. All of these are

         aimed at securing the loan. When a business or project loan is

         granted, the borrower utilises the funds to create business property,

         which becomes the primary security. This can include assets like

         stock, plant and machinery, and raw materials. A separate agreement

         may be entered into, offering land or other property as collateral

         security. The key difference is that primary security involves creating

         a security interest, while collateral security involves transferring an

         interest in the property by the borrower to the lender.
25.      For invocation of the provisions of the
SARFAESI Act
, mortgage is a

         must which, however, is not so for filing an original application under

         the Recovery of Debts and Bankruptcy Act, 199312. An original

         application under the RDB Act can be filed for recovery of both
12
RDB Act, hereafter
14
secured as well as unsecured loans.
Under the SARFAESI Act
,

         however, security interest can be enforced without intervention of

         Court while the procedure under the RDB Act is for execution of the

         decree passed by the jurisdictional Debts Recovery Tribunal upon

         reaching a satisfaction of there being outstanding dues of the lender

         which need to be recovered from the borrower.
26.      As is evident from the factual narrative adverted to by us at the

         beginning of this judgment, the arrangement worked out resulted in

         the Company mortgaging its property to the Council. There is an

         enactment titled
Nagaland Village and Area Councils Act
197813,

         which confers power on the Council to seize and dispose of the

         mortgaged property in case of any default in payment of loan.

         Relevant provisions of the 1978 Act read as follows:
“2. Powers and Duties. – The Village Council shall have the following
                powers and duties:
(1) …
                 …
                 …
                (6) to provide security for due repayment of loan received by any
                permanent resident of the Villages from the Government, Bank or
                financial institution;
…
                (8) to forfeit the security of the individual borrower on his default in
                repayment of loan, advanced to him or on his commission of a breach
                of any of the terms of loan agreement entered into by him with the
                Council and to dispose of such security by public auction or by private
                sale;
…”

         Hence, it was open to the Council to take recourse to the provisions

         of the 1978 Act against the Company which it did not.
13
1978 Act
15
27.   It is also evident from the deed of guarantee dated 11th May, 2001

      that the Council did guarantee that in case the Company failed or

      neglected to repay the loan with interest to the Corporation in

      accordance with the terms of the loan agreement dated 11th May,

      2001, the Council shall repay to the Corporation such amounts as

      they may be called upon to pay. In view of such deed of guarantee,

      the Corporation lacked the authority to invoke the
SARFAESI Act
against the Company. If at all, the sole option available to the

      Corporation was to proceed against the Council in a manner known

      to law.
28.   It is reasonable to presume that the
SARFAESI Act
not being in

      existence on 11th May, 2001, a secured creditor might not have

      thought of creation of any security interest in the secured asset

      including creation of mortgage by deposit of title deeds in terms of a

      security agreement to enforce a secured debt. Indeed, the terms

      ‘secured   creditor’,   ‘secured    interest’,   ‘secured   debt’,   ‘security

      agreement’, etc., all together, are to be found only in the
SARFAESI

      Act
and not in any previous enactment. The Division Bench has held

      in no unmistakable terms that no property was mortgaged by the

      Company in favour of the Corporation. This is an undisputed fact. It

      is, therefore, abundantly clear that the Division Bench of the High

      Court was clearly right in interdicting the actions of the Corporation

      and in allowing the writ petition filed by the Company by returning a

      finding that the action of the Corporation was without jurisdiction.
16
29.      Reliance has been placed by Dr. Singhvi for the Corporation on several

         decisions of this Court to persuade us to overturn the impugned

         judgment and order. We wish to consider three of them, which have

         some relevance and requires our observation.
30.
M.D. Frozen Foods Exports Private Limited v. Hero Fincorp14
is

         the first decision relied on by the Corporation. Two of the issues which

         arose for decision before this Court are -
“(ii) Whether resort can be had to
Section 13
of the SARFAESI Act in
               respect of debts which have arisen out of a loan agreement/mortgage
               created prior to the application of the
SARFAESI Act
to the
               respondent?
(iii) A linked question to Question (ii), whether the lender can invoke
               the
SARFAESI Act
provision where its notification as financial
               institution under
Section 2(1)(m)
has been issued after the account
               became an NPA under
Section 2(1)(o)
of the said Act?”
31.      This Court was called upon to answer these questions premised on a

         different factual situation. Loans had been granted by the respondent

         at a point of time when it was not notified as a financial institution

         within the meaning of
Section 2(1)(m)
of the SARFAESI Act. However,

         the account became a non-performing asset under
Section 2(1)(o)
thereof after the respondent was notified as a financial institution. It

         is in such a factual scenario that this Court had the occasion to

         observe, upon noticing cleavage of judicial opinion at the level of

         several high courts, as follows:
“35. The issue of whether resort can be had to
Section 13
of the
               SARFAESI Act in respect of debts which have arisen out of a loan
               agreement/mortgage created prior to the application of the
14
(2017) 16 SCC 741
17
SARFAESI Act
to the respondent, though urged before us, appears
                 really not to have been canvassed before the learned Single Judge of
                 the Delhi High Court. At least, it finds no substantive mention. We,
                 however, are of the view that in the larger interest of settling the
                 question of law, this issue is also required to be dealt with.
36.
The SARFAESI Act
was brought into force to solve the problem of
                 recovery of large debts in NPAs. Thus, the very rationale for the said
                 Act to be brought into force was to provide an expeditious procedure
                 where there was a security interest. It certainly did not apply
                 retrospectively from the date when it came into force. The question
                 is whether the Act being applicable to the respondent at a subsequent
                 date and thereby allowing the respondent to utilise its provisions with
                 regard to a past debt, would make any difference to this principle.
                 We are of the view that the answer to the same is in the negative.
37.
The Act
applies to all the claims which would be alive at the time
                 when it was brought into force. Thus, qua the respondent or other
                 NBFCs, it would be applicable similarly from the date when it was so
                 made applicable to them.
…
42. Similarly, the date on which a debt is declared as an NPA would
                 again have no impact. We are, thus, of the view that the provisions
                 of the
SARFAESI Act
would become applicable qua all debts owing
                 and live when the Act became applicable to the respondent in terms
                 of the parameters contended by the learned Senior Counsel for the
                 respondent and enlisted at Serial Nos. (i) to (iv) in para 18.”15
32.       What follows from the above is that there has to be creation of a

          security interest. Security interest is defined in
Section 2(1)(zf)
as

          follows:
(zf). “security interest” means right, title or interest of any kind,
                 other than those specified in
section 31
, upon property created in
                 favour of any secured creditor and includes-
15
For completeness of understanding, paragraph 18 is quoted below:
18. On behalf of the respondent, Mr ***, Senior Advocate contended that the effect
          of notifying the respondent as an NBFC to which the
SARFAESI Act
applies, would
          imply that the provisions of the said Act can be used to take recourse to any live
          and actionable debt i.e. a debt in praesenti. In order to invoke the provision, it was
          submitted, four factors are of significance:
(i) Existence of a present actionable debt;
(ii) Status of the person invoking the jurisdiction is that of a secured creditor;
(iii) Assets have been secured in satisfaction of the debt; and
(iv) That the debtor/borrower should have been declared an NPA.
18
(i)     any mortgage, charge, hypothecation, assignment or any
               right, title or interest of any kind, on tangible asset, retained by the
               secured creditor as an owner of the property, given on hire or
               financial lease or conditional sale or under any other contract which
               secures the obligation to pay any unpaid portion of the purchase price
               of the asset or an obligation incurred or credit provided to enable the
               borrower to acquire the tangible asset; or
(ii)    such right, title or interest in any intangible asset or
               assignment or licence of such intangible asset which secures the
               obligation to pay any unpaid portion of the purchase price of the
               intangible asset or the obligation incurred or any credit provided to
               enable the borrower to acquire the intangible asset or licence of
               intangible asset;
33.      We reiterate, no security interest in respect of any property (secured

         asset) was created in favour of the Corporation within the meaning

         of the
SARFAESI Act
and, therefore, the Corporation is not a secured

         creditor. The law
laid down in
M.D. Frozen Foods Exports Private

         Limited
(supra) has to be read in the light of the facts present in the

         appeal before this Court and the issues that arose for consideration.
34.
UCO Bank v. Deepak Debbarma16
is the next decision. The facts

         leading to the sale conducted by the appellant-bank are not discussed

         in detail. However, since the process of recovery had culminated in

         issuance of a sale certificate, which was under challenge in a writ

         petition before the relevant high court and the challenge had

         succeeded, we can presume creation of a security interest in terms

         of the
SARFAESI Act
. In the present case, no security interest was

         created by any security agreement in favour of the Corporation. This

         Court while reversing the decision under challenge was not required
16
(2017) 2 SCC 585
19
to deal with a question that we are in seisin.
In our opinion, reliance

         placed on
UCO Bank
(supra) is misplaced.
35.      The last decision which we wish to touch upon is
United Bank of

         India v. Satyawati Tondon17
. The following observations of this

         Court was placed before us with great emphasis:
“It is a matter of serious concern that despite repeated
               pronouncement of this Court, the High Courts continue to ignore the
               availability of statutory remedies under the DRT Act and the
               SARFAESI Act and exercise jurisdiction under
Article 226
for passing
               orders which have serious adverse impact on the right of banks and
               other financial institutions to recover their dues.”
36.      The aforesaid observation would have no application in a case of the

         present nature where there is no security agreement by which

         security interest has been created in favour of a secured creditor.

         Once we have held that the
SARFAESI Act
was erroneously invoked

         by the Corporation and that such invocation was without jurisdiction,

         there is no question of relegating the Company to the Debts Recovery

         Tribunal under
Section 17
of the SARFAESI Act.
CONCLUSION
37.      For the reasons aforesaid, we agree with the Division Bench and

         uphold the impugned judgment and order. The appeal stands

         dismissed, leaving it open to the Corporation to pursue/seek

         remedies against the Company or the Council in accordance with law.
38.      Since the Council is not a respondent before us, any observation

         made in this judgment may not be read as foreclosing any lawful plea
17
(2010) 8 SCC 110
20
that the Council might raise in proceedings that are initiated against

      it by the Corporation.
39.   Parties shall bear their own costs.
………………………………….……J.
                                                 (DIPANKAR DATTA)




                                            …………………………….…………J.
                                                  (ARAVIND KUMAR)
NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 16, 2025.
21