[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Maram Nirmala vs The State Of Telangana on 16 December, 2025
2025 INSC 1496
                                                                                NON-REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.        OF 2025
                                  (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 7597/2025)


                  MARAM NIRMALA & ANR.                                         ...APPELLANT(S)
                                                      VERSUS


                  THE STATE OF TELANGANA & ANR.                                ….RESPONDENT(S)


                                                   J U D G M E N T
NAGARATHNA, J.
Leave granted.
2.        Although respondent No.2 was served on 10.06.2025, there

                  is no appearance on her behalf.
3. Being aggrieved by the order dated 20.02.2025 passed by the

                  High Court for the State of Telangana at Hyderabad in Criminal

                  Petition No.3995/2023, the appellants are before this Court.
4. Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that respondent

                  No.2 herein is the complainant and appellant Nos.1 and 2 are

                  the       accused   mother-in-law   and    father-in-law,      respectively.

                  Marriage       between     respondent     No.2   and    the    son   of    the

                  appellant(s),
Signature Not Verified
namely,    Maram     Kalyan,      was    solemnised    on
Digitally signed by
NEETU SACHDEVA
12.08.2012 at L.B Nagar, Hyderabad. Out of wedlock, a girl
   Date: 2025.12.23
   16:12:11 IST
   Reason:
child, namely Thanugnya Sri, was born on 01.11.2013.
1
5. On 04.03.2023, respondent No.2 filed a complaint with the

SHO, Women P.S., Nalgonda alleging that at the time of the

marriage, on the demand made by her husband and his family

members, respondent No.2’s family had given Rupees Four Lakhs

Fifty Thousand in cash, 9 tolas (90 gms.) of gold ornaments

and domestic utensils. It was stated that respondent No.2 and

her husband lived happily together for eight years. However,

after the birth of their daughter, the husband of respondent

No.2, influenced by the words of the appellant(s), sister-in-
law and sister-in-law’s husband, started abusing her in vulgar

language and used to beat her, demanding additional dowry of

Rupees Four Lakhs. To resolve the matrimonial discord between

the   parties,   a     panchayat   was   convened   on   the   request   of

respondent No.2 and her family. However, to respondent No.2’s

dismay, her husband did not attend the panchayat meeting.
6.    Thereafter, respondent No.2 filed a complaint with the

SHO, Women P.S., Nalgonda pursuant to which, a counselling

session   for    her    husband    and   appellant(s)    was   conducted,

wherein her husband assured that he would treat his wife and

daughter well. Despite such assurances, respondent No.2 was

severely beaten by her husband and his family, including the

appellant(s) herein, who demanded additional dowry. In view of

the foregoing circumstances, respondent No.2 was forced out of

her matrimonial home. Furthermore, respondent No.2, for the
2
past two years, was trying to contact her husband, but he did

not respond to her phone calls, abandoning respondent No.2 and

their daughter without any financial or emotional support.
7. Subsequent to the aforesaid complaint, on 04.03.2023, FIR

bearing No.28/2023 came to be registered with P.S. Nalgonda

Women    P.S.,    District      Nalgonda       against   six    accused    persons

including the appellant(s) herein for the offences punishable

under Sections 498A, 323, 504 read with
Section 34
of the

Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, “
IPC
”) and under
Section 4
of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (for short, “
DP Act
”). On

18.03.2023, after completion of the investigation, the I.O.,

Women    PS,   Nalgonda,       filed    a     chargesheet    bearing     No.38/2023

against the accused persons under Sections 498A, 323, 504 read

with
Section 34
of the IPC and under
Section 3
and
4
of the DP

Act.     A case bearing C.C. No.338/2023 was committed to the

Special      Judicial    First        Class     Magistrate     (Prohibition     and

Excise Offence) at Nalgonda (for short, “trial court”).
8.     The   trial    court,     by    its     order   dated    02.05.2023,     took

cognisance of the offences under Sections 498A, 323, 504 read

with
Section 34
of the IPC and under
Section 3
and
4
of the DP

Act     alleged      against     respondent         No.2’s     husband    and   the

appellant(s) herein.
3
9.    Being    aggrieved,   the     appellant(s)      preferred      a   petition

bearing Criminal Petition No.3995/2023 before the High Court

under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for

short, “
CrPC
”), seeking quashing of the proceedings in C.C.

No.338/2023 pending before the trial court.
10. By the impugned order dated 20.02.2025, the High Court

recorded      its   unwillingness     to    interfere    with    the     criminal

proceeding pending against the appellant(s) and disposed of

the    quashing     petition   by    reserving       liberty    to   apply   for

discharge before the concerned court.
11. We have heard learned counsel for the appellant(s) and

learned       counsel   appearing     for        respondent    No.1/State     and

perused the material on record. As already noted, respondent

No.2 has failed to appear before this Court.
12. The appellant(s) herein are the mother-in-law and father-

in-law of respondent No.2. They had filed a petition under
Section 482
of the CrPC seeking quashing of the proceedings

instituted against them in C.C. No.338/2023 pending on the

file of the Judicial First Class Magistrate (Prohibition and

Excise offence) at Nalgonda alleging offences punishable under

Sections 498-A, 323, 504 read with
Section 34
of the IPC and
Sections 3
and
4
of the DP Act.
4
13. By the impugned order, the said criminal petition has been

disposed of reserving liberty to the appellant(s) herein to

seek discharge in accordance with law. Hence, this appeal.
14. The case at hand pertains to allegations of cruelty and

dowry      demand     made       by     the        respondent         No.2   against       the

appellant(s) herein. A bare perusal of the FIR however, shows

that the allegations made by respondent No.2 are vague and

omnibus     inasmuch        as    there       is    an     absence     of    any    specific

instance     or     occasion      detailed          with    particulars       wherein       the

appellant(s)        demanded          dowry    from        respondent        No.2    and     on

refusal of the same, subjected her to mental and physical

cruelty.     The     only    allegations            levelled      by    respondent         No.2

against the appellants herein are that subsequent to the birth

of   her    daughter,       the       conduct       of     her   husband      underwent      a

change, which is stated to have been on account of the alleged

inducement exercised by the in-laws including the appellant(s)

herein for the purpose of demanding additional dowry and that

pursuant     to     the   counselling          conducted         at    the   Women    Police

Station, Nalgonda, although the husband of respondent No.2 and

his family assured that she would be treated properly, they

nevertheless continued to subject respondent No.2 to mental

and physical cruelty.
15. We therefore find that the aforesaid allegations levelled

against the appellant(s), even if taken at their face value,
5
do not     prima facie     disclose the commission of the alleged

offences    so   as   to    warrant   the   initiation   of   criminal

proceedings.
16.   During the course of submissions, learned counsel for the

appellant(s) brought to our notice the judgment of this Court

in the case of Dara Lakshmi Narayana vs. State of Telangana,

(2025) 3 SCC 735 (“Dara Lakshmi Narayana”) as well as other

judgments which squarely apply to this case.         We have perused

the same.
17.   This Court speaking through one of us (B.V. Nagarathna,

J.) in Dara Lakshmi Narayana, while dealing with the issue of

quashing of criminal proceedings instituted by the respondent

wife therein against her husband and in-laws who were charged

with offences punishable under
Sections 498A
of the IPC and
Sections 3
and
4
of the DP Act, 1961, held as follows:
“27. A mere reference to the names of family
         members in a criminal case arising out of a
         matrimonial     dispute,     without     specific
         allegations indicating their active involvement
         should be nipped in the bud. It is a well-
         recognised   fact,   borne    out   of   judicial
         experience, that there is often a tendency to
         implicate all the members of the husband's
         family when domestic disputes arise out of a
         matrimonial   discord.   Such   generalised   and
         sweeping accusations unsupported by concrete
         evidence or particularised allegations cannot
         form the basis for criminal prosecution. Courts
         must exercise caution in such cases to prevent
         misuse of legal provisions and the legal
         process and avoid unnecessary harassment of
         innocent family members. In the present case,
6
Appellants 2 to 6, who are the members of the
family of Appellant 1 have been living in
different cities and have not resided in the
matrimonial house of Appellant 1 and Respondent
2 herein. Hence, they cannot be dragged into
criminal prosecution and the same would be an
abuse of the process of the law in the absence
of specific allegations made against each of
them.
xxx
30. The inclusion of
Section 498-A
IPC by way
of an amendment was intended to curb cruelty
inflicted on a woman by her husband and his
family, ensuring swift intervention by the
State. However, in recent years, as there have
been a notable rise in matrimonial disputes
across the country, accompanied by growing
discord and tension within the institution of
marriage, consequently, there has been a
growing tendency to misuse provisions like
Section 498-AIPC as a tool for unleashing
personal vendetta against the husband and his
family by a wife. Making vague and generalised
allegations during matrimonial conflicts, if
not scrutinised, will lead to the misuse of
legal processes and an encouragement for use of
arm twisting tactics by a wife and/or her
family. Sometimes, recourse is taken to invoke
Section 498-A
IPC against the husband and his
family in order to seek compliance with the
unreasonable demands of a wife. Consequently,
this Court has, time and again, cautioned
against prosecuting the husband and his family
in the absence of a clear prima facie case
against them.
xxx
31. We are not, for a moment, stating that any
woman who has suffered cruelty in terms of what
has been contemplated under
Section 498-A
IPC
should remain silent and forbear herself from
making a complaint or initiating any criminal
proceeding. That is not the intention of our
aforesaid observations but we should not
encourage a case like as in the present one,
where as a counterblast to the petition for
dissolution of marriage sought by the first
7
appellant, husband of the second respondent
             herein, a complaint under
Section 498-A
IPC is
             lodged by the latter. In fact, the insertion of
             the said provision is meant mainly for the
             protection of a woman who is subjected to
             cruelty in the matrimonial home primarily due
             to an unlawful demand for any property or
             valuable security in the form of dowry.
However, sometimes it is misused as in the
             present case.
xxx
34. We, therefore, are of the opinion that the
             impugned FIR No. 82 of 2022 filed by Respondent
             2 was initiated with ulterior motives to settle
             personal scores and grudges against Appellant 1
             and his family members i.e. Appellants 2 to 6
             herein. Hence, the present case at hand falls
             within Category (7) of illustrative parameters
             highlighted     in
Bhajan     Lal [State      of
             Haryana v. Bhajan Lal
, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335 :
1992 SCC (Cri) 426] . Therefore, the High
             Court, in the present case, erred in not
             exercising the powers available to it under
             Section 482CrPC and thereby failed to prevent
             abuse of the Court's process by continuing the
             criminal prosecution against the appellants.”

                                                    (underlining by us)
18.    Having regard to the facts and circumstances of this case,

we    find    that     the   judgment    of    this     Court   in   Dara   Lakshmi

Narayana would apply.            Hence, the impugned order of the High

Court is set aside. The proceedings instituted against the

appellant(s) in C.C. No.338/2023 pending on the file of the

Judicial       First     Class   Magistrate          (Prohibition     and    Excise

offence)       at    Nalgonda    stand        quashed    in     relation    to   the

appellants herein.
8
19. The appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms.
Pending application(s) if any shall stand disposed of.
…………………………………………………J.
                                         [B.V. NAGARATHNA]



                                         …………………………………………………J.
                                         [R. MAHADEVAN]
NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 16, 2025.
9