[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Bhagyashree Bisi vs Animesh Padhee on 18 December, 2025
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
2025 INSC 1464                                                       NON-REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO………………………OF 2025
                               (ARISING OUT OF SLP(CIVIL) NO. 25584 OF 2024)


                         BHAGYASHREE BISI                            ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                     VERSUS

                         ANIMESH PADHEE                            ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                                 JUDGMENT
VIKRAM NATH, J.
1.   Leave granted.
2.   The present appeal arises out of the impugned order dated
                              8th August 2024 passed by the High Court of Orissa at
                              Cuttack in MATA No.279 of 2023, whereby the High Court
                              affirmed the decree of divorce granted by the Family Court.
3.   The facts giving rise to the present appeal, in brief, are as
                              follows:
3.1. The appellant-wife and the respondent-husband were
                               married on 14th December 2014 at Sambalpur, Odisha.
3.2. At the time of marriage, the appellant-wife was employed
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
with Infosys and was residing in the United States of
   NEETU KHAJURIA


                               America. In February 2017, she returned to India and
   Date: 2025.12.18
   18:09:34 IST
   Reason:
thereafter commenced cohabitation with the respondent-
1
husband in Bangalore, India. Differences subsequently
     arose between the parties.
3.3. In the year 2021, the appellant-wife was deputed by her
     employer to the United States and accordingly she
     travelled abroad.
3.4. On 9th May 2022, the respondent-husband instituted C.P.
     Case No.65 of 2022 before the Family Court, Sambalpur
     under
Section 13
of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 seeking
     dissolution of marriage on the ground of desertion. It was
     averred that the appellant-wife had left the matrimonial
     home during the intervening night of 24th–25th January
     2020 and had not returned thereafter, thereby deserting
     the respondent for a continuous period exceeding two
     years.
3.5. The appellant-wife contested the said proceedings,
     asserting that she had left the matrimonial home on 19th
     January 2020 to visit her brother due to an allegedly
     hostile environment created by the respondent, including
     demands for money. She further stated that on 20th
     January   2020,     she   had    transferred     a     sum    of
     Rs.3,00,000/-   (Rupees      Three   Lakhs     only)   to    the
     respondent-husband’s      account,   and     denied     having
     deserted the respondent-husband.
3.6. The Family Court, by judgment and order dated 5th
     August 2023, allowed the petition filed by the respondent-
2
husband and dissolved the marriage by granting a decree
      of divorce on the ground of desertion.
3.7. Aggrieved thereby, the appellant-wife preferred an appeal
      before the High Court in MATA No.279 of 2023.
3.8. The High Court, by the impugned order, dismissed the
      appeal and affirmed the findings of the Family Court as
      well as the decree of divorce.
3.9. Aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the appellant-wife is
      before this Court.
4.   We have heard Mr. Nikhil Goel, learned senior counsel
     appearing for the appellant-wife, and Mr. Rajiv Kumar
     Choudhry, learned counsel appearing for the respondent-
     husband.
5.   During the course of hearing, learned senior counsel for
     the appellant-wife submitted that the appellant-wife is
     agreeable to a decree of divorce by mutual consent.
     However, it was contended that the decree ought not to be
     founded on the ground of desertion, as according to the
     appellant-wife, she had not abandoned the respondent-
     husband and had left India on account of her professional
     obligations, while remaining open to communication.
6.   Learned counsel appearing for the respondent-husband
     fairly stated that the respondent-husband is also agreeable
     to the marriage being dissolved by mutual consent, and
     has no objection to the exercise of this Court’s powers
3
under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India, instead of
     sustaining the decree on the ground of desertion.
7.   It is evident from the record that the parties have been
     living separately for a considerable length of time. Efforts
     at reconciliation have not yielded any positive outcome,
     and both parties have expressed their unequivocal desire
     to bring the marital relationship to an end. In the
     circumstances, the marriage has irretrievably broken
     down, and there remains no scope for restoration of the
     matrimonial bond.
8.   Having regard to the above, and in order to do complete
     justice between the parties, the decree on the ground of
     desertion is set aside. As agreed we deem it appropriate to
     dissolve the marriage by exercising our powers under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India on the consent of
     the parties.
9.   The   issue    of   permanent   alimony   also   arises   for
     consideration. Both the parties are working and earning
     well for themselves. In order to bring finality to all claims
     arising out of the matrimonial relationship, it would be
     appropriate to settle the same by way of a one-time lump-
     sum payment as a token.
10. Taking into account the overall facts and circumstances of
     the case, including the financial status of the parties, who
     are both working professionals, and other attendant
     factors, we are of the view that a sum of Rs. 25 lakhs would
     constitute a just and reasonable amount towards full and
     final settlement, including permanent alimony to be paid
4
within two months. The amount may be deposited with the
    Registry of this Court within the time allowed above. The
    appellant-wife would be entitled to withdraw the same.
11. The Registry shall draw up a decree of divorce upon receipt
    of proof of payment of the aforesaid amount.
12. Upon compliance with the above, any pending civil or
    criminal proceedings between the parties arising out of the
    matrimonial dispute shall stand closed.
13. The appeal is disposed of in the above terms.
14. Pending applications, if any, shall also stand disposed of.
……………………………….J.
                                         [VIKRAM NATH]



                                    ……………………………….J.
                                       [SANDEEP MEHTA]
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER 18, 2025
5