[Cites
25
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Tamil Nadu Generation And Distribution ... vs M/S Penna Electricity Ltd on 16 December, 2025
2025 INSC 1439                                                      REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5700 OF 2014


             TAMIL NADU GENERATION AND
             DISTRIBUTION CORPORATION LTD.                        …Appellant(s)

                                          VERSUS

             M/s PENNA ELECTRICITY LIMITED                        …Respondent(s)


                                            JUDGMENT
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.              The present appeal calls in question the correctness of

             the judgment and order dated 10.07.2013 passed by the

             Appellate Tribunal for Electricity (for short ‘APTEL’) in

             Appeal No.112 of 2012.
2.              The Tamil Nadu Electricity Regulatory Commission (for

             short ‘TNERC’) and the APTEL have concurrently found in

             favour of the respondent. It has been held that the power
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHANDRESH
Date: 2025.12.16
15:54:47 IST
generated by the respondent by the open cycle gas turbine
   Reason:
Page 1 of 40
for the period from 29.10.2005 to 30.06.2006 (hereinafter

called as ‘Relevant Period’) and supplied to the appellant

could not be termed as “infirm power” and that it could only

be treated as “firm power”. The consequence of the said

finding was that the Commercial Operation Date (for short

the ‘COD’) for the Gas Turbine in Open Cyc006Ce was held

to be 29.10.2005 (i.e. the synchronization date) and since

power was delivered on a continuous basis, the appellant

was ordered to pay fixed charges for the relevant period.
3.   Aggrieved, the appellant is in appeal. The principal

argument is that any sale of electricity prior to “COD” would

be infirm power and would entail the supplier only to

variable charges i.e., the cost of the fuel. To support this, the

appellant relies on the clause in the Power Purchase

Agreement (for short ‘PPA’) originally entered on 29.04.1998

and undisputedly amended on 25.08.2004. According to the

appellant, under the PPA, as amended, date of commercial

operation was the day on which the project achieved entry

into commercial operation i.e., 01.07.2006.
Page 2 of 40
4.   The relevant clauses under the PPA dealing with Date of
Commercial Operation are as under: -
“Date of Commercial Operation “means the Day on which
     Project achieves Entry into Commercial Operation””

     “4.2 Entry into Commercial Operation
(a) The Project shall be deemed to have achieved Entry
     into Commercial Operation on the date of issue by the
     Company to the Board of the Certificate of Project
     Completion, provided that the Company shall not be
     entitled to issue such a certificate unless during the
     Capacity Test to establish Entry into Commercial
     Operation conducted pursuant to the provisions of Section
     4.1, the Project achieves a Tested Capacity of at least
     47.52 MW.
(b) If the Tested Capacity at the time of Entry into
     Commercial Operation is more than 55.44 MW then any
     revision in the Contracted Capacity, and the adjustment in
     the Fixed Charges shall be mutually decided between the
     Parties.”

Attention is also drawn to the definition of “infirm power”

under the PPA which reads as follows: -
“ "Infirm Power" means the Electricity produced by the
     Project and delivered to the Board prior to the Date of
     Commercial Operation at the Supply Point, not on any
     request or Despatch Instruction of the Board, in respect of
     which the Board shall pay to the Company, Variable
     Charges calculated as per the formula pursuant to Section
     7.3.”


FINDINGS OF THE TNERC:-
5.   The TNERC recorded the following findings: -
Page 3 of 40
a)     Any PPA executed after the enactment of the
Electricity Act, 2003
, (for short ‘2003 Act’) should have

been placed before the TNERC for approval under
Section 86(1)(b)
of the 2003 Act, but both the parties in

this case have failed to do so.
b)     That the original PPA dated 29.04.1998 and the

amended PPA dated 25.08.2004 which incorporated the

requirements of combined cycle power project were

not placed before the TNERC especially when the

amended PPA was executed after the enactment of the

2003 Act.
c)     Though the original PPA was dated 29.04.1998 and

was based on the notification of the Government of India

dated 30.03.1992 issued by the Ministry of Power under
Section 43A(2)
of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 (for

short the ‘1948 Act’) the notification ceased to have force

from     10.06.2004   i.e.   after   one   year   of     the

commencement of the 2003 Act.
Page 4 of 40
d)     The PPA dated 25.08.2004 should have been

aligned with the 2003 Act and the Regulations framed

thereunder.
e)     Though the TNERC notified the Tariff Regulations

on 03.08.2005,        the   Central    Electricity   Regulatory

Commission         (Terms     and     Conditions     of     Tariff)

Regulations, 2004 (for short ‘CERC Regulations’) were in

force from 01.04.2004 and the PPA should have been

aligned with the CERC Regulations dated 01.04.2004.
f)     Under the CERC Regulations dated 01.04.2004

‘Date of Commercial Operation or COD’ was defined as

under:-
“14(x) ‘Date of Commercial Operation’ or 'COD' in
     relation to a unit means the date declared by the
     generator after demonstrating the Maximum
     Continuous Rating (MCR) or Installed Capacity (IC)
     through a successful trial run after notice to the
     beneficiaries and in relation to the generating station
     the date of commercial operation means the date of
     commercial operation of the last unit or block of the
     generating station;”
g)     Similarly, ‘Declared Capacity’ was defined as

under:-
Page 5 of 40
“14(xi) ‘Declared Capacity’ or ‘DC’ means the
     capability of the generating station to deliver ex-bus
     electricity in MW declared by such generating station
     in relation to any period of the day or whole of the day,
     duly taking into account the availability of fuel;

     Note

     In case of a gas turbine generating station or a
     combined cycle generating station, the generating
     station shall declare the capacity for units and modules
     on gas fuel and liquid fuel separately, and these shall
     be scheduled separately. Total declared capacity and
     total scheduled generation for the generating station
     shall be the sum of the declared capacity and
     scheduled generation for gas fuel and liquid fuel for
     the purpose of computation of availability and Plant
     Load Factor respectively.”
h)     The    TNERC       Regulations      also   had     identical

definitions though it came into force from 03.08.2005.
Under the Regulations, Gas based power projects can

operate in two modes viz., Gas Turbine in Open Cycle

and Steam Turbine in Combined Cycle.
i)     The power dispatched in open cycle on firm basis

as per schedule 6 of the PPA would be firm power and,

therefore, fixed charges are payable on a pro-rata basis

in accordance with schedule 29 of the PPA which

provides for fixed charges on Rs/Kwh basis.
Page 6 of 40
j)    In the case of M/s Aban Power Ltd., the appellant

     had agreed to pay fixed charges and actually made the

     payment.
6.   The appellant carried the matter in appeal to APTEL.

FINDINGS OF APTEL:-
7.   The    APTEL,    by    its   impugned     judgment        dated

10.07.2013, held as follows: -
a)    In view of the proviso to
Section 61
of the 2003 Act

     in which only one year period was provided for saving

     validity   of   the    notification   issued   earlier,     the

     Government of India Tariff Notification dated 30.03.1992

     cannot be relied upon for the amended PPA which was

     entered into on 25.08.2004. In the absence of approval

     of the PPA, it would not become a binding contract

     between the parties.
Regulation 35
of the TNERC

     Regulations relied upon by the appellant would not

     apply as it only applied to Existing Generating Stations

     and the stations in question were              not   Existing

     Generating Stations.
Page 7 of 40
b)   The TNERC correctly relied upon the CERC Tariff

Regulations since under
Regulation 4
of the TNERC

Regulations, the State Commission was to be guided by

the principles and methodologies specified by the

Central Commission for determination of tariff in the

absence of its own Regulations. The Tariff Regulations

framed by the Central Commission under the 2003 Act

provided a separate COD for each of the units of the

Combined Cycle Operation generating stations.
c)   The State Commission was entitled to direct the

alignment of the terms of the PPA with the Rules and

Regulations. The PPA dealt with only one COD for the

Combined Cycle Operation of the plant. The State

Commission Regulations, 2005 also contemplates, like

the Central Commission Regulations, separate CODs for

Open Cycle and Combined Cycle.
d)   Even assuming that the Central Commission

Regulations were not applicable, the only Regulation

that can apply is the State Regulations which also
Page 8 of 40
prescribe different CODs for Gas Turbine generating

     unit and Steam Turbine generating units.
e)   The offer of payment, subject to audit objections

     itself, shows the understanding of the appellant that the

     respondent was entitled to fixed charges during the

     relevant period under the Open Cycle Operation.
8.   We heard Mr. Amit Anand Tiwari, learned senior

advocate and AAG, for the appellant and Mr. Shyam Divan,

learned senior advocate, and Mr. Buddy A. Ranganadhan,

learned senior advocate, for the respondent. We have

perused the records.      We have also read the written

submissions filed by both the parties.
CONTENTIONS OF THE APPELLANT:-
9.   Mr. Amit Anand Tiwari, learned Senior Counsel, made

the following submissions:-
a)   According to the PPA, the COD is only for the

     project, i.e., the combined cycle operation and not for

     the Gas Turbine generator in Open Cycle mode
Page 9 of 40
independent of the Steam Turbine generator. While the

gas turbine generator in the Open Cycle was functional

from 29.10.2005, the combined cycle with the Steam

Turbine Generator was functional only from 01.07.2006.
b)   Any power supplied before the COD is only infirm

power.
c)   That the series of correspondence under which the

respondent admitted that till COD, energy generated by

the plant will be treated as infirm power, and payment

will be made for variable charges only, has not been

appreciated at all by the fora below. In this context, he

referred to the letters dated 17.10.2005 written by the

appellant and the reply dated 28.10.2005 of the

respondent.   The respondent cannot rescind from its

undertaking to receive the price for “infirm power” for

the supply during the relevant period.
d)   Dealing with the Regulations, the learned Senior

Counsel contended that a careful reading of the

definition of ‘COD’ under the CERC Regulations would
Page 10 of 40
show that all that it provides is “what COD is for a unit”

and “what COD is for a generating station”. The

submission of the learned Senior Counsel was that in

any given case, a PPA can prescribe a clause like the

one similar to the prescription in the present PPA as

contained    in   clause   4.2   and   there   is   nothing

irreconcilable between the Regulations and the PPA.
e)   For enforcement of the terms of PPA, the approval

or non-approval of the PPA is not significant. The terms

of the PPA are enforced or not enforced only in cases

where they are in direct conflict with the regulations or

being against public interest or being contrary to the

parameters of
Section 61
of the 2003 Act, particularly

with respect to the terms of the price of the electricity

purchased.
f)   The respondent received the benefits under the

PPA and cannot seek to contend that the PPA was not

approved.
Page 11 of 40
g)   The   TNERC     and    APTEL    have    erroneously

interpreted the CERC Regulations to find a case of

conflict between the Regulations and the PPA.
h)   Even if the interpretation of the respondent, on the

aspect of the Regulations, that it envisages a COD for

open cycle generation is to be accepted, there is

nothing within the regulations that mandates it.
i)   That capacity testing and reliability testing was

done between 28.06.2006 and 01.07.2006 and COD was

achieved only on 01.07.2006 for the respondent’s unit.
j)   Reliance placed on M/s Aban Power is misplaced

as the supply of power by M/s Aban Power was at the

request of the appellant.
k)   If the appellant had known that higher price was

required to be paid, it would not have accepted the

supply at all and would have looked for supply from

more economic sources.
Page 12 of 40
l)   Accepting the contention of the respondent would

    be contrary to public interest because higher prices will

    have to be recovered from the general public.
m) In
State of Himachal Pradesh vs. JSW Hydro

    Energy Ltd.
, 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1460, it has been

    held that parties cannot wriggle out of contractual

    obligations when there is no prohibition in the

    Regulations.
CONTENTIONS OF THE RESPONDENT: -
10. Mr. Shyam Divan and Mr. Buddy A. Ranganadhan,

learned senior counsels, submitted the following :-
a)   No approval was obtained by the appellant, which

    was the distribution licensee, for the PPA under
Section

    86(1)(b)
of the 2003 Act.
b)   Where there is a conflict between an unapproved

    PPA and the concerned notification and regulations, it is
Page 13 of 40
the provision in the said notification and regulations

which would hold the field.
c)   Under    the   30.03.1992    notification   of     the

Government of India issued under Section 43A(2) of the

1948 Act, each of the units viz., the Gas Turbine in the

Open Cycle Mode and Gas Turbine and Steam Turbine

in Combined Mode will have separate CODs and the

relevant date is the date of synchronization with the

Grid.
d)   In this case, Gas Turbine in the Open Cycle Mode

was tested for reliability and capacity, and permission

for synchronizing the unit with the Grid was granted and

power was supplied on a continuous basis. Reliance was

placed on the letter dated 10.11.2005 of the respondent

to the appellant pointing out about the synchronization

of the gas turbine unit with the grid of TNEB on

29.10.2005. It was also pointed out in the letter that as

per the Commissioning procedure, respondent had

reached the base load of the gas turbine generator and
Page 14 of 40
it will deliver continuously power at 30 MW under open

cycle operation on a firm basis.     Indeed, there was

continuous supply during the relevant period. Hence,

the power supplied was firm power.
e)   The   CERC     Regulations   came   into   force    on

01.04.2004 and the TNERC Regulations 2005 was

notified on 03.08.2005. Under
Regulation 4
of the TNERC

Regulations, the State Commission, while determining

the tariff, has to be guided by the principles and

methodologies specified by the Central Commission.

Hence, there was absolutely nothing illegal in the

TNERC placing reliance on the CERC Regulations. In

any event, the State Regulations were also broadly on

identical terms, though they came into force on

03.08.2005.   The CERC Regulations additionally had

express definitions for “Infirm Power”, “Small Gas

Turbine Power Generating Station” and “Unit” in the

following terms:-
Page 15 of 40
“(xv) ‘Infirm Power’ means electricity generated
     prior to commercial operation of the unit of a
     generating station;
(xxiii) ‘Small Gas Turbine Power Generating
     Station’    means      and      includes   gas
     turbine/combined cycle generating stations with
     gas turbines in the capacity range of 50 MW or
     below;
(xxiv) ‘Unit’ in relation to a thermal power
     generating station means steam generator,
     turbine-generator and auxiliaries, or in relation
     to a combined cycle thermal power generating
     station,     means     turbine-generator     and
     auxiliaries;”
f)   That even under the 30.03.1992 Regulations issued

under Section 43A(2) of the 1948 Act, the COD of the

individual unit was the date of synchronization.
g)   The CERC Regulations which came into force on

01.04.2004 and the TNERC Regulations which were

notified on 03.08.2005 also has the “unit” as the basis for

reckoning the COD.
h)   That the PPA was directly in conflict inasmuch as

instead of “unit” as the basis of COD, it dealt with

“Project”. The definition of “Project” in the PPA was to

the following effect :-
Page 16 of 40
“ ‘Project’ means the multifuel power station based
     on gas based Combined Cycle Gas Turbine
     technology proposed to be established by the
     Company in or near Valantharavi, Ramnad District
     in the State of Tamil Nadu, India, comprising the
     plant equipment, all plant machinery, ancillary
     equipment, land, buildings and infrastructure and
     other facilities, ancillary and related establishment
     erections, conveniences and all installations,
     control and protective panels, PLCC equipment at
     both the ends i.e., at the switchyard of the
     Company and as well as at the substation of the
     Board,     communication       facilities   such   as
     telemetering facilities including RTUs at the
     switchyard of the Company, and devices including
     transformer stepping up voltage to Grid System
     requirements, along with facilities and space for
     installation of VSAT terminal.”
i)     Attention was drawn to Clause 4.2 of the PPA which

also spoke of ‘project’ and the need for 47.52 MW

capacity for entering into commercial operation. This is

possible only when both the Gas and the Steam turbines

were commissioned in combined cycle. This militated

against the regulations and since it is not an approved

PPA, any interpretation placed should align the PPA with

the regulations. If it is so aligned, from the date of

commencement of the operation of the Gas Turbine unit

on 29.10.2005 i.e., the synchronization date, and as long
Page 17 of 40
as continuous supply was ensured, pro-rata payment of

     fixed charges along with variable charges for the power

     supply ought to have been made. There was no error in

     the order of the fora below.
j)    That when expert bodies like TNERC and APTEL

     have taken a view, this Court should be slow in

     interfering. Further, the civil appeal did not raise any

     substantial question of law as mandated under
Section

     125
of the 2003 Act.
k)    That   similarly   placed   generating   company,

     namely, M/s Aban Power Limited was granted the

     benefit of fixed charges when the respondent was

     denied the same.
l)    The judgment in
State of Himachal Pradesh
(supra) is distinguishable.
11. Both parties referred to certain case laws in support of

their propositions.
Page 18 of 40
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS:-
Electricity (Supply)       Act,     1948
&     the    30.03.1992
Notification:-
12. Prior to the coming into force of the 2003 Act, the 1948

Act provided for the rationalization of the production and

supply of electricity.     Section 43A dealt with the terms,

conditions and tariff for sale of electricity by Generating

Company.
Section 43A
of the Act read as under: -
“43A. TERMS, CONDITIONS AND TARIFF FOR SALE
     OF ELECTRICITY BY GENERATING COMPANY. –

     (1) A Generating Company may enter into a contract for
     the sale of electricity generated by it-
(a) With the Board constituted for the State or any of the
     States in which a generating station owned or operated
     by the company is located;
(b) With the Board constituted for any other State in
     which it is carrying on its activities in pursuance of sub-
section (3) of Sec. 15-A; and
(c) With any other person with consent of the competent
     Government or Governments.
(2) The tariff for the sale of electricity by a
     Generating Company to the Board shall be
     determined in accordance with the norms regarding
     operation and the Plant Load Factor as may be
laid
     down by
the Authority and in accordance with the
Page 19 of 40
rates of depreciation and reasonable return and such
      other factors as may be determined, from time to
      time, by the Central Government, by notification in
      the Official Gazette:
Provided that the terms, conditions and tariff for such
      sale shall, in respect of a Generating Company, wholly
      or partly owned by the Central Government, be such as
      may be determined by the Central Government and in
      respect of a Generating Company wholly or partly
      owned by one or more State Governments, be such as
      may be determined, from time to time by the
      Government or Governments concerned.”
                                           (Emphasis supplied)
13. As will be noticed, under Section 43A(2) of the 1948 Act,

the tariff for the sale of electricity by a Generating Company

to the Board was to be determined in accordance with the

norms regarding operation and the Plant Load Factor as may

be
laid down by
the Authority and in accordance with the

rates of depreciation and reasonable return and such other

factors that may be determined, from time to time, by the

Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette.
14.   By virtue of powers under Section 43A(2), the Central

Government (Ministry of Power) issued a notification on

30.03.1992. Under the said notification, for Thermal Power

Generating Stations (including gas and Naphtha based
Page 20 of 40
stations), there was to be a two-part tariff for the sale of

electricity.    It was to consist of the recovery of annual

capacity (fixed) charges consisting of interest on loan capital,

depreciation,     operation   and     maintenance     expenses

(excluding fuel), taxes on income reckoned as expenses,

return on equity and interest on working capital at a

normative level of generation on the one hand and energy

(variable) charges covering fuel cost recoverable for each

unit of energy supplied based on certain prescribed norms

and Plant Load Factors on the other. The said notification

prescribed that the date of commercial operation for gas and

Naphtha based units was to be the date of synchronization.

The notification also prescribed the method of computation

of annual capacity (fixed) charges.
PPA OF 29.04.1998:-
15. When this notification was in vogue, on 29.04.1998, a

Power Purchase Agreement was entered into between Tamil

Nadu Electricity Board, the predecessor of the appellant

(prior to unbundling) and M/s DLF Power, the predecessor of
Page 21 of 40
the respondent.   The predecessor of the respondent was

selected through the international process of competitive

bidding pursuant to Request for Qualification (RFQ) and

Request for Proposal (RFP) for setting up small capacity,

multifuel power projects in the State of Tamil Nadu issued by

the Tamil Nadu Industrial Development Corporation Limited

in 1996 to develop, procure, finance, construct, own, operate

and maintain the project and sell electricity generated

therefrom to the Board. The Board agreed to purchase all

such electricity from the project as per the terms and

conditions of the Agreement.         Admittedly, when this

Agreement was entered into, the 2003 Act was not in force

and, as such, the approval under Section 86(1)(b) of the 2003

Act could not have arisen.
THE ELECTRICITY ACT, 2003
16. The 2003 Act came into force on 10.06.2003 and was

enacted to consolidate the laws relating to generation,

transmission, distribution, trading and use of electricity and

generally for taking measures conducive to development of
Page 22 of 40
electricity industry and so on.
Part VII of the Act
deals with

Tariff.
Section 61
provided for Tariff regulations and

authorized the Appropriate Regulatory Commission, subject

to the provisions of the Act, to specify the terms and

conditions for the determination of tariff, and in doing so, the

Commission was to be guided by the principles prescribed

thereon. Some of the prescriptions are:
a)   that the principles and methodologies specified by

     the Central Commission for determination of the tariff

     applicable to generating companies and transmission

     licensees;
b)   that the generation, transmission, distribution and

     supply of electricity are conducted on commercial

     principles;
c)   that     the     factors     which   would      encourage

     competition,        efficiency,   economical     use   of     the

     resources,      good        performance        and     optimum

     investments; and
Page 23 of 40
d)    that safeguarding of consumers’ interest and at

     the same time, recovery of the cost of electricity in a

     reasonable manner.                      (Emphasis supplied)
17.
Section 61
had a proviso which reads as under:-
“Provided that the terms and conditions for determination
     of tariff under the
Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948
(54 of
     1948), the
Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998
(14 of 1998) and the enactments specified in the Schedule
     as they stood immediately before the appointed date,
     shall continue to apply for a period of one year or until the
     terms and conditions for tariff are specified under this
     section, whichever is earlier.”

Under the proviso, the old regime was to operate for one

year or until the terms and conditions for tariff are specified

under
Section 61
, whichever was earlier.               The one-year

period expired on 10.06.2004.
18. When the matter stood thus, w.e.f 01.04.2004, the CERC

in exercise of powers under Section 178 of the 2003 Act

framed the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission

(Terms and Conditions of Tariff), Regulations, 2004. We will

revert to these Regulations a little later. Going back to the

2003 Act,
Section 62
provided for determination of tariff by
Page 24 of 40
the appropriate Commission and
Section 62(1)
reads as

under:-
“62. Determination of tariff. -(1) The Appropriate
     Commission shall determine the tariff in accordance with
     the provisions of this Act for--
(a) supply of electricity by a generating company to a
            distribution licensee:
Provided that the Appropriate Commission may,
            in case of shortage of supply of electricity, fix the
            minimum and maximum ceiling of tariff for sale or
            purchase of electricity in pursuance of an
            agreement, entered into between a generating
            company and a licensee or between licensees, for
            a period not exceeding one year to ensure
            reasonable prices of electricity;
(b) transmission of electricity;
(c) wheeling of electricity;
(d) retail sale of electricity:
Provided that in case of distribution of electricity in
     the same area by two or more distribution licensees, the
     Appropriate      Commission        may,    for    promoting
     competition among distribution licensees, fix only
     maximum ceiling of tariff for retail sale of electricity.”
19.
Section 63
is set out hereunder:-
“63. Determination of tariff by bidding process.-
    Notwithstanding anything contained in
section 62
, the
    Appropriate Commission shall adopt the tariff if such tariff
    has been determined through transparent process of
    bidding in accordance with the guidelines issued by the
    Central Government.”
20. What is important is also to notice that
Section 79
prescribed the functions of the Central Commission and
Page 25 of 40
Section 86 prescribed the functions of the State Commission.

Section 86(1)(b), which is relevant for the case at hand, reads

as under:-
“86. Functions of State Commission.
(1) The State Commission shall discharge the following
     functions, namely:--
(a) xxx xxx
(b) regulate electricity purchase and procurement
     process of distribution licensees including the price at
     which electricity shall be procured from the generating
     companies or licensees or from other sources through
     agreements for purchase of power for distribution and
     supply within the State;”



CERC REGULATIONS, 2004
21. Reverting back to the CERC Regulations of 2004, which

came into force on 01.04.2004, as explained in the earlier

part of the judgment, it defined the ‘Date of Commercial

Operation’ or COD in relation to a unit and in relation to the

generating station. It also defines ‘Declared Capacity’ as

well as ‘Infirm Power’ which have already been set out

hereinabove.
Page 26 of 40
22.
Regulation 14(xxiv)
defined the “unit” as follows:-
“Unit” in relation to a thermal power generating station
     means steam generator, turbine-generator and
     auxiliaries, or in relation to a combined cycle thermal
     power generating station, means turbine-generator and
     auxiliaries”
Regulation 15
sets out the components of tariff which reads as

under:-
“15. Components of Tariff: (1) Tariff for sale of
     electricity from a thermal power generating station shall
     comprise of two parts, namely, the recovery of annual
     capacity (fixed) charges and energy (variable) charges.
     (2) The annual capacity (fixed) charges shall consist of:
(a) Interest on loan capital;
(b) Depreciation,       including   Advance   Against
          Depreciation;
(c) Return on equity;
(d) Operation and maintenance expenses; and
(e) Interest on working capital.
(3) The energy (variable) charges shall cover fuel cost.”


AMENDED PPA OF 25.08.2004: -
23. What is, however, crucial for the present matter is the

PPA between the parties came to be amended on 25.08.2004.

While the first PPA was with reference to diesel engine

based generation and tariff was fixed at Rs.2.374102 per unit,

in the amended PPA, the tariff was to be 2.2798 per unit.
Page 27 of 40
Further, there was change in location, change in fuel and

change in technology in the generation.
ALIGNING PPA WITH THE REGULATIONS: -
24. Rejecting the argument of the appellant that
Section 63
of the 2003 Act would also protect the amended PPA, the

APTEL rightly held as under:-
“34. According to the Appellant, the original PPA which
    had been entered into between the parties based on the
    tariff based competitive bidding process and therefore,
    the State Commission ought to have merely adopted the
    determined tariff
u/s 63
of the Act, 2003.
35. The First Power Purchase Agreement was
    executed on 29.4.1998 with reference to the Diesel
    Engine Based Generation Technology. In the said
    Agreement, the tariff was fixed as Rs.2.374102. During
    the year, 2002, the Government of Tamil Nadu
    approved the change of location, change of fuel and
    change of technology with an amendment to the tariff.
Thereupon, the amended Power Purchase Agreement
    was entered into on 25.8.2004. As per this Agreement,
    the tariff was to be Rs.2.2798 per unit. Therefore, the
    amended Power Purchase Agreement dated 25.8.2004
    was virtually a new Power Purchase Agreement
    executed between the parties. Admittedly. (1) There
    was a change in location (2) there was a change in fuel
    (3) there was a change in technology in the generation
    and (4) a change in the tariff also. Therefore, the
    amended PPA dated 25.8.2004 in which the entire base
    had been altered. could not be linked to the First
    Power Purchase Agreement dated 29.4.1998 executed
    pursuant to the selection of the Project under Tariff
    based competitive bidding during 1996.
Page 28 of 40
36. The competitive bidding undertaken in the year 1996
     cannot be said to be a bid undertaken in terms of the
     guidelines issued after the
Electricity Act, 2003
was
     enacted.
37. In other words, the principle propounded by the
     Appellant would apply only to the competitive bids under
     taken after 10.6.2003 i.e. the date of enactment of
Electricity Act, 2003
that too, in accordance with the
     guidelines issued by the Government of India pursuant to
Section 63
of the Act, 2003.
38.
Section 63
of the Electricity Act, 2003 relates to the
     determination of the tariff by bidding process
     notwithstanding anything contained in
Section 62
which
     empowers the State Commission to determine the tariff in
     accordance with the provisions of the
Electricity Act,
     2003
. Even
Section 63
of the Act, 2003 does not dispense
     with the mandatory approval of the Power Purchase
     Agreement by the State Commission as provided
u/s 86
of
     the Electricity Act, 2003. Admittedly, in this case, the PPA
     had not even been placed before the State Commission
     for approval. Hence, the question of application of
Section
     63
of the Electricity Act, 2003 would not arise.
39. As a matter of fact, u/s 62 of the
Electricity Act,
     2003
, the State Commission is required to determine
     the tariff and accordingly in the present case, the State
     Commission has rightly determined the same by
     invoking
section 62
of the Electricity Act, 2003 as
Section 63
of the Electricity Act, 2003 cannot be
     invoked. As such, there is no infirmity in the finding
     rendered by the State Commission on this issue.”
                                           (Emphasis supplied)
25. It is now well settled that:-
a)   terms and conditions of a PPA are not unregulated

     and are subject to approval by the Commission.
In
Tata

     Power Company Limited vs. Reliance Energy Limited
Page 29 of 40
and Others1
,.
In
Tata Power
(supra), it was held as

          under:
“108. A generating company, if the liberalisation and
               privatisation policy is to be given effect to, must be
               held to be free to enter into an agreement and in
               particular long-term agreement with the distribution
               agency; terms and conditions of such an agreement,
               however, are not unregulated. Such an agreement is
               subject to grant of approval by the Commission. The
               Commission has a duty to check if the allocation of
               power is reasonable. If the terms and conditions
               relating to quantity, price, mode of supply, the
               need of the distributing agency vis-à-vis the
               consumer, keeping in view its long-term need are
               not found to be reasonable, approval may not be
               granted.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
b)      In
KKK Hydro Power Limited vs. Himachal

          Pradesh State Electricity Board Limited and Others
2,

          this position was reiterated. It was held thus:-
“26. This provision3 puts it beyond the pale of doubt
               that fixing of the price for the purchase of electricity is
               not a matter of private negotiation and agreement
               between a generating company and a distribution
               licensee. The price as well as the agreement, i.e., PPA,
               incorporating such price and providing for purchase of
               electricity at that price necessarily have to be
               reviewed and approved by the State Commission
               under this provision. The order dated 09.02.2010
               passed by the Commission, without reference to the
               appellant's case, required only those existing PPAs
1
(2009) 16 SCC 659
2 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1847
3
Section 86(1)(b)
of the 2003 Act
Page 30 of 40
which stipulated the tariff of Rs. 2.87/- per kWh to be
            amended so as to give effect to the enhancement of
            tariff from Rs. 2.87/-per kWh to Rs. 2.95/- per kWh.
This order had no application at all to the case of the
            appellant as its PPA dated 11.03.2008 did not stipulate
            the tariff of Rs. 2.87/- per kWh. In this scenario, the
            appellant and the HPSEB were bound to approach the
            Commission to secure its approval before they could
            effect any enhancement of the tariff stipulated in the
            PPA dated 11.03.2008. Without doing so, the appellant
            and the HPSEB, on their own and without the
            Commission's review and approval, enhanced the tariff
            from Rs. 2.50/- per kWh to Rs. 2.95/- per kWh under
            their supplementary PPA dated 10.09.2010!”
c)      Secondly, it is also well settled that even existing

       PPAs had to be modified and aligned with the

       regulations made by the Regulatory Commission. See
PTC India Limited vs. Central Electricity Regulatory

       Commission
, through Secretary4.
In para 66 of
PTC

       India
(supra), it was held thus:
“66. While deciding the nature of an order (decision)
            vis-à-vis a regulation under the Act, one needs to
            apply the test of general application. On the making
            of the impugned 2006 Regulations, even the
            existing power purchase agreements (PPA) had to
            be modified and aligned with the said Regulations.
            In other words, the impugned Regulations make an
            inroad into even the existing contracts. This itself
            indicates the width of the power conferred on CERC
            under
Section 178
of the 2003 Act. All contracts
            coming into existence after making of the

4 (2010) 4 SCC 603
Page 31 of 40
impugned 2006 Regulations have also to factor in
        the capping of the trading margin. This itself
        indicates that the impugned Regulations are in the
        nature of subordinate legislation. Such regulatory
        intervention into the existing contracts across the
        board could have been done only by making
        regulations under
Section 178
and not by passing an
        order under
Section 79(1)(j)
of the 2003 Act. Therefore,
        in our view, if we keep the above discussion in mind, it
        becomes clear that the word “order” in
Section 111
of
        the 2003 Act cannot include the impugned 2006
        Regulations made under
Section 178
of the 2003 Act.”
                                           (Emphasis supplied)
26. In this case, the original PPA was of 29.04.1998. The

2003 Act gave a one-year window till 10.06.2004 and when

the Central Regulations came into force on 01.04.2004, the

PPA entered into on 25.08.2004 should have been aligned

with the CERC Regulations is the case of the respondent. In

any event, the respondent submits that the State Regulations

came into force on 03.08.2005 which were broadly identical

with the Central Regulations and, as such, the PPA ought to

have been aligned is the respondent’s case.                The only

counter to this by Mr. Amit Anand Tiwari, learned Senior

Counsel for the appellant, is that the regulations are not in

conflict with the PPA.
Page 32 of 40
27. The crucial question for determination is whether the

PPA, as amended on 25.08.2004, is in conflict with the CERC

Regulations and the TNERC Regulations of 2005.
28. Under the PPA date of Commercial Operation meant the

day on which project achieved entry into Commercial

Operation.   As briefly discussed hereinabove, the PPA in

Clause 4.2 provided “entry into commercial operation from

the date of issue of certificate of project completion.”          It

further stated that such a certificate shall not be issued unless

during the capacity test to establish entry into commercial

operation conducted pursuant to the provisions of
Section

4
.1, the project achieves a tested capacity of at least 47.52

MW. This clearly meant that unless both the gas turbine in

the open cycle and the steam turbine in the combined cycle

is both completed and synchronized to the grid, capacity of

47.52 MW cannot be achieved.
29. The Regulations, on the other hand, clearly prescribed

that the COD in relation to a unit meant the date declared by

the generator after demonstrating the Maximum Continuous
Page 33 of 40
Rating [MCR] or Installed capacity [IC] through a successful

trial run.   It further prescribes that in relation to the

generating station, the COD means the date of commercial

operation of the last unit or block of the generating station.

Further, the definition of declared capacity or DC meant the

capability of the generating station to deliver ex-bus

electricity in MW declared by such generating station in

relation to any period of the day or whole of the day, duly

taking into account the availability of fuel. Further, the note

appended states that in case of a gas turbine generating

station or a combined cycle generating station, the

generating station shall declare the capacity for units and

modules on gas fuel and liquid fuel separately, and these

shall be scheduled separately. Total declared capacity and

total scheduled generation for the generating station shall be

sum of the declared capacity and scheduled generation for

gas fuel and liquid fuel for the purpose of computation of

availability and Plant Load Factor respectively. There is a

clear dichotomy between the Regulations and the PPA.
Page 34 of 40
30. The fora below have rightly taken the view that PPA was

not in tune with the Regulations and that the PPA ought to be

aligned since it does not recognize COD in relation to a unit.

Further, in this case, during the relevant period, power has

been continuously drawn and the appellant is seeking to

classify it as infirm power only by falling back on the

definition of ‘entry into commercial operation’ in the PPA.

The definition of ‘Infirm Power’ under the Regulations state

that Infirm Power means electricity generated prior to

commercial operation of the unit of a generating station. The

reason for payment of variable charges alone for Infirm

Power is that the payment before the commencement date

amounts to reduction in capital.
‘FIRM’ VS. ‘INFIRM’ POWER
31. The question here is, is the power generated during the

relevant period continuously up to 153 million units from the

gas turbine open capacity of 30 MW after all trials is firm or

infirm power? Applying the Regulations, we have no doubt

in our mind that it is firm power and that for the said period,
Page 35 of 40
as rightly held by the fora below, the respondent was

entitled to fixed charges. Further the mandate under
Section

61(d)
of the 2003 Act, is that in the determination of tariff

recovery of the cost of electricity in a reasonable manner is

to be ensured. The respondent, having supplied continuous

power, cannot be denied the annual fixed charges for the

relevant period, and if it were done so, they will permanently

lose that amount, which will be unjust and contrary to law.
32. The argument of Mr. Amit Anand Tiwari, learned Senior

Counsel, that the letters constitute waiver and/or estoppel

also does not appeal to us. We have perused the letters. The

letter dated 17.10.2005 of the appellant to the respondent in

para three states that till the COD, energy generated by the

plant will be treated as infirm power and payment will be

made for variable charges only as per clause 5.3 of the PPA.

The respondent wrote back on 25.10.2005 stating that once

the capacity and performance of the Gas Turbine Generator

and auxiliaries were established, they will commit firm

power to the appellant which may be treated as firm power.
Page 36 of 40
This was the request of the respondent. The appellant wrote

back on 28.10.2005 stating in para 2 that till the date of COD

the energy generated by the plant will be treated as infirm

power only and only variable charges will be paid. On the

very same day, the respondent wrote back, inter alia, saying

that para 2 of the appellant’s letter of 28.10.2005 was

agreeable to them. The letters take us back to the issue of

COD and it really begs the question as to what the

commercial operation date was. We have extended the

definition of ‘COD’ as it prevails under the regulations.

Hence, we reject the argument based on estoppel and

waiver advanced by the appellant.
33. The further argument that the State Regulations came

only after the amended PPA also is not appealing. As rightly

found by the fora below, the Central Regulations operate as

guiding factors under
Regulation 4
of the State Regulations

and in any event when the State Regulations came into force

on 03.08.2005, the PPA can only be read in a manner as to be
Page 37 of 40
aligned with the State regulations. That is the mandate of the

law.
34. The argument of the appellant that capacity testing and

reliability testing was done between 28.06.2006 and

01.07.2006 and COD achieved only on 01.07.2006 also is not

tenable.   The letter of the respondent dated 10.11.2005

clearly brings out the fact that w.e.f. 29.10.2005, they

followed the commissioning procedures, reached the

baseload of the gas turbine generator and that the unit along

with its auxiliaries was running trouble-free and will be able

to deliver continuously power at 30 MW under open cycle

operation on a firm basis.    In fact, there was continuous

supply from 29.10.2005.
35. Further, the judgment in
The State of Himachal

Pradesh
(supra) is distinguishable inasmuch as in the said

case, this Court found that legal effect of cap on free supply

of power was not to override the contractual obligations

between the parties. Further, it was held that the regulation

therein covered a situation where, in cases where the
Page 38 of 40
obligation to supply free power to the State was in excess of

13%, only free power up to 13% would be considered for

tariff determination. The Court understood the contractual

obligation to supply power in excess of free power as a form

of “royalty” payable to the State in lieu of being allowed to

utilize river water which was a public and common resource.
The State of Himachal Pradesh
(supra) turned on its own

facts.
36. There was considerable debate at the Bar as to whether

M/s Aban Power Ltd. was identically situated.      We have

considered the rival submissions. Considering that we have

independently found for the respondent and its entitlement

for fixed charges for the relevant period, the aspect of

whether M/s Aban Power Ltd. was identically situated need

not detain us any further.
CONCLUSION: -
37. For all these reasons, we find no good ground to

interfere with the impugned judgment.         The judgment

passed by the TNERC directing that fixed charges shall be
Page 39 of 40
payable for the relevant period as affirmed by the APTEL in

the impugned judgment dated 10.07.2013 in Appeal No. 112

of 2012 calls for no interference and the said directions are

affirmed. The appeal is dismissed. No order as to costs.
38. On 25.08.2014, while passing an interim order staying

the judgment of the Tribunal, this Court directed the

appellant to pay a sum of Rs. 50 Crores to the respondent,

without prejudice to the rights and contentions of either

party. It is not disputed that the said amount has been paid.

In terms of our directions, the balance amount, if any, shall

also be paid to the respondent within a period of 12 weeks

from today.
……….........................J.
                                      [J. B. PARDIWALA]


                                     ……….........................J.
                                    [K. V. VISWANATHAN]

  New Delhi;
16th December, 2025
Page 40 of 40