[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Mission Accessibility vs Union Of India on 3 December, 2025
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
2025 INSC 1376




                                                            REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                 WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025

                            MISSION ACCESSIBILITY             ….PETITIONER(S)

                                                   VERSUS

                            UNION OF INDIA & ORS.             ….RESPONDENT(S)


                                               JUDGMENT
Mehta, J.
1.   The measure of a just and inclusive society lies

                            not merely in the freedoms it proclaims, but in the

                            opportunities, it ensures for all its citizens to realize

                            their fullest potential. Equality, in its truest sense,

                            demands not uniformity but the removal of barriers

                            that prevent individuals from standing on equal

                            footing. The Constitution of India envisions a

                            Republic where every person, regardless of physical
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2025.12.03
16:56:02 IST
Reason:
1
or sensory limitation, can participate with dignity in

the nation’s collective journey. The law, as an

instrument of justice, must therefore move beyond

formal equality to ensure substantive inclusion,

transforming rights from written promises into lived

realities. It is in this spirit that the present writ

petition comes before this Court, seeking not

privilege, but parity; not indulgence, but the rightful

fulfilment of the constitutional vision of equal

opportunity for all.
2.     The instant writ petition has been instituted by

Mission Accessibility1, an organisation engaged in the

advancement            of    the      rights       of   persons   with

disabilities, for enforcing the rights of persons with

disabilities to equal opportunity guaranteed to them

under the Constitution of India and the Rights of

Persons with
Disabilities Act, 2016
. The directions


1 Hereinafter, beingreferred to as “petitioner”.
2
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
sought by way of this writ petition include, inter alia,

the modification of the timeline for scribe registration

in the Civil Services Examination conducted by

Union Public Service Commission2 and for permitting

the use of laptops equipped with Screen Reader

Software along with accessible digital question

papers for eligible candidates. For the sake of ready

reference, the reliefs sought in the writ petition are

reproduced hereinbelow: -
“In light of the facts and submissions stated
     hereinabove, the Petitioner humbly prays that this
     Hon’ble Court may graciously be pleased to issue a
     writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ,
     order, or direction in the following terms:
A. Declare and hold that the Impugned Requirement
     is arbitrary, unreasonable, and violative of
Articles
     14
, 16
and
21
of the Constitution of India, as well as
     the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities Act, 2016
.
     B. Direct the Respondent No. 2 to remove the
     mandatory requirement of furnishing scribe details
     at the time of application submission and instead
     permit visually impaired candidates to provide such
     details at a reasonable time closer to the
     examination date.
C. Direct the Respondent No. 2 to modify the
     application process for the Civil Services
     Examination, 2025, which allows candidates with
     disabilities to modify their scribe details at any time
2 Hereinafter, referred to as “respondent No. 2-UPSC”.
3
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
     before any given stage of the Civil Services
     Examination.
D. Direct the Respondent No. 2 to allow the use of
     laptops with screen readers for visually impaired
     candidates at all stages of the Civil Services
     Examination.
E. Direct the Respondent No. 2 to provide question
     papers in accessible digital formats for candidates
     with disabilities opting for the same.
     F. Pass any other order/direction as may be deemed
     just and proper in the interests of justice, equity and
     good conscience.”
3.     This Court vide order dated 6th May, 2025

allowed the impleadment of Department of Personnel

and Training (DoPT) as respondent No. 3 and directed

the counsel representing respondent No. 2-UPSC to

have     a    dialogue     with     counsel      representing

respondent No. 3-DoPT regarding the apprehensions

and concerns of the candidates appearing in Civil

Services Examination. Learned counsel representing

respondent No. 2-UPSC was also directed to file an

appropriate affidavit of the competent officer with

respect to the change of scribe. The said order is

extracted hereinbelow: -
4
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
     “Application (I.A. No.95839 of 2025) seeking
     impleadment of Department of Personnel and
     Training (DoPT) as respondent no.3 is allowed.
     Issue notice.
Ms. Archana Pathak Dave, learned Additional
     Solicitor General, is requested to also appear on
     behalf of the DoPT and obtain necessary
     instructions in light of the deliberations that have
     taken place in Court today.
Mr. Hrishikesh Baruah, learned counsel appearing
     for the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC),
     shall obtain further instructions and have a dialogue
     with Ms. Archana Pathak Dave, learned ASG,
     regrading apprehensions and concerns of the
     candidates.
Mr. Baruah shall also file an appropriate affidavit of
     the competent officer from the UPSC with respect to
     the change of scribe, to be permitted within one
     week.
List the matter on 9th May, 2025.”
4.    In    compliance       of    the    aforesaid     order,

respondent No. 2-UPSC filed an affidavit stating that

it has till now received requests from approximately

27 candidates being Persons with Benchmark

Disability/Persons with Disability (PwBD/PwD) for

change of their scribe details. Respondent No. 2-

UPSC assured that it will examine each and every

such request on merit and revert to the candidates.

It was further stated that a press note with the said
5
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
details has been uploaded on its website after due

approval emphasizing that respondent No. 2-UPSC

will consider each request for change of scribe

received from PwBD/PwD candidates till 18th May,

2025 (04:00 PM) on merit basis. A copy of the press

note was annexed with the affidavit. However, the

affidavit was completely silent in respect of the issue

of providing the screen reader facility to such

candidates.
5.      On 9th May, 2025, when the matter came up for

hearing, this Court perused the aforesaid affidavit

filed    by   respondent     No.       2-UPSC   and   heard

submissions advanced by the parties. This Court

directed that all requests for change of scribe by

eligible candidates under the CSE Rules, 2025 shall

be entertained by respondent No. 2-UPSC till 18th

May, 2025, and each such prayer shall be objectively

considered and decided by a reasoned order within
6
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
three working days from its receipt. Respondent No.

2-UPSC was further directed to file a specific affidavit

clarifying its position on the use of computers with

screen readers by PwBD/PwD candidates in the

forthcoming preliminary examination. For ready

reference, the relevant extract of the said order is

reproduced hereinbelow: -
“6. Ms. Dave, learned ASG appearing on behalf of
    Union of India submitted that under the general
    instructions for preliminary and main examinations
    contained in the Civil Services Examinations Rules,
    2025 (for short ‘CSE Rules, 2025’), certain categories
    of PwD candidates has been given permission to
    avail the facility of scribe. The candidates have the
    discretion of opting their own scribe or request the
    Commission for the same. The details of the scribe
    in case the candidates are bringing their own scribe
    or availing the same through the Commission, will
    be sought at the time of filling up of the online
    application form.
7. Regarding the issue of use of laptops with screen
    readers for visually impaired candidates, Ms. Dave
    has submitted that the same could be examined and
    a suitable decision can be taken by the Commission
    in consultation with the Department for PwD in light
    of the extant instructions issued by the Government
    of India on the subject. Any decision taken in the
    matter would not require an amendment to the CSE
    Rules, 2025.
8. Shri Bajaj has raised certain concerns about the
    criterion for the change of scribe as set out in the
7
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
    affidavit on behalf of the Commission which are
    enumerated hereinbelow: -
“Prescription of a timeline within which such
       requests must be disposed of. It is submitted
       that candidates will need to make suitable
       arrangements based on whether their request
       is allowed or disallowed. For instance, if the
       Commission disallows a candidate's request for
       change of own scribe, the said candidate will
       have to take steps to request the Commission
       for a scribe or try and persuade the previously
       opted for scribe to remain available on the exam
       date. Therefore, clarity and finality on this front
       is important. This Hon'ble Court may be
       pleased to direct that all such requests will be
       disposed of within a period of 3 working days.
       No clarity is given on the grounds on which
       such requests will be allowed or disallowed,
       thereby leaving the candidates in the dark. It is
       therefore prayed that requests for change of
       scribe should be allowed: [i] due to personal
       unavailability of the scribe; [ii] due to medical
       emergencies; or [ii] if the candidate wishes to
       opt for own scribe rather than the
       Commission's scribe. In no other circumstance
       should such requests be allowed.
Required documentary evidence: as of now, the
       public notice is silent on the supporting
       document that needs to be submitted along
       with the request for change of scribe. It would
       be helpful if the said requirement is clearly spelt
       out, to avoid needless back and forth. E.g. any
       evidence of the scribe's medical unfitness, when
       that is the ground on which change is being
       sought, could be asked for along with a
       detailing documents required for the induction
       of the new scribe.”
9. In response, Shri Baruah, learned counsel
    appearing for the Commission submitted that the
    date, i.e., 18th May, 2025 as provided in the press
    note is the last date for submission of the
8
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
     applications for request of change of own scribe. He
     assured that such requests, if received within the
     stipulated time, would be disposed of within a period
     of three working days.
10. Regarding the issue of screen readers, Shri
     Baruah submitted that the portrayal made by the
     writ petitioners that only two candidates in the
     blind/low vision category are aspiring to give the
     examination by screen reader, is not acceptable to
     the Commission because in case a decision is taken
     accepting the proposal for providing screen reader
     facility to PwBD/PwD candidates, such option
     would have to be given to all eligible candidates and
     for the present, the Commission does not have the
     necessary logistical facilities for the forthcoming
     preliminary examination which is scheduled for 25th
     May, 2025. However, he has prayed for a short
     opportunity to file a specific affidavit on this aspect.
11. In view of the submissions noted above, we
     hereby provide that all the requests for change of
     scribe submitted by the concerned candidates
     who are entitled for a scribe in terms of the CSE
     Rules, 2025 shall be entertained till 18th May,
     2025. The Commission shall immediately, upon
     receipt of such application, consider the same
     objectively and communicate the decision
     thereof by a reasoned order to the candidate/s
     concerned within a period of three working days
     from the date of receipt of the application/s.
12. The learned counsel for the Commission shall
     file a specific affidavit addressing the issue of the
     use of computers with screen readers by
     PwBD/PwD candidates in the forthcoming
     preliminary examination.
13. List the matter on 16th May, 2025.”
                                       [Emphasis supplied]
6.    During the course of hearing on 31st October,

2025, the attention of this Court was drawn to the
9
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
additional affidavit dated 12th September, 2025 filed

by respondent No. 2-UPSC. In the said affidavit,

respondent      No.    2-UPSC      stated    that    it   has

comprehensively reviewed the entire issue and has,

in-principle, resolved to introduce the facility of

Screen    Reader      Software     for   visually   impaired

candidates     appearing      in   various    examinations

conducted under its aegis. The affidavit further

recites that while the decision marks a significant

policy advancement towards ensuring accessibility

and inclusion, the necessary infrastructure for its

effective implementation is presently not in place. It

has been averred that respondent No. 2-UPSC does

not maintain its own examination infrastructure, and

is entirely dependent upon the infrastructure,

logistical support, and manpower of the State

Governments, District Authorities, Schools, and

Colleges which are entrusted with the conduct of its
10
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
examinations. Respondent No. 2-UPSC has, however,

assured this Court that upon ensuring the feasibility,

readiness,     and      adequacy       of   the   requisite

infrastructure and software, and after conducting

comprehensive testing to ensure the integrity and

security of the examination process, it shall extend

the facility of Screen Reader Software to visually

impaired candidates in its examinations at the

earliest possible juncture.
7.    The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner

submitted that the petitioner is satisfied with the in-

principle decision taken by respondent No. 2-UPSC

to introduce Screen Reader Software for the benefit of

candidates belonging to the Persons with Benchmark

Disabilities/Persons with Disabilities (PwBD/PwD)

category. However, it was contended that the said

decision, though commendable in intent, lacks a

concrete plan of implementation. Respondent No. 2-
11
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
UPSC has not yet indicated any definitive roadmap,

operational framework, or timeline for equipping the

examination centres with the necessary technological

and    infrastructural     facilities     required    for   full

implementation of its intent, thereby leaving the

matter in a state of uncertainty as regards its

execution.
8.    In response, the learned counsel appearing for

respondent      No.    2-UPSC          submitted     that   the

Commission is presently in active consultation and

coordination with the State Authorities, the National

Institute for the Empowerment of Persons with Visual

Disabilities   (NIEPVD),      and       the   Department     of

Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities, with a

view to finalising the technical standards, operational

modalities, and procedural safeguards necessary for

the introduction of Screen Reader Software and for

ensuring that question papers are made available in
12
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
accessible digital formats for eligible candidates. It

was further submitted that respondent No. 2-UPSC

is fully conscious of the imperative to maintain the

sanctity,    confidentiality,     and     security     of   the

examination       process,    and      that   all    necessary

precautions are being taken to ensure that the

introduction of such assistive technology does not in

any   manner      compromise        the   integrity    of   the

examination system. The learned counsel concluded

by submitting that the facility of Screen Reader

Software shall be made operational and available to

eligible candidates from the next examination cycle,

after due testing and standardisation of the required

infrastructure.
9.    Having heard the learned counsel for the parties

and upon perusal of the additional affidavit dated

12th September, 2025 as well as the other materials

placed on record by respondent No. 2-UPSC, this
13
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
Court is of the considered view that a substantial part

of the grievances raised in the present writ petition

stand duly alleviated. Respondent No. 2-UPSC has

now taken a conscious progressive decision to extend

the facility of Screen Reader Software to visually

impaired candidates in various examinations to be

conducted by it, thereby recognising and advancing

the rights of candidates with disabilities to equal

opportunity and accessibility in public examinations.
10. However, it is equally evident that while the

policy decision has been taken, the mechanism and

modalities for its effective implementation remain to

be streamlined and operationalised. Respondent No.

2-UPSC’s dependence upon external infrastructure

and manpower, coupled with the absence of a clearly

delineated roadmap or timeline for establishing the

requisite      technological           framework   across

examination centres, underscores the need for
14
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
institutional coordination and phased execution.

This Court, therefore, finds it imperative that the

creases in the process for implementation be duly

ironed out through concrete planning, inter-agency

collaboration, and the establishment of uniform

standards, so as to ensure that the laudable objective

of accessibility does not remain confined to paper but

is translated into practical reality in forthcoming

examination cycles.
11. In view of the foregoing discussion and in order

to ensure that the decision taken by respondent No.

2-UPSC is effectively translated into action and the

rights of candidates belonging to the PwBD/PwD

category    are    fully   safeguarded,       the   following

directions are issued to take the matter to its logical

conclusion: -
A. Respondent No. 2-UPSC shall ensure that in

         every    notification    for   the   examinations
15
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
         conducted      by    it,   a   clear    provision     is

         incorporated permitting candidates eligible

         for a scribe to request a change of scribe up

         to at least seven days prior to the date of the

         examination, and such requests shall be

         objectively considered and disposed of by a

         reasoned order within three working days of

         receipt of the application.
B. Respondent          No.      2-UPSC      shall   file   a

         comprehensive compliance affidavit within a

         period of two months from the date of this

         order, clearly delineating the proposed plan

         of action, timeline, and modalities for the

         deployment and use of Screen Reader

         Software for visually impaired candidates in

         the examinations to be conducted by it. The

         affidavit shall also specify the steps proposed

         for testing, standardisation, and validation of
16
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
         the software and              related   infrastructure

         across all or designated examination centres,

         and shall further indicate the feasibility of

         ensuring that the said facility is made

         operational and available to all eligible

         candidates       from         the    next    cycle   of

         examinations.
C. Respondent           No.        2-UPSC        shall,   in

         coordination       with       the    Department      of
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities

         (DEPwD) and the National Institute for the

         Empowerment            of    Persons    with     Visual

         Disabilities (NIEPVD), formulate uniform

         guidelines and protocols for the use of

         Screen Reader Software and other assistive

         technologies      to        ensure   standardisation,

         accessibility, and security of the examination
17
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
         process across all or identified examination

         centres, as deemed fit by it.
D. Respondent No. 1-Union of India, through

         the Department of Personnel and Training

         (DoPT) and the Ministry of Social Justice and

         Empowerment, shall extend all necessary

         administrative and technical support to

         respondent No. 2-UPSC for the expeditious

         implementation of the above measures and

         shall    facilitate   coordination   with   State

         Governments and examination authorities

         wherever required.
E. It is further directed that the implementation

         of these measures shall be undertaken in a

         manner that ensures full accessibility to

         eligible candidates while maintaining the

         sanctity, confidentiality, and fairness of the

         examination process.
18
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
12. The aforesaid directions are being issued to

ensure that the constitutional mandate of equality,

non-discrimination, and the right to live with dignity

enshrined     under
Articles   14
and
21
of   the

Constitution of India, read with the provisions of the

Rights of Persons with
Disabilities Act, 2016
, is

meaningfully implemented, and that the facilitative

measures envisaged by respondent No. 2-UPSC are

operationalised in both letter and spirit within the

stipulated timeframe.
13. Before parting, this Court deems it appropriate

to observe that the true measure of inclusivity in

governance lies not merely in the formulation of

progressive policies but in their faithful and effective

implementation. The rights guaranteed to persons

with disabilities are not acts of benevolence, but

expressions of the constitutional promise of equality,

dignity, and non-discrimination enshrined in Articles
19
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
14, 19, and 21 of the Constitution of India. The Union

Public Service Commission, being the premier

constitutional body entrusted with upholding the

values of merit and fairness in public recruitment,

must ensure that its processes are accessible,

transparent, and sensitive to the needs of every

segment of society. It is therefore imperative that the

directions issued herein are carried out with utmost

earnestness, sensitivity, and expedition, so that the

constitutional vision of equal opportunity and

meaningful participation of persons with disabilities

is not reduced to a distant aspiration, but is realised

as a living, enforceable, and enduring reality in the

conduct of all public examinations in the country.
14. Accordingly, the present writ petition stands

disposed of, in terms of the observations and

directions hereinabove.
20
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025
15. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand

disposed of.
16. List again on 16th February, 2026 for receiving

the compliance affidavit of respondent No. 2-UPSC.
….……………………J.
                                        (VIKRAM NATH)


                                       ...…………………….J.
                                        (SANDEEP MEHTA)
NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 03, 2025.
21
WRIT PETITION (C) NO(S). 206 OF 2025