[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Akola Municipal Corporation vs Zishan Hussain Azhar Hussain on 8 December, 2025
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
2025 INSC 1398




                                                              REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024


                            AKOLA MUNICIPAL
                            CORPORATION AND ANR.                                ….APPELLANT(S)

                                                           VERSUS

                            ZISHAN HUSSAIN
                            AZHAR HUSSAIN AND ANR.                        ….RESPONDENT(S)


                                                     JUDGMENT
Mehta, J.
1.     Heard learned counsel for the parties and
                            perused the material available on record.
2.     The judgment dated 9th October, 2019 in Public
                            Interest Litigation No. 42 of 2018 and order dated
                            24th January, 2020 in MCA (Review) No. 42 of 2020
                            passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of
                            Judicature at Bombay, Nagpur Bench1 are subject
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2025.12.08
18:41:58 IST
Reason:                  1 Hereinafter, being referred to as “High Court”.
1
matter of challenge in these appeals filed by the Akola
Municipal Corporation2.
3.     The aforesaid writ petition in public interest
came to be filed by respondent No.1-Dr. Zishan
Hussain3 with the following prayers.
“i) Issue any appropriate writ, order or direction in
      the nature of mandamus and thereby declare that
      the revision of property tax by the respondent no.2
      Municipal Corporation for the year 2017-18 to 2021-
      22 is illegal, contrary to law and the revision of
      property tax is made without following due process
      of law;
ii) Issue any appropriate writ, order or direction and
      thereby quash and set aside revision of property tax
      by respondent no.2 Municipal Corporation for the
      year 2017-18 to 2021-22 in the interest of justice;
iii) Stay the effect and operation of the revision of
      property tax by respondent no.2 Municipal
      Corporation for the year 2017-18 to 2021·22 in the
      interest of justice”
4.     The      appellant-Corporation              took        a    specific
objection in its written submissions filed before the
High Court regarding the grievances sought to be
agitated by way of the public interest litigation, viz.,
the challenge to the jurisdiction of the Corporation to
levy/revise the rates of property tax. Specific
averments made in paragraph Nos. 9 and 11 of the
written       submissions           filed     by     the       appellant-
2 Hereinafter, being referred to as “appellant-Corporation”.
3 Hereinafter, being referred to as “respondent-writ petitioner”.
2
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
Corporation explaining the detailed procedure for
increasing the rate of property tax are germane to the
controversy. For the sake of ready reference, the
aforesaid paragraphs are reproduced hereinbelow: -
“9. The Petitioner has rightly stated in Para 5 of his
    petition that the assessment, revaluation of taxable
    values was not done from the year 2002 by Akola
    Municipal Corporation. It is submitted that the
    property tax is the main source of income of Akola
    Municipal Corporation. To strengthen the tax
    recovery system there was necessity to re-assess the
    taxable values for the year 2015-2016 till 2020-2021
    and therefore by the Written Communication dated
    01/12/2015 the Respondent No.3 made a request to
    Assistant Director of Town Planning, Akola to
    propose the rate of expected Annual Letting Value
    and ratable value of properties for various categories
    of buildings depending upon their age, location, type
    of constructions, use etc. within the limits of Akola
    Municipal Corporation Accordingly by the Written
    Communication dated 01/01/2016 (Annexure 7)
    the rates wore proposed by the in-charge Assistant
    Director Town Planning, Akola. On the basis of these
    details and other documents, official note (Annexure
    B) was prepared by then Municipal Commissioner
    regarding taking decision of revised rates of
    calculation and valuation of expected letting values
    for entire properties (Buildings and Lands) situated
    within Municipal Limits for the calculation and
    assessment of their ratable value for the period from
    2017-18 till 2021-22 and forwarded it to the
    Municipal Secretary. This official note doesn’t show
    any intention of Respondent Municipal Corporation
    to make changes or fixation of tax rates, i.e.,
    property tax, road tax, fire tax, etc. Since, there was
    no question of fixing the rates of taxes as envisaged
    in Section 99 of the Act, the prior proposal or
    suggestion from the Standing Committee was not
3
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
    required and therefore, the Municipal Secretary
    prepared agenda for the General Body Meeting held
    on 03/04/2017. If the subject No.5 of General Body
    Meeting dated 03/04/2017 (Annexure A) is perused,
    then it will show that it only says about taking
    decision, about the revised rates of entire properties
    (Building and Lands) situated within Municipal
    Limits for calculation of their expected taxable value
    for various, categories and the various policies for
    assessment of taxable. values for the period from
    2017 till 2021-22. Therefore, the objection of the
    petitioner that the criteria mentioned in Sections
    127 and 129 is not followed, is incorrect and
    baseless. At the cost of repetition, the respondent
    Municipal Commissioner says that the rates of taxes
    already fixed in the year 2002 are not disturbed of
    changed or revised by the resolution dated
    03/04/2017.
[……….]
11. The earlier verification of the properties and
    assessment of tax was done during the period of the
    then Akola Municipal Council. After the formation of
    Akola Municipal Corporation on 01/10/2001,
    verification of properties was not done and neither
    the procedure for assessment of tax was carried out.
    In last more than 20 years there was increase in the
    built-up area, changes in use of property, additional
    and new construction on large scale. The revenue
    generated by the old assessment was not sufficient
    to meet the demands of public and development of
    city. Therefore, there was pressing and extreme need
    for setting up an efficient, qualitative and stronger
    tax recovery system. Therefore, in the larger interest
    of Akola City a decision was taken to engage some
    expert agency. who will assist and help the officers,
    of Akola Municipal Corporation it this work. Hence,
    e-tender notice dated 18/02/2016 bearing No.1059
    was published on official website of Government of
    Maharashtra inviting tenders for appointment of
    technical consultant for assisting Municipal
    Corporation for conventional comprehensive door to
4
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
     door survey of land and buildings in the Municipal
     jurisdiction capturing all the details and parameters
     of those properties which are relevant for levy and
     collection of property tax and other Municipal taxes.
     It was also made clear that the selected agency shall
     have to provide property numbers on the satellite
     imaginary and linking the property tax and basic
     information on the satellite image of the properties
     for quick reference by providing the Integrated
     Property information on GIS module in the software
     to be a provided for the property tax assessment by
     the agony. The agency selected will use own
     registered for the purpose of preparation of database
     for assessment and taxation. The software should be
     capable to calculate and adopt the taxation on
     capital value method/ratable value method as per
     the law. After survey, the data should be entered in
     software for calculation of assessment on any one
     method as per corporation viz. capital or ratable
     value based, along with the automated property tax
     assessment      software    module      as  per   the
     requirements of the Municipal Corporation. Total
     GIS work should be completed from contractor. The
     total number of properties in the Municipal Area
     were approximately shown 1,50,000 in the tender.”
5.    A bare perusal of the aforesaid assertions made
by the appellant-Corporation would clearly indicate
that the property tax, which is the main source of
revenue for the appellant-Corporation to undertake
its welfare, and developmental activities had not been
revised since the year 2001.
6.    It cannot be disputed that the tasks assigned to
every municipal body includes urban planning,
public health and sanitation, waste management,
5
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
provision      of     essential      services,       upkeep     of
infrastructure of the cities/towns. These activities
are vital for public welfare and for maintaining the
standard of life of citizens in every city or town, which
are fundamental to ensuring health and dignified
living,   core      requirements     of   the      constitutional
obligations owed to the citizens. Any lapse in these
duties/activities may cause chaos, spread of diseases
and in general adversely affect the quality of life of the
citizens, for the welfare whereof the municipal bodies
are formed to work.
7.    Without        the    generation      of     revenue,   the
municipal bodies cannot be expected to sustain all
these     functions        and    perform        their   statutory
obligations. It cannot be denied that the cost of all
these activities/functions rises with passage of time
and hence, revision in the tax structure on a regular
basis to match the rising costs is unexceptionable. If
the taxes are not revised in keeping with the rise in
cost of infrastructure, human resources, etc., that
would make the municipal bodies defunct and non-
functional.
8.    Municipal            bodies,    being          autonomous
institutions        constituted      under        statutes,   are
6
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
entrusted      with     extensive     and        multifaceted
responsibilities that bear a direct and immediate
nexus to the daily lives, welfare and safety of the
citizens residing within their territorial limits. Their
functional     efficacy,     financial      stability    and
administrative independence are integral to the
discharge of these statutory obligations. It is
therefore imperative that such municipal bodies
possess adequate and independent sources of
revenue to sustain and strengthen their operational
capacities. A       municipal administration that is
compelled to depend upon the State for grants, doles
or other forms of financial largesse would be
structurally weakened and rendered incapable of
performing its statutory duties in a timely and
efficient    manner.     The    scheme      of     municipal
governance envisages financial autonomy as a
necessary concomitant of administrative autonomy;
without      such     independent     revenue-generation
mechanisms, including periodic revision of taxes and
charges as permissible in law, the very purpose for
which these bodies are constituted would stand
frustrated.
7
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
9.    It is in these facts and circumstances, the
respective Municipal Legislations and the Rules
framed     thereunder     give    powers/authorize   the
municipal bodies to take steps for revision in the
rates of property taxes so that adequate revenue may
be generated and the functioning of the municipal
bodies may not be adversely affected for lack of funds.
The fact that the tax structure in respect of properties
falling within the jurisdiction of the appellant-
Corporation had not been revised and the verification
of the properties situated within its jurisdiction, had
not been done from the year 2001-2017, by itself,
depicts gross laxity on part of the authorities
concerned.
10. It must be noted here that while entertaining
the present appeals at the instance of appellant-
Corporation, this Court vide order dated 13th
October, 2020, stayed the operation of the impugned
judgment and order dated 9th October, 2019 passed
by the High Court.
11. We have heard and considered the submissions
advanced by learned counsel for the appellant-
Corporation and learned counsel representing the
respondent-writ petitioner.
8
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
12. At the outset, we feel that the very locus of the
respondent-writ petitioner in filing the writ petition
before the High Court was questionable. The
respondent-writ petitioner, in his writ petition, did
not claim that he was representing the entire
populace of the Akola city. For ready reference, the
opening paragraphs of the writ petition wherein the
respondent-writ petitioner adverted to his locus and
grievances needs to be reproduced hereunder: -
“Being aggrieved by the apparent and manifest
    irrationality in the arbitrary increase of property tax
    by the respondents no.2 and 3 without following due
    procedure of law and the grave procedural
    impropriety in the arbitrary assessments of property
    tax done by the respondent no.2 and 3 through
    Private Contractors contrary to law, the petitioner is
    challenging the arbitrary. Increase of property tax by
    the present writ petition under
Article 226
of the
    constitution of India in public interest, as the
    petition does not have any of the efficacious remedy
    available than the present one for the redressal of
    grievances raised in the present petition. The facts
    which lead to present petition are as follows:
1. That, the petitioner is a citizen of India and
    permanent resident of Akola. The Petitioner is a
    practicing doctor having M.D. (medicine) degree and
    a social worker and corporator of the Akola
    Municipal Corporation.”
13. The respondent-writ petitioner, himself being a
corporator in the appellant-Corporation, it can be
presumed that he would be privy to the functioning
9
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
of the autonomous institution including the tax-
generation structure.
14. A perusal of the opening paragraph (supra) of
the writ petition would clearly indicate that the
grievance of the respondent-writ petitioner is prima
facie directed at the purported irrational and
arbitrary increase of property tax by the appellant-
Corporation by passing a resolution and allegedly
without following the procedure established by law.
The contents of the writ petition would further
indicate that the respondent-writ petitioner never
claimed that he had been authorised or was acting
on behalf of the citizens of the Akola city for
challenging the action of the appellant-Corporation in
revising the tax structure. Thus, apparently the
respondent-writ petitioner has raised his individual
grievance against the action of increase of tax by the
appellant-Corporation by filing a writ petition under
the garb of a public interest litigation.
15. Though it requires to be noted that as per the
respondent-writ petitioner, the public at large,
protested to and filed objections against the issuance
of the public notice by the appellant-Corporation but,
at the same time, the respondent-writ petitioner has
10
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
admitted that these complaints were disposed of
albeit mechanically.
16. There is no dispute that there exists a
mechanism of statutory remedy provided under
Section    406
of   the    Maharashtra     Municipal
Corporations Act, 1949, for challenging the decision
of the Corporations established under the aforesaid
Act. Thus, the writ petition purportedly in public
interest was in fact, nothing but an action taken as a
subterfuge to avoid filing of the appeals against the
proposal to increase the property tax.
17. We may further note that another Division
Bench of the High Court examined a similar
controversy in Writ Petition No. 1115 of 2018 which
came to be dismissed in the following terms: -
“1. Heard.
2. Admittedly, the Municipal Council, Akola-
Municipal Corporation, Akola has not revised
    property tax after 2000-01. Hence, grievance that
    revision proposed on 3/4/2017 exceeds by 60% and
    therefore    violates   statutory  provision,   is
    misconceived.
3. Learned Government Pleader has pointed out that
    Municipal Corporation has specifically looked into
    this facet in Resolution dated 3/4/2017 and has
    noted that since 2001-02 there is no regular
    revision.
4. The petitioner did not come to this Court to
    enforce obligation of Municipal Council-
    Municipal Corporation to revise property tax
11
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
    after every five years. He has chosen to approach
    Government or this Court only after the
    Municipal Corporation started efforts to revise
    the property tax.
5. It is apparent that the Municipal Corporation
    has to revise property tax from 2001-02 and
    recover the same as per law from the residents.
6. We, therefore, find present writ petition
    erroneous. It is dismissed. No costs.”
                                   [Emphasis supplied]
18. Furthermore, the respondent-writ petitioner in
the writ petition has challenged/questioned the
tender floated and work order issued by the
appellant-Corporation to the firm named Sthapatya
Consultancy Pvt. Ltd., for the purpose of survey of
properties situated within the jurisdictional limits of
the appellant-Corporation and assessment of tax. We
are, therefore, of the view that possibility of the writ
petition having been filed to agitate a conflict of
business interest cannot be ruled out.
19. Having gone through the impugned judgment
and the material placed on record, we are of the view
that in the instant case the High Court exceeded the
well-settled tenets of scope of judicial review in
effectively substituting its own opinion for that of the
appellant-Corporation. The matters of tax revision fell
squarely within the domain of the appellant-
12
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
Corporation, and the High Court ought not to have
reassessed the merits of the policy decision as if it
was sitting in appeal over the said decision. Trivial
errors in the process of revision would not vitiate the
entire regime of tax revision and collection.
20. This Court in a catena of decisions has held that
the Court cannot substitute its judgment for that of
the legislature or its agents as to matters within the
province of either.
In this respect, we may gainfully
refer to the observations of a Constitution Bench of
this Court in the case of
Shri Sitaram Sugar Co.
Ltd. v. Union of India4
: -
“57. Judicial review is not concerned with matters of
     economic policy. The court does not substitute its
     judgment for that of the legislature or its agents as to
     matters within the province of either. The court does
     not supplant the “feel of the expert” by its own views.
     When the legislature acts within the sphere of its
     authority and delegates power to an agent, it may
     empower the agent to make findings of fact which are
     conclusive provided such findings satisfy the test of
     reasonableness. In all such cases, judicial inquiry is
     confined to the question whether the findings of fact are
     reasonably based on evidence and whether such findings
     are consistent with the laws of the land. As stated by
     Jagannatha Shetty, J. in Gupta Sugar Works [1987 Supp
     SCC 476, 481] : (SCC p. 479, para 4)
          “... the court does not act like a chartered
          accountant nor acts like an income tax officer.
          The court is not concerned with any individual

4 (1990) 3 SCC 223.
13
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
           case or any particular problem. The court only
           examines whether the price determined was
           with due regard to considerations provided by
           the statute. And whether extraneous matters
           have been excluded from determination.”
58. Price fixation is not within the province of the
     courts. Judicial function in respect of such matters
     is exhausted when there is found to be a rational basis
     for the conclusions reached by the concerned
     authority. ………”
21. This       Court     has     also    held     that      judicial
interference by way of public interest litigation is
available only if there is injury to public because of
dereliction of constitutional obligations on the part of
the Government. The writ jurisdiction of the High
Court cannot be exercised in public interest for
questioning the economic/fiscal policy or reforms
sought to be undertaken by the Government or its
functionaries.
In this regard, we may gainfully refer
to the following observations made by a three-Judge
Bench of this Court in the case of
BALCO Employees’
Union v. Union of India5
: -
“93. Wisdom and advisability of economic policies are
     ordinarily not amenable to judicial review unless it
     can be demonstrated that the policy is contrary to
     any statutory provision or the Constitution. In other
     words, it is not for the courts to consider relative
     merits of different economic policies and consider


5 (2002) 2 SCC 333.
14
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
     whether a wiser or better one can be evolved. For
     testing the correctness of a policy, the appropriate forum
     is Parliament and not the courts. Here the policy was
     tested and the motion defeated in the Lok Sabha on 1-3-
     2001.
[……….]
97. Judicial interference by way of PIL is available if
     there is injury to public because of dereliction of
     constitutional or statutory obligations on the part of
     the Government. Here it is not so and in the sphere
     of economic policy or reform the court is not the
     appropriate forum. Every matter of public interest or
     curiosity cannot be the subject-matter of PIL. Courts
     are not intended to and nor should they conduct the
     administration of the country. Courts will interfere only
     if there is a clear violation of constitutional or
     statutory provisions or non-compliance by the State
     with its constitutional or statutory duties. None of
     these contingencies arise in this present case.
98. In the case of a policy decision on economic
     matters, the courts should be very circumspect in
     conducting any enquiry or investigation and must be
     most reluctant to impugn the judgment of the experts
     who may have arrived at a conclusion unless the
     court is satisfied that there is illegality in the
     decision itself.”
                                         [Emphasis supplied]
22. Recently, in the case of
Kirloskar Ferrous
Industries Ltd. v. Union of India6
, this Court held
as below: -
“54. The doctrine of judicial restraint, which is central to
     this discussion, emphasizes that courts should exercise
     caution and avoid involvement in policy decisions, as
     these are complex judgments that require a balancing of
     diverse and often competing interests. Policies are crafted
     based on thorough analysis of social, economic, and
     political factors, considerations beyond the court's

6 (2025) 1 SCC 695.
15
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
    purview. The court is tasked with ensuring that
    policies do not breach constitutional provisions or
    statutory limits; however, they should not replace
    policymakers' judgments with their own unless
    absolutely necessary.
55. Policy decisions often require the expertise of
    professionals and specialists in fields such as economics,
    public health, national security, and environmental
    science. These domains involve specialized knowledge
    that judges, as generalists in legal matters, may lack. For
    instance, in economic policy, the executive may decide on
    trade tariffs or subsidies based on extensive data and
    projections that aim to balance domestic industry
    support with global trade commitments. The courts,
    lacking the same level of economic expertise and without
    the authority to make trade-offs among competing policy
    objectives, is typically not equipped to second-guess
    these kinds of decisions.
56. While courts have the power of judicial review to
    ensure that executive actions and legislative
    enactments comply with the Constitution, this power
    is not absolute. Judicial review is meant to act as a
    safeguard against actions that overstep legal
    boundaries or infringe on fundamental rights, but it
    does not entail a comprehensive re-evaluation of the
    policy's wisdom. The judicial review of policy
    decisions is limited to assessing the legality of the
    decision making process rather than the substantive
    merits of the policy itself. For example, if a government
    policy infringes on fundamental rights or discriminates
    against a particular group, the courts have a duty to
    strike down such policies. However, in the absence of
    constitutional or legal violations, the courts should
    respect the policy choices made by the executive or
    legislature.
57. The duty of the court in policy-related cases is
    primarily to determine whether the policy falls within
    the scope of the authority granted to the relevant
    body. If the policy decision is within the executive's
16
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
    legal authority and has been made following proper
    procedures, the courts should defer to the expertise
    and discretion of the policy-makers, even if the policy
    appears unwise or imprudent. This restraint ensures
    that the courts do not impose its own perspective on
    policy matters that are rightly the responsibility of other
    branches.
58. Economic and social policies often involve significant
    redistribution of resources, prioritization of interests,
    and balancing of public needs, which requires careful
    consideration by those with specialized knowledge and
    broad perspectives. In the realm of economic policy,
    for instance, questions regarding the allocation of
    subsidies, fiscal deficits, or budget allocations are
    best managed by the executive, which has access to
    economic data and is accountable to the public for its
    financial management. Judicial interference in such
    areas risks creating disruptions in the economic
    balance that policymakers are trying to achieve.
59. Courts should assume that policy-makers act in good
    faith unless there is clear evidence to the contrary. As
    long as the policy does not contravene the
    Constitution or violate statutory provisions, it is not
    the role of the courts to question the wisdom or
    fairness of such policy.
60. While judicial restraint is essential in respecting the
    boundaries of each branch of government, it does not
    mean that courts abdicate their responsibility to protect
    constitutional rights. The courts must still intervene if a
    policy infringes on fundamental rights, discriminates
    unfairly, or breaches statutory provisions. The role of the
    court in such instances is to protect individuals and
    groups from unlawful actions while maintaining the
    overall integrity of the policy-making process. This
    balance ensures that while courts do not interfere in
    matters of policy wisdom, they remain vigilant guardians
    of constitutional rights.”
                                         [Emphasis supplied]
17
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
23. Considered        in    light   of    the   authoritative
pronouncements of this Court in the precedents cited
supra, we are of the firm opinion that the High Court
was not justified in invoking powers of judicial review
in a public interest litigation so as to interfere in the
economic policy decision taken by the appellant-
Corporation to increase the rates of the property
taxes and particularly when such revision was made
after a considerable gap of about 16 years.
24. We have also gone through the reasoning
assigned by the High Court for quashing and setting
aside the resolution dated 3rd April, 2017 as modified
by the subsequent resolution dated 19th August,
2017     passed      by      the       appellant-Corporation
determining the mode and manner in which the
property taxes are to be imposed for a period of five
years, i.e., from 2017-18 to 2021-22, thereby
increasing the tax rates in respect of properties
situated within the jurisdictional limits of appellant-
Corporation. Ex facie, we are of the opinion that the
aforesaid    exercise      was   not     permissible   to   be
undertaken in the extraordinary writ jurisdiction of
the Court and the decision of the appellant-
Corporation regarding economic policies was beyond
18
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
the scope of power of judicial review. There is no
finding by the High Court that the decision to
increase      the   tax     rates     was       perverse      or
unconstitutional.
25. A perusal of the counter affidavit filed by the
respondent-writ petitioner before this Court leaves no
room    for   doubt    that    the    respondent       himself
acknowledged the limited scope of the challenge
before the High Court. It stands admitted that the
Public Interest Litigation did not call into question
the authority or competence of the appellant-
Corporation to revise municipal taxes, and that the
grievance was confined exclusively to the procedure
and manner adopted in effectuating such revision.
For sake of ready reference, relevant paragraphs from
the counter affidavit filed by the respondent-writ
petitioner    before    this    Court     are     reproduced
hereinbelow: -
“b. It is most respectfully submitted that the
    question whether or not to revise or levy or otherwise
    Municipal Taxes is admittedly a pure question of
    Policy and is within the domain of the Corporation.
    It is submitted that however, since the aforesaid is
    not the issue raised in the Public Interest Litigation,
    the answering Respondent No. 1 is not commenting
    upon the power of the High Court under
Article 226
& 227
of Judicial Review of such decision.
    [………]
19
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
    e. It is at the cost of repetition that the Respondent
    No. 1 seeks to point out that the Public Interest
    Litigation and the lis did not pertain to the power or
    the decision of the Corporation to revise the rate of
    Municipal Taxes, but it pertained to the mode and
    manner of revision of the rates which is regulated by
    Statutory Provisions and hence the Public Interest
    Litigation is maintainable and has been rightly
    adjudicated by the High Court.”
26. In light of the above express admissions, it
becomes evident that the power of the appellant-
Corporation to revise the rate of municipal taxes was
never the subject matter of challenge before the High
Court. The only issue that was urged before the High
Court pertained to the procedure and mode adopted
by the appellant-Corporation while effecting such
revision. In the absence of any challenge to the
substantive authority of the appellant-Corporation to
revise municipal taxes, the scope of scrutiny before
the High Court stood confined solely to examining
whether the statutory procedure had been complied
with. We are of the considered view that the High
Court ought not to have embarked upon a roving
inquiry into the merits or wisdom of the decision to
revise the tax rates unless it was demonstrated that
the procedure adopted by the appellant-Corporation
was ex-facie arbitrary, perverse, unreasonable or in
20
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
blatant   derogation     of   the   governing   statutory
provisions. No such material was placed before the
Court, nor does the record disclose any such
infirmity. In these circumstances, the High Court
transgressed the permissible limits of judicial review
in interfering with the decision of the appellant-
Corporation to revise the rate of property taxes.
27. As an upshot of the above discussion, we are of
the firm view that the appellant-Corporation having
kept the taxes at a stagnant rate for almost 16 years
was indeed justified and rather under a statutory
obligation to revise the tax rates. Had the exercise
been taken on regular basis, perhaps the cumulative
increase of tax rates by the appellant-Corporation in
the year 2017 would have been much higher than
40% done under the subject exercise and the abrupt
shock could have been avoided.
28. In this background, we are of the opinion that
the impugned judgment dated 9th October, 2019 in
Public Interest Litigation No. 42 of 2018 and order
dated 24th January, 2020 in MCA (Review) No. 42 of
2020 passed by the High Court is unsustainable in
the eyes of law. Hence, the same deserves to be and
are hereby set aside.
21
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024
29. The appeals are allowed in the aforesaid terms.
No order as to costs.
30. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand
disposed of.
….……………………J.
                                     (VIKRAM NATH)


                                    ...…………………….J.
                                     (SANDEEP MEHTA)
NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 08, 2025.
22
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 12488-12489 OF 2024