[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The Director Of Town Panchayat vs M Jayabal on 12 December, 2025
Author:
Rajesh Bindal
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
2025 INSC 1423                                                                     REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS.12640-12643 OF 2025
                             (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) Nos.8776-8779 OF 2023)

             THE DIRECTOR OF TOWN
             PANCHAYAT & ORS.                                                 … Appellant (s)

                                                          VERSUS
             M. JAYABAL & ANR.                ETC.                            … Respondent(s)


                                                           WITH

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS.12644-12647 OF 2025
                              (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) Nos.8780-8783 of 2023)

             THE DISTRICT COLLECTOR,
             DHARMAPURI DISTIRCT                                              … Appellant (s)

                                                          VERSUS
             M. JAYABAL & ORS. ETC.                                           … Respondent(s)


                                                    JUDGMENT
Rajesh Bindal, J.
1.              This order will dispose of eight appeals which arise out of a

             common judgment 1 of the High Court 2 and order 3 passed in the subsequent

             review applications.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2025.12.12
16:36:12 IST
Reason:
1 Dated 03.07.2018 in W.A.Nos.778 and 779 of 2017
             2 High Court of Judicature at Madras
             3 Dated 31.01.2023 in Review Application Nos.69 and 70 of 2022
Page 1 of 23
2.          Aggrieved against the judgment of the Division Bench of the

High Court, the present appeals have been filed. The High Court vide

impugned judgment has directed that the respondents herein be given

appointment on the post of Junior Assistant. They were initially appointed as

sweepers on compassionate basis. The impugned judgment upheld the

order of the learned Single Judge, who vide judgment dated 07.10.2016

passed in W.P Nos. 16758-16759 of 2015, directed the appellants to issue

suitable orders for their appointment as Junior Assistants. They were also

held entitled to receive salary for the post of a Junior Assistant from the date

of the order. The respondents herein, on account of death of their fathers,

who were working as sweepers, were initially granted appointment on

compassionate basis as sweepers. It was in terms of the applications made

by them. After huge delay, they preferred writ petitions claiming

appointment to a higher post namely Junior Assistant raising the plea that

they were qualified for the same at the time of the initial appointment.

Learned Single Judge allowed the claim. The order was then upheld by the

Division Bench and the applications for review were also dismissed. The

aforesaid orders are under challenge in the present appeals.

ARGUMENTS OF THE APPELLANTS
3.          Mr. Jaideep Gupta, learned senior counsel appearing for the

appellants, contended that the impugned judgment of the High Court

deserves to be set aside on more than one grounds. He submitted that

appointment on compassionate basis is not a matter of right rather a
Page 2 of 23
concession given to the family members of a deceased employee to enable

them to come out of sudden financial crisis. Once a dependent family

member of a deceased has been offered appointment on a particular post

and he has accepted the same, he cannot, later on, turn around and claim

that he is entitled to a higher post on account of his better qualifications. At

that stage the family cannot be said to be in financial crisis. Even otherwise,

option once exercised by the family member of the deceased employee

cannot be allowed to be exercised again once the earlier option fructified

into employment to a post on which the person concerned had joined and

had been working.
3.1             There was huge delay in filing of writ petition 4 by the

respondents. Hence, on that ground also the respondents deserved to be

non-suited.
3.2             It was further submitted that the Government Orders have been

wrongly interpreted by the High Court while granting relief to the

respondents.
3.3             In support of the arguments, reliance has been placed upon the

judgments of this Court in
I.G. (Karmik) v. Prahalad Mani Tripathi
5,
State

of U.P. v. Premlata
6 and
State of W.B. v. Debabrata Tiwari
7.
4 W.P. No.16759 of 2015
5 2007 INSC 496 : (2007) 6 SCC 162
6 2021 INSC 619 : (2022) 1 SCC 30
7 2023 INSC 202 : (2025) 5 SCC 712
Page 3 of 23
ARGUMENTS OF THE RESPONDENTS
4.          In response, Mr. M. Purushothaman, learned counsel for the

respondents, submitted that the relief which has been granted to them by

the High Court does not call for interference by this Court as it pertains to

employment to the member of a family which was in crisis. There is no mis-

interpretation of the Government Orders. In fact, at the initial stage when

the respondents accepted the employment offer, they did not know that they

were entitled to the post of Junior Assistant, hence could not make a request

for the same. The moment they came to know that other similarly situated

persons had been given employment on the higher post, keeping in view

their qualifications, they immediately took up the issue. There was no delay

in the process. The respondents could not be discriminated. Considering

the kind of qualification that the respondents possess, they should not be

made to work on Class IV post especially when the Government Orders

permit their employment on compassionate basis on a higher post. That

being the case, there is no merit in the present appeals and the same

deserve to be dismissed.
DISCUSSION
5.          We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the

material on record.
6.          The following table shows in brief the post on which the

deceased employees were working, date of their death, the post for which

their dependent/s applied, the date on which the employment was offered
Page 4 of 23
and the post that was offered, the date of joining thereon along with the date

of filing of the writ petition, seeking appointment on a higher post.
Details                    M. Jayabal   S. Veeramani


                 Father’s post              Sweeper      Sweeper
                 Date of Father’s death     29.01.2011   07.10.2006
                 Date of application        15.03.2012   29.12.2006
                 Date of appointment        06.09.2012   24.01.2007
                 Post    on     which Sweeper            Sweeper
                 appointment was made
                 Date of joining            11.09.2012   24.01.2007
                 Date of filing of W.P.     19.04.2015   19.04.2015


WHETHER COMPASSIONATE APPOINTMENT
IS A MATTER OF RIGHT ?
7.              First and the foremost issue which requires consideration by this

Court in the present appeals is whether the compassionate appointment of a

family member on account of death of an employee in service, is as a matter

of right or not. The issue stands settled in an authoritative judgment of this

Court in
Umesh Kumar Nagpal vs. State of Haryana & Ors.
8 It was opined

therein that the core objective behind granting compassionate employment

is to enable the family to tide over sudden financial crisis and such

favourable treatment that is given to the dependant of the deceased




8 1994 INSC 189 : (1994) 4 SCC 138
Page 5 of 23
employee is a relief against destitution. It is totally on humanitarian grounds.

The relevant paragraphs in are extracted below:
“2………..One such exception is in favour of the
            dependants of an employee dying in harness and leaving
            his family in penury and without any means of livelihood.
            In such cases, out of pure humanitarian consideration
            taking into consideration the fact that unless some source
            of livelihood is provided, the family would not be able to
            make both ends meet, a provision is made in the rules to
            provide gainful employment to one of the dependants of
            the deceased who may be eligible for such employment.
            The whole object of granting compassionate employment
            is thus to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis.
            The object is not to give a member of such family a post
            much less a post for post held by the deceased. What is
            further, mere death of an employee in harness does not
            entitle his family to such source of livelihood. The
            Government or the public authority concerned has to
            examine the financial condition of the family of the
            deceased, and it is only if it is satisfied, that but for the
            provision of employment, the family will not be able to
            meet the crisis that a job is to be offered to the eligible
            member of the family. The posts in Classes III and IV are
            the lowest posts in non-manual and manual categories
            and hence they alone can be offered on compassionate
            grounds, the object being to relieve the family, of the
            financial destitution and to help it get over the
            emergency. The provision of employment in such lowest
            posts by making an exception to the rule is justifiable and
            valid since it is not discriminatory. The favourable
Page 6 of 23
treatment given to such dependant of the deceased
            employee in such posts has a rational nexus with the
            object sought to be achieved, viz., relief against
            destitution. No other posts are expected or required to be
            given by the public authorities for the purpose….”
                                                         (emphasis supplied)


7.1         In the Premlata’s case (supra), this court analysed the nature

of appointment made on compassionate basis and opined that the same is an

exception to the general rule of appointment in the public services. The

aspirant has no right to compassionate appointment. It was clarified that the

appointment on compassionate ground is a concession and not a right. The

relevant paragraphs are extracted below:
“8.         While considering the issue involved in the
            present appeal, the law
laid down by
this Court on
            compassionate ground on the death of the deceased
            employee are required to be referred to and considered.
In the recent decision, this Court in
State of Karnataka v.
            V. Somyashree [State of Karnataka
v. V. Somyashree,
            (2021) 12 SCC 20 : 2021 SCC OnLine SC 704] , had
            occasion to consider the principle governing the grant of
            appointment on compassionate ground.
After referring to
            the decision of this Court in N.C. Santhosh v. State of
            Karnataka [N.C. Santhosh v. State of Karnataka, (2020) 7
            SCC 617 : (2020) 2 SCC (L&S) 861] , this Court has
            7ummarized the principle governing the grant of
            appointment on compassionate ground as under : (
V.
            Somyashree
case [
State of Karnataka v. V. Somyashree
,
Page 7 of 23
(2021) 12 SCC 20 : 2021 SCC OnLine SC 704] , SCC para
10)

      “10.1. That the compassionate appointment is an
      exception to the general rule.
10.2.   That no aspirant has a right to compassionate
      appointment.
10.3.   The appointment to any public post in the
      service of the State has to be made on the basis of the
      principle in accordance with
Articles 14
and
16
of the
      Constitution of India.
10.4.   Appointment on compassionate ground can
      be made only on fulfilling the norms
laid down by
the
      State’s policy and/or satisfaction of the eligibility
      criteria as per the policy.
10.5.   The norms prevailing on the date of the
      consideration of the application should be the basis
      for consideration        of   claim for compassionate
      appointment.”
9.            As per the law
laid down by
this Court in a
catena of decisions on the appointment on compassionate
ground, for all the government vacancies equal
opportunity should be provided to all aspirants as
mandated under
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution.
However, appointment on compassionate ground offered
to a dependant of a deceased employee is an exception
to the said norms. The compassionate ground is a
concession and not a right.
(emphasis supplied)
Page 8 of 23
10.             Thus, as per the law
laid down by
this Court
               in the aforesaid decisions, compassionate appointment is
               an exception to the general rule of appointment in the
               public services and is in favour of the dependants of a
               deceased dying-in-harness and leaving his family in
               penury and without any means of livelihood, and in such
               cases, out of pure humanitarian consideration taking into
               consideration the fact that unless some source of
               livelihood is provided, the family would not be able to
               make both ends meet, a provision is made in the rules to
               provide gainful employment to one of the dependants of
               the deceased who may be eligible for such employment.
               The whole object of granting compassionate employment
               is thus to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis.
The object is not to give such family a post much less a
               post held by the deceased.”
                                                           (emphasis supplied)

7.2            Later, similar view was expressed by a Three-Judge Bench of

this Court in
Tinku vs. State of Haryana & Ors.
9. The relevant paragraph

is extracted below:
“12. As regards the compassionate appointment being
               sought to be claimed as a vested right for appointment,
               suffice it to say that the said right is not a condition of
               service of an employee who dies in harness, which must
               be given to the dependent without any kind of scrutiny or
               undertaking a process of selection. It is an appointment
               which is given on proper and strict scrutiny of the various


9 2024 INSC 867 : 2024 SCC Online SC 3292
Page 9 of 23
parameters as laid down with an intention to help a family
           out of a sudden pecuniary financial destitution to help it
           get out of the emerging urgent situation where the sole
           bread earner has expired, leaving them helpless and
           maybe     penniless.    Compassionate              appointment   is,
           therefore, provided to bail out a family of the deceased
           employee facing extreme financial difficulty and but for
           the employment, the family will not be able to meet the
           crisis. This shall in any case be subject to the claimant
           fulfilling the requirements as
laid down in
the policy,
           instructions,   or   rules    for      such    a     compassionate
           appointment.”


7.3         Applying the above principles of law, it can be concluded that

the dependent of a deceased employee, though eligible, is not entitled to

appointment at any position on compassionate basis as a matter of right.
Such appointments, made on purely humanitarian grounds, have to be

viewed as exceptions to the general rules of appointment. It is important to

note that mere eligibility of the applicant cannot be reason enough to

materialise his/her claim for appointment on a higher post. Once a family

member    of   the   deceased     employee         is    offered   appointment    on

compassionate basis, the purpose stands well served. Therefore, the

contention of the respondents that they are entitled to be reconsidered for

further appointment on a higher post is not maintainable.
Page 10 of 23
CLAIM FOR HIGHER POST
8.             It is not in dispute that after the death of the employees in

service, the dependent family members were offered appointment to a post

for which an application was made by them. They had joined on that post

without raising any objection. Meaning thereby, the financial crisis of the

family was over as one of the dependents of the deceased was offered

appointment on compassionate basis in terms of the policy existing at the

time of consideration of their application.
8.1            The next issue which requires consideration by this Court is

whether the dependent family member of a deceased employee, after being

appointed on a post on compassionate basis, can later on seek indulgence

of the employer to appoint him on a higher post.
9.             The law on the issue is well-settled. The issue as to whether a

second option can be exercised by the dependent family member of the

deceased employee, once option for compassionate appointment has

already been exercised and the dependent family member of the deceased

joined on the post to which appointment was given, was considered by this

Court in
State of Rajasthan v. Umrao Singh
10. In this case, the deceased

was working as Sub-Inspector, CID. On account of his death during service,

application for appointment on compassionate basis was made.              The

dependant was offered appointment on the post of L.D.C. The same was



10 1994 INSC 423 : (1994) 6 SCC 560
Page 11 of 23
accepted and the incumbent joined on the post. Later, he requested for

consideration of his case for appointment on the post of Sub-Inspector, being

eligible for the same. This Court negated the claim holding that once right

for consideration for appointment on compassionate post was consummated,

any further or second consideration for a higher post on the ground of

compassion would not arise. The relevant paragraph 8 is extracted below:
“8.           Admittedly the respondent's father died in
            harness while working as Sub-Inspector, CID (Special
            Branch)   on       16-3-1988.     The       respondent    filed     an
            application    on     8-4-1988      for     his   appointment       on
            compassionate        ground      as       Sub-Inspector   or      LDC
            according     to    the    availability      of   vacancy.     On    a
            consideration of his plea, he was appointed to the post of
            LDC by order dated 14-12-1989. He accepted the
            appointment as LDC. Therefore, the right to be
            considered for the appointment on compassionate
            ground was consummated. No further consideration on
            compassionate ground would ever arise. Otherwise, it
            would be a case of “endless compassion”. Eligibility to
            be appointed as Sub-Inspector of Police is one thing, the
            process of selection is yet another thing. Merely because
            of the so-called eligibility, the learned Single Judge of the
            High Court was persuaded to the view that direction be
            issued under proviso to Rule 5 of Rules which has no
            application to the facts of this case.”
                                                           (emphasis supplied)
Page 12 of 23
10.
In view of the law
laid down by
this Court, it stands clarified that

the once the right of an applicant to be considered for appointment on

compassionate grounds has been consummated, no further consideration is

warranted. Once dependent of a deceased employee is offered employment

on compassionate basis, his right stood exercised. Thereafter, no question

arises for seeking appointment on a higher post. Otherwise, it would be a

case of ‘endless compassion’.
WHETHER THE DEPENDANT OF A DECEASED EMPLOYEE CAN SEEK
EMPLOYMENT ON COMPASSIONATE BASIS ON A HIGHER POST ?
11.         This Court has also opined on the issue whether a dependent

family member of a deceased employee can seek compassionate

appointment on a post higher than the post which the deceased was holding,

merely on the ground that he fulfils the criteria of such higher post. The

opinion expressed is that the same will run contrary to the very object of

grant of compassionate appointment, which is provided to enable the family

of the deceased employee to tide over sudden financial crisis. Employment

on    compassionate basis is provided only on account of humanitarian

consideration. Relevant paragraph of the judgment of this Court in
Premlata
(Supra) is extracted below:
“10.2        In a given case, it may happen that the
            dependant of the deceased employee who has applied
            for appointment on compassionate ground is having the
            educational qualification of Class II or Class I post and the
            deceased employee was working on the post of
            Class/Grade IV and/or lower than the post applied
,
in
Page 13 of 23
that case
the dependant/applicant cannot seek the
            appointment on compassionate ground on the higher post
            than what was held by the deceased employee as a matter
            of right, on the ground that he/she is eligible fulfilling the
            eligibility criteria of such higher post. The aforesaid shall
            be contrary to the object and purpose of grant of
            appointment     on   compassionate      ground    which    as
            observed hereinabove is to enable the family to tide over
            the sudden crisis on the death of the breadearner. As
            observed above, appointment on compassionate ground
            is provided out of pure humanitarian consideration taking
            into consideration the fact that some source of livelihood
            is provided and family would be able to make both ends
            meet.”
12.         Keeping in view the core objective behind appointment on

compassionate basis, as has been discussed in a catena of judgments of this

Court, it is well settled that compassionate appointment is a relief against

immense financial hardship caused by the sudden and unforeseen loss of the

earning member of a family. In such event, when a dependant family

member of the deceased employee is provided appointment on

compassionate basis, it is done in order to ensure that the family members

are not subjected to impoverishment. Therefore, such appointment which is

arising out of exceptional circumstances, cannot be used as a ladder to climb

up in seniority by claiming a higher post merely on the basis that he/she is

eligible for such post.
Page 14 of 23
DELAY AND LACHES
13.             The claim of the respondents/M. Jayabal & S. Veeramani also

deserves to be rejected on the ground of delay and laches as has been

noticed in the previous part of the judgment. Both the respondents had

approached the Court belated after they had joined on the post they were

offered appointment on compassionate basis. Reference for this purpose

can be made to the judgment of this Court in
State of Orissa v. Laxmi

Narayan Das
11 wherein it was held that delay reflects the indolence of a

litigant and the Court must scrutinise whether such belated lis must be

entertained or not. Therefore, inordinate delay on behalf of any litigant to do

an act required by law shall stand in his/her way for getting relief.
14.             This Court in Debabrata Tiwari’s case (supra) has opined that

in a case where the claim for appointment on compassionate grounds is

belated, for reasons of prolonged delay, the sense of immediacy is diluted

and lost. The relevant paragraphs are extracted below:
“35.              Considering the second question
referred to
               above
,       in    the   first   instance,   regarding   whether
               applications for compassionate appointment could be
               considered after a delay of several years, we are of the
               view that, in a case where, for reasons of prolonged
               delay, either on the part of the applicant in claiming
               compassionate appointment or the authorities in deciding
               such claim, the sense of immediacy is diluted and lost.
               Further, the financial circumstances of the family of the

11 2023 INSC 619 : (2023) 15 SCC 273
Page 15 of 23
deceased, may have changed, for the better, since the
            time of the death of the government employee.
xxx                       xxx                         xxx
            41.            Applying the said ratio to the facts of the
            present      case,   we     hold    that    the       respondent-writ
petitioners, upon submitting their applications in the year
            2006-2005 did nothing further to pursue the matter, till the
            year 2015 i.e. for a period of ten years. Notwithstanding
            the tardy approach of the authorities of the appellant State
            in dealing with their applications, the respondent-writ
            petitioners delayed approaching the High Court seeking
            a writ in the nature of a mandamus against the authorities
            of the State. In fact, such a prolonged delay in
            approaching the High Court, may even be regarded as a
            waiver of a remedy, as discernible by the conduct of the
            respondent-writ      petitioners.         Such    a    delay    would
            disentitle    the    respondent-writ         petitioners       to   the
            discretionary relief under
Article 226
of the Constitution.”
15.          It is a settled principle of law that delay in filing of writ petition

before the High Court is fatal for grant of relief to the party. This principle is

more applicable in the cases of compassionate appointments. The idea

behind compassionate appointment is to take care of immediate financial

crisis in the family of the deceased employee. In such case, the delay would

mean that the family could survive even after death of the employee, as they

may be having another source of income. In such circumstances, the party

approaching the court with a significant delay can be denied the relief.
Page 16 of 23
NEGATIVE DISCRIMINATION
16.         Another    argument     raised    by   learned   counsel   for the

respondents/M. Jayabal & S. Veeramani was to claim parity with another

employee who had been granted similar benefit. The law on the subject is

well-settled. No one can approach the court and base his claim on negative

discrimination merely because some relief has been granted to a person

who may not be entitled to the same. This Court in Tinku’s case (supra)

opined that wrongful conferment of a right or claim on someone would not

entitle a similar claim to be put forth before a court and nor would the court

be bound to accept such a plea. The relevant paragraph is extracted below:
“11.         The very idea of equality enshrined in
Article
            14
is a concept clothed in positivity based on law. It can
            be invoked to enforce a claim having sanctity of law. No
            direction can, therefore, be issued mandating the State to
            perpetuate any illegality or irregularity committed in
            favour of a person, an individual, or even a group of
            individuals which is contrary to the policy or instructions
            applicable. Similarly, passing of an illegal order
            wrongfully conferring some right or claim on someone
            does not entitle a similar claim to be put forth before a
            court nor would court be bound to accept such plea. The
            court will not compel the authority to repeat that illegality
            over again. If such claims are entertained and directions
            issued, that would not only be against the tenets of the
            justice but would negate its ethos resulting in the law
            being a causality culminating in anarchy and lawlessness.
The Court cannot ignore the law, nor can it overlook the
Page 17 of 23
same to confer a right or a claim that does not have legal
               sanction. Equity cannot be extended, and that too
               negative to confer a benefit or advantage without legal
               basis or justification.”

                                                              (emphasis supplied)
17.            Reference for the purpose can also be made to the judgment of

this Court in
Jyostnamayee Mishra v. State of Odisha
12. The relevant

extract is reproduced herein below:
“31.     Another argument was raised while referring to
               two communications dated 28.06.1999 appointing Ms.
               Jhina Rani Mansingh and Sri Lalatendu Rath as Tracer on
               promotion, claiming to be from the post of Peon, on the
               basis of which the petitioner is claiming violation of
Article 14
, namely the discrimination. Suffice to add, this
               Court cannot put a stamp on the illegalities committed by
               the department while perpetuating the same. A litigant
               coming to the Court cannot claim negative discrimination
               seeking direction from the Court to the department to act
               in violation of the law or statutory Rules. It is a settled
               proposition of law that
Article 14
does not envisage
               negative equality. Reference for the purpose can be
               made to a judgment of this Court in
R. Muthukumar v. The
               Chairman and Managing Director TANGEDCO
. Relevant
               para thereof is extracted below:
“28.                 A principle, axiomatic in this country's
                      constitutional lore is that there is no negative


12 2025 INSC 87 : 2025 SCC Online SC 117
Page 18 of 23
equality. In other words, if there has been a benefit
                 or advantage conferred on one or a set of people,
                 without legal basis or justification, that benefit cannot
                 multiply, or be relied upon as a principle of parity or
                 equality.
In
Basawaraj v. Special Land Acquisition
                 Officer
, this court ruled that:
“8.    It is a settled legal proposition that
Article 14
of the Constitution is not meant to
                         perpetuate illegality or fraud, even by
                         extending the wrong decisions made in other
                         cases. The said provision does not envisage
                         negative equality but has only a positive
                         aspect. Thus, if some other similarly situated
                         persons      have         been     granted    some
                         relief/benefit inadvertently or by mistake,
                         such an order does not confer any legal right
                         on others to get the same relief as well. If a
                         wrong is committed in an earlier case, it
                         cannot be perpetuated.”

                                                          (emphasis supplied)
18.         From the position of law as enunciated above, it is evident that

the foundation of any claim based on equity has to be devoid of the element

of negative discrimination. The respondents in the present case are heirs of

the deceased employees who were appointed on compassionate basis upon

the death of their fathers. Their appointment, in its own self, was a sufficient

relief to serve the actual purpose behind compassionate appointments. The

further claim of seeking appointment on a higher post cannot be based on
Page 19 of 23
the sole premise that another similarly placed person was granted such

benefit. It is a settled proposition of law that an illegality committed by an

authority cannot be validated and further perpetuated by its extension to

other similarly placed persons. Thus, the contention of respondents that they

may be appointed on a higher post in view of similar benefit being granted

to another person is wholly misplaced and unsustainable in the eyes of law.
19.         From the law on the issue which we have referred to in the

aforesaid paragraphs, it is clearly culled out that illegal orders, passed in

case of similarly situated person, will not confer any right upon the other

person to come to the court and enforce the same claiming discrimination.

Such plea cannot be accepted as the authorities cannot be directed to

perpetuate the wrong committed by them. The party in such cases may have

different remedies. We are not dilating on the same.


FACTS OF THE CASE
20.         With reference to the above enunciation of law, if the facts of the

case are considered, M. Jayabal, respondent No.1 in C.A. No.12640 of 2025

was appointed on compassionate basis on the post of Sweeper, for which he

applied and after joining and working on that post, he applied for a higher

post after a gap of three years. Similarly, in the case of S. Veeramani,

respondent No.1 in C.A. No.12641 of 2025 who was also appointed on

compassionate basis on the post of Sweeper, for which he applied and after

joining and working on that post, he has applied for the higher post after a

gap of nine years.
Page 20 of 23
21.            From      the    aforesaid     facts,     it   is   established   that   the

respondents/M. Jayabal & S. Veeramani had applied for a particular post and

their prayer was accepted, as a result of which they were offered

appointment on the post for which they had applied. After they had joined

on the post offered to them on compassionate basis, consideration of their

prayer for the same stood consummated.                        The families of both the

respondents were no more in financial distress. The right once exercised

could not be permitted to be exercised again and again by making it an

endless exercise. An applicant for the post on compassionate basis may be

eligible for any higher post but that does not mean he has right to be

appointed on that post. This depends on the rules and the policy applicable

and also the number of vacancies to be offered in that category. In fact, this

is not an additional source of recruitment, rather an exception to the general

rule of providing equal opportunities to all for recruitment in government

jobs. This Court in
Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Ltd. & Ors. vs.

Anusree K.B.
13 has held that for consideration of an application for

appointment on compassionate basis, financial status of the family is also a

relevant factor. It is not a matter of selection or choice of an applicant for

such a post, rather for the employer to consider various factors. The basic

idea is to provide succour to the family to enable them to come out of




13 2022 INSC 1051: 2022 SCC Online SC 1331
Page 21 of 23
immediate financial crisis. Delay in filing the application for compassionate

appointment has also been held to be fatal for the exercise of such a right.
22.         If the facts of the case in hand are considered, in our view,

belated applications made by the respondents seeking appointment on a

higher post, after they had already been appointed on a lower post, was

rightly rejected by the competent authority. The view expressed by learned

Single Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court directing their

appointment on a higher post w.e.f the date of judgement was certainly

erroneous and contrary to the spirit of the law
laid down by
this Court on the

subject.
23.         In our view, the issue of discrepancies/anomalies, as were

sought to be pointed out with respect to the relevant government orders, or

the rights which, according to the respondents, were flowing to them on the

basis of the said government orders, is not required to be touched as, for the

purpose of grant or refusal of relief to the respondents, nothing hinges on

the said government orders.
24.         The only plea raised by the respondents/M. Jayabal & S.

Veeramani for seeking appointment on a higher post was that they were

ignorant about their right for such appointment, initially, on a higher post

and that a similar relief having been granted to others, the respondents

should not be discriminated against. It is well-settled that ignorance of law

is not an excuse, as a result of which, such plea raised by the respondents
Page 22 of 23
cannot be entertained. Further, negative discrimination cannot be claimed

if a no right can be made out as per the settled position of law.
25.         For the reasons mentioned above, we find merit in the present

appeals. The same are accordingly allowed and the impugned judgment/s

of the High Court are set aside. Resultantly, W.P.No.16759 of 2015 filed by

respondent/M. Jayabal and W.P. No 16758 of 2015 filed by respondent/S.

Veeramani before the High Court are dismissed. There shall be no order as

to costs.
……………….……………..J.
                                                  (RAJESH BINDAL)


                                                  ……………….……………..J.
                                                  (MANMOHAN)
New Delhi
December 12, 2025.
Page 23 of 23