[Cites
39
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Rajasthan High Court vs Rajat Yadav on 19 December, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 1503

                                                                                  REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 14112 OF 2024


             RAJASTHAN HIGH COURT & ANR.                                     … APPELLANTS


                                                          VS.


             RAJAT YADAV & ORS.                                               … RESPONDENTS

                                                         WITH

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 3957-4009 OF 2025



                                                   JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
THE APPEALS
1.             A Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan, Bench

                            at Jaipur, allowed D.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 7564 of 2023 and

                            connected matters vide judgment and order dated 18th September,
Signature Not Verified   20231. Aggrieved by the impugned order, the administration of the
Digitally signed by
JATINDER KAUR
Date: 2025.12.27
19:19:31 IST
Reason:
1
impugned order
1
High Court and its Registrar2 have preferred these civil appeals by

        special leave.
BRIEF RESUME OF FACTS
2.      The basic facts triggering the appellate proceedings before us are

        undisputed.
3.      The Rajasthan       District   Courts   Ministerial   Establishment   Rules,

        1986 were framed to regulate appointments and conditions of service

        in the ministerial establishments of the District Courts. Thereafter,

        the Rajasthan High Court Staff Service Rules, 2002 were notified on

        5th December, 2002, providing for recruitment to the post of Junior

        Judicial Assistant/Clerk Grade-II by way of a competitive examination

        comprising two stages, viz. a written test and a computer-based

        typewriting test.
4.      In pursuance thereof, on 5th August, 2022, the High Court issued an

        advertisement. Applications were invited for appointment on 2756

        vacancies in the posts of Junior Judicial Assistant/Clerk Grade-II in the

        High Court, the Rajasthan State Judicial Academy, the District Courts

        and allied institutions, including the Legal Services Authorities and

        Permanent Lok Adalats. The vacancies were distributed category-wise

        across General, Scheduled Caste (SC), Scheduled Tribe (ST), Other

        Backward Class (OBC), Most Backward Class (MBC), Economically
2
appellants
2
Weaker Section (EWS), and horizontal reservation for various other

        categories.
5.      The scheme of selection envisaged a written test of 300 marks,

        followed by a typewriting test on computer of 100 marks. The

        qualifying marks in the written test were fixed at 50% for the General

        category,     45%       for   OBC   and   other   categories,   and   40%   for

        SC/ST/PwD3. It was further stipulated that only candidates securing

        the prescribed minimum in the written test, to the extent of five times

        the number of vacancies category-wise, would be eligible to appear in

        the typewriting test. The final merit list was to be drawn on the

        aggregate of marks secured by the aspirants at both stages.
6.      The respondents in these appeals had applied pursuant to the

        aforementioned advertisement. Since they were found prima facie

        eligible, the appellants permitted them to appear in the written test.
7.      The written test was held on 12th and 19th March, 2023. The

        respondents duly participated in the written test. The results followed

        soon, being declared on 1st May, 2023. The list of candidates who

        qualified for the second stage of the examination, i.e., the typewriting

        test on computer, was duly published. The break-up of candidates

        called for the type-writing test, which was thereafter scheduled

        between 26th May and 29th May, 2023, is given in the chart

        hereinbelow:
3
Persons with Disabilities
3
S. No.     Category No. of Vacancies No.    of     candidates
                                          declared qualified for
                                          typewriting test
        1        General       1077                 5385

        2        OBC-NCL             459                    2295
3        MBC-NCL             136                     680
4             EWS            286                    1431

        5             SC             416                    2081

        6             ST             370                    1850
7        Saharia             12                      11
Total               2756                     13733
8.     Significantly, the cut-off marks for various reserved categories like SC,

       OBC-NCL, MBC-NCL and EWS were higher than the cut-off marks

       provided for the General category. The cut-off marks, for various

       categories, is given hereinbelow:
S. No.          Category                                   Cut-off marks

 01             General                                     196.3451

 02             General (Widow)                             135.0103

 03             General (Divorcee)                          158.7026

 04             Scheduled Caste                             202.4398

 05             Scheduled Caste (Women)                     200.0362

 06             Scheduled Caste (Widow)                     120.0437

 07             Scheduled Caste (Divorcee)                  166.5399

 08             Scheduled Tribe                             192.0553
4
09           Scheduled Tribe (Widow)                       120.4113

 10           Scheduled Tribe (Divorcee)                    122.3075

 11           Shariya Tribe                                 135.1360

 12           Other Backward Class-NCL                      230.4431

 13           Other Backward Class-NCL (Women)              226.2512

 14           Other Backward Class-NCL (Widow)              142.9102

 15           Other Backward Class-NCL (Divorcee)           209.9972

 16           More Backward Class-NCL                       203.3569

 17           More Backward Class-NCL (Women)               201.6867

 18           More Backward Class-NCL (Widow)               139.8478

 19           More Backward Class-NCL (Divorcee)            148.3763

 20           Economically Weaker Sections                  224.5384

 21           Economically Weaker Sections (Widow)          150.6860

 22           Economically Weaker Sections (Divorcee) 210.7884
9.    The respondents, belonging to different reserved categories, secured

      marks in the written test in excess of the cut-off marks for the General

      category candidates, i.e., 196.3451, but less than the cut-off marks

      for their respective reserved category. Despite securing marks in

      excess of the cut-off marks for the General category candidates, the

      respondents belonging to different reserved categories were treated

      as aspirants who could compete for the reserved posts only and not

      the posts which were ‘general’; hence, much to their shock and

      dismay, they did not figure in the list of successful candidates, eligible

      to take the typewriting test on computer from their own reserved
5
category in the short-listing process. Relative merit of the reserved

    category candidates was, thus, given a complete go-bye.
10. As per Note (ii) under Clause 15 of the Advertisement, those

    candidates who secured minimum 45% marks and 40% marks in the

    case of SC/ST and persons with benchmark disabilities, respectively,

    in the written test were eligible for appearing in the typewriting test

    on computer, subject to a cap of five times the number of vacancies

    (category wise), but in the same range all those candidates who

    secured the same percentage of marks were to be included.
11. On   10th     May,   2023,   one   of   the   respondents,   Rajat   Yadav,

    instituted D.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 7564 of 2023 before the High

    Court. Several other writ petitions were thereafter filed by similarly

    situated candidates. The prayers in substance were to quash the result

    dated 1st May, 2023, including the cut-off, and to direct that reserved

    category candidates who had secured marks greater than the cut-off

    marks prescribed for the General category be included in the general

    list and declared qualified for taking the typewriting test.


IMPUGNED ORDER
12. We propose to take note of the impugned order, in some detail,

    whereby the Division Bench disposed of the writ petitions with suitable

    directions.
6
13. It was the contention of the aggrieved writ petitioners4 before the

        Division Bench that the appellants, being the recruiters, were obliged

        to shortlist all the candidates - irrespective of the categories to which

        they belonged, whether in the open category or in any of the reserved

        categories - to the extent provided in the advertisement, i.e., five

        times the total number of vacancies and, thereafter shortlist the

        candidates for typewriting test based on their performance in the

        written test, and that category-wise shortlisting would be contrary to

        law.
14. The Division Bench noted that all the vacancies for which the

        recruitment process was initiated were governed by the provisions with

        regard to reservation for various categories like ST, SC, OBC (NCL),

        MBC and EWS, including horizontal reservation for categories like PwD.

        The Division Bench also noted the permissibility of shortlisting being

        restricted to the extent of five times the number of vacancies, as

        provided in the advertisement.
15. It was held by the Division Bench that if the contention of the

        recruiters, as advanced by learned senior counsel on their behalf were

        accepted, the object of reservation itself would be jeopardized.
16. Learned senior counsel for the recruiters placed reliance on
Chattar

        Singh and Others v. State of Rajasthan and Others5
where it was

        held that the rule of migration would not be applicable at the stages of
4
petitioning candidates
5
(1996) 11 SCC 742
7
shortlisting   of   the   candidates     during   screening/preliminary

    examination as the marks are not added while preparing final merit

    list and that such migration of reserved category candidates would be

    applicable only at the time of preparation of the final merit list for the

    purposes of making appointment. They contended before the Division

    Bench that if the claim of the petitioning candidates were accepted,

    the candidates in the OBC category as well as other reserved

    categories, who obtained higher marks in the written examination

    were required to be migrated to the open category before the final

    merit list is prepared, which is impermissible.
17. The Division Bench considered
Chattar Singh
(supra) wherein Rule

    13 of the Rajasthan State and Subordinate Service (Direct Recruitment

    by Combined Competitive Examination) Rules, 1962 was under
challenge. The Rules therein envisaged a two-stage process of

    Preliminary and Main Examinations which, after an amendment,

    required declaration of results category-wise. The contention therein

    that OBC candidates were entitled to the same 5% relaxation in

    qualifying marks as SC/ST candidates was rejected. It was held therein

    that such relaxation was confined to SC/ST candidates and that, even

    prior to the amendment, preparation of category-wise lists was implicit

    in the scheme of the Rules. In furtherance thereof, the Division Bench

    rejected the contention that shortlisting of the candidates, category-
wise after written examination is contrary to the scheme of the

    examination. Following this, the Division Bench also rejected the
8
challenge against the provisions contained in the advertisement which

       provided for category-wise preparation of list by shortlisting the

       candidates after the written examination.
18.
Referring to Dharamveer Tholia and Others v. State of Rajasthan

       and Another6
, the Division Bench noted that it was held therein that

       a preliminary examination is essentially a screening test to shortlist

       candidates and that the rider of
Article 335
of the Constitution of India

       cannot be applied at the stage of Preliminary Examination, though, it

       could be applied to the Main Examination as the Court cannot presume

       that allowing some candidates to appear in the Main Examination,

       would automatically lead to their induction in Government service.
19. The Division Bench in the impugned order further noted that in the

       previous decisions, the common reasoning was that a reserved

       category candidate could not claim migration to the open category at

       the stage of the Preliminary Examination, since marks secured therein

       were not carried forward to the final merit list. It was, however,

       emphasised that such reasoning had no application once the Main

       Examination commenced. Distinguishing the precedents, the Division

       Bench noted that those cases dealt only with claims for migration at

       the preliminary stage, whereas in the present case, the dispute arose

       after the written examination forming part of the Main Examination.
On this basis, the principles
laid down in
Dharamveer Tholia
6
2000 (3) WLC
399
9
(supra) and subsequent decisions of the High Court were held to be

       inapplicable, and the recruiters’ contentions stood rejected.
20. The Division Bench emphasised that exclusion of a reserved category

       candidate, despite securing marks higher than the cut-off marks for

       General/Open category, solely on account of his category, would

       violate
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution. It was underscored that

       the placement of a more meritorious reserved category candidate in

       the Open category is not a facet of reservation, but a principle of

       equality founded on merit. Relying on
Janki Prasad Parimoo v.

       State of Jammu & Kashmir7
, the Division Bench observed that while

       reservation may involve preferring a less meritorious candidate, it does

       not require confining a more meritorious reserved category candidate

       to his own slot, for such confinement would amount to impermissible

       discrimination.
21. Adverting to the factual position in the batch of petitions before it, the

       Division Bench noted that the cut-off marks for the General category

       were lower than those prescribed for SC, OBC (NCL), MBC (NCL), and

       EWS categories, as can be seen from the table mentioned earlier. On

       this basis, it was observed that the recruiters, in preparing the lists

       category-wise, had treated the General/Open category as if it were a

       compartment reserved exclusively for general candidates. The Division
Bench further held
that had the lists been prepared purely on the basis

       of merit across categories, several reserved category candidates would
7
AIR 1973 SC 930
10
have displaced general category candidates, thereby preserving the

     constitutional principle of equality.
22. The Division Bench drew support from the Constitution Bench decisions

     in
Indra Sawhney v. Union of India8
and
R.K. Sabharwal v. State

     of Punjab9
to reiterate that a reserved category candidate who

     secures equal or higher merit cannot be denied equality of treatment

     merely on account of his caste or community. Any such exclusion, the

     Division Bench held, would amount to rejecting a more meritorious

     candidate solely because of the category to which he belongs.
23.
In further reinforcement of its views, reliance was placed by the

     Division Bench on
Saurav Yadav v. State of Uttar Pradesh10
,

     wherein it was clarified that reservations, vertical or horizontal, secure

     representation but are not ‘rigid slots’. The open category is open to

     all solely on merit, and to confine candidates within quotas would

     negate merit and amount to communal reservation.
24. Reliance was also placed by the Division bench on
U.P. Power

     Corporation Ltd. v. Nitin Kumar11
, wherein the High Court of

     Allahabad    held   that   reservation   earmarks   posts   for   specified

     categories, but unreserved seats are open to all on merit and not

     confined to general candidates. It was further held that a reserved

     category candidate securing selection on open merit cannot be
8
1992 Supp (3) SCC 217
9
(1995) 2 SCC 745
10
(2021) 4 SCC 542
11
2015 SCC OnLine All 8611
11
adjusted against reserved vacancies, and that this principle applies

    throughout the selection process, not merely at the stage of final merit

    list, since any other view would yield anomalous consequences.
25. In the factual milieu presented before it, the Division Bench noted that

    the petitioning candidates were unable to find place in the select list of

    their respective reserved categories, the cut-off marks therein being

    comparatively high. Nevertheless, their marks were more than what

    was secured by a substantial number of candidates shortlisted under

    the general category, yet, they were not treated as open category

    candidates. The effect of such exclusion amounted to treating the open

    category as if it were a compartment reserved exclusively for general

    category candidates, thereby denying entry to more meritorious

    reserved category candidates. Such an approach, apart from being

    legally untenable, was held to result in a negation of merit.
26. The petitioning candidates’ contention that the Rules do not permit

    category-wise shortlisting after the written examination was rejected.

    On an analysis of the scheme, and relying on
Chattar Singh
(supra),

    it was held that preparation of category-wise lists is implicit in the

    rules. Equally, candidates who had participated in the process with full

    knowledge of its terms could not later challenge it on being

    unsuccessful. However, it was clarified that such bar would not extend

    to questioning whether the settled principle of migration of meritorious

    reserved category candidates to the open/general category, subject to

    their not having availed any special benefit, had been adhered to. The
12
objection that the petitioning candidates were estopped from raising

    this claim was, therefore, rejected. The Division Bench held, as the

    inescapable conclusion from the foregoing discussion, that while

    preparing category-wise lists after the written examination, reserved

    category candidates who had secured marks higher than the cut-off

    for the general category were required to be included in the open

    category list. The proper course was first to prepare the General/Open

    category list strictly on merit, including therein all such reserved

    category candidates who could compete without availing any special

    benefit, to the extent of five times the number of vacancies. Only

    thereafter, the reserved category lists were to be drawn up, excluding

    those already accommodated in the Open category.
27. It was noted by the Division Bench that some of the petitioning

    candidates had been permitted to provisionally appear in the

    typewriting test, while others had not been so fortunate. The Division

    Bench directed revision of category-wise lists by first preparing the

    General/Open category list on merit, including therein reserved

    category candidates who had secured higher marks than the

    unreserved cut-off, provided they had not availed of any special

    benefit. The reserved category lists were thereafter to be drawn.

    Candidates successful in the written test, already permitted to

    provisionally appear in the typewriting test, were to have their

    aggregate marks computed - while those not permitted earlier, were

    to be given an opportunity to appear in a fresh test. The merit lists for
13
both categories were to be re-worked and appointments offered

    accordingly. It was further directed that if no vacancies remained, less

    meritorious appointees in either category would have to make way for

    the more meritorious.
ARGUMENTS OF THE APPELLANT
28. The pivotal contention of Mr. Gupta, learned senior counsel for the

    appellants, is that non-interference with the impugned order would

    result in benefits of migration being given twice – first, at the stage of

    declaration of the results of the written test and the other at the stage

    of declaration of the typewriting test on computer. According to him,

    there are authorities in abundance declaring the law on the question

    of migration and it is now beyond any pale of doubt that the rule of

    migration of a reserved category candidate (from the category to

    which he/she belongs) to the general category is attracted at the stage

    of preparing the final merit list after all tiers of examination have been

    successfully cleared and not at any intermediate tier of the selection

    process, i.e., when the exercise of shortlisting of candidates within the

    respective categories is complete and the marks of all the candidates

    who have cleared the final tier are available, and the stage is reached

    for preparing the final merit list. It has been his consistent argument

    that law, as
laid down by
this Court and several other high courts, do

    not permit benefits of migration to be extended to the reserved

    category candidates at different tiers of the same selection process
14
and such benefit can be availed only once, and that too if the reserved

    candidate has not availed of any concession/relaxation.
29. Mr. Gupta submitted that several findings recorded by the Division

    Bench of the High Court in the impugned judgment have not been

    challenged by the petitioning candidates and, therefore, do not call for

    any interference by this Court. Two of those findings are as follows and

    are non-issues before us:
a.   The Division Bench held that the preparation of list category

           wise is implicit in the relevant rules.
b.   The Division Bench upheld the restriction of shortlisting to the

           extent of five times the number of vacancies, as provided in the

           advertisement.
30. Mr. Gupta next contended that the rule of adjusting a meritorious

    reserved category candidate in the general category is to be applied

    at the stage of final selection, i.e., when the final merit list is prepared,

    and not at the intermediate stage of shortlisting for the second stage

    of examination. A candidate belonging to a reserved category cannot

    claim placement in the general category merely on the basis of marks

    obtained in the written examination, as the written test is only one

    stage of the selection process. The final determination of merit must

    await the completion of all stages, including the typewriting test, which

    carries minimum qualifying marks separately assigned. Hence, the

    gravamen of his contention is that the rule of migration does not apply

    at the stage of shortlisting of candidates through screening or
15
preliminary examination but only at the stage of preparation of the

       final merit or select list for appointment.
31. It was finally urged that having participated in the selection process,

       the respondents are precluded from challenging the process insofar as

       the preparation of category-wise list is concerned.

DECISIONS CITED BY MR. GUPTA
32. Mr. Gupta had been called upon by us to cite authoritative decisions of

       this Court for the proposition he was advancing before us. Multiple

       authorities on the question of migration have been referred to by Mr.

       Gupta in his written notes of arguments, which we allowed him to place

       on record.
33. The decisions cited by Mr. Gupta together with the relevant passages

       therefrom are noted hereunder:
a.
Vikas Sankhala & Ors. v. Vikas Kumar Agarwal & Ors.12
(2 Js):
18. The participants of reserved category candidates in recruitment
               process of 2012 and 2013 preferred SLP(C) No. 31109 of 2014
               wherein this Court issued notice and allowed the appellant Nos. 8 to
               13 belonging to 2013 recruitment, to file SLP. In March, 2015, result
               declared with regard to recruitment of 2013 giving relaxation in
               accordance with State policy dated March 23, 2011. However,
               appointments are not given to reserved category candidates availing
               relaxation although seats have been kept vacant. Moreover,
               migration to general seats was not allowed. The appellant in SLP(C)
               No. 31109 of 2014 belonging to 2013 recruitment moved I.A. No. 14
               of 2015 seeking direction to the State to prepare merit list of 2013
               recruitment in the same manner as done in 2012 recruitment giving
               benefit of relaxation and migration.
***
24. It so happened that many candidates who belonged to reserved
               category got higher marks than the last candidates from the general
               category who was selected for the appointment in the said
               recruitment process. In terms of its various circulars, which we shall
12
(2017) 1 SCC 350
16
refer to at the appropriate stage, such reserved category candidates
who emerged more meritorious than the general category candidates
were allowed to migrate in general category. Effect thereof was that
these candidates though belonging to reserved category occupied the
post meant for general category. According to the writ petitioners
(respondents herein), it was impermissible as these reserved
category candidates got selected after availing certain concessions
and, therefore, there was no reason to allow them to shift to general
category. The High Court has accepted this plea treating the
relaxation in pass marks in TET as concession availed by the reserved
category candidates in the selection process.
***
36. On the aforesaid basis, migration of such reserved category
candidates, though emerged as more meritorious in the selection
process than the last candidate selected in the general category, are
not permitted to migrate to the general category.
***

38.3 (iii) Whether reserved category candidates, who secured better
than general category candidates in recruitment examination, can be
denied migration to general seats on the basis that they had availed
relaxation in TET?
***
78. ... It was further pointed out that during the pendency of the
matter before this Court, appointments were made by the respective
local bodies with respect to recruitment of 2012 giving relaxation in
accordance with the State policy dated March 23, 2011 and also
allowing migration as per policy dated May 11, 2011 subject to the
decision of this Court. The participants of reserved category
candidates in recruitment process of 2012 and 2013 preferred SLP
(C) No. 31109 of 2014 wherein this Court issued notice and allowed
the appellant Nos. 8 to 13 belonging to 2013 recruitment to file SLP.
In March, 2015, result declared with regard to recruitment of 2013
giving relaxation in accordance with State policy dated March 23,
2011. However, appointments are not given to reserved category
candidates availing relaxation although seats have been kept vacant.
Moreover, migration to general seats was not allowed. The appellants
in SLP (C) No. 31109 of 2014 belonging to 2013 recruitment, moved
I.A. No. 14 of 2015 seeking direction to the State to prepare merit
list of 2013 recruitment in the same manner as done in 2012
recruitment giving benefit of relaxation and migration.
***

84.2 Migration from reserved category to general category shall be
admissible to those reserved category candidates who secured more
marks obtained by the last unreserved category candidates who are
selected, subject to the condition that such reserved category
candidates did not avail any other special concession. It is clarified
that concession of passing marks in TET would not be treated as
concession falling in the aforesaid category.
17
b.
Pradeep Singh Dehal v. State of H.P.13
(2
Js)


         From Pradeep Singh Dehal
(supra), paragraph 15 was referred to

         us which in turn referenced paragraph 84.2 of the decision in
Vikas

         Sankhala
(supra), reproduced supra. It reads:
15.
In the judgment reported as
Vikas Sankhala v. Vikas Kumar
               Agarwal
one of the questions examined was whether reserved
               category candidate who obtains more marks than the last general
               category candidate is to be treated as general category candidate. It
               was held that such reserved category candidate has to be treated as
               unreserved category candidate provided such candidate did not avail
               any other special concession.
…

      c.
Gaurav Pradhan v. State of Rajasthan14
: (2 Js)
14. As per Rule 7(1), orders were issued by the State of Rajasthan
               from time to time providing for reservations and matters connecting
               therewith. In the present case we are only concerned with the
               question of migration of reserved category candidate into
               general/open category candidate. Hence, it is sufficient to note the
               relevant orders issued by the Government in the above context. The
               1989 Rules do not contain any provision regarding migration of
               reserved category candidates into general/open category candidates,
               but the government orders which were referable to Rule 7(1) do
               provide the criteria and basis for such migration. The Circular dated
               24-6-2008 was the last circular on the subject prior to initiation of
               recruitment process. Para 6.2 of the Circular dated 24-6-2008 which
               has also been extracted by the
Division Bench [Rajesh Singh v. State
               of Rajasthan
, 2014 SCC OnLine Raj 6470: (2014) 2 RLW 1585] of
               the High Court is to the following effect: (
Rajesh Singh
case [
Rajesh
               Singh v. State of Rajasthan
, 2014 SCC OnLine Raj 6470: (2014) 2
               RLW 1585], SCC OnLine Raj para 40)


                     ‘Circular dated 24-6-2008


                     6.2. In the State, members of the SC/ST/OBC can compete
                     against non-reserved vacancies and be counted against them,
                     in case they have not taken any concession (like that of age,
                     etc.) available to them other than that relating to payment of
                     examination fee in case of direct recruitment.’
13
(2019) 9 SCC 276
14
(2018) 11 SCC 352
18
23. The reservation being the enabling provision, the manner and
               extent to which reservation is provided has to be spelled from the
               orders issued by the Government from time to time. In the present
               case, there is no issue pertaining to the extent of reservation
               provided by the State Government to the SC, ST and OBC candidates.
The issue involved in the present case is as to whether the reserved
               category candidates can be allowed to be migrated into general
               category candidates. The reservation is wide enough to include
               exemption, concession, etc. The exemption, concession, etc. are
               allowable to the reserved category candidates to effectuate and to
               give effect to the object behind
Article 16
clause (4) of the
               Constitution. The State is fully empowered to lay down the criteria
               for grant of exemption, concession and reservation and the manner
               and methodology to effectuate such reservation. The migration of
               reserved candidates into general category candidates is also part and
               parcel of larger concept of reservation and the Government Orders
               issued on 17-6-1996, 4-3-2002 and 24-6-2008 were the Government
               Orders providing for methodology for migration of reserved category
               candidates into general category candidates which was well within
               the power of State. Neither before us nor even before the High Court,
               the aforesaid government orders, last being 24-6-2008, were under
               challenge. As noted above, the High Court itself has returned a
               finding that earlier methodology of providing for migration of
               reserved category candidates into general category candidates was
               reversed by order dated 11-5-2011 by which despite taking any
               special concession, reserved category candidates could be migrated
               into general category candidates.
d. Saurav Yadav v. State of U.P.15 (Para 53) (3 Js)
53. The controversy that arises in the present round of litigation is
               the correct method of filling the quota reserved for women
               candidates (‘horizontal quota’). It is the complaint of the applicants,
               who are largely women, belonging to the Other Backward Class
               categories, that the State has not correctly applied the rule of
               reservation, and denied such OBC women candidates the benefit of
               ‘migration’ i.e. adjustment in the General category vacancies.

      e.
Nirav Kumar Dilipbhai Makwana v. Gujrat Public Service

         Commission16
: (2 Js)
2. The question for consideration in this appeal is whether a
               candidate who has availed of an age relaxation in a selection process
15
(2021) 4 SCC 542
16
(2019) 7 SCC 383
19
as a result of belonging to a reserved category, can thereafter seek
               to be accommodated in/or migrated to the general category seat?
               ***
19. It is evident from the above two circulars that a candidate who
               has availed of age relaxation in the selection process as a result of
               belonging to a reserved category cannot, thereafter, seek to be
               accommodated in or migrated to the general category seats.

               ***
24.
Article 16(4)
of the Constitution is an enabling provision
               empowering the State to make any provision or reservation of
               appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens
               which in the opinion of the State is not adequately represented in the
               service under the State. It is purely a matter of discretion of the State
               Government to formulate a policy for concession, exemption,
               preference or relaxation either conditionally or unconditionally in
               favour of the backward classes of citizens. The reservation being the
               enabling provision, the manner and the extent to which reservation
               is provided has to be spelled out from the orders issued by the
               Government from time to time.
***
36. There is also no merit in the submission of the learned counsel
               for the appellant that relaxation in age at the initial qualifying stage
               would not fall foul of the circulars dated 29.01.2000 and 23.07.2004.
               The distinction sought to be drawn between the preliminary and final
               examination is totally misconceived. It is evident from the
               advertisement that a person who avails of an age relaxation at the
               initial stage will necessarily avail of the same relaxation even at the
               final stage. We are of the view that the age relaxation granted to the
               candidates belonging to SC/ST and SEBC category in the instant case
               is an incident of reservation under
Article 16(4)
of the Constitution of
               India.
f.
Govt. of NCT Delhi v. Pradeep Kumar17
: (3 Js)
21. At this stage we need to discuss the Vikas Sankhala judgment in
               some detail as the High Court and the Tribunal granted relief to the
               respondents on the basis of this Judgment. The recruitment in Vikas
               Sankhala, related to Rajasthan where the candidates who availed
               concession in the CTET examination, were allowed to migrate to
               Unreserved (or general) category vacancies, if they were more
               meritorious than the general category candidates."
               ***
17
(2019) 10 SCC 120
20
29. From the above extract of the two OMs, it is quite apparent that,
               unlike in Vikas Sankhala, there is an express bar on migration to the
               unreserved category of those reserved category candidates who had
               availed of relaxation including those for qualification. ...
               ***
30. The other distinguishing aspect in
Vikas Sankhala
(supra) is that
               the candidates who had applied under the reserved category
               belonged to Rajasthan. For the selection and aspirants from the same
               State i.e., Rajasthan, the Court allowed such candidates to migrate
               to the unreserved category.
***
32. The respondents with their CTET qualification under relaxed
               norms would be eligible for OBC category posts provided their OBC
               status is certified and recognized by the Delhi government. But such
               not being the case, they are ineligible for the reserved category
               vacancies. To allow them to migrate and compete for the open
               category vacancies would not be permissible simply because, they
               have secured the CTET qualification with relaxation of pass marks
               meant for those belonging to the OBC category. As the respondents
               have not secured the normal pass marks for general category, their
               eligibility for the general category vacancies is not secured.
               Therefore, their performance in the selection examination would be
               of no relevance, in the present process.
g.
Sadhana Singh Dangi v. Pinki Asati18
: (3 Js)


               6.1. Going by the settled principles of law, migration of reserved
               category candidate on the basis of merit for allotment of a seat in
               General Category would certainly be applicable to vertical
               reservation.
h.
Ramnaresh @ Rinku Kushwah v. State of Madhya Pradesh19
:
(2 Js)
16.
In view of the settled position of law as
laid down by
this Court
               in the case of
Saurav Yadav
(supra) and reiterated in the case of
Sadhana Singh Dangi
(supra), the methodology adopted by the
               respondents in compartmentalizing the different categories in the
               horizontal reservation and restricting the migration of the meritorious
               reserved category candidates to the unreserved seats is totally
               unsustainable. In view of the law
laid down by
this Court, the
18
(2022) 12 SCC 401
19
2024 SCC OnLine SC 2058
21
meritorious candidates belonging to SC/ST/OBC, who on their own
               merit, were entitled to be selected against the UR-GS quota, have
               been denied the seats against the open seats in the GS quota.
i.
Alok Kumar Pandit v. State of Assam20
: (2 Js)
7. The learned counsel for the appellant referred to the provisions of
               the
Assam Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation of
               Vacancies in Services and Posts) Act, 1978
, Assam Public Service
               Combined Competitive Examination Rules, 1989 and Office Memo No.
               ARP-338/83/14 dated Dispur, 4-1-1984 issued by the State
               Government and argued that the reserved category candidates, who
               were more meritorious than open category candidates, but were
               appointed against the reserved category posts should be deemed to
               have been appointed against the posts earmarked for the open
               category and they cannot be treated as appointed against the posts
               earmarked for the reserved category, which is constitutionally and
               legally impermissible. He submitted that if migration is allowed to
               more meritorious candidates of the reserved category, who, as per
               their overall merit should be appointed against the general category
               posts then the quota earmarked for reserved category will be reduced
               and that would be clearly contrary to the provisions of the Rules
               framed under the proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution, the
               reservation policy framed by the State Government and
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution.
ARGUMENTS OF THE PETITIONING CANDIDATES
34. Dr. Chauhan, learned senior counsel for the petitioning candidates,

       contended that the recruitment process initiated pursuant to the

       advertisement dated 05th August, 2022 suffered from a fundamental

       illegality, inasmuch as the General/Open category was treated as an

       exclusive compartment reserved for non-reserved candidates. Such an

       approach, it was urged, has the effect of converting the selection into

       a form of communal reservation, a concept expressly proscribed by

       the constitutional scheme.
20
(2012) 13 SCC 516
22
35. Drawing our attention to the decision of this Court in
Saurav Yadav
(supra), Dr. Chauhan placed particular reliance on the opinion of

    Hon’ble S. Ravindra Bhat, J. (as His Lordship then was) where it was

    emphasised that the open category is not a quota, but remains

    accessible to all candidates irrespective of social classification.
36. It was also urged that the illegality in the present selection process is

    manifest from the cut-off marks for several reserved categories being

    demonstrably higher than the cut-off marks for the General/Open

    category, revealing an impermissible methodology of category-wise

    segregation at the stage of shortlisting after the written examination.
37. Pointing out that a candidate (who had not availed of any special or

    additional benefit of reservation) was entitled to be placed in the

    General/Open category having secured marks well above the cut-off

    marks for the General/Open category and that denial of such

    placement resulted in his wrongful exclusion from the next stage of

    the selection process, namely, the type-writing test on computer, Dr.

    Chauhan contended that the exclusion of meritorious reserved

    category candidates at the shortlisting stage itself defeats the very

    principle of equality based on merit and renders the subsequent stages

    of selection constitutionally infirm.
38. It was further submitted that the Division Bench in the impugned order

    correctly applied the settled constitutional principle that a candidate

    belonging to a reserved category, who secures marks higher than the
23
cut-off prescribed for the General/Open category, is entitled to be

    considered against the General/Open category.
39. Highlighting that the Division Bench’s directions merely mandate a

    lawful reworking of the merit lists - by first preparing the Open/General

    category list strictly on the basis of merit, followed by the preparation

    of the respective reserved category lists and by granting an

    opportunity to candidates who were wrongly excluded to participate in

    the type-writing test, it was next contended that the Division Bench

    did not confer any undue or preferential advantage on the petitioning

    candidates, but merely restored them the position they would have

    occupied had the selection process been conducted in accordance with

    constitutional norms from its inception.
40. Finally, it was argued that migration of reserved category candidates

    to the Open/General category cannot be confined only to the final

    stage of appointment, but must necessarily operate at every stage

    where merit is assessed and shortlisting is undertaken; otherwise, the

    primacy of merit, which underlies
Articles 14
and
16
of the

    Constitution, would stand diluted by procedural stratification.

OUR OBSERVATIONS, ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

  A. PRINCIPLE OF ESTOPPEL
41. Our examination of the erudite arguments advanced by Mr. Gupta

    must begin with consideration of the objection to the conduct of the

    petitioning candidates based on applicability of the principle of

    ‘estoppel’.
24
42. There is a long line of decisions of this Court that candidates who

     participated in a selection process cannot later challenge the procedure

     adopted merely because the result is not palatable to them. It has

     been held there, generally, that the principle of estoppel operates

     against such a candidate who, having taken a calculated chance of

     selection by participating in the selection process and failed to secure

     selection, challenges the process of selection in Court on the ground

     of a flawed procedure being adopted by the recruiting/selecting

     authority. Profitable reference may be made to some of the decisions

     of this Court, viz.
G. Sarana v. University of Lucknow21
,
Om

     Prakash Shukla v. Akhilesh Kumar Shukla22
,
Madan Lal v. State

     of Jammu & Kashmir23
,
K.A. Nagamani v. Indian Airlines24
,
Manish Kumar Shahi v. State of Bihar25
,
Ramesh Chandra Shah

     v. Anil Joshi26
and
Ramjit Singh Kardam v. Sanjeev Kumar27
.
43. However, this rule is not absolute. As elucidated in Meeta Sahai v.
State of Bihar28, participation of a candidate in a selection process

     implies acceptance of the prescribed procedure, but not of any

     illegality in the conduct of the said procedure or constitutional infirmity

     underlying it. Where the challenge pertains to a misconstruction of
21
(1976) 3 SCC 585
22
1986 Supp SCC 285
23
(1995) 3 SCC 486
24
(2009) 5 SCC 515
25
(2010) 12 SCC 576
26
(2013) 11 SCC 309
27
(2020) 20 SC 209
28
(2019) 20 SCC 17
25
statutory rules or violation of constitutional principles, the plea of

       estoppel cannot operate as a bar.
44. This distinction was earlier recognised by a Bench of three Judges

       in
Raj Kumar v. Shakti Raj29
, where despite participation, the Court

       held that glaring illegalities in the process rendered estoppel

       inapplicable.
45. Having considered the precedents in the field, to our mind, a candidate

       would be estopped from challenging a selection process post-

       participation, unless he can show that despite due diligence, he could

       not have known earlier of the illegality in the procedure that came to

       be adopted or that the procedural flaw striking at the root of the

       selection process was hidden and surfaced only after completion of the

       process of selection; hence, no challenge could have been laid by him

       prior to his participation in the process.
46. In the present case, the advertisement was a representation to the

       aspirants for public employment that category-wise lists would be

       prepared. None would question such a condition. There was, however,

       no indication that meritorious reserved category candidates would not

       be treated as General/Open category candidates even if they outscore

       the latter. The illegality lies in the action of the appellants in not

       treating    the   meritorious    reserved    category   candidates   as

       General/Open category candidates, despite noticing that the former

       had outperformed and outshone the latter. Since the petitioning
29
(1997) 9 SCC 527
26
candidates could not have possibly visualised such an approach on the

    part of the recruiters by projecting their own imagination and discover

    all facts and circumstances that might be in their contemplation to be

    adopted while drawing up the merit lists at the time they participated

    in the preliminary written examination, the question of such candidates

    being estopped from mounting a challenge to the legality of the

    process does not and cannot arise. The petitioning candidates paid a

    price for their merit and having challenged the very legality of the

    process alleging violation of constitutional norms and legal principles,

    the plea of estoppel could not have defeated such a challenge.
47. The Division Bench by entertaining the writ petitions and granting relief

    of the nature noticed above cannot be held to have exercised

    jurisdiction illegally.
B. ON ‘DOUBLE BENEFIT’
48. Moving on with consideration of the objection regarding ‘double

    benefit’, we see no reason to agree.
49. A reserved category candidate, howsoever meritorious he/she might

    be, in present times has to face stiff competition from other equally

    meritorious candidates having regard to dearth of jobs in our country.

    It is out of an anxiety to obtain an employment that such a reserved

    category candidate typically indicates the category to which he/she

    belongs for being considered for appointment on a reserved vacancy.

    Certainly, mere indication of one’s reserved category in the application

    form does not automatically qualify the candidate for appointment on
27
a reserved vacant post but only enables him/her to stake a claim

    amongst all reserved candidates based on the inter se merit position.

    Equally, for a deserving reserved category candidate to be appointed

    on an unreserved vacant post, it is merit and merit alone that must

    determine suitability. In other words, for the unreserved vacant posts,

    the inter se merit among all the competing candidates serves as the

    benchmark for appointment in public service.
50. Bearing such well-acknowledged legal position in mind, we have no

    hesitation to record our clear agreement with the view expressed by

    the Division Bench, notwithstanding the assiduous arguments of Mr.

    Gupta. The premise underlying the argument of potentially conferring

    ‘double benefit’ to the candidates of the reserved category proceeds

    on an erroneous assumption that a reserved category candidate is

    necessarily availing the benefit of reservation at more than one/every

    stage of a multi-tier process. It is entirely conceivable that a candidate

    belonging to a reserved category may, on his or her own merit, secure

    marks in the preliminary stage exceeding the cut-off for the

    unreserved category and may, likewise, on cumulative assessment,

    surpass the unreserved cut-off in the final stage as well. In such a

    situation, the reserved candidate does not draw upon the benefit of

    reservation at any stage and is entitled to be considered and appointed

    against an unreserved vacant post purely on merit. The apprehension

    of a ‘double benefit’, therefore, is misconceived, since the availability

    of reservation does not operate as a bar for a reserved category
28
candidate from being considered on merit against the unreserved

    category, placement therein depending solely on merit demonstrably

    sufficient at the particular stage, a proposition we propose to examine.

  C. PRECEDENTS ON ‘MIGRATION’
51. Having read the extracts of the precedents referred to us by Mr. Gupta

    on the question of migration, we have not found the same to support

    the proposition of law he has argued. However, before inching ahead,

    for the sake of completeness, we wish to advert to certain omitted

    paragraphs from the precedents that were cited as well as a couple of

    more precedents bearing on the issue for presenting a holistic and

    coherent picture of the legal position governing migration of reserved

    category candidates in a multi-tier selection process.
52.
Paragraph 15 of Pradeep Singh Dehal
(supra) was referred to by Mr.

    Gupta. However, we wish to refer to paragraphs 16 and 17 of
the said

    decision
as well for a complete perspective on the reasoning of this

    Court. The same are reproduced below:
16. The concessions which were availed by the reserved category
        candidates are in the nature of age relaxation, lower qualifying marks,
        concessional application money than the general category candidates.
17. In view of the said fact, we find that the selection process conducted
        by the University cannot be said to be fair and reasonable.
Consequently, the University is directed to re-examine the selection
        process by constituting an Expert Committee who shall consider the
        “publications” of the candidates who were being considered in pursuance
        of Advertisement No. 3 of 2011 and make suitable recommendations
        accordingly by having a joint merit list of all the categories of candidates
        who applied for appointment to the post of Assistant Professor. However,
        in such selection process, the appointment of candidates already
        selected will not be disturbed, except the appellant whose appointment
        shall be subject to the decision of the University on the basis of
        recommendation of the Expert Committee.
29
53. Paragraph 7 of the decision in
Alok Kumar Pandit
(supra) was

    referred. For completeness, the relevant extracts from
the said

    decision
containing the answer to the question noticed in paragraph 7

    are reproduced below:
13. If the proposition
laid down in
Indra Sawhney v. Union of
           India
[1992 Supp (3) SCC 217 : 1992 SCC (L&S) Supp 1 : (
1992) 22
           ATC 385] and R.K. Sabharwal v. State of Punjab
[(1995) 2 SCC 745
           : 1995 SCC (L&S) 548 : (1995) 29 ATC 481] are considered in
           abstract, it may be possible to say that once a reserved category
           candidate secures higher merit than open category candidates, he
           can be considered for appointment only against open category post
           and the quota of the particular reserved category cannot be reduced
           by treating his appointment as one made against the post earmarked
           for the reserved category to which he belongs. However, literal
           application of this proposition can lead to serious anomaly and
           discrimination inasmuch as more meritorious candidate of the
           particular reserved category could be deprived of the
           service/cadre/post of his choice/preference and less meritorious
           candidate of the reserved category could get appointment on the post
           which would otherwise be available to more meritorious candidate.
This can be illustrated by the following example:
X and Y are members of reserved category. They compete for
           selection for recruitment to All-India Services, which includes, IAS,
           IPS, IRS, etc. In the merit list prepared by the Commission X is
           placed higher than some of the open category candidates but on the
           basis of his overall inter se merit with the open category candidates
           he could get appointment only to IRS. X can get the post of his
           choice/preference i.e. IAS provided his case is considered for
           appointment against the posts earmarked for the particular reserved
           category to which he belongs. If he is not allowed to do so, then why
           (sic., Y) who is less meritorious than X within the reserved category
           will get appointment to IAS against the reserved post. In this
           manner X will, despite his better merit within the reserved category,
           stand discriminated in the matter of appointment against the post for
           which he had given his preference.
***
           24.1. A reserved category candidate who is adjudged more
           meritorious than the open category candidates is entitled to choose
           the particular service/cadre/post as per his choice/preference and he
           cannot be compelled to accept appointment to an inferior post
           leaving the more important service/cadre/post in the reserved
           category for less meritorious candidate of that category.
30
54.
In
Jitendra Kumar Singh v. State of U.P.30
, this Court [while

        construing the Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for

        Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act,

        1994 and the executive instructions issued thereunder] drew a clear

        distinction between concessions granted at the threshold stage such

        as reduced fee and age relaxation (to enable participation in the

        selection process) and relaxation in the standards of selection. The

        relevant paragraphs therefrom read as follows:
72. Soon after the enforcement of the 1994 Act the Government
               issued Instructions dated 25-3-1994 on the subject of reservation for
               Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other backward groups in
               the Uttar Pradesh Public Services. These instructions, inter alia,
               provide as under:
“4. If any person belonging to reserved categories is selected
                       on the basis of merits in open competition along with general
                       category candidates, then he will not be adjusted towards
                       reserved category, that is, he shall be deemed to have been
                       adjusted against the unreserved vacancies. It shall be
                       immaterial that he has availed any facility or relaxation (like
                       relaxation in age-limit) available to reserved category.”
               From the above it becomes quite apparent that the relaxation in age-
               limit is merely to enable the reserved category candidate to compete
               with the general category candidate, all other things being equal. The
               State has not treated the relaxation in age and fee as relaxation in
               the standard for selection, based on the merit of the candidate in the
               selection test i.e. main written test followed by interview. Therefore,
               such relaxations cannot deprive a reserved category candidate of the
               right to be considered as a general category candidate on the basis
               of merit in the competitive examination. Sub-section (2) of
Section 8
further provides that government orders in force on the
               commencement of the Act in respect of the concessions and
               relaxations including relaxation in upper age-limit which are not
               inconsistent with the Act continue to be applicable till they are
               modified or revoked.
***
75. In our opinion, the relaxation in age does not in any manner
               upset the “level playing field”. It is not possible to accept the
               submission of the learned counsel for the appellants that relaxation
               in age or the concession in fee would in any manner be infringement
               of
Article 16(1)
of the Constitution of India. These concessions are
30
(2010) 3 SCC 119
31
provisions pertaining to the eligibility of a candidate to appear in the
               competitive examination. At the time when the concessions are
               availed, the open competition has not commenced. It commences
               when all the candidates who fulfil the eligibility conditions, namely,
               qualifications, age, preliminary written test and physical test are
               permitted to sit in the main written examination. With age relaxation
               and the fee concession, the reserved candidates are merely brought
               within the zone of consideration, so that they can participate in the
               open competition on merit. Once the candidate participates in the
               written examination, it is immaterial as to which category, the
               candidate belongs. All the candidates to be declared eligible had
               participated in the preliminary test as also in the physical test. It is
               only thereafter that successful candidates have been permitted to
               participate in the open competition.
55. More recently, in
Deepa E.V. v. Union of India31
, this Court

        elucidated an important qualification to the principle enunciated

        in
Jitendra Kumar Singh
(supra). This Court held that should the

        governing statutory rules or executive instructions provide for an

        express bar that candidates belonging to the Scheduled Caste,

        Scheduled Tribe or Other Backward Classes, having availed any

        relaxation or concession, shall not be adjusted against unreserved

        vacancies, such express bar would have primacy. The instructive

        passages from the decision are set out below:
4. The appellant, who has applied under OBC category by availing
               age relaxation and also attending the interview under the “OBC
               category” cannot claim right to be appointed under the General
               category.
***
8. The learned counsel for the appellant mainly relied upon the
               judgment of this Court in
Jitendra Kumar Singh v. State of
               U.P. [Jitendra Kumar Singh
v. State of U.P., (2010) 3 SCC 119 :
(2010) 1 SCC (L&S) 772] , which deals with the U.P. Public Services
               (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
               Backward Classes) Act, 1994 and Government Order dated 25-3-
1994. On a perusal of the above judgment, we find that there is no
               express bar in the said U.P. Act for the candidates of SC/ST/OBC
               being considered for the posts under general category. In such facts
31
(2017) 12 SCC 680
32
and circumstances of the said case, this Court has taken the view
            that the relaxation granted to the reserved category candidates will
            operate a level playing field.
In the light of the express bar provided
            under the proceedings dated 1-7-1998 the principle
laid down
            in
Jitendra Kumar Singh [Jitendra Kumar Singh v. State of U.P.
,
            (2010) 3 SCC 119 : (2010) 1 SCC (L&S) 772] cannot be applied to
            the case in hand.
56. At this stage, it is necessary to clarify that the present case stands on

    a different footing from the principles of law discussed above. No such

    concession or relaxation has been extended to the petitioning

    candidates and the controversy before us is confined to a narrower

    question, namely, whether a candidate belonging to a reserved

    category, who has secured marks higher than the cut-off for the

    general category in the preliminary/screening stage, is to be treated

    as having qualified against an open or unreserved vacant post, or

    whether such candidate must necessarily be confined to the reserved

    category alone.
D. MIGRATION- MEANING AND APPLICABILITY
57. We are convinced, on the facts that have emerged, that we have an

    “open” slate before us. As would unfold from the discussion hereafter,

    our stance remains unchanged from what was conveyed to Mr. Gupta

    in course of hearing.
58. We begin our observations, analysis and ruling on migration by

    refreshing our memory with certain well-established principles in

    relation to affirmative action under our Constitution. It is well-settled

    that the concept of ‘equality before law’ ingrained in
Article 14
of the

    Constitution   of   India   contemplates,      inter   alia,   elimination   of
33
inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities not only amongst

    individuals but also amongst groups of people and is aimed at securing

    the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the

    society and to protect them from social injustice and exploitation. The

    equal protection clause urges affirmative action for those who are

    placed unequally. Affirmative action is also recognised by
Article 16.
Then again,
Article 335
thereof provides for special consideration in

    the matter of claims of the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes for

    public employment. The entire field of law relating to affirmative action

    is so well occupied by authoritative decisions that we consider it

    unnecessary to burden this judgment by referring to the same. What

    particularly concerns us in these appeals is not a sterile invocation of

    formal   legal   equality,   but   an   assessment   of   the   real-world

    consequences flowing from the principle of equality. The focus,

    therefore, must be on outcomes as much as on rules.
59.
Indra Sawhney
(supra) explained the principles of reservation.

    Hon’ble B.P. Jeevan Reddy, J. (as His Lordship then was) declared,

    inter alia, that where a vertical reservation is made in favour of a

    backward class, the candidates in this category may compete for open

    or general category and that if they are appointed on merit in the open

    or general category, their number will not be counted against the

    backward class category and, as such, it cannot be considered that the

    vertical reservations have been filled up to the extent candidates of

    this category have migrated to the open category on merit.
34
60.
In
Saurav Yadav
(supra), Hon’ble S. Ravindra Bhat, J. in His

     Lordship’s supplementing opinion32 outlined the features of vertical

     and horizontal reservation as follows:
59. The features of vertical reservations are:
59.1. They cannot be filled by the open category, or categories of
              candidates other than those specified and have to be filled by
              candidates of the social category concerned only (SC/ST/OBC).
              59.2. Mobility (“migration”) from the reserved (specified category)
              to the unreserved (open category) slot is possible, based on
              meritorious performance.
59.3. In case of migration from reserved to open category, the
              vacancy in the reserved category should be filled by another person
              from the same specified category, lower in rank.
59.4. If the vacancies cannot be filled by the specified categories due
              to shortfall of candidates, the vacancies are to be “carried forward”
              or dealt with appropriately by rules.
60. Horizontal reservations on the other hand, by their nature, are
              not inviolate pools or carved in stone. They are premised on their
              overlaps and are “interlocking” reservations49. As a sequel, they are
              to be calculated concurrently and along with the inviolate “vertical”
              (or “social”) reservation quotas, by application of the various steps
              laid out with clarity in para 21.3 of Lalit, J.’s judgment. They cannot
              be carried forward. The first rule that applies to filling horizontal
              reservation quotas is one of adjustment i.e. examining whether on
              merit any of the horizontal categories are adjusted in the merit list
              in the open category, and then, in the quota for such horizontal
              category within the particular specified/social reservation.
61. The open category is not a “quota”, but rather available to all
              women and men alike. …”.
61. The above observations were followed by His Lordship’s observation,

     found almost at the end of the opinion, that the “open category is open

     to all, and the only condition for a candidate to be shown in it is merit,

     regardless of whether reservation benefit of either type is available to

     her or him.”. The same have a profound meaning, and needs to be
32
the Editor’s note in the SCC report suggests that all three Hon’ble Judges on the Bench
had signed the supplementing opinion.
35
translated into action without being unnecessarily bothered by a term

    like ‘migration’.
62. Drawing inspiration from the guiding light provided by
Indra

    Sawhney
(supra) and
Saurav Yadav
(supra), we hold that the word

    ‘open’ connotes nothing but ‘open’, meaning thereby that vacant posts

    which are sought to be filled by earmarking it as ‘open’ do not fall in

    any category. One does find categories like ‘open’ or ‘unreserved’ or

    ‘general’ being widely used in course of recruitment drives but they

    are meant to signify the open/unreserved vacant posts on which any

    suitable   candidate   can      be    appointed,   regardless   of   the

    caste/tribe/class/gender of such candidate. For all intents and

    purposes, the vacancies on posts which are notified/advertised as open

    or unreserved or general, as the terms suggest, are not reserved for

    any caste/tribe/class/gender and are, thus, open to all notwithstanding

    that a cross-section of society can also compete for appointment on

    vacant posts which are ‘reserved’ – vertical or horizontal – as

    mentioned in the notification/advertisement.
63. Now, turning to the dictionary meaning of the word ‘migration’, what

    we find is that the same typically refers to the act of moving from one

    place to another, often involving a change of residence or location.

    This can apply to various contexts like human migration, animal

    migration, data migration, etc. In general, migration involves a change

    of location, often with the intention of settling or establishing a new

    presence in the new location.
36
64. In the context of reservation in public employment, the word

       ‘migration’ refers to a candidate claiming benefits or entitlements. The

       word is used in, at least, two scenarios.
65. Scenario 1 is “Inter-State Reservation Migration” envisaging a

       portability of reservation benefits. Since we are not concerned with a

       scenario 1 case, we make no observation except noting two decisions

       of this Court. The first is
Action Committee v. Union of India33
where it has been held by a Constitution Bench that a person belonging

       to Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe in relation to his original State, of

       which he is a permanent or ordinary resident, cannot be deemed to be

       so in relation to any other State on his migration to that State for the

       purpose of employment, education, etc.
The second is
Uttar Pradesh

       Public Service Commission v. Sanjay Kumar Singh34
holding that

       if a person certified as Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe in one State

       migrates to another State, then he would not be entitled to the benefit

       available to Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe in the State to which he

       has migrated unless he belongs to the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled

       Tribe in that State.
66. Scenario 2, with which we are concerned, occurs when there is a “Merit

       Induced Shift”. Although this shift is largely referred to as migration,

       we find in
Saurav Yadav
(supra) Hon’ble Ravindra Bhat, J. explaining
33
(1994) 5 SCC 244
34
(2003) 7 SCC 657
37
the term as adjustment of a reserve category candidate in the

    unreserved category based on his/her merit.
67. Here, we do not see reason to agree with Mr. Gupta that any shift or

    adjustment, or even migration as he contends, as such is required

    where a candidate, who is also otherwise entitled to compete and be

    selected for a reserved vacant post, happens to outscore, outperform

    and outshine not only reserved candidates but also general candidates

    and figures at the top of the list of successful candidates prepared after

    a qualifying/preliminary examination (for screening/shortlisting) solely

    by dint of the marks secured by him/her in such examination (without

    availing any concession/relaxation) thereby entitling him/her to

    participate in the second tier of a further suitability test. Such a

    meritorious candidate, notwithstanding that he/she belongs to a

    reserved category, be it Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or Other

    Backward Class, must of necessity (arising out of the concept of

    equality before law and equal protection of the laws in
Article 14
, and

    extended to
Article 16
in matters of public employment) be treated as

    a candidate who has competed for the ‘unreserved’ category and not

    the ‘reserved’ category, thereby obviating the need for any ‘migration’

    or, so to say, shift or adjustment.
68. In a two-tier process, as in the present case, we wish to illustrate how,

    generally, the exercise of screening/short-listing of candidates

    (belonging to General/Open, Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or

    Other Backward Class, etc., categories) with five times the number of
38
vacancies in each category, who would literally be gaining the ‘pass’

to reach the second tier to participate in the typewriting test on

computer can be conducted without complaints of unfairness and non-

transparency in the process. Say, 100 vacancies in the General/Open

category are notified and a similar number for the reserved categories

is also notified. Five times the number of vacancies would mean not

more than 500 candidates can be screened/shortlisted for the

General/Open category. At the outset, based on the performance of

the candidates who take the written test, the recruiting authority has

to screen/short-list the candidates to be included in the General/Open

category and subsequently for reserved categories. Judicial notice can

be taken that this exercise is often facilitated by preparing a broad-

sheet, also called a short-list, containing names of all the candidates

(who acquit themselves successfully in the written test). For the

preparation of the short-list for the General/Open category, candidates

are first arranged strictly in descending order of merit and, thereafter,

candidates falling short of the cut-off for such category figure in

descending order of merit according to their respective reservation

category in separate short-lists. If any candidate, say ‘C’, being the

member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or Other Backward

Class, outscores the candidates not belonging to any reserved

category in the written test, he/she shall be included in the short-list

for the General/Open category. At this stage, there is no question of

any migration; merit is the only criterion amongst all candidates who
39
have to be seen as belonging to General/Open category. Once ‘C’ gains

the ‘pass’ for the second-tier process and qualifies in the typewriting

test on computer obtaining marks in excess of the requisite marks,

his/her marks obtained in such test would be required to be added to

the marks obtained in the written test. Once again, a broad-sheet has

to be prepared based on cumulative scores containing names of all the

candidates in order of highest to lowest marks with the more

meritorious candidates, obviously, figuring at the top. Preparation of

this broad-sheet is a handy tool for drawing up the final merit list of

candidates. From the broad-sheet, names of candidates drawn up in

order of merit with candidates ranked according to their marks in

descending order, commonly called the Combined Merit List, ought to

reflect where each one of the aspiring candidates stand on merit. If ‘C’

figures within the first 100 candidates in order of merit, i.e., the

number of vacant posts for the General/Open category, he/she shall

be counted as a General/Open candidate for the purpose of

appointment. Here too, there is no question of migration for the reason

we have already indicated above, i.e., merit being the only criterion

and not caste/tribe/gender, etc. If ‘C’ does not figure in the first 100

candidates and whilst preparing the merit list of reserved category

candidates it is found that he/she figures within the specified number

of vacancies in the reserved category to which he/she belongs and

which can be filled up by appointing him/her, he/she ought to be

counted as a candidate of such reserved category for appointment. If
40
‘C’ fails to figure in the merit list for the reserved category list as well,

    question of his/her appointment would not arise.
69. We, however, sound a note of caution that our observations above are

    relatable to the selection process of the kind under consideration. It

    has not been shown with reference to the recruitment rules that the

    same ordain otherwise. If, at all, the recruitment rules governing any

    selection process ordain otherwise than what is observed above,

    obviously the recruitment rules would have precedence subject to the

    condition that such rule passes the test of constitutionality.
70. Reverting to the appeals under consideration, we see no reason to say

    that there has been a ‘migration’, in the sense of either an adjustment

    or a shift being made. At the time of screening/short-listing of

    candidates based on their performance in the qualifying examination

    and even thereafter, initially all the aspiring candidates including the

    reserved candidates should be seen as General/Open candidates. If

    such a candidate, notwithstanding that he/she belongs to a reserved

    category maintains excellence in standard even in the second tier of

    examination (typewriting test, in this case), he/she would cease to be

    treated as a candidate belonging to any category and entitled to

    treatment as a candidate seeking appointment on a vacant post which

    is categorised as General/Open. Should there be a decline in

    performance in the second tier test pushing out the candidate from the

    zone of consideration for appointment on posts which are open or

    unreserved or general but not beyond the zone for the reserved vacant
41
posts, it is necessary to regard him/her as a candidate belonging to

    the reserved category to which he/she belongs, thereby paving the

    way for him/her to stake a claim for consideration for appointment on

    an appropriate reserved vacant post.
71. In the milieu of facts, none of the petitioning candidates has been

    shown to have availed of any concession/relaxation. No law – either

    rule or executive instruction – has been shown which prevented the

    High Court from treating the reserved candidates as General/Open

    candidates once it transpired that they outshone the latter. Question

    of any migration or deriving twin benefits of migration did not and

    could not arise in the circumstances.
72. If we accept the proposition advanced by the appellants, it would not

    only have a detrimental impact on candidates from the disadvantaged

    sections but also erode the principles enshrined in the Constitution.
73. Now, turning to
Chattar Singh
(supra) which was heavily relied on by

    the appellants, we have to record that the ratio laid down therein must

    be appreciated in its proper context. In that case, the scheme of

    examination clearly provided that the marks obtained in the

    preliminary examination would not be considered for the determination

    of final merit. The rule therein, appearing from paragraph 5 of the

    decision, read as follows:
5. Rule 13 of the Rules prescribes the mode of conducting
           preliminary as well as Main Examination. It reads as under:
“13. Scheme of Examination, personality and viva voce test.—
                 The competitive examination shall be conducted by the
                 Commission in two stages, i.e., Preliminary Examination and
                 Main Examination as per the scheme specified in Schedule III.
42
The marks obtained in the Preliminary Examination by the
                  candidates, who are declared qualified for admission to the
                  Main Examination will not be counted for determining their
                  final order of merit…”
                                                              (emphasis ours)

    It is in view of this rule that this Court held that the claim of reserved

    category candidates to be accommodated in the open category on the

    basis of marks obtained will be determined at the final stage. We find

    no reason to differ from that principle. However, the facts of the

    present case stand on a distinct footing. First, the main written

    examination here is not a mere preliminary/screening test but an

    integral and substantive component of the selection process, carrying

    300 marks out of a total of 400 - constituting 75% of the final

    assessment. Its weight and determinative value distinguish it from the

    limited preliminary stage examination contemplated in
Chattar

    Singh
(supra), thereby rendering that ratio inapplicable to the present

    factual matrix. Secondly, the inclusion of a reserved category

    candidate in the open merit list at the stage of shortlisting cannot be

    equated with ‘migration’, for no benefit or concession of reservation is

    availed.
Such inclusion is purely merit-based and, therefore, stands on

    a plane distinct from the concept of ‘migration’ as addressed

    in
Chattar Singh
(supra).
74. Before we part, we find it necessary to enter a caveat. A situation could

    arise, if the aforesaid principles were applied, of a reserved category

    candidate based on his/her performance outshining General/Open

    candidates and figuring in the General merit list, but finding the
43
options to be limited. He/she may, as a consequence of being counted

       as a General candidate, lose out on a preferred service or a preferred

       post because the same is reserved for a reserved category candidate.

       Should such an eventuality occur, the same is bound to breed

       dissatisfaction, disappointment and displeasure which are not in the

       interests of public service. After all, fairness matters even in public

       employment. Where adjustment against the unreserved category

       would result in a more meritorious reserved category candidate being

       displaced in favour of a less meritorious candidate within the same

       category for a preferred service or a preferred post within the reserved

       quota, the former must be permitted to be considered against the

       service/post in the reserved quota. This would ensure merit being

       preserved both across categories and within them, and that

       reservation functions as a means of inclusion rather than an

       instrument of disadvantage. The approach adopted by us in holding so

       is consistent with the view expressed by this Court, encapsulated

       in paragraph 24.1 of
Alok Kumar Pandit
(supra).
We may also

       mention here that prior to the view expressed in
Alok Kumar Pandit
(supra), the High Court at Calcutta in a somewhat like situation took

       the same view in
Mukul Biswas v. State of West Bengal35
.
75. We appreciate the proactive stance of the Division Bench of the High

       Court while it rectified a situation where the High Court itself was found

       to contravene constitutional ideals.
35
2010 SCC OnLine Cal 1983
44
CONCLUSION
76. For the foregoing reasons, the impugned order is upheld. As a sequel

    thereto, the appeals fail and are dismissed.
77. While considering the cases of the petitioning candidates, the High

    Court may endeavour not to dislodge employees in position, as

    expressed by the Division Bench, as far as possible.
78. Parties shall, however, bear their own costs.
79. Time to comply with the impugned order is extended by two months

    from date.
………………………………J
                                                     (DIPANKAR DATTA)



                                         …………………………………………J
                                         (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)
New Delhi;
December 19, 2025.
45