[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Dadu @ Ankush vs State Of Madhya Pradesh on 8 December, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 1395                                                                NON-REPORTABLE



                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. ………….. OF 2025
                             [ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRIMINAL) NO. 10759/2024]




             DADU @ ANKUSH & ANR.                                              … APPELLANTS

                                                          VS.

             STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ANR.                                   … RESPONDENTS




                                                   JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
1.           This appeal, by special leave, is at the instance of the two appellants,

                            Dadu @ Ankush (A-1) and Ankit (A-2). It is directed against the

                            judgment and order dated 18th January, 2024 of a learned Judge of

                            the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur of dismissal of an
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
RADHA SHARMA
Date: 2025.12.08
15:10:15 IST
Reason:
1
appeal1 under
Section 374(2)
, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973

         preferred by the appellants.
2.   Appellants stood trial in a case2 registered on the basis of a complaint

         lodged by the respondent no. 23 before the Special Judge, Scheduled

         Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 19894.

         The Special Court convicted A-1 under
Section 323
, Indian Penal

         Code, 18605 and sentenced him to rigorous imprisonment for 3

         months together with fine of Rs.1000/- with default term. A-2 was

         convicted under
Sections 354
and
323
, IPC as well as
Section 3(1)(xi)
of the SC/ST Act. For the offences under
Section 354
, and
Section

         3(1)(xi)
of the SC/ST Act, A-2 was sentenced to a year’s rigorous

         imprisonment each together with fine of Rs.1000/-. For the offence

         under
Section 323
, IPC, he was sentenced to rigorous imprisonment

         for 3 months and fine of Rs.1000/-. The sentences were directed to

         run concurrently.
3.   Appellants carried the conviction and sentence in appeal before the

         High Court which, by the aforementioned judgment and order,

         dismissed the appeal.
4.   In the written complaint lodged by the victim giving rise to the First

         Information Report6, it was alleged as follows:
1
Crl. Appeal No. 7239 of 2019
2
Special Case No. 200010 of 2016
3
victim
4
SC/ST Act
5
IPC
6
FIR
2
“I live in Sawargaon, Amba Ward, Padhurna. I study in class 11. My
             family consists of my mother, father, dadi and younger brother Pawan.
             On 04/10/2015 my mother, father and dadi had gone for hawking to
             Ambada market and around 10:30 at night my brother was in the Ganesh
             Utsav organized nearby our house. I was at home. Dadu Pendse of my
             locality came along with his friend Ankit Kevte and enquired from the
             gate of the house, if any one is there, I came out on which Dadu Pendse
             asked isn’t there any one in the house, to which I replied that my father
             has gone to the market. On listening to his Ankit Kevta caught hold of my
             dupatta, I pulled back my dupatta and asked him to leave it, on which
             he caught hold of my neck with bad intention. I shouted and tried to run
             away due to which he scratched my neck. My brother Pawan came to
             save me upon listening my voice, on which both of them gave him
             beating and abused him. Ankit Kevte belongs to Teli cast and despite
             knowing that I belong to Schedule Cast (sic, Caste), he teased me,
             beaten and abused my brother. I have come to lodge the report along
             with my brother Pawan. I have lodged the report. Action be taken.”
5.   Paragraph 2 of the impugned judgment and order records the

     prosecution’s case. We consider it appropriate to reproduce the same

     hereunder:
“2. The facts necessary for disposal of present appeal, in short, are that
             on 04.10.2015, the prosecutrix lodged a report that she was in her house
             and her brother had gone to attend a program of Ganesh Ji. At that time,
             the appellants came there and inquired as to whether there is anybody
             in the house or not. When the prosecutrix informed that her father has
             gone to the market, then the appellant No.2 caught hold of her chunni
             and with evil intention caught hold of her neck. When she tried to run
             away, the appellant No.2 scratched her neck. When her brother came
             running to save her, then he too was also assaulted and he was abused
             filthily. The police lodged the FIR, arrested the appellants, recorded the
             statements of the witnesses and after completing the investigation filed
             the charge-sheet for offence under
Sections 354
,
294
,
323
,
34
of IPC and
             under
Section 3 (1)
11
of SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act.”
6.   In her examination-in-chief, the victim (as PW-1) deposed as follows:
“3. The accused Dadu present in the court, came to my house and asked
             if there was anyone in the house or not, to which I replied that no one is
             there. Then accused Dadu called someone from his mobile phone and
             after a while, the boy standing with the accused Dadu, also came to my
             house. I was standing on the staircase of my house suddenly when the
             boy standing with the accused Dadu pulled my dupatta. I screamed
             loudly and my brother Pawan who was 16 years old at the time of
3
incident came to the house. The boy standing with Dadu also injured me
             on my back through nail marks. As soon as my brother Pawan came to
             rescue me, he was also beaten up by the both the accused present in
             the court. He got injuries on his head, hand and chest. Bleeding also
             oozed from head and chest.”
7.   From the written complaint giving rise to the FIR as well as the

     victim’s deposition in court, it is clear that qua the victim, A-1 did not

     touch the victim. His role is confined to enquiring from the victim as

     to whether anyone was in her house or not. Insofar as A-2 being

     called on phone by A-1 is concerned, the version in the written

     complaint is at variance. Allegedly, A-2 had accompanied A-1. Qua

     her brother (PW-2), the victim deposed that both the appellants beat

     him and he received injuries on his head, hand and chest. Blood also

     oozed from his head and chest. Significantly, the victim did not

     depose in court that A-2, knowing that she and her brother belonged

     to Scheduled Caste, teased her and beat and abused him.
8.   The victim’s brother (PW-2) stepped into the box and deposed as

     follows in course of his examination-in-chief:
“2. The incident happened about 2-3 years ago. The incident took place
             at 8:00-8:15 pm at night when I was at the temple with my friends. My
             house is near the temple, I got the information about the fight happening
             in my house so I ran home and found the accused Dadu alias Ankush
             who is present in the court and another boy whose name came to be
             known as Ankit and my sister was there. Both the accused were teasing
             my sister. Accused Ankit had already pulled my sister’s dupatta and
             there were nail marks on her back. When I intervened, both the accused
             beat me with their hands and with the wood kept near the stove, due to
             which I got injured on my nose and mouth and there was bleeding. The
             accused ran away after assaulting me.
3. There was no one else at my house except my sister. At the time of the
             incident, many people from the locality had come and had seen the
             incident. Thereafter I along with my sister reached the Pandhurna police
4
station where she filed a report about the incident. After the report, …
              and I were sent to Pandhurna hospital for medical examination and
              where both of us were medically examined and treated.”
9.   The evidence of PW-2 reveals that he was at the Ganesh temple when

      he got information about a fight happening in his house and, as such,

      he ran home to find A-1 and A-2 teasing the victim (her sister). From

      whom PW-2 obtained information is not disclosed. Though not being

      present at the relevant time, he deposed that A-2 had pulled the

      dupatta of the victim and scratched her back with nails. Upon

      intervening, the appellants beat him with a wood (kept near the

      stove) resulting in PW-2 suffering bleeding injury on his nose and

      mouth. It is also in his evidence that many people from the locality

      had come and had seen the incident.
10.   From the evidence on record before the trial court, it is revealed that

      on the next day of the incident, the victim and PW-2 were examined

      by the medical officer (PW-5). Insofar as the injuries suffered by

      them are concerned, PW-5 stated as follows:
“1. ***
1. A scratch mark on the back of the neck with length 4 to 5 cm.
2. The said injury was simple in nature and seemed to have been
                     caused by a hard and blunt object. It was occurred within 4 to 5
                     hours of testing. The report given by me Exhibit P-6 which bears my
                     signature at point A to A.
3. ***
1. There was a scratch mark on his chest of size about 1 cm X 1/2
                   cm.
2. A scratch mark above the eyebrow of the left eye, of size about 1
                  cm in length.
4. According to my opinion, the above-mentioned injuries were simple in
           nature and seemed to be caused by a hard and blunt object. They were of
           within 4 to 5 hours of examination. The report given by me Exhibit P-7 bears
           my signature at point A to A.”
5
11.   In his cross-examination, PW-5 deposed as follows:
“5. It is correct to say that if a person falls or gets dragged on the ground, it
           is possible to get both the above-mentioned injuries in such a situation.”
12.   Having considered the evidence led by the prosecution, there appears

      to be a discrepancy as to whether A-2 accompanied A-1 when A-1

      came to the house of the victim and enquired about the availability

      of her family members.
13.   While the FIR version is that the A-2 had accompanied A-1, in court,

      she deposed that A1 had called A2 on phone whereafter he arrived.

      This discrepancy, however, may not be too material for the purpose

      of a decision on this appeal because of other more glaring

      discrepances which we propose to highlight now.
14.   However, what has struck us is the deposition of PW-2 that many

      people from the locality had come and seen the incident. Not only did

      PW-2 not name any person from the locality who had seen the

      incident, not a single witness from the locality was examined who had

      seen the incident. No post-occurrence witness, having heard of the

      incident, was also examined.
15.   That apart, the evidence of PW-5 does suggest that the injuries which

      were suffered by both the victim and PW-2 could have been possible

      if someone falls or gets dragged on the ground. It is also noteworthy

      that the injuries found on the person of both the victim and PW-2

      were simple injuries which, according to PW-5, seem to have been
6
caused by a hard and blunt object. PW-2 had referred to a wood by

      which he was struck by the appellants but such wood was not

      recovered and exhibited.
16.   Although the victim had deposed of being injured by A2 on her back

      through nail mark, the same (nail mark) does not find mention in the

      deposition of PW-5. It is also noteworthy that while PW-2 deposed

      that he was injured on his nose and mouth and there was bleeding,

      no injury on the nose and mouth appear to have been found by PW-
5. That PW-2 suffered injury on his nose and mouth is belied by the

      deposition of the victim, who deposed that PW-2 was bleeding from

      the head and chest.
17.   It is in the evidence of the victim that when A-2 pulled her dupatta,

      she screamed loudly prompting PW-2 to rush to the house. PW-2,

      however, did not say that he rushed to the house on hearing the

      victim’s scream. He said, someone had informed him of a fight in his

      house. If the statement of the victim is contrasted with the statement

      of PW-2, we find it improbable that victim’s loud screams could only

      reach the ears of PW-2 and no one else’s considering that a large

      number of members of the public were present for the Ganesh Puja

      celebrations (as per the version of PW-2 himself).
18.   At this stage, it is also apposite to highlight that as per PW-2, many

      people from the locality had come and seen the incident, hence, it

      would appear strange that none from the locality was produced in the

      court as a prosecution witness. While it is within the realm of
7
possibility, the fact that no member of the public rushed to rescue

        the victim when she was being teased by the appellants is also a

        circumstance to find the testimony of PW-2 unbelievable. We have,

        therefore, come to the ineluctable conclusion that PW-2 has not been

        truthful.
19.     It is also important to note the deposition of PW-4. Though related to

        the victim and PW-2, he deposed that the pandal of Ganesh Puja was

        overcrowded and peoples’ feet were touching each other due to which

        PW-2 felt that A-1 and A-2 had stepped on PW-2’s feet. This resulted

        in a scuffle breaking out between A-1 and A-2 on the one hand and

        PW-2 on the other. Though PW-4 was declared hostile after he made

        the above statement, he was subjected to cross-examination by the

        Public Prosecutor. Notably, it is in his evidence that it was wrong to

        suggest that PW-2 was assaulted by A-1 and A-2. The High Court did

        not refer to the evidence of PW-4 simply on the ground that he had

        turned hostile, in ignorance of the law relating to appreciation of the

        evidence of a witness who has been declared hostile. A profitable

        reference may be made to the decision of this Court in
State of U.P.

        v. Ramesh Prasad Misra7
wherein it was held that it is settled law

        that the evidence of a hostile witness would not be totally rejected if

        spoken in favour of either the prosecution or the accused. It would

        rather have to be subjected to closer scrutiny and that portion of the

        evidence which is consistent with the case of the prosecution or
7
(1996) 10 SCC 360
8
defence may be accepted. The mere rejection of the evidence of PW-
4 in the manner aforesaid is contrary to the law
laid down by
this

      Court.
20.   The High Court further observed that from the statements of the

      appellants recorded under
Section 313
Cr. PC, it was clear that they

      knew PW-1 belonging to Scheduled Caste. An abrupt finding was

      recorded that “it is clear that the offence was committed by the

      appellants simply for reason that the complainant was belonging to

      scheduled caste.” Curiously, there appears to be no statement in

      court in course of trial by the victim that A-2 committed the alleged

      offence only because of the victim being a member of Scheduled

      Caste. No such statement was even made by PW-2. The finding

      returned by the High Court is, thus, perverse.
21.   In our view, the defence has been successful in placing a probable

      and believable account of a scuffle having broken out between PW-2

      and the appellants at the Ganesh Puja pandal, which might have

      prompted PW-2 to set up a false story of commission of offence on

      the victim. Such scuffle could have resulted in PW-2 falling on the

      ground and suffering injuries which were ultimately found on his

      person by PW-5.
22.   Insofar as the victim is concerned, as noted above, she has not

      attributed any offensive act to A-1. Her version of A-2 pulling her

      dupatta and the appellants beating PW-2 also do not inspire

      confidence, in view of the aforesaid discussions. What remains is the
9
scratch on the back of her neck. We do not see reason to hold, in

      view of the evidence of PW-5 and our above findings, that A-2 ought

      to be held guilty of an offence under
Section 323
, IPC.
23.   The conviction and sentence of the appellants being indefensible,

      stand set aside. They are set free and discharged from their bail

      bonds.
24.   The appeal, thus, stands allowed.
………………………………….……J.
                                               (DIPANKAR DATTA)




                                          …………………………….…………J.
                                          (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)
NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 08, 2025.
10