[Cites
22
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Srinibas Goradia vs Arvind Kumar Sahu on 17 December, 2025
Author:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
2025 INSC 1467                                                       Reportable
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.                   OF 2025
                             (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 3682 of 2025)


                            SRINIBAS GORADIA                          ….Appellant(s)
                                                        Versus


                            ARVIND KUMAR SAHU & ORS.                ….Respondent(s)




                                                     JUDGMENT
N.V. ANJARIA, J.
Leave granted.
1.1           Interlocutory Application No.266331 of 2025 is
                            allowed granting permission to produce the additional
                            documents.
2.            Whether or not the appellant herein is a
                            ‘workman’ within the meaning and concept of definition
                            under
Section 2(s)
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, is the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
babita pandey
singular question that arises in this appeal, which would in
   Date: 2025.12.18

                            its answer, guide the outcome of the appeal.
   18:56:35 IST
   Reason:
Page 1 of 21
2.1           The aggrieved appellant has addressed
challenge to judgment and order dated 30.01.2024 passed
by the High Court of Orissa in Writ Petition (Civil) No.24351
of 2022, whereby the High Court set aside the judgment and
award dated 16.04.2022 of the Labour Court, Jeypore,
District Koraput, Orissa in Industrial Case No.02 of 2019. The
Labour Court had allowed the reference of the appellant
setting aside the termination order dated 22.04.2018 as
illegal, further directing the respondent-management to
reappoint the appellant with full back wages.
2.2           Upturning the view of the Labour Court, the
High Court held that the appellant did not fall within the
meaning of ‘workman’ under
Section 2(s)
of the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’).
3.            Before adverting to the moot question, basic
facts may be outlined. The appellant was appointed as
cashier in M/s Sai International Hotels Private Limited,
Rayagada, on 09.03.2025. The appellant stated that obeying
the master-servant relationship, he use to carry out the
directions of the respondent employer, that he received a
letter of appreciation from the management, and was also
receiving employee’s provident fund and State insurance
benefits as a workman. It was stated that after long service
of 12 to 13 years, his salary was suddenly stopped by the
employer.
Page 2 of 21
3.1          When inquired through right to information
process, the appellant received a letter dated 09.11.2018 in
which it was stated by the respondent-employer that his
services were already terminated from 22.04.2018 and was
offered one month’s notice pay. Since nothing yielded even
after request- letters and correspondences with the
management, the appellant invoked jurisdiction of the
Labour Court by filing Reference on 20.07.2019. The terms
of reference before the Labour Court was whether the
termination letter dated 09.11.2018 issued to the appellant
by the respondent was legal.
3.2          The first party-employer filed its written
statement before the Labour Court which is on record along
with production of additional documents. In the written
statement, the first party-employer sought to raise the
defence that the Reference was not maintainable inasmuch
as the dispute raised was not within the compass of
‘industrial dispute’ and that the appellant was not a
‘workman’ within the meaning of definition under the Act. It
was contended that the management took over hotel
business in the name of M/s Sai International Hotels Private
Limited from the previous management as the erstwhile
management was not in good financial condition.
3.2.1        As per the say of the first party-employer, the
appellant used to work as Front Office Executive and was
entrusted the work of Receptionist and supervising the room
Page 3 of 21
boys and since his duty was supervisory in nature, he was
not ‘workman’ to be entitled to seek the industrial reference.
3.2.2         In the rejoinder before the Labour Court, the
appellant asserted that he was not a supervisor nor had been
assigned any supervisory or administrative duties as such.
The appellant stated that he was under control of the
Managing Director of M/s Sai International Hotels Private
Limited and that the Managing Director used to instruct
about the work to General Manager and that the appellant
was working by carrying out the directions of his superior.
It was denied that along with the termination order, one
months’ salary, as claimed, was paid by the management.
3.3           The Labour Court concluded that the dispute
between the parties before it was in the nature of ‘industrial
dispute’ within the meaning of
Section 2(j)
of the Act, that the
hotel business run by the respondent-management was
‘industry’ and also that the appellant was covered within the
definition of ‘workman’ under
Section 2(s)
of the Act. The
Labour Court recorded the finding that the appellant
worked for more than 240 days in a year rendering in
continuous service. It was concluded that termination of the
appellant was in breach of provisions of
Section 25(F)
of the
Act, entitling the appellant-workman to be reinstated with
back wages.
Page 4 of 21
3.3.1         While   holding        the   appellant   to   be   a
              ‘workman’, the Labour Cour recorded that though it was the
              case of the first party-employer that the second party was
              not a ‘workman’ and had been doing supervisory work,
              however the first party failed to established the same. It was
              held that it is not the designation of the employee, but the
              nature of duties that would determine whether the employee
              concerned is a ‘workman’.
3.4           The judgment and award of the Labour Court
              came to be challenged by the respondent-employer by
              filing Writ Petition before the High Court. The High Court
              was of the view that the contention raised by the
              management-employer in its paragraph 10 of its written
              statement was not properly examined by the Labour Court
              that the employee was in a supervisory capacity. The High
              Court relied on the decision of this Court in
Syed Yakoob v.
              K.S. Radhakrishnan1
, for observations in paragraphs 7 and
              8 therein, and further on the observations in paragraph 7 of
              the decision of this Court in
National Engineering
              Industries Ltd. v. Shri Krishan Bhageria2
to hold that since
              the appellant could be said to be engaged in supervisory or
              managerial work, he could not be treated as ‘workman’. The
              High Court further relied on the contents of letter dated
              21.05.2019 written by the management mentioning that the
1
AIR 1964 SC 477
2
AIR 1988 SC 329
Page 5 of 21
appellant was an employee of the old management and that
he was appointed as Manager or Front Office Supervisor.
4.               Heard learned counsel for the appellant Mr.
Rajdipa Behura and learned counsels for the respondents
Mr. Kedar Nath Tripathi and Mr. Aditya Narayan Tripathi, at
length.
5.               As the controversy is centripetal to the issue as
to whether the appellant is ‘workman’, the definition of
‘workman’ contained in
Section 2(s)
of the Industrial
Disputes Act may be looked at, at the outset. It is reproduced
hereunder,

      ‘2 [(s) “workman” means any person (including an
      apprentice) employed in any industry to do any
      manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational,
      clerical or supervisory work for hire or reward,
      whether the terms of employment be express or
      implied, and for the purposes of any proceeding
      under this Act in relation to an industrial dispute,
      includes any such person who has been
      dismissed, discharged or retrenched in
      connection with, or as a consequence of, that
      dispute, or whose dismissal, discharge or
      retrenchment has led to that dispute, but does not
      include any such person—
(i)       who is subject to the
Air Force Act,
                    1950
(45 of 1950), or the
Army Act,
                    1950
(46 of 1950), or the
Navy Act, 1957
(62 of 1957); or
(ii)      who is employed in the police service
                    or as an officer or other employee of a
                    prison; or (iii) who is employed mainly
                    in a managerial or administrative
                    capacity; or (iv) who, being employed
                    in a supervisory capacity, draws
Page 6 of 21
wages exceeding 3 [ten thousand
                               rupees] per mensem or exercises,
                               either by the nature of the duties
                               attached to the office or by reason of
                               the powers vested in him, functions
                               mainly of a managerial nature.]’


              5.1           Analysing the above quoted definition of
              “workman”, it states that a workman means any person
              employed in any industry to do any manual, unskilled,
              skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work
              for higher reward. The terms of employment of such a person
              may be express or implied. Workman includes any person
              who has been dismissed, discharged, or retrenched in
              connection with or as a consequence of any dispute. Sub-
              clause (iii), however, does not treat a person to be a workman
              who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative
              capacity. Sub-clause (iv) does not include any person who is
              employed in a supervisory capacity and draws wages
              exceeding a particular monetary limit or that such person, by
              virtue of his duties attached to his job or by reason of powers
              vested in him, discharges functions which are mainly of a
              managerial nature.
5.2           It would be useful to survey the decisions on
              the aspect as to when an employee would fall within
              aforesaid definition to become ‘workman’.
In
Lloyds Bank
              Limited, New Delhi v. Panna Lal Gupta and Others3
this
              Court observed that while dealing with the issue, the courts
3
AIR 1967 SC 428
Page 7 of 21
would generally consider the essence of the matter without
               attaching undue importance to the designation of the
               employee or the name assigned to the class to which the
               employee belonged. The kind of primary duties performed
               by the employee would be the right test to be applied, it was
               held. If the employee is engaged in the clerical or manual
               work, he would be a ‘workman’, whereas if he is a
               supervisor, in that eventuality would not fall within the
               concept of ‘workman’.
5.3           The decisions of this Court may firstly be
               considered, which would throw light as to what constitutes
               duties of supervisory nature as against the clerical or manual
               work.   In order that an employee acquires supervisory
               capacity, he should be invested with right to supervise the
               work of the subordinate employees to the logical end.
               Supervisory function would denote independent right to
               exercise control on any group of workers. This principle was
               highlighted in A.R. Nataraja Ayyar and Trichy-Srirangam
               Transport Co. Ltd4 wherein the employee who was
               assigned the work of supervising the conductors and drivers
               so as to verify whether they were discharging the duties
               properly. The Checking Inspector was required to send his
               daily check-record to the office. This Court held that in the
               nature of work performed by the employee there was a
               definite element of supervisory finality.
4
1955 I LLJ 608
Page 8 of 21
5.3.1         In
United Commercial Bank, Ltd. v. L.S.
            Seth5
this Court held that the cashier of the banking
            company who was responsible for all the acts of commission
            and omission of the employees of the cash department and
            he who was controlling the work of the cash department
            done by the other employees, was doing a purely
            supervisory work, not to be treated as ‘workman’. It was
            further observed that in order that a person is treated as
            supervisor or officer, such person should occupy a position
            of command with decision making power so as to exercise
            his authority without the sanction of the management or
            other supervisor.
In
All India Reserve Bank Employees’
            Association and Others v. Reserve Bank of India and
            Others6
this Court observed referring to the types of
            employee involved in the case, ‘these employees distribute
            work, detect faults, report for penalty, make arrangements
            for filling vacancies, to mention only a few of the duties
            which supervisory and not merely clerical’.
5.4           A Calcutta High Court decision in
Mcloed &
            Co. v. Sixth Industrial Tribunal, West Bengal and Others7
reserves a reference for its exposition to explain distinction
            between supervisor and clerical duties in the context of
            deciding whether an employee is workman within the
            meaning of the statutory definition under the Act. It was
            stated that in order to determine the category of service,
5
1954 II LLJ 457
6
AIR 1966 SC 305
7
1958 Calcutta 273
Page 9 of 21
different    words      like     ‘supervisory,   managerial,
administrative’, the common notions cannot be imported to
interpret those terms. These expressions, it was stated has
not rigid frontiers and too much subtlety should not be used
in trying to precisely defined where supervision ends,
management begins or administration commences.
5.4.1          It was emphasised that the approach should
be practical, and not theoretical. It was clearly stated that
the supervisor need not be a manager. A supervisor can be
considered to be a workman so long as he discharges
clerical work without any disciplinary power. The decision
of the Calcutta High Court was referred to with approval of
this Court in National Engineering Industries Ltd.2


5.5            In
National Engineering Industries Ltd.
(supra), this Court referred to the Black’s Law Dictionary,
Special Deluxe, Fifth Edition (Page 1290) to explain the term
‘Supervisor’, thus,

              ‘In a broad sense, one having authority over
        others, to superintend and direct.
The term ‘supervisor’ means any individual
        having authority, in the interest of the employer, to
        hire, transfer, suspend, lay off, recall, promote,
        discharge, assign, reward, or discipline other
        employees, or responsibility to direct them, or to
        adjust their grievances, or effectively to recommend
        such action, if in connection with the foregoing the
Page 10 of 21
exercise of such authority is not of a merely routine or
                        clerical nature, but requires the use of independent
                        judgment.’


               5.6                Power of effective supervision, independent
               exercise of authority, power to issue command, to have
               subordinate staff, etc. are the basic traits which could make an
               employee a supervisor or manager. At the same time,
               incidental       trappings   of   supervision   while   performing
               essentially clerical or manual work, would not make an
               employee a ‘supervisor’. The employee could still fell within
               the compass of
Section 2(s)
of the Act to remain a ‘workman’.
5.6.1              In
Hind Construction & Engineering Co. Ltd. v.
               Their Workmen8
the Court found that nature of duties
               performed by the appellant before it showed that the
               substantial part of the work of the appellant consisted of
               looking after the security of the factory and its property by
               deputing the watchmen working under him to work at the
               factory gate and that the appellant had also the powers to send
               them to watch towers, to direct them to go to a accompany the
               visitors of the factory. However, there was no power to appoint
               which would which would bring the nature of duties outside
               the purview of supervisory or commanding character.
In
The
               Punjab Co-operative Bank Ltd v. R.S. Bhatia (Dead) Through
               Lrs.9
it was held that the accounted was supposed to sign the
8
AIR 1965 SC 917
9
AIR 1975 SC 1898: (1975) 4 SCC 696
Page 11 of 21
salary bills of the staff even while performing the duties of a
               clerk, which by itself did not make him employee in a
               managerial or administrative capacity.
5.6.2         The    principal    was   reiterated   in
D.P.
               Maheshwari v. Delhi Administration and Others10
, stating
               that a supervisor was one who could bind the company to
               take some kind of decision on behalf of the company. One
               who was reporting merely as to the affairs of the company
               and making assessment for the purpose of reporting was not
               a supervisor.
Again in
D.P. Maheshwari vs. Delhi
               Administration and Ors.11
. this Court applied the same
               criteria mainly that an employee is designated as Accounts
               Officer was workman since he was mainly discharging the
               duties of clerical nature.
5.6.3         In Lloyds Bank Limited3, it was further
               observed that in order that a person is treated as supervisor
               or officer, such person should occupy a position of
               command with decision making power to exercise his
               authority without the sanction of the management or other
               supervisor. In Lloyds Bank Limited3, the question was
               whether employees were entitled to claim the supervisory
               allowance on the footing that they were the supervisors and
               not the ‘workmen’. Brining out a reverse situation than
               obtained in the present case, the stand of the employer was
10
AIR 1984 SC 153
11
(1983) 4 SCC 293
Page 12 of 21
that the three workmen concerned were not supervisors,
therefore supervisory allowance would not be payable to
them.
5.6.4         While dealing with the issue, this Court delved
into kind and nature of the duties performed by those
employees to conclude that the duties assigned to them such
as checking the ledgers and entries in the subsidiary books,
overseeing the vouchers, checking cash balance, preparing
monthly reconciliation statements, etc. did not suggest the
supervisory character. Disapproving the view taken by the
Tribunal, this Court observed that the use of the word
“checking” cannot introduce an element of supervisory
nature which was purely mechanical without bearing
supervisor function.
5.6.5         The High Court in impugned order has relied
on National Engineering Industries Ltd.2 to take a view that
the appellant was not a ‘workman’. In that case after noticing
the evidence, this Court observed that the employee
concerned was working under the company as an ordinary
auditor on a monthly salary and his duties were mainly of
reporting and checking up on behalf of the management,
however, he had no independent right or authority to take
decision as the decision did not bind the company. He was
held to be a ‘workman’ within the meaning of
Section 2(S)
of
the Act and not the supervisor.
Page 13 of 21
5.7            In the modern-day nature of management, in
               every industrial organisation the employees of a particular
               class may be required and also expected to do the work
               which may have blend of supervision with clerical or manual
               duties. An incidental performance of supervisory work and
               vice versa may not become decisive to bring an employee
               within the meaning of ‘workmen’ or to get him out of the
               purview. Nature of duties to be performed by an employee,
               more often than not would overlap therefore real criteria to
               judge whether a ‘workman’ within the meaning of
Section
               2(S)
of the Act is the test what is called ‘dominant nature test’.
               It is the main nature of work assigned to the employee would
               become decisive.
5.7.1          This Court in
Anand Bazar Patrika (P) Ltd.
               vs. The Workmen12
addressed the issue whether a person
               was clerk or was working in a supervisory capacity.
               Applying the criteria that the principal work of clerical
               nature, fall within
Section 2(s)(iv)
of the Act. Endorsing to the
               decision of the labour court, this Court observed that few
               minor duties of supervisory character cannot convert his
               office of senior clerical in-charge that of supervisor.
5.7.2          It was observed,

                            “…..His principal work was in
                        maintaining and writing the cash book and
                        of preparing various returns. Being the
                        senior-most clerk he was put in charge of the
12
(1970) 3 SCC 248
Page 14 of 21
Provident Fund Section and was given a
                        small amount of control over the other clerks
                        working in the section. He was to allocate
                        work between them, to permit them leave
                        during the office hours and to recommend
                        their leave applications.”           (Para 6)


               5.7.3         This Court in Anand Bazar Patrika (P) Ltd.13
               relied on its decision in Burma-Shell Oil Storage and
               Distributing Company of India, Ltd., Madras and Their
               Employees2 pinpointed the relevance of the substantial
               work consideration,

                             ‘If a person is mainly doing supervisory
                          work and incidentally or for a fraction of the
                          time also does some clerical work, it would
                          have to be held that he is employed in a
                          supervisory capacity, and conversely; if the
                          main work done is of clerical nature, the mere
                          fact that some supervisory duties are also
                          carried out incidentally or as a small fraction
                          of the work done by him will not convert his
                          employment as a clerk into one in
                          supervisory capacity.’                 (Para 3)


               5.7.4         The substantial duty factor again guided this
               Court in Ved Prakash Gupta vs. M/s Delton Cable India (P)
               Ltd.14 The appellant was recruited initially as a clerk latter he
               become a Chargeman Security in the factory of the respondent
               holding him to be a workman, the Court noted thus,

                            ‘The substantial duty of the appellant
                        was only that of a Security Inspector at the
                        gate of the factory premises. It was neither
                        managerial nor supervisory in nature in the
13
(1970) 3 SCC 248
14
(1984) 2 SCC 569
Page 15 of 21
sense in which those terms are understood
                       in industrial law. Therefore, the appellant
                       clearly falls within the definition of a
                       workman in
Section 2(s)
and the reference of
                       the dispute under
Section 10(1)(c)
was valid
                       in law.’                           (Para 12)


              5.7.5         The dominant nature test was propounded and
              discussed in a slightly different context of considering the
              definition of “industry”, under the Act, in
Corporation of the
              City of Nagpur vs. Employees15
, a body like corporation or
              municipality discharges functions in different areas through
              working of different departments. This Court observed that a
              particular activity of municipality may be covered by the
              definition of “industry’ with the financial and administrative
              departments are solely in charge of that activity,

                            ‘But there may be cases where the said
                       two departments may not only be in charge
                       of a particular activity or service covered by
                       the definition of "industry" but also in charge
                       of other activity or activities falling outside
                       the definition of "industry".In such cases a
                       working rule may be evolved to advance
                       social justice consistent with the principles
                       of equity. In such cases the solution to the
                       problem depends upon the answer to the
                       question whether such a department is
                       primarily and predominantly concerned
                       with industrial activity or incidentally
                       connected therewith.’
                                                             (Para 17)
                                                   (emphasis supplied)
15
AIR 1960 SC 675
Page 16 of 21
5.7.6             In all such cases, the decisive aspect considered
              is whether an employee is a “workman” or not, is the
              substantial, essential and principal nature of work for which
              the employee is engaged. In Burmah Shell Oil Storage and
              Distribution Company of India Limited, this Court, after
              referring to Ananda Bazar Patrika, referred to, with
              approval, certain English decisions which also advocated and
              emphasized the criteria of substantial nature of employment.
              In Re Dairymen’s Foremen and Re Tailor’s Cutters16, it was
              observed that although the employees might perform manual
              labour, the question was whether that was the real substantial
              employment for which they were engaged or whether it was
              incidental or accessory to it. It was observed, “the actual
              labour of cutting out cloth might be manual labour, but the
              position he really occupied was a manager of a business
              department. His duties therefore substantially were not those
              involving manual labour and he was not workman within the
              Act”.
5.7.7             Similar test was
laid down in
Reid versus
              British and Irish Steam Packet Company Limited17, that
              what is required to be judged is whether the manual work was
              real substantial work for which the employee is engaged, and
              vice-a-versa. If a substantial part of the employment cannot be
              described as “manual” labour, the fact that manual work has
              to be performed does not bring the employee within the
16
(1911-12) 28 Times Law Reports 587
17
(1921) 2 KBD 319
Page 17 of 21
definition of workman. The reverse is equally true. This was
              highlighted in Jaques versus Owner of Steam Tug
              Alexandra18. The same test of substantial nature of
              employment was applied in interpreting the word “employed
              in manual labor” in the
Factories Act
, in J & F Stone Lighting
              and Radio Ltd. versus Haygarth19.
6.           Therefore, the acid test is, what may be called
              the dominant nature test to determine whether the
              employee is a “workman” or not. It is the dominant nature of
              work or the main employment to which the employee is
              engaged, that would make or unmake the status as a
              “workman” for such employee. This test is based on the
              realistic consideration of the principal nature of work
              performed by the employee. On the other hand, incidental
              trapping of supervisory work does not make an employee
              the supervisor. Even in manual duties, certain supervisory
              work would be in-built, but it cannot be a ground to exclude
              the employee from the definition of workman. What is to be
              applied is the acid test of dominant nature. Supervisor may
              have to perform clerical work attendant to his principal job.
6.1          Furthermore, the designation or nomenclature
              is also not the guiding consideration. One has to look and
              assess only the prominent and dominant nature of work in
              which the employee is engaged by the employer. The
18
(1921) 2 AC 339
19
(1968) AC Pt. 3
Page 18 of 21
designations and nomenclatures are often designed by the
management to suit itself and to embellish the post with high-
sounding names such as manager or supervisor or executive,
as in the present case. When an employee so designated
substantially and essentially works manually without any
supervisory domain, he cannot be termed as supervisor, to
put him out of the purview of the definition in
Section 2(s)
of
the Act. Such an employee, notwithstanding the designation
given to him, would be a “workman” for the reason that the
substantial and essential nature of duties assigned to him and
performed by him, are manual and non-supervisory, who
possesses no command over other.
7.            Applying the above principles and the tests
indicated, to the facts of the present case, the appellant was
appointed as a cashier. The employer nomenclatured the
appellant to be the manager in the Front Office. In the identity
card, he was shown to be an executive. However, when the
veil is pierced to seek the real nature of duties, the appellant
was not found to be discharging any supervisory or
authoritative work. The nomenclature or the designation
given to the appellant was an eyewash.
7.1           The evidence on behalf of the appellant clearly
showed that he was doing the work of receptionist and used
to handle the hotel boys. He denied that he was a manager or
had any supervisory powers. He stated that no employee was
under him and he was not able to exercise his own authority
Page 19 of 21
over the staff. He could establish his case that although the
respondent employer - the hotel management named his post
in a particular fashion in the identity card etc., his duties were
never supervisory or managerial, and not used to attend any
managerial meetings, nor had power to sanction leave for
anybody, nor he was supervising any person or thing in the
hotel by virtue of his singular authority.
8.            Merely because the management named the
post of the appellant as manager in the front office, it would
not ipso facto take him out of the purview of workman, for, he
was not entrusted with any independent supervisory
authority or work, except incidental to manual work. The bald
assertion on behalf of the respondent employer that the
appellant was manager and that he possessed supervisory
powers, remained without support of any cogent material,
therefore, without any substantiation. In any view, applying
the dominant nature test, the principal duties entrusted to the
appellant and discharged by him invested him with the status
of a “workman”. It has to be held that the appellant fell within
the definition of
Section 2(s)
of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947.
9.            In light of the above, the High Court committed
a manifest error in taking the view that the appellant was not
a workman. The Labour Court rightly held that the appellant
was a “workman”, further recording a finding of fact that the
workman rendered had service completing 240 days in a
Page 20 of 21
year and that his termination was in breach of
Section 25-F
of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The judgment and award of
the Labour Court deserves to be upheld.
10.            As a result, the impugned judgment and order
of the High Court dated 30.01.2024 in Writ Petition (Civil)
No.24351 is set aside. The judgment and award of the Labour
Court stands restored. It shall be complied with by the
respondent within two weeks from today.
11.            The appeal is allowed accordingly.
In view of the disposal of the Appeal,
interlocutory applications, if any, will not survive and stand
disposed of.
…………………………………J.
                                  (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)



                                  …………………………………J.
                                         (N.V. ANJARIA)


NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 17, 2025.
Page 21 of 21