[Cites
35
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Director Of Income Tax (It)-I, Mumbai vs M/S. American Express Bank Ltd on 15 December, 2025
2025 INSC 1431                                              REPORTABLE



                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8291 OF 2015


             DIRECTOR OF INCOME TAX (IT)-I, MUMBAI.     …APPELLANT



                                           VERSUS



             M/S. AMERICAN EXPRESS BANK LTD.            …RESPONDENT



                                        WITH



                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4451 OF 2016




                                   JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.12.15
15:16:08 IST
Reason:
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the
following parts:
INDEX

A. Factual Matrix ....................................................................... 2
(i)     Civil Appeal No. 8291 of 2015 ........................................................ 2
(ii) Civil Appeal No. 4451 of 2016 ........................................................ 5

B. Relevant Provisions ............................................................... 8

C. Submissions on behalf of the appellant .................................. 9

D. Submissions on behalf of the respondents ........................... 14

E. Issue to be determined ........................................................ 19

F. Analysis .............................................................................. 20
(i)     Basic Principles of Interpretation .................................................. 21
(ii) Interpreting
Section 44C
of the Act, 1961 ..................................... 28
(iii)     Whether the principle of law barring exclusive expenditure under
  Section 44C is approved by this Court?.............................................. 49
(iv)      Application to the facts at hand ................................................ 51

G. Conclusion .......................................................................... 53
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                                Page 1 of 55
1. Since the issues raised in the captioned appeals are the same, they
     were taken up for hearing analogously and are being disposed of
     by this common judgment.
2. The central issue involved in these appeals relates to the
     interpretation of
Section 44C
of the Income Tax Act, 1961
     (hereinafter referred to as “the Act, 1961”), more particularly
     whether it merely covers ‘common expenditure’ incurred by the
     head office attributable to an assessee’s business in India or would
     also include ‘exclusive expenditure’ incurred by the head office for
     the Indian branches.
A. Factual Matrix
(i) Civil Appeal No. 8291 of 2015
3. M/s American Express Bank, the respondent-assessee, is a non-
     resident banking company engaged in the business of providing
     banking-related services. The respondent filed its income tax
     return on 01.12.1997 for AY 1997-1998, declaring an income of
     INR 79,45,07,110. In the said return, the respondent claimed
     deductions for the following expenses under
Section 37(1)
of the
     Act, 1961: (i) INR 6,39,13,217 incurred for solicitation of deposits
     from Non-Resident Indians; and (ii) INR 13,50,87,275 incurred at
     the head office directly in relation to the Indian branches.
4. The respondent vide notice dated 21.10.1999, was asked to explain
     why the expenses in question should not be subjected to the ceiling
     specified in
Section 44C
of the Act, 1961, and thus be disallowed.
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016             Page 2 of 55
5. The respondent, in its reply to the notice referred to above, clarified
     that the expenses in question could not have been classified as
     head office expenditure for the reason that
Section 44C
of the Act,
     1961 presupposes that at least a part of the expenditure is
     attributable to the business outside India. If this presumption does
     not hold true, and the entire expenditure is incurred solely for the
     business in India, then clause (c) does not apply. Consequently,
     Section 44C would not be applicable to such expenses.
6. The Assessing Officer, vide its Assessment Order dated 08.02.2000,
     limited the deduction to 5% of the gross total income by applying
Section 44C
of the Act, 1961, having regard to the view taken by
     the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal in the respondent’s own case for
     AY 1987-88. The decision of the Assessing Officer was also based
     on the following reasons:
a) Section 44C is a non-obstante provision that begins with the
             words “notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
Section 28
to 43A,” and therefore, the head office expenses
             allowable to the respondent assessee are subject to the
             limits set out under Section 44C.
b) The purpose of inserting Section 44C was to address the
             difficulties encountered in scrutinising the books of account
             maintained outside India. Therefore, the assessee could not
             have claimed that the expenses incurred outside India
             should have been allowed beyond the ceiling prescribed
             under Section 44C. If such a plea were permitted, Section
             44C would become redundant and otiose.
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016              Page 3 of 55
c) The definition of head office expenditure is clear and the
             same includes all kinds of expenses of any office outside
             India.
7. Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the Assessing Officer, the
     respondent filed an appeal before the Commissioner of Income Tax
     (Appeals) VII, Mumbai. The Commissioner vide Order dated
     26.09.2000 affirmed the decision of the Assessing Officer.
8. Thereafter, the respondent filed an appeal before the Income Tax
     Appellate Tribunal, Mumbai. The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal,
     Mumbai, vide Order dated 08.08.2012, allowed the appeal of the
     respondent by relying upon the Bombay High Court’s decision in
Commissioner of Income Tax v. Emirates Commercial Bank
     Ltd.
, reported in 2003 SCC OnLine Bom 1280. The relevant
     observations made by the Tribunal are as follows:
“In principle, we are in full agreement with this contention that
          the judgment in the case of
Emirates Commercial Bank Ltd.
(supra) can operate for allowing deduction in full
u/s 37(1)
where the expenditure is exclusive. In a case of allocated
          expenses, the amount can be considered only u/s 44C. The
          Mumbai bench of the tribunal in the case of ADIT (I.T.) Vs.
          Bank of Bahrain & Kuwait (2011) 44 SOT 693 (Mum) has
          canvassed similar view by holding that the exclusive expenses
          incurred by the head office for Indian branch are outside the
          purview of sec. 44C and only common head office expenses
          are governed by this section. There can be no quarrel over this
          proposition of law. But the fact of the matter is that the
          expenses which are subject matter of ground nos: 1 and 2 are

          exclusive and not common. It is amply borne out from the
          assessment order, where the AO has reproduced the reply
          filed by the assessee stating that these expenses were
          exclusive. Relevant part of such contention advanced on
          behalf of the assessee has been extracted verbatim in para
          2.1 of this order. The AO has no where controverted this
          submission. Thus, it follows that the assessee's contention of
          these amounts representing exclusive head office, expenses
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                Page 4 of 55
was accepted by the AO. Once the amount is found to be
          exclusive expenditure incurred by the head office towards the
          Indian branch, the same is required to be allowed in terms of
section 37(1)
, without clubbing it with shared head office
          expenses as per sec. 44C. This, submission of the Revenue is
          jettisoned as shorn of merits. Accordingly, we hold that no
          adverse inference can be drawn against the assessee on this
          issue and such exclusive expenses incurred by the assessee
          are required to be allowed as deduction
u/s 37(1)
without any
          reference to section 44C. These two grounds are therefore,
          allowed.”
                                               (Emphasis Supplied)
9. The appellant challenged the order passed by the Tribunal
referred
     to above
before the Bombay High Court by way of Income Tax
     Appeal No. 1294 of 2013.
However, before the High Court, the
     appellant’s counsel conceded that the question regarding the
     application of Section 44C for the exclusive expenditure incurred
     by the head office for the Indian branches had been decided against
     the Revenue by a division bench of the High Court in
Emirates
     Commercial Bank
(supra). As a result, the High Court, by way of
     its impugned order dated 01.04.2015, dismissed the Revenue’s
     appeal on the said issue.
10.
In such circumstances
referred to above
, the appellant is before
     this Court with the present appeal.
(ii) Civil Appeal No. 4451 of 2016
11. M/s Oman International Bank, the respondent-assessee, filed its
     return of income for AY 2003-04 on 28.11.2003, declaring a loss of
     INR 71,79,69,260. In the return, the respondent claimed a
     deduction of INR 21,63,436 towards expenses specifically incurred
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016             Page 5 of 55
by the head office for the Indian branches. The respondent was
     asked to justify such a claim for deduction.
12. The respondent vide letter dated 16.03.2006 provided the following
     details with regard to the expenditure incurred by the head office
     specifically for the Indian branches:
S.No    Item                       Amount (Rs)

            1.      Travelling Expenses        21,14,096

            2.      Certification Fees         49,340

                    Total                      21,63,436
13. The respondent claimed that the travelling expenses included travel
     fares, hotel charges, and other costs incurred by the head office for
     staff travelling to India for various purposes, such as local advisory
     board meetings, training, internal audits, staff meetings, etc.
     Additionally, the certification fees were for the charges paid to
     auditors for issuing certificates of expenses incurred by the head
     office chargeable to the Indian branches of the bank, for the year
     ending March 31, 2003.
14. The stance of the respondent was that since the expenses
referred
     to above
were incurred specifically for the Indian branches, they
     would fall outside the scope of
Section 44C
of the Act, 1962, and
     were allowable as deductions under
Section 37
of the Act, 1961. It
     claimed that the deduction under Section 44C applies to common
     head office expenses attributable to Indian branches.
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                 Page 6 of 55
15. The Assessing Officer, vide its Order dated 20.03.2006, disagreed
     with the explanation offered by the respondent and held that both
     the above-mentioned expenses fell within the purview of Section
     44C and thus are bound by the ceiling limit set thereunder.
16. Aggrieved by the Order of the Assessing Officer
referred to above
,
     the respondent appealed to the Commissioner of Income Tax
     (Appeals)-XXXIII,     Mumbai.
The    Commissioner   allowed    the
     respondent’s appeal by relying on its previous years’ decisions for
     AY 2001-2002 and 2002-2003, respectively, where an identical
     question was decided in favour of the respondent, consistent with
     the Bombay High Court’s decision in
Emirates Commercial Bank
(supra).
Subsequently, the Revenue’s appeal to the Income Tax
     Appellate Tribunal on the said issue also came to be dismissed
     based on the decision in
Emirates Commercial Bank
(supra).
17. Finally, by the impugned order dated 28.07.2015, the Bombay High
     Court also ruled against the Revenue on the aforementioned issue.
     The pertinent extract from the impugned order states as follows:
“4.So far as question No.3 is concerned, it is agreed between
          the parties that the question as arising herein stands
          concluded in favour of the respondent-assessee and against
          the revenue. This is so, as identical question was raised in
          revenue's appeals in respect of Assessment Years 1998-99
          and 1999-2000 in Income Tax Appeal Nos.1775 of 2013 and
          1789 of 2013 to this Court and the same was not entertained
          by. an order dated 1 July 2015. This was by following the
          decision of this Court in
C.I.T. v/s Emirates Commercial Bank
          Ltd.
, reported in 262 I.T.R. 55, which covers issue in favour
          of the respondent- assessee. Hence, question No.3. does not
          give rise to any substantial question of law and hence not
          entertained.”
18.
In such circumstances
referred to above
, the appellant is before
     this Court with the captioned appeal. In the captioned appeal, the
     Revenue also raised an additional issue regarding interest received
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016              Page 7 of 55
from the head office. However, this issue was neither pressed nor
     argued before us in the captioned appeal. In such circumstances,
     we have addressed ourselves to the solitary issue of ‘head office
     expenditure’ under
Section 44C
of the Act, 1961.
B. Relevant Provisions
19. The relevant portion of
Section 37
of the Act, 1961, reads as follows:
“37. General. (1) Any expenditure (not being expenditure of
          the nature described in
Sections 30
to
36
and not being in the
          nature of capital expenditure or personal expenses of the
          assessee), laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for
          the purposes of the business or profession shall be allowed
          in computing the income chargeable under the head “Proﬁts
          and gains of business or profession” [...]”
20. The relevant portion of
Section 44C
of the Act, 1961, reads as
     follows:
“44C. Deduction of head oﬃce expenditure in the case of
          non-residents. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
          contained in
Sections 28
to 43-A, in the case of an assessee,
          being a non-resident, no allowance shall be made, in
          computing the income chargeable under the head “Proﬁts and
          gains of business or profession”, in respect of so much of the
          expenditure in the nature of head oﬃce expenditure as is in
          excess of the amount computed as hereunder, namely:
(a) an amount equal to ﬁve per cent of the adjusted total
                 income; or
(b) [* * *]
(c) the amount of so much of the expenditure in the nature
                 of head oﬃce expenditure incurred by the assessee as
                 is attributable to the business or profession of the
                 assessee in India:
whichever is the least:
Provided that in a case where the adjusted total
                    income of the assessee is a loss, the amount under
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016              Page 8 of 55
clause (a) shall be computed at the rate of ﬁve per cent
                     of the average adjusted total income of the assessee.
Explanation – For the purposes of this section,—

               […]
(iv) “head oﬃce expenditure” means executive and general
          administration expenditure incurred by the assessee outside
          India, including expenditure incurred in respect of—
(a)rent, rates, taxes, repairs or insurance of any premises
            outside India used for the purposes of the business or
            profession;
(b) salary, wages, annuity, pension, fees, bonus,
            commission, gratuity, perquisites or proﬁts in lieu of or in
            addition to salary, whether paid or allowed to any employee
            or other person employed in, or managing the aﬀairs of, any
            oﬃce outside India;
(c) travelling by any employee or other person employed in,
            or managing the aﬀairs of, any oﬃce outside India; and
(d) such other matters connected with execution and general
            administration as may be prescribed.”




 C. Submissions on behalf of the appellant
21. Mr Raghavendra P Shankar, the learned Additional Solicitor
     General appearing on behalf of the appellant, submitted the
     following:
Statutory Scheme and Rationale for introducing Section 44C
a) Section 44C applies when two conditions are satisfied: (i) the
             assessee is a non-resident, and (ii) the deduction claimed
             pertains to ‘head office expenditure’ a term defined broadly
             in the Explanation to Section 44C. Under Section 44C, the
             allowable deduction is strictly limited to the lower of two
             amounts: a fixed cap of 5% of the ‘adjusted total income’
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                  Page 9 of 55
(clause a), or the actual expenditure specifically attributable
             to the Indian business (clause c). Essentially, clause (a)
             serves as an absolute ceiling on claims. While clause (c)
             assesses the actual expenditure incurred that is attributable
             to the Indian branches, it cannot exceed the statutory limit.
Even if the verifiable expenditure is higher, the deduction is
             mandatorily restricted to the 5% cap.
b) The legislative intent behind Section 44C, as clarified by the
             Memorandum to the Finance Bill, 1976, and CBDT Circular
             No. 202, was to address a specific mischief concerning the
             taxation of non-resident entities. Parliament observed that
             foreign companies with branches in India often reduced
             their domestic tax liability by inflating claims for head office
             administrative expenses. Since the supporting books of
             account for these claims were maintained abroad, it was
             essentially impossible for Indian revenue authorities to
             scrutinise or verify them. Furthermore, Parliament also
             recognised that dividing a common pool of global expenses
             to determine what is attributable to India involves a
             significant degree of subjectivity, which is largely impossible
             to verify.
c) For example, if an executive is appointed to manage the
             affairs of the Asia-Pacific region of the Bank and receives a
             salary from the head office located outside India, it becomes
             necessary to make a normative assessment of how much of
             her time she spends solely in overseeing the operations of
             the   Indian   branches.     Consequently,   it    needs   to     be
             determined what percentage of her salary can be claimed by
             the assessee as a head office expenditure deductible when
             calculating the taxable income under the Act, 1961. The
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                   Page 10 of 55
Parliament observed that these difficulties faced by the
             Revenue were being exploited by some assessees to submit
             inflated claims for deductions, which were often difficult for
             the Revenue to verify. In this context, the simplified
             mechanism under Section 44C was introduced.
d) To cure the mischief, Section 44C replaces the need for
             subjective, case-by-case verification with an objective
             statutory ceiling. Consequently, the amendment sets a
             mandatory limit: the deduction is capped at the lesser of the
             actual attributable expenditure (under clause c) or 5% of the
             adjusted total income (under clause a). This mechanism
             thus serves to reduce the evidentiary burden on the
             assessee and also prevents or curtails inflated deductions.
Applicability of Section 44C vis-à-vis
Section 37
e) Section     44C     begins     with   a   non-obstante     clause
             (“notwithstanding anything to the contrary...”), which
             explicitly provides it with overriding legal effect over
Sections
             28
to 43A, including
Section 37
. As a result, Section 44C
             functions as a special provision governing ‘head office
             expenditure’ for non-residents. Since
Section 37(1)
is a
             general provision, it only applies to head office expenditure
             not explicitly covered under Section 44C. Therefore, once an
             expense qualifies as ‘head office expenditure’ under the
             Explanation, it must be processed strictly under Section
             44C. Otherwise, the section would be rendered meaningless.
             In the present appeals, the expenditure claimed by the
             respondents, incurred by the head offices located outside
             India, squarely falls within the said definition, being
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                Page 11 of 55
executive and general administrative expenditure incurred
             outside India.
f) The primary contention of the respondents is that Section
             44C    is   wholly   inapplicable   to   expenditure   incurred
             exclusively for Indian branches, thereby allowing them to
             claim such expenses in full under
Section 37(1)
without
             being subject to the restrictive monetary cap under Section
             44C. This claim essentially requires that the definition of
             ‘head office expenditure’ be read down to be limited to
             expenditure incurred at the head office overseas for the
             global operations as a whole (as opposed to those expenses
             stated to be exclusively for or in connection with the Indian
             operations). However, this interpretation runs contrary to
             the plain language of the statute, which provides an
             inclusive and broad definition of ‘head office expenditure’ in
             the Explanation to Section 44C.
g) Even if the respondents’ assertion was accepted, that the
             expenses were incurred exclusively for the Indian branch, it
             would still make no difference to the operation of the law.
             Since the nature of the expense squarely falls within the
             statutory definition of ‘head office expenditure’, the mere
             fact that it is exclusively attributable to the Indian business
             only serves to situate the claim within Section 44C(c). Any
             amount calculated under clause (c) is mandatorily subject
             to the overall ceiling provided in clause (a). Therefore,
             proving exclusivity does not liberate the expense from
             Section 44C.
h) Accepting the respondents’ assertion would reintroduce the
             exact mischief Section 44C was designed to prevent. The
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                Page 12 of 55
provision was enacted specifically to eliminate the difficult
             task of verifying foreign head office expenditure claims.
             Allowing the respondents to bypass the statutory cap by
             proving exclusivity would defeat this purpose and simply
             bring back the burden of verification. Section 44C mandates
             that   even    expenses     incurred   exclusively   for   Indian
             operations remain subject to the 5% ceiling. This cap would
             be rendered meaningless if unlimited deductions were
             permissible under
Section 37
.
Reliance on the decisions in Emirates Bank and Rupenjuli Tea is
      misplaced
i) The reliance on the judgment in
Emirates Commercial
             Bank
(supra) is completely misplaced.
In
Emirates
             Commercial Bank
(supra), the decision was based on a
             concurrent finding that the head office had actually
             recovered the disputed expenditure from the Indian branch
             by issuing a specific debit note. As a result, the Court
             considered the expense as one effectively incurred by the
             Indian branch itself, thus excluding it from the scope of head
             office expenditure. In stark contrast, the present appeals
             involve no such financial recovery or debit note transaction.
             The expenditure continues to be incurred solely at the head
             office level.
Therefore, the ratio of
Emirates Commercial
             Bank
(supra) is limited strictly to its particular facts and
             cannot be applied to the present case.
j) Even if
Emirates Commercial Bank
(supra) were to be
             applied, it does not establish good law as it introduces an
             artificial distinction between ‘common’ and ‘exclusive’
             expenditure that is entirely absent from the plain language
             of Section 44C. The definition of ‘head office expenditure’
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                Page 13 of 55
encompasses both categories without exception. Moreover,
             such an interpretation renders the insertion of Section 44C
             a nullity, effectively reinstating the pre-amendment position
             where unlimited deductions could be claimed under Section
37.
k) Reliance on the Calcutta High Court’s decision in
Rupenjuli
             Tea Co. Ltd v. Commissioner Income Tax
, reported in
             1989 SCC OnLine Cal 410, is also misplaced as that
             decision was based on very peculiar factual circumstances.
             In that case, although the assessee had a head office in
             London, its entire business operations were conducted
             solely in India. The Court reasoned that Section 44C
             contemplates allocating expenses between Indian and
             foreign businesses. Since the specific assessee had no
             business operations outside India, the concept of attribution
             or    allocation   was   impossible,   rendering   the   section
             inapplicable. In stark contrast, the respondents in the
             present appeals are global entities with branches across the
             world.
Consequently, the logic of
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra)
             does not apply to the respondents.
22.
In the circumstances
referred to above
, the learned counsel prayed
     that, there being merit in his appeals, they be allowed.
D. Submissions on behalf of the respondents
23. Mr. Percy Pardiwala and Mr. Aniruddha A. Joshi, the learned senior
     counsel appearing for the respondents, submitted the following:
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                Page 14 of 55
a) Under
Section 29
of the Act, 1961, the income chargeable
             under the head “Profits and gains from business or
             profession” is to be computed in accordance with the
             provisions contained in
Sections 30
to 43D. None of the
             aforementioned sections require that, in order to qualify as
             an allowable deduction, the expenditure must be incurred
             in India. Respondents have claimed a deduction under
Section 37(1)
of the Act, 1961, which provides that any
             expenditure laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for
             the purposes of business or profession, not being in the
             nature of capital expenditure or personal expenditure, shall
             be allowed as a deduction in computing the income
             chargeable under the head “Profits and gains from business
             or profession”. Therefore, it is clear that there is no
             restriction under
Section 37(1)
of the Act that, for an
             expenditure to be deductible under it, it must be incurred in
             India.
b) This position is further supported by paragraph 3 of
Article
             7
of the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement between the
             Governments of India and the USA, which is applicable
             when dealing with respondent M/s American Express Bank,
             as it is an entity incorporated in the United States of
             America. Paragraph 3 of
Article 7
requires that, in
             determining the profits of a permanent establishment,
             expenses     incurred     for     the    purposes     of    such    an
             establishment shall be allowed as a deduction, whether
             incurred within the State where the establishment is
             situated    or   elsewhere.       It   further   states    that    such
             expenditure must be allowed in accordance with, and
             subject to, the limitations provided under the local laws of
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                     Page 15 of 55
the country in which the permanent establishment is
             situated, which, in this case, is India. Therefore, even under
             the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement, the expenditure
             incurred by the respondent M/s American Express Bank,
             for the purposes of its Indian branches, is an allowable
             deduction.
c) The reliance placed by the Revenue on
Section 44C
of the
             Act, 1961, to restrict the deduction that is otherwise
             allowable under
Section 37(1)
of the Act, 1961, is misplaced.
             Section 44C is not a provision which grants a deduction. The
             deduction must be allowed in accordance with
Section 37
             (1)
.
d) For Section 44C to apply two conditions need to be satisfied:
(i) first, the expenditure in question must necessarily fall
             within the definition of the head office expenditure as
             defined in clause (iv) of the Explanation below Section 44C.
and (ii) secondly, by virtue of clause (c), expenditure
             incurred by the assessee should be in the nature of a
             ‘common’ expenditure, and only a part of it should be
             attributable to the business of the assessee that is carried
             on in India.
e) In the present case, a part of the expenditure incurred by
             the respondents will not be in the nature of the head office
             expenditure but, even assuming the entirety of the
             expenditure falls within the definition of head office
             expenditure, the same is not attributable to the business of
             the assessee in India but, is in fact exclusively incurred for
             the business operations in India. It is this distinction
             between ‘expenditure attributable to business in India’ and
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016              Page 16 of 55
‘expenditure exclusively incurred for business in India’ that
             is crucial.
f) This distinction between ‘attributable expenditure’ and
             ‘exclusive expenditure’ has been recognised and applied by
             the Calcutta High Court in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra) and the
             Bombay High Court in
Emirates Commercial Bank
(supra).
Further, the distinction sought to be drawn by the
             appellant between the facts in the present appeals and the
             decisions     in
Rupenjuli      Tea
(supra)   and   Emirates
             Commercial Bank is without any basis.
g) The principle enunciated by the Calcutta High Court in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra) was that if the expenditure is
             incurred exclusively for Indian operations, then, the
             provision of Section 44C could not be invoked to disallow a
             part of the expenditure so incurred. The fact that, in the case
             of the assessee therein, the business was carried on only in
             India, albeit the head office was situated in the UK, was not
             a distinguishing factor as sought to be made out.
This is
             further supported by the Delhi High Court’s decision in DIT
             vs. Ravva Oil (Singapore) Private Limited, reported in
             2006 SCC OnLine Del 1742.
h) The burden is on the Revenue to prove that the expenditure
             was not incurred solely for Indian operations, and therefore,
             the provisions of Section 44C apply. The authorities below
             have accepted that the expenditure incurred by the assessee
             was exclusively for Indian operations, and accordingly, it
             should be allowed in its entirety without being restricted by
             the limitations provided under
Section 44C
of the Act, 1961.
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                   Page 17 of 55
i) The Revenue proceeds based on the misconception that a
             deduction is allowable under
Section 44C
of the Act, 1961,
             the moment expenditure is incurred outside India by the
             head office, and therefore its allowability is subject to the
             limitations outlined in that section. This interpretation does
             not align with the language or the legislative intent behind
             the introduction of Section 44C. As per the Memorandum
             explaining the provisions of the Finance Bill, 1976, the scope
             of the provision is limited to expenditure that constitutes
             head office expenses, which are claimed on a proportionate
             basis, because the purpose was to address difficulties
             related to the deduction of such proportionate claims.
             Therefore, it must be understood that expenditure incurred
             outside India solely for Indian operations is not governed by
             the restrictions of Section 44C.
j) To illustrate the scope of Section 44C, consider a US
             corporation employing a General Counsel. If this counsel
             exclusively handles legal issues for the Indian branch, their
             entire salary is deductible under
Section 37(1)
without the
             limitations of Section 44C, as it is a direct expense for India.
             Conversely, if the counsel manages legal affairs globally,
             including the US office and other international branches,
             and only a portion of their cost is allocated to India, this
             expense     falls   under         the   ‘executive    and    general
             administration’ definition of Section 44C. In this latter
             scenario, because the counsel is managing ‘any office
             outside India’ rather than solely the Indian operations, the
             allocated cost is subject to the statutory cap.
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                      Page 18 of 55
k) The judgment of
Emirates Commercial Bank
(supra),
             relied upon by the Bombay High Court in the impugned
             orders, was the subject matter of further appeal to this
             Court in
CIT vs. Emirates Commercial Bank Ltd. (Civil
             Appeal No.
1527 of 2006) and vide order dated 26.08.2008
             the same was dismissed following the view taken by this
             Court in
CIT vs. Deutsche Bank A.G. (Civil Appeal No.
1544
             of 2006) and DIT vs. Ravva Oil (Singapore) Pvt. Ltd. (Civil
             Appeal No.5822 of 2007). Thus, the principle of law that
             stands approved by this Court is that if expenditure is
             incurred by the head office outside India, which is incurred
             exclusively for the Indian operations of a non-resident
             entity, then such expenditure cannot be brought within the
             ambit of the term ‘head office expenditure’ provided in
Section 44C
of the Act and consequently, the expenditure is
             allowable in its entirety without being subjected to the
             ceiling provided therein.
24. In the circumstances referred to above, the learned counsels prayed
     that, there being no merit in the appeals, they be dismissed.
E. Issue to be determined
25. Having heard the learned counsels appearing for the parties and
     having gone through the materials on record, the following question
     falls for our consideration:
a) Whether expenditure incurred by the head office of a non-
resident assessee exclusively for its Indian branches falls
             within the ambit of
Section 44C
of the Act, 1961, thereby
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016             Page 19 of 55
limiting the permissible deduction to the statutory ceiling
             specified therein?
F. Analysis
26. Having regard to the rival contentions canvassed on either side, it
     is evident that the core of the disagreement concerns the scope of
Section 44C
of the Act, 1961. The appellant seeks to interpret it
     more broadly, encompassing not only the expenditure incurred by
     the head office attributable to various foreign branches, i.e.,
     ‘common’ expenditure, but also the ‘exclusive’ expenditure
     incurred specifically for the Indian branches. The respondents,
     however, aim to restrict the scope of Section 44C to include only
     ‘common’ expenditure. This is best illustrated by the example
     provided by the respondents. If a general counsel is appointed by
     the head office solely to handle Indian matters, it constitutes
     exclusive expenditure. However, if a general counsel is appointed
     by the head office to handle matters in branches across the globe
     (including India), it constitutes common expenditure. The appellant
     contends that Section 44C applies in both cases, whereas the
     respondents argue that it is only applicable in the latter scenario.
     In other words, the respondents argue that for exclusive
     expenditure, Section 44C is wholly inapplicable, and therefore, the
     deduction of the expenditure is not subject to the ceiling limit set
     out therein.
27. Before addressing the aforementioned issue, we consider it
     appropriate to first discuss certain principles that guide the
     interpretation of taxing statutes.
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016             Page 20 of 55
(i) Basic Principles of Interpretation
28. It is a well-established rule that taxing statutes have to be strictly
     construed.
In
Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras v. Kasturi
     & Sons Ltd
, reported in (1999) 3 SCC 346, this Court was
     determining the meaning of the word ‘moneys’ in the expression
     ‘money’s payable’ under
Section 41(2)
of the Act, 1961. In that
     context, the Court referenced the following concerning the strict
     interpretation of taxation statutes:
“9. The principle that a taxing statute should be strictly
          construed is well settled. In Principles of Statutory
          Interpretation by Justice G.P. Singh, 6th Edn., 1996, the law
          is stated thus:
“The well-established rule in the familiar words of LORD
              WENSLEYDALE, reaffirmed by LORD HALSBURY and LORD
              SIMONDS, means: ‘The subject is not to be taxed without
              clear words for that purpose; and also that every Act of
              Parliament must be read according to the natural
              construction of its words.’ In a classic passage LORD
              CAIRNS stated the principle thus: ‘If the person sought
              to be taxed comes within the letter of the law he must
              be taxed, however great the hardship may appear to
              the judicial mind to be. On the other hand, if the Crown
              seeking to recover the tax, cannot bring the subject
              within the letter of the law, the subject is free, however
              apparently within the spirit of law the case might
              otherwise appear to be. In other words, if there be
              admissible in any statute, what is called an equitable
              construction, certainly, such a construction is not
              admissible in a taxing statute where you can simply
              adhere to the words of the statute.’ VISCOUNT
              SIMON quoted with approval a passage from ROWLATT,
              J. expressing the principle in the following words: ‘In a
              taxing Act one has to look merely at what is clearly
              said. There is no room for any intendment. There is no
              equity about a tax. There is no presumption as to tax.
              Nothing is to be read in, nothing is to be implied. One
              can only look fairly at the language used.’ Relying upon
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                Page 21 of 55
this passage LORD UPJOHN said: ‘Fiscal measures are
              not built upon any theory of taxation.’ ””

                                               (Emphasis Supplied)
29. The principle outlined above has been articulated by this Court in
     similar terms in a plethora of cases. Thus, it is clear that when
     interpreting taxation statutes such as the Act, 1961, the following
     aspects must be strictly observed: (i) equitable considerations,
     presumptions, or assumptions should not be taken into account,
     and (ii) the statute should be interpreted according to what is
     clearly expressed. Thus, if the court is satisfied that a case falls
     strictly within the provisions of the law, the subject can be taxed,
     regardless of the consequences such a levy of tax might have [See
A.V. Fernandez v. The State of Kerala
, reported in 1957
SCC
     OnLine SC 23 & Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P v. Modi Sugar
     Mills Ltd
, reported in 1960 SCC OnLine SC 118].
30. Another fundamental rule of statutory interpretation is that when
     the language of the statute is plain and unambiguous, allowing
     only one meaning, then no issue of statutory construction arises as
     the statute speaks for itself. The reasoning behind this principle is
     that when the words are clear and plain, the courts are obliged to
     accept the expressed intention of the Legislature [See
State of
     Uttar Pradesh & Ors v. Dr. Vijay Anand Maharaj
, reported in
     1962 SCC OnLine SC 12, M.V. Joshi v. M.U. Shimpi & Anr,
     reported in 1961 SCC OnLine SC 56 & Godrej and Boyce
     Manufacturing Company Limited v. Deputy Commissioner of
     Income Tax, Mumbai, reported in (2017) 7 SCC 421].
31. While, at first glance, the principle of plain meaning, as referred to
     above, may seem simple and self-contained, it is crucial to
     understand the nuances involved when applying it to disputes
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016              Page 22 of 55
surrounding statutory interpretation. The same has been lucidly
     spelt out in the Principles of Statutory Interpretation by Justice G.P.
     Singh, fourteenth edition (2016), and reads thus:
“It may look somewhat paradoxical that plain meaning rule
          is not plain and requires some explanation. The rule, that
          plain words require no construction, starts with the premise
          that the words are plain, which is itself a conclusion reached
          after construing the words. It is not possible to decide
          whether certain words are plain or ambiguous unless they
          are studied in their context and construed. The rule,
          therefore, in reality means that after you have construed the
          words and have come to the conclusion that they can bear
          only one meaning, your duty is to give effect to that meaning.
The true import of the rule is well brought out in an American
          case where JUDGE PEARSON after reaching his conclusion
          as to the meaning of the statutory language said: “That
          seems to me a plain clear meaning of the statutory language
          in its context. Of course, in so concluding I have necessarily
          construed or interpreted the language It would obviously be
          impossible to decide that language is 'plain' (more accurately
          that a particular meaning seems plain) without first
          construing it. This involves far more than picking out
          dictionary definitions of words or expressions used.
          Consideration of the context and setting is indispensable
          properly to ascertain a meaning. In saying that a verbal
          expression is plain or unambiguous, we mean little more than
          that we are convinced that virtually anyone competent to
          understand it and desiring fairly and impartially to ascertain
          its significance would attribute to the expression in its context
          a meaning such as the one we derive, rather than any other;
          and would consider any different meaning by comparison,
          strained, or far-fetched, or unusual or unlikely”

          For a proper application of the rule to a given statute, it is
          necessary, therefore, to determine first whether the language
          used is plain or ambiguous. As pointed out by LORD
          BUCKMASTER, "by 'any ambiguity' is meant a phrase fairly
          and equally open to diverse meanings". "A provision is not
          ambiguous", says LORD REID, "merely because it contains a
          word which in different contexts is capable of different
          meanings". LORD REID, proceeds to add: "It would be hard
          to find anywhere a sentence of any length which does not
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                 Page 23 of 55
contain such a word. A provision is, in my judgment,
          ambiguous only if it contains a word or phrase which in that
          particular context is capable of having more than one
          meaning". To decide, therefore, whether certain words are
          clear and unambiguous, they must be studied in their context
          [...] Unambiguous means ‘unambiguous in context’. So
          ambiguity need not necessarily be grammatical ambiguity
          but one of appropriateness of the meaning in a particular
          context.”

                                                  (Emphasis Supplied)
32. From the above extract, the following principles regarding
     statutory interpretation are evident: (i) first, deciding whether
     statutory language is ‘plain’ inherently involves a process of
     construction. One cannot simply declare words to be clear without
     first studying them, and (ii) secondly, true unambiguity depends on
     context, not just grammar. Words cannot be judged in isolation, as
     most words are capable of multiple meanings. A provision is seen
     as unambiguous only when, after being examined in its specific
     context, almost anyone competent would assign to it a single,
     appropriate meaning to the exclusion of others, i.e., the words are
     unambiguous in the context of the provision in question.
33. This aspect of interpreting the words of a statute in their specific
     context has also been affirmed by this Court.
In
Commissioner of
     Gift Tax, Madras v. N.S. Getty Chettiar
, reported in (1971) 2
     SCC 741, this Court examined the meaning that should be given
     to   words    “disposition,    conveyance,   assignment,   settlement,
     delivery, payment, and alienation” appearing in
Section 2(xxiv)
of
     the Gift Tax Act, 1958. The court observed that the true meaning
     of statutory language cannot be understood merely by holding the
     text in one hand and a dictionary in the other. Instead, the words
     must be interpreted by considering the context in which they are
     used and the purpose they are meant to serve.
In
Reserve Bank of
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016               Page 24 of 55
India v. Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd. &
     Ors
, reported in (1987) 1 SCC 424, this Court reiterated that
     interpretation depends on both the text and the context, where the
     text is the texture and the context provides the colour.
34. A natural extension of both the principles discussed earlier and a
     well-known principle of interpretation is that, if the language of the
     enactment is clear and unambiguous, it would be unjustifiable for
     the courts to add words on the ground that such additions would
     better enable carrying out the legislature's presumed intentions.
     This is because, in all ordinary cases, the language employed is the
     determinative factor for determining legislative intention [See
Sri
     Ram Narain Medhi & Ors v. State of Bombay
, reported in 1958
     SCC OnLine SC 53, Dadi Jagannadham v. Jammulu Ramulu
     & Ors, reported in (2001) 7 SCC 71 ].
Furthermore, this reluctance
     to give the courts the authority to add or read words into the statute
     is also based on the fact that it is not the court's duty to reframe
     the legislation, as the power to ‘legislate’ has not been granted to it
     [See
Commissioner of Income Tax, Kerala v. Tara Agencies
,
     reported in (2007) 6 SCC 429].
35. However, this is not a hard and fast rule, and in certain exceptional
     circumstances, the court can add or read words into the statute.
     The circumstances which would allow for such a departure from
     the ordinary rule have been succinctly captured in Principles of
     Statutory Interpretation by Justice G.P. Singh, fourteenth edition
     (2016), as follows:
“As already noticed it is not allowable to read words in a
          statute which are not there, but "where the alternative lies
          between either supplying by implication words which appear
          to have been accidentally omitted, or adopting a construction
          which deprives certain existing words of all meaning, it is
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016               Page 25 of 55
permissible to supply the words" A departure from the rule of
          literal construction may be legitimate so as to avoid any part
          of the statute becoming meaningless. Words may also be
          read to give effect to the intention of the Legislature, which is
          apparent from the Act read as a whole. Application of the
          mischief rule or purposive construction may also enable
          reading of words by implication when there is no doubt about
          the purpose which the Parliament intended to achieve. But
          before any words are read to repair an omission in the Act, it
          should be possible to state with certainty that these or similar
          words would have been inserted by the draftsman and
          approved by Parliament had their attention been drawn to
          the omission before the Bill passed into law.”
36. If legislative intention is to be principally assessed based on the
     language of the enactment, then under what circumstances should
     the objects and purposes behind a legislation be taken into
     account? This Court in
Shashikant Laxman Kale v. Union of
     India
, reported in (1990) 4 SCC 366, established a distinction
     between the purpose or object of an enactment and the legislative
     intent. It held that while the former is to provide a remedy for the
     malady, the latter relates to the meaning or exposition of the
     remedy as enacted. Thus, the object and purpose are elements that
     are taken into account more concretely when the court is applying
     the mischief rule of interpretation.
37. The mischief rule of interpretation, also known as Heydon’s Rule,
      was established in England as far back as 1584. This rule states
      that for the sure and true interpretation of all statutes in general,
      four things are to be discerned and considered:
(a) The Prior Law: What the law was before the new Act was
                passed?
(b) The Problem (Mischief): The specific defect or issue that
                the old law failed to address.
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                 Page 26 of 55
(c) The Solution (Remedy): The new method Parliament
                introduced to fix that problem.
(d) The Reason: The underlying logic or purpose behind this
                new solution.
This rule was considered necessary to guide judges away from
     subtle inventions or loopholes that might allow the mischief to
     continue. The mischief rule has been widely adopted by this Court
     in various scenarios.[See
Bengal Immunity Company Limited v.
     State of Bihar & Ors
, reported in (1955) 1
SCC 763] &
     Shashikant Laxman
(supra)]
38. As noted above, in most circumstances, the legislative intention is
     to be discerned from the words used in the statute itself, and the
     mischief rule of interpretation should not be invoked in an
     unfettered manner. This Court has held that considering the object
     and purpose is relevant only when the words in question are
     ambiguous and reasonably capable of more than one meaning [See
Commissioner of Income Tax, MP v. Shrimati Sodra Devi
,
     reported in 1957
SCC OnLine SC 33 & Kanai Lal Sur v.
     Paramnidhi Sadhukhan
, reported in 1957 SCC OnLine SC 8].
39. However, as recognised above, even determining the ‘plain’
     meaning involves the contextual interpretation of a word, and the
     object and purpose of a relevant statute are elements that form part
     of that context. Yet, there is a vital distinction: while the object and
     purpose may help illuminate the context, they cannot override the
     text. Once the words are examined in their context, including
     considerations of object and purpose, and are found to be clear,
     unambiguous, and capable of only one meaning, then the plain
     meaning rule prevails, and considerations of object and purpose
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                Page 27 of 55
cannot be invoked to alter, control, or distort the clear mandate of
     the statutory language.
40. A brief summary of the aforesaid discussion is as follows:
a) Taxation statutes require strict interpretation.
b) Where the words are plain and unambiguous, the court is
             bound to give effect to their plain meaning.
c) The determination of whether language is ‘plain and
             unambiguous’ is not a mechanical exercise, and it
             necessitates interpreting words within their specific context
             rather than in isolation.
d) The legislative intent is primarily to be gathered from the
             specific words used by the legislature. Reference to the
             object and purpose becomes crucial in those situations
             where the language is ambiguous and capable of multiple
             constructions.
e) Under ordinary circumstances, it is impermissible for the
             Court to add or read words into the statute, especially when
             the language is plain and unambiguous, on the notion that
             such words would appear to better serve the legislative
             object or purpose.
(ii) Interpreting
Section 44C
of the Act, 1961
41. With the foregoing principles of statutory interpretation as our
     guide, we now proceed to examine the specific language of
Section
     44C
of the Act, 1961, to determine whether the provision, in its true
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                Page 28 of 55
scope, contemplates a distinction between ‘common’ and ‘exclusive’
     head office expenditure.
42. For our analysis,
Section 44C
of the Act, 1961 can be divided into
     two separate but interconnected parts. The first is the operative or
     substantive provision, which outlines the conditions for applying
     the section and details the computation mechanism. The second is
     the definitional provision in the Explanation, which clarifies the
     scope of the term ‘head office expenditure’. The meaning given
     under the Explanation serves as the statutory trigger, as only when
     an expense falls within the ambit of this meaning does the operative
     framework of Section 44C come into effect.
43. Let us first examine the operative part of Section 44C. For clarity,
     the operative part of Section 44C can be divided into the following
     distinct components:
a) Section 44C applies specifically to non-resident assessees.
b) Section 44C governs the computation of income chargeable
             under the specific head “Profits and gains of business or
             profession”.
c) Section 44C mandates that no allowance under the
             aforementioned head shall be made in respect of ‘head office
             expenditure’ to the extent that such expenditure is in excess
             of the lesser of the following two amounts: (a) an amount
             equal to five per cent of the adjusted total income; or (b) the
             amount of head office expenditure attributable to the
             business or profession of the assessee in India.
d) Section 44C is a non-obstante provision as it starts with a
             phrase: notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
             in
Sections 28
to 43A. Consequently, it has an overriding
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016               Page 29 of 55
effect on
Sections 28
to 43A for the specific purpose of
             computing head office expenditure of a non-resident
             assessee.
44. We have no doubt that for an expense to be governed by the tenets
     of
Section 44C
of the Act, 1961, two conditions must be fulfilled: (i)
     the assessee should be a non-resident, and (ii) the expenditure
     should be a ‘head office expenditure’. If both conditions are met,
     then Section 44C, being a non-obstante provision, will apply
     regardless of whether its principles contravene
Sections 28
to 43A
     respectively.
45. The respondents may be correct in stating that for an expenditure
     to be deductible under
Section 37(1)
, it does not necessarily have
     to have been incurred in India. Furthermore, they are also correct
     in stating that Section 44C only seeks to put a ceiling on the ‘head
     office expenditure’ that can be allowed as a deduction. However,
     their argument that Section 44C cannot restrict deductions that
     are otherwise allowable under
Section 37(1)
is misplaced. If the
     expenditures meet the above two conditions, Section 44C governs
     the quantum of allowable deduction. This means that even if such
     head office expenditure can be allowed as a deduction under
Section 37(1)
, it would not be permitted if it exceeds the ceiling limit
     set under Section 44C. To decide otherwise would be to overlook
     the non-obstante nature of Section 44C.
46. It is prudent to closely examine & understand the meaning
     attributed to the term ‘head office expenditure’ under Section 44C.
     This is because, in the context of the question before us today, if
     the meaning assigned to ‘head office expenditure’ under Section
     44C is taken to suggest that it only includes common expenditure
     incurred by the head office, then the issue would stand resolved in
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                Page 30 of 55
favour of the respondents. Consequently, as contended by the
     respondents, for exclusive expenditure incurred by the head office
     for the Indian branches, Section 44C would not apply, and a
     deduction could be claimed under other sections, including
Section
     37
, without adhering to the ceiling limits set under Section 44C.
47. Upon close analysis of the meaning assigned to the words ‘head
     office expenditure’ under
Section 44C
of the Act, 1961, it does not
     appear that the legislature has limited the scope to cover only
     common expenditure incurred by the head office for the benefit of
     various branches, including those in India. In fact, the Explanation
     is unambiguous in stating that for an expenditure to be considered
     as head office expenditure, it must meet two conditions only: (i) it
     has to be incurred outside India by the assessee, (ii) it must be
     expenditure of a nature related to executive and general
     administrative expenses, including those specified in clauses (a) to
(d), respectively, of the Explanation.
48. Thus, the Explanation focuses solely on two aspects: where the
     expense was incurred and the nature of that expense. It does not
     matter whether the expense was a common expense or an expense
     exclusively for the Indian branch, so long as the expense incurred
     is for the business or profession. The text provides no indication
     that the expenditure must be of a common or shared nature.
     Therefore, the meaning of the Explanation is clear, straightforward,
     and unambiguous. If we were to accept the respondents’
     contention, we would be forced to add words to the statute that
     simply do not exist. As noted above, adding words is generally not
     permissible, especially when the plain meaning of the statute is
     unambiguous. To illustrate, the table below depicts the words that
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016             Page 31 of 55
would need to be added to the Explanation if the respondents’
     contention were to be accepted:
Explanation        as      provided Explanation               under     Section
      under Section 44C of the Act, 44C of the Act, 1961, as
      1961                                     would      be       implied     if   the
                                               respondents’ contention were
                                               to be accepted

      “head oﬃce expenditure” means “head office expenditure” means
      executive         and       general common and shared executive
      administration           expenditure and          general       administrative
      incurred     by    the     assessee expenditure              incurred    outside
      outside India, [...]                     India, [...]

                                               OR

                                               “head office expenditure” means
                                               executive           and         general
                                               administration              expenditure
                                               incurred       by     the      assessee
                                               outside India, except where
                                               such expenditure is incurred
                                               exclusively for the Indian
                                               branch [...]
49. The necessary corollary of the aforesaid discussion is that,
     irrespective of whether the expenditure was ‘common’ or ‘exclusive’,
     the moment it is incurred by a non-resident assessee outside India
     and falls within the specific nature described in the Explanation,
     then Section 44C would come into play and become applicable. At
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                         Page 32 of 55
this juncture, it is essential to consider and evaluate the
     respondents' contention that an additional condition must be
     fulfilled for Section 44C to apply.
50. According to the respondents, by virtue of clause (c) of
Section 44C
of the Act, 1961, only when the expenditure is of a common nature,
     and not exclusive expenditure incurred for the Indian branches,
     would the section become applicable. They rely on the Calcutta
     High Court’s decision in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra) to support their
     argument.
51.
In
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra), the assessee was a company with its
     head office in the United Kingdom. However, all of its business
     operations were conducted in India, with only statutory functions
     being performed from the head office in the United Kingdom.
     During the assessment year in question, the assessee incurred
     expenditure of INR 4,70,074 at its head office on account of
     secretarial remuneration, warehouse charges, brokerage, director’s
     fees, and emoluments. The assessee claimed the entire amount as
     business expenditure in computing its total income chargeable to
     tax in India under the Act, 1961. However, the below authorities
     held that the allowance of the head office expenditure was subject
     to the limits prescribed under Section 44C and accordingly
     disallowed the sum of INR 21,441. Before the High Court, the
     assessee argued that Section 44C was inapplicable to the facts and
     circumstances of the case because the company had no business
     operations outside India, and its London head office was solely
     attending to statutory functions. Therefore, the expenses incurred
     at the head office were entirely connected with its business
     operations in India.     The Calcutta High Court, after taking into
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016             Page 33 of 55
account the object and purpose behind inserting Section 44C, held
     as follows:
“On a combined reading of the said Explanatory
          Memorandum as well as the said circular issued by the
          Central Board of Direct Taxes, it is clear that this section is
          intended to be made applicable only in the cases of those
          non-residents who carry on businesses in India through their
          branches. It has been made very clear that the said section
          was introduced with a view to getting over difficulties in
          scrutinising and verifying claims in respect of general
          administrative expenses incurred by the foreign head offices
          in so far as such expenses can be related to their business or
          profession in India having regard to the fact that foreign
          companies operating through branches in India sometimes
          try to reduce the incidence of tax in India by inflating their
          claims in respect of head office expenses. The objective
          behind the aforesaid legislation is also clear from a bare
          perusal of the earlier portion of the said section which
          provides, inter alia, the manner in which the disallowable
          amount is to be computed. The expenditure to be disallowed
          is the difference between the expenditure in the nature of
          head office expenditure and the least of the following three
          computations:
(a) an amount equal to 5 per cent. of the adjusted total
          income;
(b) an amount equal to the average head office expenditure;
(c) the amount of so much of the expenditure in the nature of
          head office expenditure incurred by the assessee as is
          attributable to the business or profession of the assessee in
          India.
The language of clause (c) clearly postulates that the
          expenditure in question should be incurred not only in
          connection with the business in India, but also business
          outside India. In other words, a part of the expenditure at
          least must not be attributable to the business operations
          carried on in India. Where an assessee does not have any
          business overseas and the entire operations are carried out
          by it in this country only, the question of allocating a part of
          the expenditure in question to the business carried on in
          India cannot arise.
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                Page 34 of 55
In
CIT v. B. C. Srinivasa Setty
(1981] 128 ITR 294, the
          Supreme Court held that the charging section and the
          computation provisions together constitute an integrated
          code. When there is a case to which the computation
          provisions cannot apply at all, it is evident that such a case
          was not intended to fall within the charging section. Referring
          to
section 48(ii)
, the Supreme Court further observed that this
          section contemplated an asset in the acquisition of which it
          was possible to envisage a cost. None of the provisions
          pertaining to the head "Capital gains" suggests that they
          include an asset in the acquisition of which no cost at all can
          be conceived. Further, the date of acquisition of the asset was
          a material factor in applying the computation provisions
          pertaining to capital gain; but, in the case of goodwill
          generated in a new business, it was not possible to
          determine the date when it came into existence. In view of
          these observations of the Supreme Court, we are inclined to
          hold that if any one or more of the base figures forming part
          of computations under clauses (a), (b) or (c) of section 44C are
          not conceivable in a particular case, it must be held that the
          non obstante provisions contemplating disallowance of "head
          ofﬁce expenditure" under section 44C would not apply. On a
          fair reading of clause (c), it appears that the expression "so
          much of the expenditure ...as is attributable to business.... in
          India" contemplated that at least a part of the expenditure is
          referable to a business outside India. In the case before us,
          it is an admitted position that the assessee-company did not
          have any business operations outside India and the entire
          expenditure incurred at its London head office was wholly
          attributable to its business activities in this country. If that
          be so, it is clear that clause (c) cannot have any application
          in this case and, therefore, no disallowance can be made
          under section 44C in the facts and circumstances of this
          case.
That section 44C applies only when a foreign company
          operates through its branches in India is made clear even in
          the explanatory note appended to the Finance Bill, 1976. [...]

          The difficulties of the nature as stated in the said
          memorandum as well as in the said circular of the Central
          Board of Direct Taxes cannot exist in a case where the entire
          head office expenditure is for the purpose of business in
          India. It is, therefore, clear that the provisions of section 44C
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                 Page 35 of 55
have been introduced to cover cases where a non-resident
          assessee was incurring expenditure abroad and the
          business activities of such non-resident assessee were not
          only confined to India but were also being carried on
          overseas.
In this view of the matter, we answer the question in the
          negative and in favour of the assessee.”

                                                    (Emphasis Supplied)
52. Based on the extracts above, it is evident that the Calcutta High
     Court’s decision was primarily based on the following:
a) Section 44C applies when non-residents conduct business
             in India through their branches, but not when the entire
             business activity is carried out in India with the head office
             outside India, merely performing statutory functions.
b) In situations where the entire business operation is in India
             and the head office outside India does not undertake any
             business    operations     itself,   clause   (c)   would   not     be
             applicable. This is because clause (c) envisages that a
             portion of the expenditure is attributable to the business or
             profession of the assessee outside India. The phrase “so
             much of the expenditure ... as is attributable to business.... in
             India” in clause (c) clearly indicates this. If there are no
             business operations outside India, then there is no question
             of attribution or allocation.
c) Whenever clause (c) becomes inapplicable to a specific
             expenditure, Section 44C as a whole will also not apply.
Consequently, such expenditure will no longer fall under
             Section 44C.
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                     Page 36 of 55
53. The Bombay High Court, in Commissioner of Income Tax v.
Deutsche Bank A.G., reported in 2003 SCC OnLine Bom 1286,
     had the occasion to address a similar issue. The question before
     the court was if one of the three parameters listed in clauses (a),
(b), and (c) of Section 44C, respectively, fails, then whether the
     Revenue can ignore the said parameter and grant an allowance
     based solely on the remaining two parameters. In this case, clause
(b) was not fulfilled, and thus, the department considered clauses
(a) and (c) of Section 44C, respectively, limiting the deduction to the
     least of the two. The Bombay High Court concurred with the
     decision of the Calcutta High Court in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra) and
     held that, if one of the three parameters is inapplicable, the entire
     section becomes non-operational and must be ruled out. The
     relevant observation made by the court is as follows:
“6. [...] Now, in the present case, Explanation (iii) which
          defines average head office expenditure is not applicable
          because under clause (b) read with Explanation (iii), as it
          stood at the relevant time, deduction in respect of head office
          expenses was limited to the annual average of head office
          expenditure allowed during a base period of three previous
          years relevant to the assessment years 1974-75, 1975-76
          and 1976-77. In the present case, the assessee commenced
          its business operations only in October 1980. Therefore,
          clause (b) of section 44C was not attracted. This position is
          not disputed by the Department. The only argument
          advanced on behalf of the Department was that since clause
(b) was not attracted, it may be ignored and the least of the
          deductions under clauses (a) and (c) of section 44C be
          granted. We do not find any merit in the arguments advanced
          on behalf of the Department. As stated above, section 44C
          begins with a non obstante clause. It restricts deduction to
          the least of the three parameters mentioned in clauses (a), (b)
          and (c) of section 44C. Section 44C begins by a non obstante
          clause which states that notwithstanding anything to the
          contrary contained in
sections 28
to 43A, deduction in respect
          of head office expenditure shall be restricted to the least of
          the three deductions mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and (c).
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016               Page 37 of 55
Therefore, section 44C overrides the provisions of
sections 29
to
37
of the Income-tax Act. Section 44C is not conferring
          deductions on the assessee. It is restricting the deduction
          under
section 37(1)
of the Act by virtue of the overriding
          provisions contemplated by section 44C. Therefore, when the
          working of section 44C fails, the entire section 44C becomes
          non-workable and consequently, the assessee would become
          entitled to the full deduction under
section 37(1)
of the Act.
          Section 44C restricts the head office expenditure. Section 44C
          provides for three parameters in the matter of computing
          deduction for head office expenditure incurred by a non-
          resident. Section 44C specifically states that deduction for
          the head office expenditure should be restricted to the least
          of the three parameters. The expression used in section 44C
          is “whichever is the least”.
This expression shows that the
          least of the three parameters should be taken into account
          for computing allowance under section 44C for head office
          expenditure incurred by the non-resident. Therefore, in the
          absence of one of the parameters out of the three parameters,
          the entire section becomes non-workable. Hence, the entire
          section 44C stands ruled out. This is the ratio of the judgment
          of the Calcutta High Court also in the case reported in
Rupenjuli Tea Co. Ltd. v. CIT
[1990] 186 ITR 301 with which
          we respectfully agree. [...]”

                                                (Emphasis Supplied)
54. It should be noted that in both
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra) and
Deutsche Bank
(supra), respectively, the courts applied the
     unamended Section 44C, which contained three parameters:
clauses (a), (b), and (c). However, through the
Finance Act, 1993
,
     clause (b) was omitted. Nonetheless, the removal of clause (b) does
     not affect the principle established in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra) and
Deutsche Bank
(supra), and the same principles remain relevant
     in relation to clauses (a) and (c) of Section 44C.
55.
In Ravva Oil (supra), the Delhi High Court addressed a case similar
     to
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra), where the assessee did not conduct any
     business outside India.
Accordingly, the Delhi High Court relied on
     the decisions in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra) and
Emirates Commercial
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016               Page 38 of 55
Bank
(supra) and concluded that, since these decisions had settled
     the matter, no substantial question of law was involved in the
     appeals, and accordingly dismissed them.
56. The respondents have also relied on the Bombay High Court’s
     decision in
Emirates Commercial Bank
(supra). In this case, the
     Bombay High Court examined whether the travelling expenses
     incurred by the staff members of the head office on their visit to the
     assessee's branch office in India are deductible under Section 44C.
     The Court held as follows:
“Section 44C is applicable only in the cases of those non-
          residents, who carry on business in India through their
          branches. The said section was introduced to get over
          difficulties in scrutinising claims in respect of general
          administrative expenses incurred by the foreign head office
          in so far as such expenses stand related to their business or
          profession in India having regard to the fact that foreign
          companies operating through branches in India sometimes
          try to reduce incidence of tax in India by inflating their claims
          in respect of the head office expenses. In other words, section
          44C seeks to impose a ceiling/ restriction on head office
          expenses. However, section 44C contemplates allocation of
          expenses amongst various entities. That, the expenditure
          which is covered by section 44C is of a common nature,
          which is incurred for the various branches or which is
          incurred for the head office and the branch. However, in this
          case, we are concerned with the expenditure exclusively
          incurred for the branch. In this case, there is a concurrent
          finding of fact recorded by the Commissioner (Appeals) as
          well as the Tribunal stating that the officers came from the
          head office at Abu Dhabi to Bombay to attend to the work of
          the Bombay branch and, in connection with that work, the
          expense was incurred. That, the expense was initially
          incurred by the head office which was recovered by the head
          office from the branch in India by raising a debit note.
          Therefore, the expense was incurred for the branch office in
          India. These are concurrent findings of fact. We do not wish
          to interfere with those findings. Hence, section 44C has no
          application.”
                                                  (Emphasis Supplied)
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                 Page 39 of 55
57. A close examination of the rulings in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra) and
Emirates Commercial Bank
(supra), respectively, reveal that,
     while both held that Section 44C was not applicable to their facts,
     their reasoning differed significantly.
For the Calcutta High Court
     in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra), the decisive factor was the absence of
     any business operations outside India by the non-resident
     assessee, including at its head office in London.
On the other hand,
     the Bombay High Court in
Emirates Commercial Bank
(supra)
     proceeded on the premise that Section 44C covers only common
     expenditure and not expenditure incurred exclusively for the
     Indian branches.
58. The decision in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra) does not support the
     contention raised by the respondents in any way. The respondents’
     argument is that clause (c) only covers common expenditure and
     not   expenditure     exclusively    incurred   for   Indian   branches.
     Consequently, they contend that clause (c) does not come into play
     with respect to such expenditure, Section 44C as a whole would
     also not apply, and thereby, the deduction of such expenditure
     would not be governed by the ceiling limits set under Section 44C.
However, in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra), clause (c) and subsequently
     Section 44C as a whole were held to be inapplicable, not because
     the expenditure was exclusively for Indian operations, but because
     the business operations were confined to India. In other words, the
     deciding factor with respect to non-application of clause (c) was
     rooted not in the nature of expenditure, but rather in the nature of
     business operations of the assessee.
However, the observation
     made by the Bombay High Court in
Emirates Commercial Bank
(supra) does create a distinction between common and exclusive
     expenditure. Thus, it could be argued that it paves way for
     accepting the respondents’ contention.
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                 Page 40 of 55
59. The Bombay High Court in
Emirates Commercial Bank
(supra)
     provides no basis whatsoever as to how it concluded that the
     expenditure which is covered by Section 44C is of a common
     nature, incurred for the various branches or for the head office and
     the branch. As discussed above, this conclusion is not supported
     by the meaning attached to the term ‘head office expenditure’ under
     the Explanation in Section 44C. Is it the case that the language
     employed in clause (c) indicates that there is a distinction between
     ‘common’ and ‘exclusive’ expenditure?
60. Clause (c) of Section 44C allows for the computation of head office
     expenditure on an actual basis, wherein all the head office
     expenditure that is attributable to the business in India is taken
     into account. A plain reading of the clause in no way indicates that
     the legislature envisaged taking into account only ‘common’ head
     office    expenditure    while    excluding    ‘exclusive’       head   office
     expenditure under the clause. The text of the provision is broad
     and unqualified. It employs the phrase “head office expenditure
     incurred by the assessee as is attributable to the business or
     profession of the assessee in India,” without carving out any
     exception for expenses incurred exclusively for Indian branches.
61. The      respondents’    contention       proceeds   on      a     misplaced
     understanding that there is a stark conceptual difference between
     ‘attributable’ expenditure and ‘exclusive’ expenditure. Such a
     contention is, however, not sustainable. ‘Attributability’ is a genus
     of which ‘exclusivity’ is merely a species. Expenditure that is
     incurred exclusively for the business in India is, by its very nature,
     attributable to the business in India. In fact, exclusive expenditure
     represents the strongest form of attribution, as there is a direct and
     undivided nexus between the expense and the Indian operations.
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                   Page 41 of 55
Therefore, exclusive expenditure, without contrary legislative
     intent, which is absent in clause (c), must necessarily be treated as
     part of attributable expenditure. When the statute uses the term
     ‘attributable’, it brings into its fold all things concerned with the
     Indian business, whether they are common expenses allocated to
     India or expenses incurred exclusively for India.
62. In income tax disputes, this Court has often been called upon to
     interpret    the     phrase     ‘attributable    to’,   particularly      in
     contradistinction to the narrower phrase ‘derived from’. This Court
     has consistently held that the expression ‘attributable to’ is of a
     much wider import than the expression ‘derived from’. While
     ‘derived from’ envisages a direct nexus, ‘attributable to’ also covers
     an indirect nexus. Thus, there is no doubt that the words
     ‘attributable to’ in the context of clause (c) would include both
     common and exclusive expenditure. [See
Commissioner of Income
     Tax v. Meghalaya Steels Limited
, reported in (2016) 6 SCC 747]
63. Further, if the Parliament had intended to restrict the scope of
     clause (c) only to common or shared expenses, it would have
     employed specific language to that effect. In the absence of such
     words of limitation, if we accept the respondents’ contention, it
     would tantamount to reading a qualification into clause (c) and
     thereby rewriting the statute.
64. Both    parties    have   resorted   to   the   legislative   history   and
     background to support their contentions. The legislative history
     and background behind Section 44C were set forth by the parties
     vide the Memorandum explaining the provisions in the Finance
     Bill, 1976 and the CBDT Circular No. 202 dated 05.07.1976. It is
     important to note that these materials cannot be used to determine
     the meaning of the provision, but merely to look at what mischief
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                   Page 42 of 55
was sought to be remedied. Furthermore, based on the principles
     discussed above, it is essential to determine whether the meaning
     of Section 44C is plain and unambiguous, even when read in the
     context of its legislative object and purpose.
65. Section 44C was inserted into the Act, 1961, by the Finance Bill,
     1976. The relevant portion from the Memorandum explaining the
     provisions in the Finance Bill, 1976, is as follows:
“In the case of foreign companies operating in India through
          branches, a proportion of the general administrative
          expenses incurred by the foreign head office is claimed as a
          deduction in the computation of taxable profits. It is
          extremely difficult to scrutinise and verify such claims,
          particularly in the absence of account books of the head
          office which are kept outside India. Foreign companies
          operating through branches in India sometimes try to reduce
          the incidence of tax in India by inflating their claims in
          respect of head ofﬁce expenses. With a view to getting over
          these difficulties, it is proposed to lay down certain ceiling
          limits for the deduction of head office expenses in computing
          the taxable profits in the case of non-resident taxpayers.[...]”
66. The relevant portions of CBDT Circular No. 202 dated 5.7.1976
     read thus:
“Ceiling expenses in respect of head office case of non-
          residents-New section 44C.
25.1 Non-residents carrying on any business or profession
          in India through their branches are entitled to a deduction,
          in computing the taxable profits, in respect of general
          administrative expenses incurred by the foreign head
          offices in so far as such expenses can be related to their
          business or profession in India. It is extremely difficult to
          scrutinise and verify claims in respect of such expenses,
          particularly in the absence of account books of the head
          office which are kept outside India. Foreign companies
          operating through branches in India sometimes try to reduce
          the incidence of tax in India by inflating their claims in
          respect of head office expenses. With a view to getting over
          these difficulties, the
Finance Act
has inserted a new section
          44C in the
Income-tax Act
laying down certain ceiling limits
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                 Page 43 of 55
for the, deduction of head office expenses in computing the
          taxable profits in the case of non-resident taxpayers. [...]”

                                                (Emphasis Supplied)
67. The respondents have relied on the phrase “a proportion of the
     general administrative expenses” used in the memorandum to
     argue that the legislative intent was to cover only head office
     expenses that are claimed on a proportionate basis, and therefore,
     it must be inferred that ‘exclusive expenditure’ is not subject to
     Section 44C. However, we disagree with the respondents'
     contention as the word ‘proportion’ in the memorandum was only
     used in the context of describing the quantum attributed to the
     Indian branches out of the total expenditure of the head office. It
     was not employed to exclude ‘exclusive’ expenditure, but to
     highlight the mischief that foreign entities sometimes were
     arbitrarily inflating the ‘proportion’ or share of head office expenses
     attributed to India, whether such expenses were common expenses
     or expenses exclusively incurred for the Indian branches.
68. Having regard to the memorandum and circular
referred to above
,
     it is by no means evident that the primary legislative object was to
     enact Section 44C solely for ‘common’ expenditure. In fact, the
     specific nature of the expenditure does not appear to be the focal
     point of the legislative concern. Rather, the concern was mainly
     with respect to the ‘inflating’ of expenses by some foreign
     companies, who attributed excessive expenditure to their Indian
     branches, and the inherent difficulty faced by the Revenue in
     scrutinising and verifying such claims. In such a scenario, the
     legislative history does not further the respondents’ contention in
     the slightest. On the contrary, it merely reinforces the conclusion
     that the plain and unambiguous meaning of Section 44C must be
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016               Page 44 of 55
given full effect to remedy the very mischief the legislature sought
     to address.
69. Respondent M/s American Bank Express has also placed reliance
     on paragraph 3 of
Article 7
of the Double Taxation Avoidance
     Agreement between the Governments of India and the USA.
     Paragraph 3 of
Article 7
reads as follows:
“3. In the determination of the profits of a permanent
      establishment, there shall be allowed as deductions expenses
      which are incurred for the purposes of the business of the
      permanent establishment, including a reasonable allocation of
      executive and general administrative expenses, research and
      development expenses, interest, and other expenses incurred for
      the purposes of the enterprise as a whole (or the part thereof
      which includes the permanent establishment), whether incurred
      in the State in which the permanent establishment is situated or
      elsewhere, in accordance with the provisions of and subject to
      the limitations of the taxation laws of that State. However, no
      such deduction shall be allowed in respect of amounts, if any,
      paid (otherwise than towards reimbursement of actual
      expenses) by the permanent establishment to the head office of
      the enterprise or any of its other offices, by way of royalties, fees
      or other similar payments in return for the use of patents, know-
      how or other rights, or by way of commission or other charges
      for specific services performed or for management, or, except in
      the case of a banking enterprises, by way of interest on moneys
      lent to the permanent establishment. Likewise, no account shall
      be taken, in the determination of the profits of a permanent
      establishment, for amounts charged (otherwise than toward
      reimbursement of actual expenses), by the permanent
      establishment to the head office of the enterprise or any of its
      other offices, by way of royalties, fees or other similar payments
      in return for the use of patents, know-how or other rights, or by
      way of commission or other charges for specific services
      performed or for management, or, except in the case of a banking
      enterprise, by way of interest on moneys lent to the head office
      of the enterprise or any of its other offices.”

                                                   (Emphasis Supplied)

     On perusal of paragraph 3 of
Article 7
, it is evident that, while
     deductions are allowed for expenses incurred for the purposes of
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                Page 45 of 55
the permanent establishment in India, irrespective of whether they
     are incurred within or outside India, the same are subject to the
     limitations of the taxation laws of India. That invariably leads to the
     conclusion that, under the said agreement, the deduction for head
     office expenditure of the permanent establishment is to be governed
     by the limits set out under Section 44C. Thus, the reliance placed
     on paragraph 3 of
Article 7
does not further the case of the
     respondents in any manner.
70. The    summary       of   the   legal     position   emerging    from     the
     aforementioned analysis is as follows:
a) First, Section 44C would apply only when the two primary
             conditions are met: the assessee is a non-resident and has
             incurred     expenditure    in     the   nature   of    head    office
             expenditure.
b) Secondly, the definition of ‘head office expenditure’ in the
             Explanation keeps in mind two factors: the nature of the
             expense (executive and general administration) and its
             geographic location (incurred outside India). It is entirely
             irrelevant   whether     such      expenditure    is   common      or
             exclusive.
c) Thirdly, clause (c) mandates computation on an actual
             basis, and the phrase “attributable to” as present in clause
(c) is wide enough to encompass both the shared expenses
             allocated to India branches and exclusive expenses incurred
             for India branches.
71. Thus, after examining the issue from all angles, we have no doubt
     that Section 44C does not create a distinction between common
     and exclusive head office expenditure. We, therefore, find no merit
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                    Page 46 of 55
in the contention of the respondents that exclusive expenditure
     falls outside the purview of this section. Consequently, we hold that
     the view expressed by the Bombay High Court in
Emirates
     Commercial Bank
(supra) regarding the applicability of Section
     44C is incorrect and does not declare the position of law correctly.
72. Before we proceed further, we would like to address a brief ancillary
     issue. The appellant claims that the definition of ‘head office
     expenditure’ in the Explanation to Section 44C is inclusive and has
     a wide scope and illustratively includes rent, taxes, repairs or
     insurance of premises abroad; salaries and other emoluments of
     staff employed abroad; travel by such staff; and other matters
     connected with executive and general administration.
73. To simplify the issue, we must view it through the lens of genus
     and species. The term ‘executive and general administration’
     expenditure represents the broad genus. Within this broad
     category, the specific items enumerated in clauses (a), (b), and (c),
     as well as those prescribed under clause (d), constitute the distinct
     species. The appellant’s argument is that the definition is wide and
     merely illustrative, and consequently, so long as an expenditure
     satisfies the broad test of the genus (i.e., it is administrative in
     nature), it should be covered. In essence, they argue that one needs
     to only satisfy that the expenditure falls under the genus of
     ‘executive and general administration’ expenditure, and not
     necessarily satisfy that within the broad genus they fall under the
     distinct species, specified or prescribed under clauses (a) to (d) of
     the Explanation.
74. Such an interpretation is impermissible as the appellant has failed
     to consider clause (d) of the Explanation in its entirety. Clause (d)
     to the Explanation reads as follows: “such other matters connected
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016             Page 47 of 55
with executive and general administration as may be prescribed”.
Thus, clause (d) stands as a clear statutory indicator that the
     Explanation would cover ‘executive and general administration’
     expenditure only of the kind mentioned in clause (a), (b) and (c) or
     of the kind prescribed under (d). If the Explanation were to be
     interpreted as broadly inclusive, covering all kinds of executive and
     general administration expenses without restriction, it would
     render the words “as may be prescribed” in clause (d) otiose and
     redundant.
75. In other words, for an expenditure to qualify as ‘head office
     expenditure’ within the meaning of the Explanation to Section 44C,
     the assessing officer has to be satisfied of the following three
     ingredients:
a) First, the expenditure must be incurred outside India.
b) Secondly, the expenditure must be in the nature of executive
             and general administration, i.e., a broad genus.
c) Thirdly, the said executive and general administration
             expenditure     must     fall     within   the   specific   species
             enumerated in clauses (a), (b), and (c), or expressly
             prescribed under clause (d).
76. Such a restrictive interpretation of the term ‘head office
     expenditure’ is also supported on the basis of legislative intent. On
     this aspect, the Memorandum Regarding Delegated Legislation,
     which is part of the Notes on Clauses for Finance Bill, 1976, reads
     thus:
“Clause 10 of the Bill seeks, inter alia, to insert a new
          section 44C in the
Income-tax Act
. The new section provides
          for a ceiling limit in respect of deduction to be allowed on
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                   Page 48 of 55
account of expenditure in the nature of head office
          expenditure in computing the profits and gains of a non-
          resident. Clause (iv) of the Explanation to the new section
          which defines the expression "head office expenditure"
empowers the Central Board of Direct Taxes to prescribe by
          rules the items of expenditure which may be deemed to be
          head office expenditure. The clause enumerates expressly,
          as far as practicable, all the items of head office
          expenditure. The power to specify other items of head office
          expenditure is being taken only by way of abundant caution
          to cover items of such expenditure which cannot be easily
          visualised now.”

                                                    (Emphasis Supplied)
(iii) Whether      the   principle      of   law   barring   exclusive
       expenditure under Section 44C is approved by this Court?
77. Lastly, it was argued on behalf of the respondents that the Bombay
     High Court’s decision in
Emirates Commercial Bank
(supra) was
     challenged by way of appeal to this Court in
CIT vs. Emirates
     Commercial Bank Ltd. (Civil Appeal No.
1527 of 2006) and this
     Court by its judgment dated 26.08.2008 had dismissed the appeal
     following the view taken by it in the case of
CIT vs. Deutsche Bank
     A.G. (Civil Appeal No.
1544 of 2006). Consequently, the principle of
     law that stands approved by this Court is that if expenditure is
     incurred by the head office outside India, which is incurred
     exclusively for the Indian operations of a non-resident entity, then
     such expenditure cannot be brought within the ambit of the term
     ‘head office expenditure’ provided in
Section 44C
of the Act.
78.
In the case of
CIT vs. Deutsche Bank A.G. (Civil Appeal No.
1544
     of 2006), the decision of the Bombay High Court in
Deutsche Bank
(supra) was in appeal before this Court.
This Court vide order dated
     26.08.2008 dismissed the said appeal on the question of
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                 Page 49 of 55
applicability of Section 44C on the following basis: (i) the decision
     of the High Court and the tribunal was based on the decision of the
     Calcutta High Court’s decision in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra), (ii) the
     Revenue had not filed any appeal against the Calcutta High Court’s
     decision in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra) nor any material was adduced
     to make good its case that its decision not to appeal was due to the
     fact that revenue involved in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra) was meagre
     and (iii) therefore it was assumed that the Revenue had accepted
     the ratio in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra) and accordingly the question of
     applicability of Section 44C was answered against the Revenue.
79.
In
CIT vs. Emirates Commercial Bank Ltd. (Civil Appeal No.
1527 of 2006), this Court, on the issue of applicability of Section
     44C, had held as follows:
Question No.(4) stands concluded against the Revenue and in
      favour of the assessee in view of our order of even date in
      C.A.No.1544 of 2006 etc.
80. From the above, it could be inferred that this Court’s decision in
CIT vs. Emirates Commercial Bank Ltd. (Civil Appeal No.
1527
     of 2006) was also based on the reasoning that the Revenue had
     accepted the decision in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra).
81. However, we have made ourselves very clear in the preceding
     paragraphs that the facts and reasoning governing the decisions in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra) and
Emirates Commercial Bank
(supra),
     respectively, are starkly different.
In fact, unlike in
Deutsche Bank
(supra), the Bombay High Court in
Emirates Commercial Bank
(supra) made no reference to the decision in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra).
     Consequently, it could in no manner be stated that this Court had
     accepted the principle of law that exclusive expenditure cannot be
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016             Page 50 of 55
brought within the ambit of the term ‘head office expenditure’
     provided in
Section 44C
of the Act, 1961.
82. The aforesaid orders of this Court could in no manner be said to
     lay down and operate as a binding precedent on the principle of law
     that exclusive expenditure cannot be brought within the ambit of
Section 44C
of the Act, 1961. The said orders, however, are
     indicative of one aspect only: the decision in
Rupenjuli Tea
(supra)
     stood finalised and accepted by the Revenue.
(iv) Application to the facts at hand
83. The pivotal question involved in these appeals has been answered
     in favour of the Revenue. However, it remains to be seen whether,
     on merits, the entire expenditure that the respondents claim as
     deductible under
Section 37
would fall within the ambit of Section
     44C. There is no dispute that the respondents are non-residents
     and the expenditure was incurred outside India. However, there
     seems to be disagreement with regard to the fact whether or not
     certain expenditures could be of an ‘executive and general’ nature
     as specifically enumerated in the Explanation. In fact, the
     respondents have contended that a part of the expenditure
     incurred by them would not be in the nature of head office
     expenditure as described under Section 44C.
84. From a bare perusal of the orders of the lower authorities, it is not
     clear whether the nature of these expenditures was subjected to
     the rigorous scrutiny required to conclusively place them within the
     definition of ‘head office expenditure’ under the Explanation. Even
     when the nature of the expenditure was being discussed, the
     authorities proceeded on the notion that the definition was
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016             Page 51 of 55
inclusive and its scope was broad. We have held above that such a
     reading of the Explanation is incorrect.
85. As established, for an expense to be categorized as ‘head office
     expenditure’, the Assessing Officer must be satisfied on three
     distinct fronts: (i) the expenditure must have been incurred outside
     India; (ii) it must be in the nature of ‘executive and general
     administration’ expenditure; and (iii) the said executive and general
     administration expenditure must fall within the specific categories
     enumerated in clauses (a), (b), or (c) respectively of the Explanation,
     or prescribed under clause (d). This Court, while exercising
     appellate jurisdiction, is not the appropriate forum to undertake
     this granular factual verification. Accordingly, we deem it
     appropriate to remand these matters to the Income Tax Appellate
     Tribunal, Mumbai, on this limited issue. The Tribunal is directed
     to examine the expenses afresh in light of the legal principles
     enunciated herein, more particularly to verify whether the disputed
     expenditures satisfy the tripartite test necessary to qualify as ‘head
     office expenditure’ under the Explanation to Section 44C. With
     respect to the expenditure which the respondents do not wish to
     dispute, the same would fall under the ambit of Section 44C, and
     thereby their deduction will be governed by the limits set out
     therein.
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016               Page 52 of 55
G. Conclusion
86. A conspectus of our legal discussion regarding
Section 44C
of the
     Act, 1961, is as under:
a) Section 44C is a special provision that exclusively governs
             the quantum of allowable deduction for any expenditure
             incurred by a non-resident assessee that qualifies as ‘head
             office expenditure’.
b) For an expenditure to be brought within the ambit of Section
             44C, two broad conditions must be satisfied: (i) The assessee
             claiming the deduction must be a non-resident; and (ii) The
             expenditure in question must strictly fall within the
             definition of ‘head office expenditure’ as provided in the
             Explanation to the Section.
c) The Explanation prescribes a tripartite test to determine if
             an expense qualifies as ‘head office expenditure’ - (i) The
             expenditure was incurred outside India; (ii) The expenditure
             is in the nature of ‘executive and general administration’
             expenses;    and    (iii)   The   said   executive    and   general
             administration     expenditure      is   of   the    specific   kind
             enumerated in clauses (a), (b), or (c) respectively of the
             Explanation, or is of the kind prescribed under clause (d).
d) Once the conditions in (b
)
referred to above
are met, the
             operative part of Section 44C gets triggered. Consequently,
             the allowable deduction is restricted to the least of the
             following two amounts: (i) an amount equal to 5% of the
             adjusted total income; or (ii) the amount of head office
             expenditure specifically attributable to the business or
             profession of the assessee in India.
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016                     Page 53 of 55
87. Based on the aforesaid discussion, it is manifest that the plain
     language of Section 44C, when viewed against the backdrop of the
     specific mischief it sought to curtail, is unambiguous. The statutory
     definition is broad and inclusive, containing no indication that
     ‘exclusive expenditure’       is to be    excluded from    its ambit.
     Furthermore, the term ‘attributable’ in Clause (c) does not create a
     statutory     distinction     between     ‘common’   and   ‘exclusive’
     expenditure.
88. Thus, the question of law formulated by us is squarely answered in
     favour of the Revenue. We hold that Section 44C applies to ‘head
     office expenditure’ regardless of whether it is common expenditure
     or expenditure incurred exclusively for the Indian branches.
89. On the specific facts at hand in these appeals, a bare perusal of the
     records of the authority below reveals that the authorities have not
     satisfactorily dealt with the question whether the impugned
     expenditure actually constitutes ‘head office expenditure’ as
     defined in the statute. It also appears that the authorities below
     conceived the meaning of ‘head office expenditure’ in a broad and
     inclusive sense, which we have held is not a correct reading of the
     exhaustive definition provided in the Explanation. In other words,
     there is no factual finding on whether the expenses fulfil the three
     specific criteria we have elucidated in this judgment.
90. As an appellate court, we should not embark upon such a fact-
finding exercise. Consequently, we remand the matters to the
     Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Mumbai, for the limited purpose of
     verifying whether the disputed expenditures satisfy the tripartite
     test necessary to qualify as ‘head office expenditure’ under the
     Explanation to
Section 44C
of the Act, 1961.
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016              Page 54 of 55
91. For all the foregoing reasons, the appeals succeed and are hereby
     allowed.
….………………………….…. J.
(J.B. PARDIWALA)



                                               ….………………………….…. J.
(K.V.VISWANATHAN)

NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 15, 2025.
Civil Appeal Nos 8291 of 2015 & 4451 of 2016             Page 55 of 55