[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Abhishek Gupta vs Dinesh Kumar on 3 December, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 1406
                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL Nos.14545-14546/2025
                                 [SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) Nos. 35171-72/2025]
                                             (@ Diary No.68082/2025)


                            ABHISHEK GUPTA                                         APPELLANT

                                                             VERSUS

                            DINESH KUMAR & ORS.                                    RESPONDENTS




                                                       JUDGMENT
1.    Permission, to file special leave petitions, is granted.
2.    Delay condoned.
3.    Leave granted.
4.    Appellant was allotted, by grant of a license, a fair price shop in

                            place of the respondent no.1, upon revocation of the license of such

                            respondent on the ground of breach of lawful terms and conditions

                            thereof.
5.    Revocation of the license and an appellate order of its affirmance

                            were the subject matter of challenge in a writ petition 1 presented by the

                            respondent no.1 before the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad. In such
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
writ petition, the appellant was not impleaded as a party.
   rashmi dhyani pant
   Date: 2025.12.09
   17:36:57 IST
   Reason:
1
Writ C No. 37063 of 2019
6.     The writ petition of the respondent no.1 came to be allowed by an

      order dated 10th June, 20252 of a Single Judge. The order revoking the

      license of the respondent no.1 and the appellate order of affirmation

      stood set aside. In pursuance of such order, the respondent no.1 was

      required to be reinstated as a fair price shop licensee by the official

      respondents.
7.     Sensing the imminent consequence of the order of the Single Judge,

      i.e., he would be compelled to step down and make way for the

      respondent no.1, the appellant approached a Division Bench of the High

      Court with an intra-court appeal3. His complaint was that the order

      passed by the Single Judge prejudicially affected his interest, without he

      being given an opportunity of hearing. Such appeal has been dismissed

      by the Division Bench vide judgment and order dated 30th October, 2025

      as not maintainable, placing reliance on Chapter VIII Rule 5 of the

      Allahabad High Court Rules, 19524 and a Full Bench Judgment of the

      same High Court in
Sheet Gupta v. State of U.P.5
interpreting such

      rule. However, the appellant was granted liberty to apply for a review of

      the judgment and order under appeal before the Single Judge.
8.     In the present appeals, the appellant has not only questioned the

      judgment and order of the Division Bench dated 30th October, 2025 but

      also questioned the judgment and order of the Single Judge dated 10 th

      June, 2025.
9.     At the outset, we reject the contention of learned counsel for the
3
Special Appeal Defective No. 908 of 2025
4
1952 Rules
5
AIR 2010 All 46 (FB)
2
respondent no.1 that the appeals should be dismissed on the ground of

suppression of material facts.
10.   Looking to the impugned judgment and order of the Division Bench,

we find that it neither reproduces Rule 5 of Chapter VIII of the 1952

Rules nor adverts to the specific answer given by the Full Bench in
Sheet

Gupta
(supra) to the question which was referred. We, therefore,

propose to note Rule 5 and the answer of the Full Bench.
11.   Rule 5 of Chapter VIII of the 1952 Rules reads as follows:
5. Special appeal :- An appeal shall lie to the Court from a judgment
      (not being a judgment passed in the exercise of appellate
      jurisdiction) in respect of a decree or order made by a Court subject
      to the superintendence of the Court and not being an order made in
      the exercise of revisional jurisdiction or in the exercise of its power
      of superintendence or in the exercise of criminal jurisdiction or in
      the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred by
Article 226
or
Article
      227
of the Constitution in respect of any judgment, order or award--
(a) of a tribunal, Court or statutory arbitrator made or purported to
      be made in the exercise or purported exercise of jurisdiction under
      any Uttar Pradesh Act or under any Central Act, with respect to any
      of the matters enumerated in the State List or the Concurrent List in
      the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, or (b) of the Government
      or any officer or authority, made or purported to be made in the
      exercise or purported exercise of appellate or revisional jurisdiction
      under any such Act of one Judge.
12.
In
Sheet Gupta
(supra), the Full Bench has recorded as follows:
15. Having given our anxious consideration to the various plea (sic.,
      pleas) raised by the learned counsel for the parties, we find that
      from the perusal of Chapter VIII Rule 5 of the Rules a special appeal
      shall lie before this Court from the judgment passed by one Judge of
      the Court. However, such special appeal will not lie in the following
      circumstances:
1. The judgment passed by one Judge in the exercise of appellate
          jurisdiction, in respect of a decree or order made by a Court
          subject to the Superintendence (sic., superintendence) of the
          Court;
2. the order made by one Judge in the exercise of revisional
          jurisdiction;
3. the order made by one Judge in the exercise of the power of
          superintendence of the High Court;
4. the order made by one Judge in the exercise of criminal
          jurisdiction;
3
5. the order made by one Judge in the exercise of jurisdiction
         conferred by
Article 226
or
Article 227
of the Constitution of
         India in respect of any judgment, order or award by
(i)        the tribunal,
(ii)       Court or
(iii)      statutory arbitrator
         made or purported to be made in the exercise of or purported
         exercise of jurisdiction under any Uttar Pradesh Act or under any
         Central Act, with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the
         State List or the Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule to the
         Constitution;
6. the order made by one Judge in the exercise of jurisdiction
         conferred by
Article 226
or 227 of the Constitution of India in
         respect of any judgment, order or award of
(i)        the Government or
(ii)       any officer or
(iii)      authority,
         made or purported to be made in the exercise or purported
         exercise of appellate or revisional jurisdiction under any such
         Act, i.e. under any Uttar Pradesh Act or under any Central Act,
         with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State List
         or the Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule to the
         Constitution.
13.   On a plain reading of Rule 5, the Special Appeal of the appellant

would appear to be barred. However, there is much more than what is

plainly visible. In our considered opinion, the Special Appeal ought not to

have been held not maintainable for the reasons we propose to assign.
14.   While interpretation of Rule 5 by the Full Bench of the High Court is

correct, we discern from
Sheet Gupta
(supra) that the Full Bench in

course of answering the reference had not been called upon to examine

whether an appeal with an application seeking leave to appeal, by a non-

party to a writ petition under
Article 226
, would or would not be

maintainable if the order - appellate or revisional - under challenge in

such petition is passed by the Government or officer or authority under a

Central/State legislation.
Since this was not a question which the Full

Bench was required to examine, whatever has been
laid down in
Sheet
4
Gupta
(supra) on interpretation of Rule 5 may not be decisive in a

situation under consideration. This aspect of the matter escaped the

attention of the Division Bench which, erroneously, dismissed the appeal

as not maintainable.
15.   Although Rule 5, inter alia, ordains that no Special Appeal shall lie

from an order passed by a Single Judge of the High Court in writ

proceedings    under
Article   226
of   the   Constitution   where    an

appellate/revisional order of the Government or any officer or authority

under any of the specified enactments is under challenge, in our

considered opinion, Rule 5 has to be read and understood in a manner

that advances the cause of “access to justice” and not thwart it. The

object and purpose behind enactment of Rule 5 have to be borne in mind

while embarking on its interpretation. The object seems to be that when

two tiers of adjudication – quasi-judicial and judicial - are available, i.e.,
(i) a determination by the appellate/revisional forum under a specified

Central/State legislation on a particular lis raised by a party and defended

by the adversary at the first instance, is (ii) followed by an adjudication

by a Single Judge on a writ petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution

as to whether such appellate/revisional order is legal, valid or proper, a

third tier for ruling on the same lis in the shape of a special appeal before

the Division Bench ought not to be made available to the aggrieved party.

The purpose is clear: to achieve a sort of finality at the level of the High

Court and not to add to the agony of the concerned litigant. The

unwritten rule is that any party aggrieved by the adjudication made by

the Single Judge will have to seek remedy under
Article 136
of the
5
Constitution before this Court or seek a review under the High Court’s

        inherent jurisdiction.
16.   In the circumstances before us, the bar created by Rule 5 must

        yield to the foundational principles of natural justice, namely, the right to

        be heard and the right to a fair hearing. It is trite law that the principle of

        non-joinder, though originating from
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908,

        applies with equal force to writ proceedings. An order passed in writ

        jurisdiction without impleading an affected or necessary party is liable to

        be invalidated on that ground alone. Since the courts exist to administer

        justice, the rigours of Rule 5 would not apply and stand relaxed in a case

        of the present nature where the order under challenge is one, passed by a

        Single Judge on a petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution, adversely

        affecting the rights of a party who was not a party-respondent before the

        Single Judge.
17.
In our further considered opinion, the law
laid down by
this Court in
Smt. Jatan Kanwar Golcha v. Golcha Properties (P) Ltd.6
and
State

        of Punjab v. Amar Singh7
that an appeal could be preferred with an

        application for leave to appeal, provided the           non-party appellant

        demonstrates that either the order under challenge is prejudicial to his

        interest or adversely affects him or is binding on him, would be

        applicable.
18.   Also, the maxim ubi jus, ibi remedium cannot be ignored. A party

        suffering an adverse order in judicial proceedings where he is not noticed,
6
AIR 1971 SC 374
7
AIR 1974 SC 994
6
because he was not a party, cannot be left without a remedy. Although he

can apply for a review, the scope of a review is much narrow than an

appeal and would not provide a remedy as effective as an appeal.
19.   For the foregoing reasons, we hold that where an allegation of non-

joinder of a necessary party is raised in an intra-court appeal, the High

Court, if satisfied that such allegation has merit, should either remand the

matter to the Single Judge or decide it on the merits. Such an approach

while not militating against the object and purpose of Rule 5 would, at the

same time, accord with the maxim ubi jus, ibi remedium.
20.   Even otherwise, the appellant by way of abundant caution has

appealed against the judgment and order of the Single Judge dated 10 th

June, 2025. Had we concurred with the Division Bench that the

appellant’s appeal before it was not maintainable, nothing would have

prevented us to hear such appeal against
the said judgment
and order.
21.   In such view of the matter, we set aside the impugned judgment

and order of the Division Bench and restore the Special Appeal of the

appellant to its original file and number. The same may now be heard by

the Division Bench and disposed of expeditiously, since we are not

inclined to allow the appellant to run the fair price shop for the present.
22.   We leave it open to the respondent no.1 to seek dismissal of the

Special Appeal in the light of the affidavit sworn by the appellant at the

time he was allotted the fair price shop in place of the respondent no.1.

Equally, we leave it open to the appellant to counter such contention in

such manner and on such ground(s) as he may be advised. No opinion is

expressed by us on the merits of the rival claims.
7
23.    We are informed that the fair price shop has been allotted in favour

of the respondent no.1 in compliance with the order of the Single Judge;

hence, the same shall abide by the result of the Special Appeal.
24.    The appeals stand disposed of on the aforesaid terms.
25.    Pending application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed of.
…………………………………………J.
                                               [DIPANKAR DATTA]




                                         …………………………………………J.
                                          [AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH]


      NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 03, 2025.
8