[Cites
32
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Syed Shahnawaz Ali vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 19 December, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
2025 INSC 1484                                                               REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 5589-5590 OF 2025
                         (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025)



               Syed Shahnawaz Ali                                        …Appellant (s)

                                                      Versus

               The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors.                         …Respondent (s)

                                                JUDGMENT
MANOJ MISRA, J.
1.             Leave granted.
2.             These two appeals arise from a common proceeding and are

                            directed against the orders of the High Court of Madhya

                            Pradesh at Jabalpur1 dated 21.02.2024 and 31.08.2024

                            passed in Criminal Revision No. 1986 of 2020 and Misc.

                            Criminal Case (MCRC) No. 36327 of 2024 respectively.

                            Facts
3.             The father of the appellant, Shamshad Ali, filed an

                            application under Section 156(3) of the Code of Criminal
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHETAN ARORA
Date: 2025.12.19
18:37:37 IST
Reason:
1 The High Court
Page 1 of 17
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025
          Procedure, 19732 for registering a first information report3

          against respondents 2 to 5. The said application was allowed,

          an FIR was registered and investigated. After investigation,

          police report was submitted indicting respondents 2 to 5 for

          offences punishable under
Sections 419
,
420
,
467
,
468
,
471
,
120-B
and
34
of Indian Penal Code, 18604. However, vide

          order dated 07.03.2020, the Court of XVIIth Additional

          Sessions Judge, Bhopal, M.P. discharged the accused

          respondents from offences punishable under
Sections 419
,
467
,
468
,
471
,
120-B
and
34
IPC and directed the trial to

          proceed under
Section 420
IPC only. Aggrieved by the order

          dated 07.03.2020, the father of the appellant (i.e., the

          informant) filed Criminal Revision No. 1986 of 2020 before

          the High Court.
4.        During pendency of the revision, on 05.05.2021 the father of

          the appellant i.e., the revisionist died. The appellant, who was

          arrayed as a witness in the police report, filed IA No. 19769

          of 2021 to continue the revision proceedings. The High Court

          by the impugned order dated 21.02.2024 rejected the


2
Cr.P.C
.
3
FIR
4
IPC
Page 2 of 17
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025
        application holding that there is no provision for substitution

        in a Criminal Revision and, therefore, the Revision would

        abate.
5.      Aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the appellant filed an

        application under Section 528 of Bharatiya Nagrik Suraksha

        Sanhita, 20235 (corresponding to
Section 482
of Cr.P.C.) for

        recall of the order dated 21.02.2024. This application was

        dismissed by the second impugned order dated 31.08.2024.

        Aggrieved by the aforesaid orders dated 21.02.2024 and

        31.08.2024, the appellant is before this Court.

        Submissions
6.      In short, the submission on behalf of the appellant is that the

        appellant is a victim within the meaning of
Section 2(wa)
6
of

        Cr.P.C. and is, therefore, entitled to continue the revision

        proceedings. In the alternative, it is submitted that a revision

        cannot abate. Once the Court entertains a revision, the Court

        has to test the legality and propriety of the order impugned

        before it. Therefore, the appropriate course for the High Court
5
BNSS
6
Section 2 (wa)
of CrPC. – “victim” means a person who has suffered any loss or injury caused by reason of the
act or omission for which the accused person has been charged and the expression “victim” includes his or her
guardian or legal heir.
Page 3 of 17
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025
       was to decide the matter on merits and for an effective

       hearing to allow the appellant’s counsel or an amicus to

       assist the Court.
7.     On behalf of the State, written submissions have been filed

       accepting the rights of a victim to participate in the criminal

       justice process.
8.     Per contra, on behalf of respondents 2 to 5, it has been

       contended that
Section 3947
of Cr.P.C. applies to appeals.

       There is no corresponding provision for continuance of a

       revision by the legal heirs. No doubt, a victim may file an

       appeal but, in absence of an enabling provision, he cannot be

       substituted as a revisionist. In such circumstances, the

       impugned orders call for no interference.
9.     In addition to above, on behalf of respondents 2 to 5, it was

       submitted that respondents 2 to 5 were discharged of certain
7
394. Abatement of appeals.
(1) Every appeal under
Section 377
or
Section 378
shall finally abate on the death of the
accused.
(2) Every other appeal under this Chapter (except an appeal from a sentence of fine) shall
finally abate on the death of the appellant : Provided that where the appeal is against a
conviction and sentence of death or of imprisonment, and the appellant dies during the
pendency of the appeal, any of his near relatives may, within thirty days of the death of the
appellant, apply to the Appellate Court for leave to continue the appeal; and if leave is granted,
the appeal shall not abate.
Explanation. - In this section, "near relative" means a parent, spouse, lineal descendant,
brother or sister.
Page 4 of 17
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025
      offences for cogent reasons which do not suffer from any

      perversity or illegality.
Discussion
10. Before we set out to test the correctness of the orders

      impugned, it would be useful to first understand the concept

      of abatement. In Black’s Law Dictionary abatement has

      been described as: (1) the act of eliminating or nullifying; (2)

      the suspension or defeat of a pending action for a reason

      unrelated to the merits of the claim; (3) the act of lessening

      or moderating; diminution in amount or degree; (4) the

      reduction of a legacy, general or specific, as a result of estate

      being insufficient to pay all debts and legacies; (5) the act of

      thrusting oneself tortiously into real estate after the owner

      dies and before the legal heir enters. In P. Ramanatha

      Aiyar’s Advanced Law Lexican, in the context of criminal

      law, abatement of proceedings connotes their termination

      without any decision on the merits and without the assent of

      the prosecutor; and abatement of the main action abates

      proceedings ancillary or collateral to it.
11. In the context of a civil proceeding, if, on death of any party,

      either the right to sue, or to be sued, does not survive on the
Page 5 of 17
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025
      surviving parties, the proceeding would abate. In a criminal

      action, trial is of the offender i.e., the person who is accused

      of committing an offence. Therefore, if the accused facing trial

      dies (or ceases to exist), the trial would abate and so would

      the appeal against his acquittal, as the person to be

      prosecuted or convicted, as the case may be, ceases to exist.

      However, if the accused has been convicted and he files an

      appeal against his conviction, on his death, the proviso to

      sub-section (2) of
Section 394
of Cr.P.C. enables a relative of

      the convict to pursue the appeal with the leave of the court.

      In absence thereof, the appeal abates. The purpose of such

      liberty is, inter alia, to save the convict’s family’s honour.

      There may be instances where the law requires that

      proceeding shall be instituted and prosecuted by a particular

      person and no one else. In such a case, if that person dies, in

      absence of law permitting some other person to continue the

      proceeding, the proceeding would abate.
12. Now, the issue which arises for our consideration is whether

      on death of the revisionist, the revision proceeding under
Section 397
read with
Section 401
of Cr.P.C. would abate.

      The answer to it would depend on the nature of the order
Page 6 of 17
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025
       under challenge in the revision. If, for example, an accused

       has invoked the revisional power for testing the correctness

       of an order rejecting his discharge application, on his death,

       the revision proceeding would abate because the main trial

       would abate and, therefore, ancillary proceeding emanating

       therefrom would automatically abate. But where the main

       proceeding survives despite death of the revisionist, the

       revision may not abate owing to the nature of the revisional

       proceeding.
13. In Praban Kumar Mitra Vs. State of West Bengal &

       Another8, a Constitution Bench of this Court discussed the

       nature of revisional powers of a High Court under
Section 439
of the old Code (i.e.,
Code of Criminal Procedure
1898), which

       is in pari materia Section 4019 of the 1973 Code, read with
8
1958 SCC OnLine SC 79: AIR 1959 SC 144: 1959 Cri LJ 256: 1959 Supp (1) SCR 63
9
401. High Court's powers of revision.
(1) In the case of any proceeding the record of which has been called for by itself or which
otherwise comes to its knowledge, the High Court may, in its discretion, exercise any of the
powers conferred on a Court of Appeal by
Sections 386
,
389
,
390
and
391
or on a Court of
Session by
Section 307
and, when the Judges composing the Court of revision are equally
divided in opinion, the case shall be disposed of in the manner provided by
Section 392
. (2)
No order under this section shall be made to the prejudice of the accused or other person
unless he has had an opportunity of being heard either personally or by pleader in his own
defence. (3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a High Court to convert a
finding of acquittal into one of conviction. (4) Where under this Code an appeal lies and no
appeal is brought, no proceeding by way of revision shall be entertained at the instance of
the party who could have appealed. (5) Where under this Code an appeal lies but an
application for revision has been made to the High Court by any person and the High Court
is satisfied that such application was made under the erroneous belief that no appeal lies
thereto and that it is necessary in the interests of justice so to do, the High Court may treat
the application for revision as a petition of appeal and deal with the same accordingly.
Page 7 of 17
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025
Section 435
of the old Code, which is in pari materia Section

       39710 of the 1973 Code. In that regard, it was held that the

       revisional power is a discretionary power which is to be

       exercised in aid of justice. Whether the High Court should

       exercise its revisional jurisdiction depends upon the facts and

       circumstances of that case and once it entertains an

       application for revision and issues a Rule, that Rule has to be

       heard and determined in accordance with law, whether or not

       the petitioner is alive or dead, or whether he is represented

       in court by a legal practitioner. For ready reference, the

       relevant portion of that judgment is extracted below:
“6. The revisional powers of the High Court
              vested in it by
Section 439
of the Code, read with
Section 435
, do not create any right in the litigant,
              but only conserve the power of the High Court to
              see that justice is done in accordance with the
              recognised rules of criminal jurisprudence, and
              that subordinate Criminal Courts do not exceed
10
397. Calling for records to exercise powers of revision.
(1) The High Court or any Sessions Judge may call for and examine the record of any
proceeding before any inferior Criminal Court situate within its or his local jurisdiction for
the purpose of satisfying itself or himself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of any
finding, sentence or order, recorded or passed, and as to the regularity of any proceedings of
such inferior Court, and may, when calling for such record, direct that the execution of any
sentence or order be suspended, and if the accused is in confinement, that he be released on
bail or on his own bond pending the examination of the record. Explanation. - All Magistrates,
whether Executive or Judicial, and whether exercising original or appellate jurisdiction, shall
be deemed to be inferior to the Sessions Judge for the purposes of this sub-section and of
Section 398
. (2) The powers of revision conferred by sub-section (1) shall not be exercised in
relation to any interlocutory order passed in any appeal, inquiry, trial or other proceeding.
(3) If an application under this section has been made by any person either to the High Court
or to the Sessions Judge, no further application by the same person shall be entertained by
the other of them.
Page 8 of 17
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025
                 their jurisdiction, or abuse their powers vested in
                 them by the Court. On the other hand, as already
                 indicated, a right of appeal is a statutory right
                 which has got to be recognized by the Courts, and
                 the right to appeal, where one exists, cannot be
                 denied in exercise of the discretionary power even
                 of the High Court. The legislature has, therefore,
                 specifically provided, by Section 43111 of the Code,
                 the rules governing the right of substitution in
                 case of death of an appellant, but there is no
                 corresponding provision in Chapter XXXII, dealing
                 with the question of abatement and the right of
                 substitution in a criminal revision. We may
                 assume that the Legislature was aware of the
                 decision of the Bombay High Court, referred to
                 above, when it enacted
Section 431
for the first
                 time in the Code of 1882. If the Legislature
                 intended that all application in revision pending
                 in a High Court, should be dealt with on the same
                 footing as a pending appeal, it would have enacted
                 accordingly. But in the absence of any such
                 enactment, we may infer that the power of revision
                 vested in the High Court under Chapter XXXII of
                 the Code, was left untouched -- to be exercised
                 according to the exigencies of each case. The High
                 Court is not bound to entertain an application in
                 revision, or having entertained one, to order
                 substitution in every case. It is not bound the
                 other way, namely, to treat a pending application
                 in revision as having abated by reason of the fact
                 that there was a composite sentence of
                 imprisonment and fine, as some of the single
                 Judge decisions placed before us, would seem to
                 indicate. The High Court has been left complete
11
Section 431
of Old Code: Every appeal under
section 417
or section 417A shall finally abate on the death of
the accused, and every other appeal under this Chapter (except an appeal from a sentence of fine) shall finally
abate on the death of the appellant.
Page 9 of 17
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025
                   discretion to deal with a pending matter on the
                   death of the petitioner in accordance with the
                   requirements of justice. The petitioner in the High
                   Court may have been an accused person who has
                   been convicted and sentenced, or he may have
                   been a complainant who may have been directed
                   under
s. 250
of the Code to pay compensation to
                   an accused person upon his discharge or
                   acquittal. Whether it was an accused person or it
                   was a complainant who has moved the High Court
                   in its revisional jurisdiction, if the High Court has
                   issued a Rule, that Rule has to be heard and
                   determined in accordance with law, whether or
                   not the petitioner in the High Court is alive or
                   dead, or whether he is represented in court by a
                   legal practitioner. In hearing and determining
                   cases under
Section 439
of the Code, the High
                   Court discharges its statutory function of
                   supervising the administration of justice on the
                   criminal side. Hence, the considerations applying
                   to abatement of an appeal, may not apply to the
                   case of revisional applications…….”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
14.
In
Honnaiah T.H. Vs. State of Karnataka & Others12
on

           the issue of locus to maintain a revision under
Cr.P.C
., it was

           observed:
“16. The challenge to the maintainability of the
                   revision at the instance of the appellant
                   impugning an order passed during the pendency
                   of the trial must also be rejected. The revisional
                   jurisdiction of a High Court under
Section
                   397
read with
Section 401
of the CrPC, is a
12
(2022) SCC OnLine SC 1001
Page 10 of 17
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025
                   discretionary jurisdiction that can be exercised by
                   the revisional court suo motu so as to examine the
                   correctness, legality or propriety of an order
                   recorded or passed by the trial court or the inferior
                   court. As the power of revision can be exercised by
                   the High Court even suo moto, there can be no bar
                   on a third party invoking the revisional
                   jurisdiction and inviting the attention of the High
                   Court that an occasion to exercise the power has
                   arisen. Holding a revision petition instituted by a
                   complainant maintainable, Justice Santosh
                   Hegde writing for this Court in K Pandurangan v.
SSR Velusamy and another13 observed:
“6. So far as the first question as to the
                        maintainability of the revision at the instance of the
                        complainant is concerned, we think the said
                        argument has only to be noted to be rejected. Under
                        the provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
,
                        1973, the court has suo motu power of revision, if
                        that be so, the question of the same being invoked
                        at the instance of an out- sider would not make any
                        difference because ultimately it is the power of
                        revision which is already vested with the High Court
                        statutorily that is being exercised by the High Court.
                        Therefore, whether the same is done by itself or at
                        the instance of a third party will not affect such
                        power of the High Court. In this regard, we may note
                        the following judgment of this Court in the case of
                        Nadir Khan v. State (Delhi Admn).”

                                                        (Emphasis supplied)
15. The legal principles deducible from the afore-quoted extracts

           may be summarised thus:
13
(2003) 8 SCC 625
Page 11 of 17
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025
(a)   revisional     power   under
Cr.P.C
.   is   a

                 discretionary power, the exercise of which cannot

                 be claimed as of right;
(b)   exercise of revisional power is not entirely

                 dependent on who petitions the Court, inasmuch

                 as it can be exercised suo motu;
(c)   the role of the revisionist is essentially that of

                 a person who invites attention of the Court that an

                 occasion to exercise the revisional power has

                 arisen;
(d) once a Rule is issued, ordinarily, that Rule has

                 to be heard and determined in accordance with

                 law, whether or not the petitioner is alive or dead,

                 or whether he is represented in court by a legal

                 practitioner; and
(e) the Court while exercising revisional power

                 discharges a statutory function of supervising the

                 administration of justice on the criminal side and

                 in furtherance thereof examines the correctness,

                 legality or propriety of an order passed by the court

                 subordinate to it.
Page 12 of 17
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025
16.   However, when a court is vested with discretionary power,

      discretion must be exercised judiciously, based on sound

      legal principles governing the scope of that power. Though

      the strict rule of locus may not apply for invocation of that

      power, the court must be circumspect in entertaining

      petitions at the behest of complete strangers to the dispute,

      otherwise the discretionary power may become a tool in the

      hands of those who, though have suffered no injury, have

      an axe to grind. Therefore, in our view, to ensure that

      revisional power is not abused by those who have an axe to

      grind, the definition of a victim, contained in
Section 2(wa)
of the Code, may be used as a guide to determine whether a

      revision should be entertained at the instance of the person

      who has invoked the revisional power.
17. Since strict rule of locus does not apply to a revision

      proceeding, on death of a revisionist, the law of abatement

      that applies to an appeal does not apply to a revision

      proceeding, more particularly when revision is not at the

      instance of an accused. However, where the revision is at the

      instance of an accused/convict, the revisional court may

      refuse to continue the proceedings on his death, inter alia,
Page 13 of 17
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025
      where (a) the revisional proceeding emanates from an order

      passed during trial; or (b) the revisional proceeding is against

      an order of conviction, or affirmance of conviction. In

      situation (a) (supra), on death of accused the trial would

      abate and so would ancillary proceedings emanating

      therefrom. In situation (b) (supra), the sentence or fine

      cannot be executed against a dead person, therefore, in

      absence of any application from a person seeking leave to

      pursue     the   revision,   the   court   may   terminate   the

      proceedings as having abated. However, where the revision

      is at the instance of an informant or a complainant, on his

      death, the proceedings will not abate and, therefore,

      revisional court may exercise its discretion and proceed to

      test the correctness, legality or propriety of an order passed

      by the court subordinate to it.
18. In so far as substitution in place of the deceased revisionist

      is concerned, there is no specific provision in the Code for

      substitution. Therefore, no one can claim substitution as of

      right.   However, what is important is that there is no

      provision for abatement as well, as is there for an appeal (see
Section 394
). Hence, once a revision is entertained, in our
Page 14 of 17
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025
      view, the Court exercising revisional power has discretion to

      proceed with the revision and test the correctness, legality or

      propriety of the order under challenge before it, regardless of

      the death of the person who had invoked the revisional

      jurisdiction. However, while doing so, the Court may, in its

      discretion, allow a person to assist it in discharge of its

      statutory functions provided that person has no conflict of

      interest.    In that context, a victim of the crime would

      ordinarily be the most suitable person to provide assistance

      because of his interest in overturning a decision that went

      against him. Therefore, when revisional powers are invoked

      by a victim of the crime, and he dies during pendency of the

      revision, other victims of that crime, who fall within the

      scope of its definition, as provided in
Section 2 (wa)
of

      Cr.P.C., may be allowed to assist the Court in effectively

      discharging its statutory function. In that regard, the Court

      would be well within its jurisdiction in granting leave to such

      a person to pursue the revision. However, in absence of a

      provision for substitution, though a person may not have a

      legal right to claim substitution as a revisionist, there is no

      legal restriction on revisional court’s power in allowing a
Page 15 of 17
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025
      person to assist the Court in furthering the cause of justice,

      more particularly, when strict rule of locus does not apply to

      a criminal revision.
19. In light of the discussion above, the impugned order of the

      High Court dismissing the revision as having abated on

      death of the revisionist is held unsustainable in law. More

      so, because the trial against the accused-respondents is

      pending.
20. As far as rejection of the application of the appellant to assist

      the Court as a substitute for the deceased revisionist is

      concerned, suffice it to say that the original revisionist (i.e.,

      the informant) had alleged that the accused had set up a

      fabricated sale deed to stake a false claim to his property.

      Challenge in the revision was to an order of discharge of the

      accused from offences other than cheating. Since on

      revisionist’s death, his son (i.e., the appellant herein) would

      inherit an interest in the property, in our view, the appellant

      is a victim of the crime and, therefore, has vital interest in

      the outcome of the proceeding. Hence, in our view, the

      revisional court could have allowed him to assist the court

      in the capacity of a victim of the crime.
Page 16 of 17
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025
21. For the foregoing reasons, the order of the High Court

      dismissing the revision as abated, and the order rejecting the

      application of the appellant, are liable to be set aside and

      are, hereby, set aside. The appeals are allowed. Revision No.

      1986 of 2020 is restored on the file of the High Court. The

      appellant shall be at liberty to assist the revisional court in

      the capacity of a victim of the crime, and the revision shall

      be decided expeditiously, in accordance with the law.
22. It is made clear that we have not expressed any opinion on

      the merits of the order under challenge in the revision

      proceeding. The revision shall be decided on its own merit

      without being influenced by any observation made herein

      above.
23. Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
….............................................J.
                                                          (Sanjay Karol)


                                 ................................................J.
                                                              (Manoj Misra)
New Delhi;
December 19, 2025
Page 17 of 17
SLP (Crl.) Nos. 1715-1716/2025