[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Thankamma Baby vs The Regional Provident Fund ... on 7 November, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023 INSC 987


                                                                          Non-Reportable

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4619 OF 2010




                            THANKAMMA BABY                                  …APPELLANT


                                                          Vs.

                            THE REGIONAL PROVIDENT FUND
                            COMMISSIONER, KOCHI, KERALA                   …RESPONDENT


                                                         WITH


                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4620 OF 2010


                                                   JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECT
1)   The issue involved in these appeals is of interpretation of
                            clause (b) of sub-Section (3) of Section 1 of the Employees’
                            Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (for
                            short, ‘the 1952 Act’). In order to understand the controversy,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.11.07
the facts must be briefly stated.
17:52:58 IST
   Reason:
Civil Appeal No. 4619 of 2010                                    Page 1 of 8
2)     The appellant is engaged in manufacturing, assembling,
      and selling umbrellas. The respondent (the Regional Provident
      Fund Commissioner) issued a notice dated 30th December 1997
      to the appellant, alleging that the 1952 Act was applicable to
      the appellant. It was alleged in the notice that the business of
      the appellant fell in the category of ‘trading and commercial
      establishments’ notified under the notification dated 7th March
      1962, issued by the Central Government in the exercise of
      powers under clause (b) of sub-Section (3) of Section 1 of the
      1952 Act. The respondent made an Inquiry under Section 7A
      of the 1952 Act. The respondent held that the case of the
      appellant was covered by the notification dated 7th March 1962.
A Review Petition was filed by the appellant, which was rejected
      by the respondent. An appeal preferred by the appellant to the
      Appellate Authority against the decision of the respondent was
      dismissed. Being aggrieved by the said orders, a Writ Petition
      was filed by the appellant. The learned Single Judge dismissed
      the Writ Petition, and the order of the learned Single Judge has
      been confirmed by the impugned judgment by a Division Bench
      of the Kerala High Court in a Writ Appeal filed by the
      respondent.
SUBMISSIONS
3)     The    learned     counsel   appearing   for   the     appellant
      submitted that establishments covered by clause (a) of sub-
      Section (3) of Section 1 are factories engaged in industries
      specified in Schedule I of the 1952 Act. His submission is that
      clause (a) is applicable to the factories engaged in the
Civil Appeal No. 4619 of 2010                                     Page 2 of 8
industries specified in Schedule I. Therefore, those factories not
      specified in Schedule I cannot be covered by clause (b) of sub-
      Section (3) of Section 1 of the 1952 Act. He submits that clause
(b) of sub-Section (3) does not refer to the factories. Thus, from
      the intention of the legislature, it is very clear that ‘any other
      establishment’ mentioned in clause (b) of sub-Section (3) will
      not include any factory. His submission is that, in fact, the
      counter filed by the respondent before the learned Single Judge
      contains an admission that the umbrella-making unit of the
      appellant is not an industry included in Schedule I. He relied
      upon a decision of the Apex Court in the case of
Regional
      Provident Fund Commissioner V. Shibn Metal Works1
. He
      submitted that by no stretch of the imagination, the appellant’s
      establishment can be called a trading and commercial
      establishment covered by the notification dated 7th March
      1962.
4)         Learned counsel appearing for the respondent urged that
      the respondent, the appellate authority, the learned Single
      Judge and the learned Division Bench have concurrently held
      against the appellant. His submission is that the business of
      the appellant is admittedly not only of assembling or
      manufacturing the umbrellas but also of selling the same. He
      would, therefore, submit that the appellant will be covered by
      the category of trading and commercial establishments
      incorporated in the aforesaid notification.
1
1965 (2) SCR 72
Civil Appeal No. 4619 of 2010                                Page 3 of 8
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS

      5)     Section 1 of the 1952 Act reads thus:
“1. Short title, extent and application.— [(1) This Act
              may be called the Employees’
Provident Funds and
              Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952
.]
              (2) It extends to the whole of India.
[(3) Subject to the provisions contained in
section 16
, it
              applies—
(a) to every establishment which is a factory
              engaged in any industry specified in Schedule I and in
              which [twenty] or more persons are employed, and
(b) to any other establishment employing [twenty]
              or more persons or class of such establishments which
              the Central Government may, by notification in the
              Official Gazette, specify in this behalf:
Provided that the Central Government may, after
              giving not less than two months’ notice of its intention
              so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply the
              provisions of this Act to any establishment employing
              such number of persons less than [twenty] as may be
              specified in the notification.]
              [(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
              (3) of this section or sub-section (1) of
section 16
, where
              it appears to the Central Provident Fund Commissioner,
              whether on an application made to him in this behalf or
              otherwise, that the employer and the majority of
              employees in relation to any establishment have agreed
              that the provisions of this Act should be made applicable
              to the establishment, he may, by notification in the
              Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act to that
              establishment on and from the date of such agreement
              or from any subsequent date specified in such
              agreement.]
              [(5) An establishment to which this Act applies shall
              continue to be governed by this Act notwithstanding that
              the number of persons employed therein at any time falls
              below twenty.]”
Civil Appeal No. 4619 of 2010                                    Page 4 of 8
Clause (a) of sub-Section (3) as well as clause (b) of sub-
Section (3) are applicable to establishments. Clause (a) covers
      those establishments which are factories engaged in any
      industry specified in Schedule I to the 1952 Act where twenty
      or more than twenty persons are employed. Clause (a) of sub-
      Section (3) proceeds on the footing that factories are
      establishments. There is no dispute that the appellant’s
      establishment is not covered by clause (a) as it is not a factory
      engaged in any industry specified in Schedule I.
6)         Before we deal with the contentions raised by the
      appellant, we must note here that the Constitution Bench of
      this Court, in the case of
Mohmedalli and others V. Union of
      India
and another,2 has dealt with the issue of interpretation
      of the provisions of the 1952 Act and in particular sub-Section
      (3) of
Section 1
of the 1952 Act. The Constitution Bench held
      that:
a) The 1952 Act was made to institute provident
                           funds for the benefit of the employees in factories
                           and other establishments;
b) The provisions of the 1952 Act constitute social
                           justice measures; and
c) The underlying idea behind the provisions of the
                           1952 Act is to bring all kinds of employees within
                           its fold as and when the Central Government
2
1963 Supp (1) SCR 993
Civil Appeal No. 4619 of 2010                                     Page 5 of 8
might think it fit after reviewing each class of
                     establishments.
After considering clause (a) of sub-Section (3) of
Section
      1
, the Constitution Bench held that, in so far as establishments
      which do not come within the description of the factories
      engaged in industries enumerated in schedule I are concerned,
      the Central Government has been vested with the power of
      specifying such establishments or class of establishments as it
      might determine to be brought within the purview of the 1952
      Act.
7)     Clause (a) of sub-Section (3) is applicable only to those
      factories engaged in any industry specified in Schedule I.
      Clause (b) of sub-Section (3) is applicable to all other
      establishments which are not covered by clause (a) of sub-
      Section (3) provided such establishments are notified by a
      notification issued by the Central Government which is
      published in the official Gazette. Clause (b) of sub-Section (3)
      takes within its fold all establishments which are not covered
      by clause (a). Therefore, a notification under clause (b) can be
      issued in respect of factories engaged in any industry which is
      not specified in Schedule I. Hence, the argument that a
      notification cannot be issued under clause (b) of sub-Section
      (3) regarding a factory engaged in an industry not covered by
      Schedule I cannot be accepted. We are dealing with a social
      welfare legislation described by the Constitution Bench as a
      measure of social justice. Therefore, to give effect to the
      legislature's intention, the Court will have to adopt a purposive
Civil Appeal No. 4619 of 2010                              Page 6 of 8
interpretation. We, therefore, reject the contention that all
      factories which are not covered by industries in Schedule I are
      out of the coverage of clause (b).
8)     We may note here that it is not the case of the appellant
      that her establishment has been exempted under
Section 16
of
      the 1952 Act. Under the notification dated 7th March 1962,
      there is a category of ‘trading and commercial establishments’.
      Admittedly, the appellant is carrying on the business of
      assembling/manufacturing umbrellas and selling the same.
      The respondent has recorded a finding of fact that the business
      of establishment of the appellant was of assembling umbrellas
      and selling the same in her own outlet. Thus, the establishment
      of the appellant is a commercial establishment. It is an
      establishment predominantly carrying on commercial activity.
Therefore, it cannot be denied that the business of the
      appellant will fall in the category of ‘trading and commercial
      establishments’. In the circumstances, the case of the
      appellant will be governed by the said notification issued under
      clause (b) of sub-Section (3) of
Section 1
. The decision of this
      Court     in    the       case   of   Regional   Provident   Funds
      Commissioner.
Vs. Shibn Metal Works
(Supra) does not deal
      with clause (b) of sub-Section (3) of
Section 1
.
9)     We, therefore, find absolutely no error in the view taken
      by the learned Single Judge and Division Bench of Kerala High
      Court. Accordingly, we dismiss the appeals with no order as to
      costs.
Civil Appeal No. 4619 of 2010                                 Page 7 of 8
10)    If there is any monetary liability incurred by the appellant
      pursuant to the orders of the respondent confirmed by the High
      Court, considering the fact that the present appeals are of the
      year 2010, we grant time of three months to the appellant to
      pay the necessary amount.
……………………..J.
                                                      (Abhay S. Oka)


                                                    ……………………..J.
                                                      (Sanjay Karol)

      New Delhi;
November 07, 2023
Civil Appeal No. 4619 of 2010                                Page 8 of 8