[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sachidhanandam vs E Vanaja And Ors. on 6 November, 2023
Author:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
,
Hima Kohli
,
B.R. Gavai
1


2023 INSC 984                                             REPORTABLE
                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3667 OF 2018


      SACHIDHANANDAM                            …. APPELLANT(S)
      SINCE DEAD THROUGH HIS LRS.

                                  VERSUS

      E. VANAJA AND ORS.                        …. RESPONDENTS

                            WITH
      CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). ______________OF 2023 @
      SLP(C) NO(S). _________ @ DIARY NO(S). 7823 OF
      2018.


                              JUDGMENT
PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J.
Delay condoned in filing Special Leave Petition(C) Diary

      No(s). 7823 of 2018.
2.    Leave granted in Special Leave Petition (C) No(s).

      _____________ @ Special Leave Petition(C) Diary No(s). 7823

      of 2018.
3.    This appeal has been preferred by the defendant no. 2

      (Sachidhanandam) assailing the legality and validity of the
2
judgment and decree passed by the High Court, allowing the

regular second appeal in part, preferred by the plaintiff (E.

Vanaja-respondent no. 1 herein).
4.   Plaintiff’s suit for partition was allowed by the trial Court

allotting her 1/8th share in the suit properties. On appeal by the

defendant no. 2, the First Appellate Court allowed the appeal in

part holding that the plaintiff/respondent no. 1 is entitled to

1/16th share in suit ‘B’ and ‘C1’ schedule properties. At the

same time, the First Appellate Court granted liberty to the

plaintiff to work out her remedy for mesne profits with regard

to ‘C1’ schedule property and items 25 to 30 in ‘B’ schedule

properties by filing a separate proceeding under
Order 20 Rule

12 of CPC
. As against this, the High Court in second appeal has

held that after the death of the plaintiff’s husband, namely,

Elangovan, and her mother-in-law, the plaintiff is entitled to

1/7th share out of 1/8th and 1/16th of her mother-in-law’s share

in the ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘C1’ schedule properties.
5.   The plaintiff-respondent no. 1 is the widow and the sole

heir of Elango, the third son of Nallathambi Chettiar whereas

the defendants are the widow, sons and daughters and grand-
3
sons of the said Nallathambi Chettiar. It would be appropriate

to refer the genealogical tree as mentioned in Schedule ‘A’ of

the plaint to appreciate the relations between the parties.
6.   The plaintiff preferred a suit for partition claiming 1/8th

share, or such shares as the Court thinks fit, in the suit

properties described in schedules ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘C1’ as also for

mesne profits. It was the case of the plaintiff that ‘B’ schedule

properties are self-acquired properties of Nallathambi Chettiar,

whereas the ‘C’ schedule properties have been purchased by

defendant nos. 1 to 4 from the income earned from the ‘B’

schedule properties and ‘C1’ schedule properties are also joint
4
family properties, therefore, the plaintiff is entitled to 1/8th

share in all the properties.
7.   The defendants admitted the relationship between the

parties. According to them, the plaintiff can claim a share in

respect of her deceased husband’s share in the joint family

properties. It was stated that on the date of the death of the

plaintiff’s husband, his 1/8th share in the estate of Nallathambi

Chettiar devolved equally on his wife, the plaintiff herein and

his mother (Elangovan’s mother) who died during the pendency

of the suit. Thus, the plaintiff is entitled only to 1/16th share in

‘B’ schedule properties. In respect of ‘C’ schedule properties, it

was the case of the defendants that except for items 15 and 16

standing in the name of the plaintiff’s deceased husband, other

properties do not belong to the joint family. No part of the

income from the joint family properties has been utilized for

the purchase of properties in the individual names of defendant

nos. 2 to 4 and 8.
8.   Both parties have led evidence, oral and documentary

before the trial Court basing upon which the trial Court held

that the defendants have not established the veracity of the
5
Will dated 01.02.2000 executed by the deceased-1st defendant

(Nagammal), therefore, they are not entitled to claim the rights

in respect of the properties mentioned in the Will. The trial

Court categorically held that the properties mentioned in

schedule ‘B’ and ‘C’ are jointly family properties and the

plaintiff is entitled to her share therein to the extent of 1/8th.

The First Appellate Court held that the plaintiff/respondent is

entitled to 1/16th share in suit ‘B’ and ‘C1’ schedule properties.

In respect of ‘C’ schedule properties, it was held by the First

Appellate Court that the same are not joint family properties

and, thus, are not liable for partition.
9.   The second appeal was heard by the High Court on the

following substantial questions of law:-
“(a)   In view of the admission of DW1 that
        the properties were purchased from out of the
        joint family income, whether the lower
        appellate court has erred in modifying the
        decree and judgment of trial court?
(b)    When the Will under Ex. B12 was not
        proved as per law, whether the finding of lower
        appellate court regarding truth of Ex.B12
        tenable in law?
(C)     Whether the dismissal of suit filed by
        the plaintiff in respect of the items of properties
6
standing in the name of D1 to D4 and D8 is
                  sustainable?”

            Basing on the evidence available on record, the High

Court found that the properties and the business of the joint

family continued to be in joint possession of both the parties

and, therefore, the status of the joint family both, backwards

and forward must be taken into account by the Court. The

High Court eventually held that all the plaint schedule

properties are joint family properties.
10. Having                   examined   the   pleadings,   evidence   and   the

judgments rendered by the courts below, we do not find any

perversity in the findings recorded by the High Court holding

that all the suit properties are joint family properties. However,

in view of the provisions contained in Sections 15 (1)(a) and

16 of the Hindu Succession Act, 19561, the High Court is not

correct in allotting 1/16th share to the plaintiff out of the share

of her mother-in-law in the ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘C1” schedule

properties.
11. Sections 15 and 16 of the Act need to be referred which

are re-produced hereunder:
1
(for short, ‘the Act’)
7
“15. General rules of succession in the case
of female Hindus.-(1) The property of a
female Hindu dying intestate shall devolve
according to the rules set out in
section 16
,—
(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters
(including the children of any pre-deceased son
or daughter) and the husband;
(b) secondly, upon the heirs of the husband;
(c) thirdly, upon the mother and father;
(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the mother.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (1),—
(a) any property inherited by a female Hindu
from her father or mother shall devolve, in the
absence of any son or daughter of the deceased
(including the children of any pre-deceased son
or daughter) not upon the other heirs referred
to in sub-section (1) in the order specified
therein, but upon the heirs of the father; and
(b) any property inherited by a female Hindu
from her husband or from her father-in-law
shall devolve, in the absence of any son or
daughter of the deceased (including the
children of any pre-deceased son or daughter)
not upon the other heirs referred to in sub-
section (1) in the order specified therein, but
upon the heirs of the husband.
16. Order of succession and manner of
distribution among heirs of a female
8
Hindu.—The order of succession among the
        heirs referred to in
section 15
shall be, and the
        distribution of the intestates property among
        those heirs shall take place according to the
        following rules, namely:—

        Rule 1.—Among the heirs specified in sub-
        section (1) of
section 15
, those in one entry
        shall be preferred to those in any succeeding
        entry and those included in the same entry
        shall take simultaneously.
Rule 2.—If any son or daughter of the intestate
        had pre-deceased the intestate leaving his or
        her own children alive at the time of the
        intestate’s death, the children of such son or
        daughter shall take between them the share
        which such son or daughter would have taken if
        living at the intestate’s death.
Rule 3.—The devolution of the property of the
        intestate on the heirs referred to in clauses (b),
(d) and (e) of sub-section (1) and in sub-
section (2) to
section 15
shall be in the same
        order and according to the same rules as would
        have applied if the property had been the
        father’s or the mother’s or the husband’s as the
        case may be, and such person had died
        intestate in respect thereof immediately after
        the intestate’s death.”
12.   Sections 15 and 16 of the Act provide that the property

of a female Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according to

the rules set out in
Section 16
.
Section 15(1)(a)
provides that

such devolution shall be firstly, upon the sons and daughters

(including the children of any pre-deceased son or daughter)

and the husband. The rule for distribution of the intestate
9
property of a female Hindu and order of succession is provided

under Section 16 of the Act according to which, the order of

succession among the heirs of a female Hindu referred to in
Section 15
shall be firstly, as per rule 1 thereof, among the

heirs specified in sub-section (1) of Section 15 of the Act.
13. A combined reading of
Section 15(1)(a)
and Section 16 of

the Act would make it manifest that the property of a female

Hindu dying intestate shall devolve, firstly, upon the sons and

daughters (including the children of any pre-deceased son or

daughter) and the husband. Therefore, the plaintiff being the

widow of the pre-deceased son does not have the first right or

entitlement to receive any share in the share of her mother-in-

law.
14. For the foregoing reasons, we allow Civil Appeal No. 3667

of 2018 in part. The impugned judgment rendered by the High

Court shall stand modified only to the extent that the plaintiff-

respondent no. 1 is not entitled to 1/16th share in the share of

her mother-in-law in the suit properties. The judgment and
10
decree passed by the High Court is, thus, affirmed subject to

the above modification.
15. Resultantly, the civil appeal arising out of SLP(C) Diary

No(s). 7823 of 2018 filed by the plaintiff stands disposed of in

the above stated terms.
16. The parties shall bear their own costs.
………………………………………J.
                                         (B.R. GAVAI)



                                       ………………………………………J.
                                         (HIMA KOHLI)


                                        ………………………………………J.
                                    (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)
NOVEMBER 06, 2023
NEW DELHI.