[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Nanhe vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 21 November, 2023
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S. Oka
Criminal Appeal No.2791 of 2023



 2023 INSC 1011                                                    NON-REPORTABLE



                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2791 OF 2023



          NANHE                                                   …APPELLANT

                                                 VERSUS


          STATE OF U.P.                                           …RESPONDENT



                                            J U D G M E N T
PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.              Heard learned counsel appearing for the parties.
2.              In an incident which took place on 30.05.2007 at about 3:30

                         p.m. in the market area, one Mahendra was injured and one

                         Saddam Hussain, son of the informant, Mohd. Ali was killed.

                         Two cases, one crime No.169/2007 under
Section 304
and
308
IPC and another case crime No.170/2007 under
Section 25
of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.11.21
12:37:18 IST
Arms Act, 1959 were registered against the accused Nanhe.
Reason:
Page 1 | 15
Criminal Appeal No.2791 of 2023
3.       Both the cases were clubbed and were tried as Sessions Trial

         Nos. 1097 of 2007 and 1212 of 2007 by Special Judge,

         S.C./S.T.(P.A.) Act,1989.   The trial court vide judgment and

         order dated 14.05.2010 held the accused Nanhe to be guilty of

         an offence under
Section 302
IPC and sentenced him to life

         imprisonment with fine of Rs.5000/- and in the event of default

         in payment of fine to undergo additional one year of

         imprisonment. The trial court also held the accused to be guilty

         for an offence under
Section 25
of the Arms Act and imposed

         punishment of two years of rigorous imprisonment with fine of

         Rs.1000/-.
4.       The judgment and order of conviction and sentencing the

         accused was affirmed by the High Court vide its judgment and

         order dated 31.01.2019 passed in criminal appeal No.4474 of

         2010. It may be worth noting that a single appeal was filed by

         the accused against his conviction in both the cases.
5.       The aforesaid judgment and order of the High Court has been

         assailed by the accused/convict by means of the present appeal.
Page 2 | 15
Criminal Appeal No.2791 of 2023
6.       The submission of learned counsel for the appellant is that there

         was no intention of the appellant to kill the deceased. His death

         was accidental.          His intention could have been only to kill

         Mahendra and not the deceased Saddam Hussain.                   The

         appellant at the relevant time was heavily intoxicated and as

         such was not in a position to even know what he was doing.

         The case would therefore, fall under Part II of
Section 304
IPC

         and not under
Section 302
IPC.
7.       The informant, Mohd. Ali lodged a written FIR at police station

         Moosajhag, district- Badaun on 30.05.2007 stating that on the

         said date at about 3:30 p.m. he was going from home to the

         shop of Sant Ram for purchasing some domestic items along

         with his son, Saddam Hussain (deceased). When he reached

         the shop, he saw Mahendra and Nanhe (appellant) quarrelling

         with each other. Sant Ram, who is none other than the brother

         of Mahendra intervened and asked Nanhe (appellant) to leave

         the place. On this, Nanhe (appellant) left but after walking 15

         to 20 steps from there, he turned around and with his country




                                                                  Page 3 | 15
Criminal Appeal No.2791 of 2023



         made pistol fired a shot which piercing the neck of the deceased

         hit the head of Mahendra. Nanhe (appellant) was caught on the

         spot. Saddam was taken to the district hospital where he died.
8.       There is no dispute to the fact that Saddam Hussain died of a

         fire arm shot received in his neck and that the same was fired

         from the country made pistol possessed by the appellant Nanhe.

         The weapon of offence and the cartridges were recovered from

         him. It is also an admitted position as established from the

         evidence on record that the single shot fired from the said

         country made pistol after hitting and piercing the deceased in

         his neck had finally hit Mahendra in his head with whom he

         was having an altercation a few minutes earlier.
9.       On the basis of the evidence of the eye witnesses though one of

         them had turned hostile, the trial court as well as the High

         Court came to a definite conclusion that the appellant is guilty

         of an offence under
Section 302
IPC.
10.       The only aspect which requires consideration by us is whether

         the said offence is liable to be reduced to culpable homicide not




                                                               Page 4 | 15
Criminal Appeal No.2791 of 2023



         amounting to murder falling under second part of
Section 304
IPC in view of the fact that the appellant had no intention to kill

         the deceased as he had fired with the intention to settle his

         score with Mahendra with whom he had entered into a harsh

         argument. The other aspect which needs consideration is as to

         what would be the impact of the intoxication of the appellant at

         the time of the incident.
11. In context with the argument that the appellant had no

         intention to kill the deceased and that he was accidently killed

         though in fact he had fired the shot upon Mahendra with whom

         he had a quarrel/altercation a little earlier, it is relevant to refer

         to
Section 301
of IPC which reads as under: -
“301.Culpable homicide by causing death
                     of person other than person whose death
                     was intended. -If a person, by doing anything
                     which he intends or knows to be likely to cause
                     death, commits culpable homicide by causing
                     the death of any person, whose death he neither
                     intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause,
                     the culpable homicide committed by the offender
                     of the person whose death he intended or knew
                     himself to be likely to cause.”




                                                                        Page 5 | 15
Criminal Appeal No.2791 of 2023
12. The aforesaid provision is based up on the ‘Doctrine of

              Transfer of Malice or Transmigration of Motive’ which provides

              that where there is ‘mens rea’ of committing an offence, it can

              be transferred to another. To illustrate the said doctrine, an

              example could be given of a person who had intention to kill

              a person but by mistake kills another person, then he would

              still be held guilty of committing murder even in the absence

              of intention to kill that particular person. In simpler words,

              if a person has an intention to commit an offence or cause a

              death of any person but kills one whose death he never

              intended to cause, he would still be guilty of causing death.
13.
In
Shankarlal Kacharabhai & Ors vs. The State of

              Gujarat1
, this court while discussing the scope of
Section

              301
IPC held as under:
"It embodies what the English authors describe
                       as the doctrine of transfer of malice or the
                       transmigration of motive. Under the section if A
                       intends to kill B, but kills C whose death he
                       neither intends nor knows himself to be likely to
                       cause, the intention to kill C is by law attributed
                       to him. If A aims his shot at B, but it misses B
1
AIR 1965 SC 1260




                                                                             Page 6 | 15
Criminal Appeal No.2791 of 2023



                      either because B moves out of the range of the
                      shot or because the shot misses the mark and
                      hits some other person C, whether within sight
                      or out of sight, under S.301, A is deemed to have
                      hit C with the intention to kill him. What is to be
                      noticed is that to invoke
S.301
of the Indian
                      Penal Code A shall not have any intention to
                      cause the death or the knowledge that he is
                      likely to cause the death of C."
14.
In a similar case where also, the victim was accidently shot

               though the firing was intended to cause injuries to some

               other person, this Court in
Rajbir Singh vs. State of U.P.

               and Anr.2
held that the approach of the High Court in setting

               aside the order passed by the Special Judge solely on the

               ground that the firing was not aimed at the victim and that

               he was accidently injured is completely in ignorance of the

               provision of
Section 301
IPC. The Supreme Court observed

               as under: -
“We have heard learned counsel for the
                      appellant (complainant), learned counsel for
                      Akhilesh Chauhan (respondent no.2) and have
                      perused records. The only reason given by the
                      High Court for setting aside the order passed by
                      the learned Special Judge framing charges
                      against respondent no.2 is that the firing was
2
(2006) 4 SCC 51




                                                                            Page 7 | 15
Criminal Appeal No.2791 of 2023



                      not aimed at Pooja Balmiki but she accidently
                      received the injuries as she was passing
                      through that way and was hit. The High Court
                      completely ignored the provisions of
Section 301
IPC.”
                             The aforesaid provision clearly shows that
                      if the killing took place in the course of doing an
                      act which a person intends or knows to be likely
                      to cause death, it ought to be treated as if the
                      real intention of the killer had been actually
                      carried out.
The fact that there was no intention to
                      cause injury to Pooja Balmiki and she was
                      accidently hit can make no difference as
                      according to the version of the prosecution, the
                      accused intended to cause injuries by firearm to
                      Hoti Lal and in attempting to carry out the same,
                      also caused injuries to her. The reasons given by
                      the High Court for quashing the charges are,
                      therefore, wholly erroneous in law and cannot
                      be sustained.”
15.
In another case of similar nature i.e.
Jagpal Singh vs. State

               of Punjab3
, this Court held that under the ‘Doctrine of

               Transfer of Malice or Transmigration of Motive’ as per
Section

               301
IPC, the accused has made himself punishable under
Section 302
IPC (simplicitor) as he accidently shot a

               particular person, though, in fact he might have intended to
3
AIR 1991 SC 982




                                                                            Page 8 | 15
Criminal Appeal No.2791 of 2023



             kill another person and may have aimed the shot at that

             another person only.
16. A composite reading and understanding of the aforesaid

             provision of
Section 301
IPC, ‘‘Doctrine of Transfer of Malice

             or Transmigration of Motive’ and above cases on the subject,

             it is quite implicit that the appellant herein is guilty of

             committing an offence of culpable homicide amounting to

             murder punishable under
section 302
IPC and that the

             intention to kill some other person is not material in as much

             as he had the intention of committing the aforesaid offence

             though accidently he might have killed another person.
17. In so far as the impact of intoxication and causing death

             while in the state of intoxication is concerned, a reference to
Section 86
of IPC is relevant which provides for the offence

             caused by a person under intoxication and incapable of

             understanding the nature of his act.      The said provision

             absolves the accused of committing an offence by reason of

             intoxication and incapability of knowing the nature of his act.
Page 9 | 15
Criminal Appeal No.2791 of 2023



             However, for applying the said provision, it has to be noticed

             that such intoxication has to be administered to him against

             his will or without his knowledge which means that it should

             not be a voluntary intoxication.
18. The aforesaid provision for the sake of convenience is

             reproduced herein below: -
“86. Offence requiring a particular
                     intent or knowledge committed by one
                     who is intoxicated.—In cases where an act
                     done is not an offence unless done with a
                     particular knowledge or intent, a person who
                     does the act in a state of intoxication shall be
                     liable to be dealt with as if he had the same
                     knowledge as he would have had if he had
                     not been intoxicated, unless the thing which
                     intoxicated him was administered to him
                     without his knowledge or against his will.”
19. In applying the above provision, the following twin conditions

         have to be satisfied.            The first that the accused was

         administered a thing which intoxicated him without his

         knowledge or against his will. Secondly, the intoxication has to

         be of the level which incapacitated him of knowing the nature

         of the act committed or likely to be committed by him.
Page 10 | 15
Criminal Appeal No.2791 of 2023
20. The above provision of
Section 86
IPC had come up for

           consideration before this Court in the case of
Basdev vs. State

           of Pepsu4
and it was held that where no evidence was led to

           show that the accused was incapacitated to form requisite

           intention due to the influence of the drink, the killing of a person

           would be an offence of murder.      In short, the ratio is that not

           only the accused be intoxicated but also the level of his

           intoxication be such as to render him incapable of knowing and

           understanding what he is doing or likely to do.          Therefore,

           evidence to prove his incapacity to understand the nature of his

           action is mandatory to reduce the criminality of the accused.
21. In a celebrated case The King vs. Meade5 it was opined that a

           person charged with a crime of violence may show or rebut the

           presumption that he intended the natural consequences of his

           acts, that he was drunk and that he was incapable of knowing

           what he was doing was dangerous. The law was thus summed

           up as under:
4
AIR 1956 SC 488
5
(1909) 1 K.B. 895,




                                                                  Page 11 | 15
Criminal Appeal No.2791 of 2023
(i)      The insanity, whether due to drunkenness or

                           otherwise is a defence in a crime;
(ii)     The evidence of drunkenness which renders the

                           accused     incapable    of    forming   any    opinion    or

                           intention    ought      to    be   considered    with     the

                           surrounding facts and circumstances so as to come

                           to the conclusion whether or not he had intention to

                           do the said act; and
(iii)    The drunkenness of the accused must be sufficient

                           to render him incapacitated to form any intention to

                           commit the crime.
22. In the case at hand, though the informant, Mohd. Ali, PW1 in

         his deposition/cross-examination has accepted that at the time

         of the incident, the appellant, Nanhe was drunk and was in a

         state of intoxication, and even the SI, PW6 was of the opinion

         that the accused was heavily intoxicated and he was unable to

         speak but the fact remains that in even in such a situation he

         was able to walk properly and had gone 15 to 20 steps away




                                                                           Page 12 | 15
Criminal Appeal No.2791 of 2023



         from the place of quarrel after it was settled to return and fire.

         This sufficiently proves that he was mentally alert and was not

         incapacitated from knowing what he is doing and what would

         be its consequences. Once the killing was complete, the public

         had thrashed and beaten him mercilessly and, therefore, when

         the SI PW6 examined him, he could not speak. The inability to

         speak in such a situation would not be sufficient indication that

         the level of intoxication was so high that he was unable to

         understand and take a conscious decision.
23. In view of the above statements of the witnesses, it stands duly

         established that the appellant had fired the shot in the state of

         intoxication which resulted in the killing of Saddam Hussain

         but there is no evidence to prove that on account of the

         intoxication, he was incapacitated to know and understand his

         actions.
24. The facts as narrated above would clearly reflect that the

         incident had taken place on account of a quarrel between the

         appellant and Mahendra with which the deceased Saddam




                                                              Page 13 | 15
Criminal Appeal No.2791 of 2023



         Hussain had no connection. In the firing which probably took

         place as a result of the above quarrel, the target was Mahendra,

         but unfortunately, Saddam was killed. The aforesaid killing of

         the Saddam was apparently not intentional and was rather by

         way of an accident.
25. It may be true that the deceased may have been killed accidently

         by the appellant in the state of intoxication but there is no iota

         of evidence to establish that due to intoxication he was

         incapable of knowing the nature of his act or that the act which

         he was doing or likely to do was so dangerous so as to cause

         death of any person. Thus, in the absence of such evidence,

         coupled with the fact that it is not the case of the appellant that

         he was administered intoxication without his knowledge or

         against his will, the provision of
Section 86
IPC would not be

         applicable and he would not be entitled to reduction of sentence

         from 302
IPC
to one falling under Part-II of
Section 304
IPC.
26. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we find no

         illegality in the impugned judgment and order of the High Court




                                                               Page 14 | 15
Criminal Appeal No.2791 of 2023



         in confirming the conviction and punishing the appellant under
Section 302
IPC.
27. The appeal is devoid of merit and is accordingly dismissed with

         no order as to cost. However, the appellant is at liberty to apply

         for remission in accordance with remission policy of the State

         in vogue and in the event such power is invoked, the State is

         expected to consider it on its own merit most expeditiously.
……………………….. J.
(ABHAY S. OKA)



                                                   ……………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 21, 2023.
Page 15 | 15