[Cites
48
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Manjunath vs State Of Karnataka on 6 November, 2023
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Abhay S. Oka
REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 978
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 866 OF 2011




             MANJUNATH & ORS.                                               …APPELLANTS


                                                          Versus


             STATE OF KARNATAKA                                             …RESPONDENT


                                               JUDGMENT
SANJAY KAROL J.,
1.             Appellants1 (six in number) have filed this appeal against the

             judgment and order dated 21st September 2010 passed by the

             High Court of Karnataka at Bangalore in Criminal Appeal No.1795

             of 2004 whereby the appeal filed by the State against the verdict

             of acquittal in favour of all 29 accused, vide judgment and order

             dated 25th September, 2004 in S.C. No.162 of 1999, passed by the

             Additional Sessions Judge - Presiding Officer, Fast Track Court-
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NITIN TALREJA
Date: 2023.11.06
17:23:39 IST
Reason:
1 Manjunath (s/o Bachanna) A-1; Ramegowda (s/o Bachanna) A-2; Ramappa (s/o
             Narayanappa) A-3; Ramesh (s/o Chikka Venkatarayappa) A-4; Manjunath (s/o Ramappa)
             A-5; Dyavappa (s/o Narayanappa) A-7.
1- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
II, Kolar, was partly allowed. Overturning the same in respect of

A-1 to A-5 and A-7, the Court while convicting them for having

committed an offence punishable under Sections 143, 144, 146,

147, 148, 447, 324, 326, 504 and 506 r/w
Section 149
of Indian

Penal Code, 1860 sentenced each one of them to undergo rigorous

imprisonment for a period of 4 years and pay a fine of ₹ 5000 each.


FACTUAL PRISM
2.     The facts, as set out by the Courts below, shorn of

unnecessary details are :-
2.1      On 6th August 1997, the deceased namely Byregowda2

     and      his     brothers,   T.V.      Narayanaswamy   (PW4),   T.V.
Gopalreddy (PW5), T.V. Rajanna (PW10) and Marappa (PW2)

     had gone to the fields to work when, allegedly, all the accused

     armed with weapons such as clubs, iron rods and choppers

     came and threatened them. PW2, PW4, PW5 and PW10

     managed to escape but while the deceased, was attempting to

     do so, he was greviously assaulted by A1, A2 and A3 by means

     of iron rod and a steel edged weapon (chopper). Immediate

     medical treatment was administered to the deceased at the



2 Hereinafter, the deceased

                              2- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
     Sidlaghatta General Hospital by Dr. Loganayaki (PW1) who

     also informed the police. V.M. Sonnappa (PW19), the then

     Sub-Inspector of Police took his statement (Ex. P1) and as a

     consequence therefore, registered FIR being Crime No.

     249/1997 dated 08.08.1997 under several penal provisions.


     2.2   After due investigation, the challan came to be filed and

     the case was committed to the Court of Additional Sessions

     Judge-Presiding Officer, Fast Track Court-II, Kolar. All the

     accused denied the charges under
section 120B
,
143
,
447
,
302
read with
Section 149
IPC and claimed trial. Accused

     Nos.6 and 8 are recorded to have died and therefore, the

     proceedings against them stood abated at this stage.



FINDINGS OF THE TRIAL COURT
3.    The prosecution in order to prove the charges levied,

examined 28 witnesses; exhibited 24 documents and three

material objects. The accused did not lead any evidence save and

except producing five witnesses to contradict the version of PW 4,

Gopala Reddy (PW5), Chandrappa (PW15), T.V Krishnappa

(PW17) and T.S Ramakrishna (PW13) respectively.
3- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
4.     The evidence led was categorized into five heads – (a) ocular;
(b) Dying declaration; (c) circumstantial evidence; (d) recovery of

incriminating material; and (e) motive.
4.1   PW2, PW3 and PW15 are eyewitnesses and PW2 and

           PW15 have not supported the case of the prosecution.

           PW2 has deposed that he had heard from the family

           members of the deceased that he had sustained various

           injuries and upon reaching there found the latter to be

           lying a little away from his own lands and later find out

           that he had died. PW3 has deposed that he had seen the

           accused persons assaulting the deceased, and it is they

           who had laid the deceased, post such assault, on the

           eucalyptus leaves on the fields of PW11. PW15 stated that

           he saw the deceased lying on southern side of the

           eucalyptus plantation where PW2, PW4 and PW5 were

           also present. PW15 has deposed that he saw the accused

           persons armed with weapons and proceeding towards the

           garden. He followed them and found that the accused had

           chased and assaulted the deceased. It is a point of conflict

           whether the accused had, as per the statement of PW3,

           laid the deceased down on the eucalyptus fields of PW11

                            4- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
- Raghava or was it PW15 who had done so. No other

       witnesses have deposed to that effect.

      The Trial Court, therefore, did not rely on the ocular

evidence.
4.2     In respect of the dying declaration, it was observed that

        the evidence clearly shows PW19 to not have recorded the

        declaration. It has borne out from cross examination of

        this witness that it was one of his staff members, namely

        Nataraj who had recorded the statement who was neither

        cited nor examined as a witness. Moreover, this deponent

        has not even endorsed such a statement.


4.3      In respect of the medical evidence furnished, it was

         observed that PW1 admitted non stating of who

         furnished history of injuries- whether it was injured

         himself or another person who had brought him to the

         hospital. This, read alongside PW1’s earlier statement

         that   numerous      persons         were   present   with   the

         injured/deceased led the Trial Court to believe that, on

         account of severe head injury he was not in a position to

         give a statement and it was other persons present who

         furnished necessary details to form the same.
5- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
4.4     In respect of circumstantial evidence, it was observed

        that PW2 has not implicated any of the accused in the

        circumstance relating to a mob approaching the fields in

        the morning of 6 August 1997. PW15 had deposed, as

        noted above that the deceased was laid on eucalyptus

        leaves in an injured state. It was however not his case

        that the deceased had informed him about who caused

        his injuries. This, led the Trial Court to observe “falsity”

        in the evidence of PWs 4,5,6 and 7 who stated the

        deceased had told that the accused assaulted him.


      4.4.1    For PW3 and PW13, it was observed that their

          conduct did not reflect that of an “ordinary prudent

          man” as the former did not rush to the village or to the

          rescue of the deceased but instead, ostensibly, to invite

          the villagers to a hiding place; and the letter since he

          claimed to have heard the accused persons conspiring

          to attempt to take the lives of the deceased and his

          brothers and further claimed that later he heard the

          persons state that while one of them was caught, others

          ran away. Despite hearing this he proceeded to leave to

          attend the marriage of someone at Vijayapura. This, the

                        6- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
          Court, found to be a conduct, against of a prudent

          person who proceeded as normal, despite hearing of a

          conspiracy to kill a fellow man.
4.4.2    It is in light of above conclusions that the Trial

          Court held the web of circumstances to be unable to

          point “unerring, cogently and positively” to the guilt of

          the accused.
4.5     On recovery of weapons, the Court observed that

        although the weapons had been recovered at the instance

        of accused persons - clubs at the instance of A10, A3, A5,

        A6 and A7; iron rod at the instance of A1 and A2 and

        chopper at the instance of A4, but doubted the veracity

        of the seizure on the ground that the clubs were recovered

        from a place of common access and the chopper as well

        as the rods were recovered from places where others also

        resided. Further, it was observed that the clubs seized

        (M.O. 3) were of 4 ft in length and 3 inches, in diameter

        which could cause such as abrasion(s), contusion(s), and

        laceration(s). However, the medical evidence of PW1 did

        not record any such injury. The Court, therefore,



                         7- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
           concluded that the incriminating objects or weapons were

           not of any assistance in the case against the accused.


     4.6   On motive, it was observed that although a dispute had

           taken place on the night of 4th August, 1997 between PW4

           and A1, A2, A4, A7, A8, A9, A11 and A12 regarding the

           obstruction of a pathway, resulting into criminal

           prosecution against the persons involved but leading only

           to their acquittals. Therefore, in view of the Court, motive

           was absent.
4.7 Two other aspects were also urged on behalf of the

           prosecution, one; regarding the place of occurrence of

           offence and two; the delay in recording the statements of

           the ocular and circumstantial witnesses. On both these

           grounds as well, the court did not find anything to be

           pointing towards the guilt of the accused persons.


     4.8   In view of such findings, the court acquitted all accused

           persons.
5.     The State, aggrieved by the acquittals en masse, appealed to

the High Court.
8- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
FINDINGS OF THE HIGH COURT
6.     It was noted that the deceased had specifically named as

certain accused as also attributed specific roles to them. Having

appreciated the evidence on record and the submissions of the

learned counsel for the accused, who stated that the doctor had

not certified the deceased fit to give a statement and in the

absence of such a certificate of fitness, his declaration could not

be relied upon; and the learned counsel for the state who

submitted that the dying declaration categorically indicts A1-A7.
7.     The Court found :-
7.1 The dying declaration makes a clear case against A1 to A7;


     7.2 The injuries sustained by the deceased correspond to

        narration of the incident to PW19 (S. Narayanaswamy) and

        that PW1 (Dr. Loganayagi) certified the deceased to have

        been in a fit condition to give a statement.


     7.3 The dying declaration of the deceased stood corroborated

        by PW3, PW4, PW5 as well as other witnesses.


     7.4 On submission of the learned counsel for the accused that

        the injuries inflicted upon the deceased were on non-vital

        parts of the body, no intention could be gathered on part of

                            9- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
       the accused; hence the Court, in its wisdom, convicted the

       above specified accused under
Section 304
Part II,
IPC
to

       undergo a sentence of rigorous imprisonment for a period

       of four years and pay fine of Rs. 5000/- each. All other

       accused were acquitted.
8.    The position of the accused persons as it presently stands is

indicated in a tabular form as under :-
Sl    Name of Accused     Sentenced          Sentenced by        Punishment
no.                       by Trial           High Court          awarded
                          Court
1.    Manjunath           Acquitted          Convicted
u/s 304
4
years RI and fine
      S/o Bachanna                           Part II,
IPC
of Rs. 5000/-
2.    Ramegowda           Acquitted          Convicted
u/s 304
4
years RI and fine
      S/o Bachanna                           Part II,
IPC
of Rs. 5000/-
3.    Ramappa             Acquitted          Convicted
u/s 304
4
years RI and fine
      S/o Narayanappa                        Part II,
IPC
of Rs. 5000/-
4.    Ramesh              Acquitted          Convicted
u/s 304
4
years RI and fine
      S/o Chikka                             Part II,
IPC
of Rs. 5000/-
Venkatarayappa
5.    Manjunatha          Acquitted          Convicted
u/s 304
4
years RI and fine
      S/o Ramappa                            Part II,
IPC
of Rs. 5000/-
6.    Ramanjanappa        Expired            -
S/o Muniswamappa
      (Dead)
7.    Dyavappa            Acquitted          Convicted
u/s 304
4
years RI and fine
      S/o Narayanappa                        Part II,
IPC
of Rs. 5000/-
8.    Dyavappa S/o        Abated             -
Chikka
      Miniswamappa
      (Abated)
9.    Venugopala          Acquitted          Acquitted
      S/o Pillappa
10.   Chowda Reddy        Acquitted          Acquitted
      S/o Narayanappa
11.   Jayachandra S/o     Acquitted          Acquitted
      Bachappa



                         10- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
12.   Narayana Swamy @      Acquitted          Acquitted
      Beema S/o
      Munegowda
13.   Bachegowda,           Acquitted          Acquitted
      S/o Pillappa
14.   Narayana Swamy        Acquitted          Acquitted
      S/o Pillappa
15.   Krishanappa S/o       Acquitted          Acquitted
      Guttappa
16.   Mune Gowda            Acquitted          Acquitted
      S/o Venkatarayappa
17.   Aswath                Acquitted          Acquitted
      S/o Gateppa
18.   Aswathappa            Acquitted          Acquitted
      S/o Nanjegowda
19.   Murthy                Acquitted          Acquitted
      S/o Venkatappa
20.   Ramesh S/o Mune       Acquitted          Acquitted
      Gowda
21.   Ramesh                Acquitted          Acquitted
      S/o Byamma
22.   Nagaraja              Acquitted          Acquitted
      S/o Narayanappa
23.   Dayappa               Acquitted          Acquitted
      S/o Pillappa
24.   Naryanaswamy          Acquitted          Acquitted
      S/o Bachappa
25.   Ramappa               Acquitted          Acquitted
      S/o Chennarayappa
26.   Manjunatha            Acquitted          Acquitted
      S/o Naryanappa
27.   Sonne Gowda           Acquitted          Acquitted
      S/o Chennarayappa
28.   Mahesh                Acquitted          Acquitted
      S/o Jayachandra
29.   Lokesh S/o            Acquitted          Acquitted
      Bachanna
9.    Proceeding further, we notice, that this is a case involving

primarily a dying declaration made by the accused in addition to

the ocular and circumstantial evidence.
10. In fact, the dying declaration (Ext. P1) proven by PW19, is

the main foundation of the prosecution case. It would be
                           11- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
beneficial to appreciate the principles that the courts must adhere

to when adjudicating a case of this nature.


PRINCIPLES IN REGARD TO DYING DECLARATIONS
11. Section 32 the Indian Evidence Act, 18723 relates to

statements, written or verbal of relevant fact made by a person

who is dead or who cannot be found, in other words, dying

declaration. The various principles laid down by pronouncements

of this court in respect of dying declarations can be summarised

as under: –

   11.1        The basic premise is “nemo moriturus praesumitur

       mentire” i.e. man will not meet his maker with a lie in his

       mouth.
11.1.1 In
Laxman        v.     State        of   Maharashtra4
a

                       Constitution bench of this court observed: –

               “when the party is at the point of death and when every
               hope of this world is gone, when every motive to
               falsehood is silenced, and the man is induced by the
               most powerful consideration to speak only the truth The
               situation in which a man is on the deathbed is so solemn
               and serene, is the reason in law to accept the veracity of
               his statement.”

   11.2        For a statement to be termed a “dying declaration”, and

       thereby be admissible under
Section 32
of IEA, the



3 For brevity, "IEA"
4 (2002) 6 SCC 710 [5 Judge Bench]

                                12- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
        circumstances discussed/disclosed therein “must have

        some proximate relation to the actual occurrence”.

   11.3        The Privy Council in Pakala Narayana Swamy v.
Emperor5 explained the phrase “circumstances of the

        transaction” as under:-
“The circumstances must be circumstances of the
               transaction : general expressions indicating fear or
               suspicion whether of a particular individual or
               otherwise and not directly related to the occasion of the
               death will not be admissible. But statements made by
               the deceased that he was proceeding to the spot where
               he was in fact killed, or as to his reasons for so
               proceeding, or that he was going to meet a particular
               person, or that he had been invited by such person to
               meet him would each of them be circumstances of the
               transaction, and would be so whether the person was
               unknown, or was not the person accused. Such a
               statement might indeed be exculpatory of the person
               accused. ‘Circumstances of the transaction’ is a phrase
               no doubt that conveys some limitations. It is not as
               broad as the analogous use in ‘circumstantial evidence’
               which includes evidence of all relevant facts. It is on the
               other hand narrower than ‘res gestae’. Circumstances
               must have some proximate relation to the actual
               occurrence : though, as for instance, in a case of
               prolonged poisoning they may be related to dates at a
               considerable distance from the date of the actual fatal
               dose. It will be observed that ‘the circumstances’ are of
               the transaction which resulted in the death of the
               declarant. It is not necessary that there should be a
               known transaction other than that the death of the
               declarant has ultimately been caused, for the condition
               of the admissibility of the evidence is that ‘the cause of
               (the declarant's) death comes into question’.”

           11.3.1     In the well-known case of
Sharad Birdhichand

                  Sarda v. State of Maharashtra,6
principles in


5 AIR   1939 PC 47 [5 Judge Bench]
6 (1984) 4 SCC 116 [3 Judge Bench]




                                13- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
        respect of the application of
section 32
have been

        noted as under: –

Per S. Murtaza Fazal Ali J.,-
“21. …
       (1)
Section 32
is an exception to the rule of hearsay and
      makes admissible the statement of a person who dies,
      whether the death is a homicide or a suicide, provided
      the statement relates to the cause of death, or exhibits
      circumstances leading to the death. In this respect, as
      indicated above, the
Indian Evidence Act
, in view of the
      peculiar conditions of our society and the diverse nature
      and character of our people, has thought it necessary to
      widen the sphere of
Section 32
to avoid injustice.
      (2) The test of proximity cannot be too literally construed
      and practically reduced to a cut-and-dried formula of
      universal application so as to be confined in a
      straitjacket. Distance of time would depend or vary with
      the circumstances of each case. For instance, where
      death is a logical culmination of a continuous drama
      long in process and is, as it were, a finale of the story,
      the statement regarding each step directly connected
      with the end of the drama would be admissible because
      the entire statement would have to be read as an organic
      whole and not torn from the context. Sometimes
      statements relevant to or furnishing an immediate
      motive may also be admissible as being a part of the
      transaction of death. It is manifest that all these
      statements come to light only after the death of the
      deceased who speaks from death. For instance, where
      the death takes place within a very short time of the
      marriage or the distance of time is not spread over more
      than 3-4 months the statement may be admissible
      under
Section 32
.
(3) The second part of clause (1) of
Section 32
is yet
      another exception to the rule that in criminal law the
      evidence of a person who was not being subjected to or
      given an opportunity of being cross-examined by the
      accused, would be valueless because the place of cross-
      examination is taken by the solemnity and sanctity of
      oath for the simple reason that a person on the verge of
      death is not likely to make a false statement unless
      there is strong evidence to show that the statement was
      secured either by prompting or tutoring.
14- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
               (4) It may be important to note that
Section 32
does not
               speak of homicide alone but includes suicide also, hence
               all the circumstances which may be relevant to prove a
               case of homicide would be equally relevant to prove a
               case of suicide.
(5) Where the main evidence consists of statements and
               letters written by the deceased which are directly
               connected with or related to her death and which reveal
               a tell-tale story, the said statement would clearly fall
               within the four corners of
Section 32
and, therefore,
               admissible. The distance of time alone in such cases
               would not make the statement irrelevant.”


     11.4      Numerous judgments have held that provided a dying

        declaration inspires confidence of the court it can, even sans

        corroboration, form the sole basis of conviction.
In this

        regard, reference may be made to
Khushal Rao v. State of

        Bombay7
,
Suresh Chandra Jana v. State of West Bengal8
and
Jayamma v. State of Karnataka9
.
11.5      In order to rely on such a statement, it must fully

        satisfy the confidence of the court, since the person who

        made such a statement is no longer available for cross-

        examination or clarification or for any such like activity.

        11.5.1        In
Madan v. State of Maharashtra10
, while

               referring to an earlier decision in
Ram Bihari Yadav v.

               State of Bihar11
it was observed that a Court must rely



7   AIR 1958 SC 22 [3 Judge Bench]
8 (2017) 16 SCC 466 [2 Judge Bench]
9 (2021) 6 SCC 213 [3 Judge Bench]
10 (2019) 13 SCC 464 [2 Judge Bench]
11 (1998) 4 SCC 517 [2 Judge Bench]

                                15- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
                on dying declaration if it inspires confidence in the

                mind of the court.
11.5.2          On a similar note, this Court in
Panneerselvam

                v. State of T.N12
has observed: –


                  “Though a dying declaration is entitled to great
                  weight, it is worthwhile to note that the accused has
                  no power of cross-examination. Such a power is
                  essential for eliciting the truth as an obligation of oath
                  could be. This is the reason the court also insists that
                  the dying declaration should be of such nature as to
                  inspire full confidence of the court in its correctness.”


       11.5.3          However, a note of caution has also been

                 sounded. If such a declaration does not inspire

                 confidence in the mind of the court, i.e., there exist

                 doubts about the correctness and genuineness

                 thereof, it should not be acted upon, in the absence of

                 corroborative evidence.
11.5.3.1       In
Paniben v. State of Gujarat13
it was

                     observed-
“The Court has to be on guard that the statement of
                deceased was not as a result of either tutoring,
                prompting or a product of imagination.”

                A reference may also be made to
K. Ramachandra

                Reddy v. Public Prosecutor14
12 (2008) 17 SCC 190 [3 Judge Bench]
13 (1992)   2 SCC 474 [2 Judge Bench]
14 (1976) 3 SCC 618 [2 Judge Bench]

                                 16- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
    11.6     The Court must be satisfied that at the time of making

        such a statement, the deceased was in a “fit state of mind”.
In
Shama v. State of Haryana,15
a fit state of mind has

        been held to be a prerequisite, alongside the ability to

        recollect the situation and the state of affairs at that point

        in time in relation to the incident, to the satisfaction of the

        court.
11.6.1      In
Uttam v. State of Maharashtra16
, it was

               discussed that it is for the court to determine, from

               the evidence available on record, the state of mind

               being fit or not.
11.6.2     In order to make a determination of the state of

                 mind of the person making the dying declaration, the

                 court    ordinarily       relies      on    medical   evidence.17

                 However, equally, it has been held that if witnesses

                 present, while the statement is being made, state that

                 the deceased while making the statement was in a fit

                 state of mind, such statement would prevail over the

                 medical evidence.18 The statement of witnesses




15 (2017) 11 SCC 535 [2 Judge Bench]
16 (2022) 8 SCC 576 [2 Judge Bench]
17 (2008) 4 SCC 265 [2 Judge Bench]
18 (2002) 6 SCC 710 [5 Judge Bench]

                               17- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
                present prevailing over the opinion of the doctor has

                been reiterated in
Uttam
(supra).
11.6.3      It has also, however, been held in
Laxman
(supra)

                that the mere absence of a doctor’s certificate in

                regard to the “fit state of mind” of the dying declarant,

                will    not     ipso      facto      render   such   declaration

                unacceptable.
This position had been once again

                recognised in
Surendra Bangali @ Surendra Singh

                Routele v. State of Jharkhand19
.
11.7      In case of a plurality of such statements, it has been

        observed that it is not the plurality but the reliability of

        such declaration determines its evidentiary value. The

        principle as held in
Amol Singh v. State of M.P20
was:-
“13. … it is not the plurality of the dying declarations
                but the reliability thereof that adds weight to the
                prosecution case. If a dying declaration is found to be
                voluntary, reliable and made in fit mental condition,
                it can be relied upon without any corroboration [but]
                the statement should be consistent throughout. …
                However, if some inconsistencies are noticed between
                one dying declaration and the other, the court has to
                examine the nature of the inconsistencies, namely,
                whether they are material or not [and] while
                scrutinising the contents of various dying
                declarations, in such a situation, the court has to
                examine the same in the light of the various
                surrounding facts and circumstances.”




19 Criminal Appeal No. 1078 of 2010 [2 Judge Bench]
20 (2008) 5 SCC 468 [2 Judge Bench]

                                18- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
        11.7.1      Faced with multiple dying declarations, this Court

             in
Lakhan v. State of M.P21
observed-
“21. …. In such an eventuality no corroboration is
                required. In case there are multiple dying declarations
                and there are inconsistencies between them,
                generally, the dying declaration recorded by the
                higher officer like a Magistrate can be relied upon,
                provided that there is no circumstance giving rise to
                any suspicion about its truthfulness.
In case there are
                circumstances wherein the declaration had been
                made, not voluntarily and even otherwise, it is not
                supported by the other evidence, the court has to
                scrutinise the facts of an individual case very
                carefully and take a decision as to which of the
                declarations is worth reliance.”


        11.7.2 This Court, in
Jagbir Singh v. State (NCT of

             Delhi
)22, in this respect, concluded as under: –

                “32. We would think that on a conspectus of the law
                as
laid down by
this Court, when there are more than
                one dying declaration, and in the earlier dying
                declaration, the accused is not sought to be roped in
                but in the later dying declaration, a somersault is
                made by the deceased, the case must be decided on
                the facts of each case. The court will not be relieved
                of its duty to carefully examine the entirety of
                materials as also the circumstances surrounding the
                making of the different dying declarations. If the court
                finds that the incriminatory dying declaration brings
                out the truthful position particularly in conjunction
                with the capacity of the deceased to make such
                declaration, the voluntariness with which it was made
                which involves, no doubt, ruling out tutoring and
                prompting and also the other evidence which support
                the contents of the incriminatory dying declaration, it
                can be acted upon. Equally, the circumstances which
                render the earlier dying declaration, worthy or
                unworthy of acceptance, can be considered.”




21 (2010) 8 SCC 514[2 Judge Bench]
22 (2019) 8 SCC 779 [2 Judge Bench]

                               19- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
   11.8      The presence of a Magistrate in recording of a dying

       declaration, is not a necessity but only a rule of Prudence.
To this effect in
Jayamma
(supra), this Court observed :
“…law does not compulsorily require the presence of
               a judicial or executive Magistrate to record a dying
               declaration or that a dying declaration cannot be
               relied upon as the solitary piece of evidence unless
               recorded by judicial or executive Magistrate. It is only
               a rule of prudence, and if so permitted by the facts
               and circumstances, the dying declaration may
               preferably be recorded by a judicial or executive
               Magistrate so as to muster additional strength to the
               prosecution case.”

               Referring to the Constitution bench in
Laxman
(supra) the principle of a dying declaration not necessarily

         to be recorded by a Magistrate stands reiterated in
Rajaram v. State of Madhya Pradesh23
11.9      Dying Declaration is not to be discarded by reason of

       its brevity is what is held in
Surajdeo Ojha v. State of

       Bihar24
.
11.9.1 It was observed in the
State of Maharashtra v.

       Krishnamurti Laxmipati Naidu25
that if the dying

       declaration,       while        being      brief,    contains   essential

       information, the courts would not be justified in ignoring

       the same.
23 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1733 [2 Judge Bench]
24 1980 Supp SCC 769 [2 Judge Bench]
25 1980 Supp SCC 455 [2 Judge Bench]

                              20- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
           11.9.2 In fact, the Constitution bench in Laxman

          reiterated this principle, stating: –

                  “Marely because a dying declaration does not contain
                  the details of the occurrence, it cannot be rejected and
                  in case there is merely a brief statement, it is more
                  reliable for the reason that the shortness of the
                  statement is itself a guarantee of its veracity.”



      11.10 Examination of the person who reduced into writing, the

           dying declaration, is essential. Particularly, in the absence

           of any explanation forthcoming for the production of

           evidence is what stands observed in
Govind Narain v.

           State of Rajasthan26
.
11.10.1 In fact, in
Kans Raj v. State of Punjab27
it was
           held: –

                  “11. …To make such statement as substantive
                  evidence, the person or the agency relying upon it is
                  under a legal obligation to prove the making of such
                  statement as a fact. If it is in writing, the scribe must
                  be produced in the Court and if it is verbal, it should
                  be proved by examining the person who heard the
                  deceased making the statement.” and;
In
Sudhakar v. State of Maharashtra28
, this

                  Court categorically observed: -
“5. If it is in writing, the scribe must be produced in
                  the court and if it is verbal, it should be proved by
                  examining the person who heard the deceased

26 1993 Supp (3) SCC 343 [2 Judge Bench]
27 (2000) 5 SCC 207 [3 Judge Bench]
28   (2000) 6 SCC 671[3 Judge Bench]
                                21- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
                making the statement. However, in cases where the
                original recorded dying declaration is proved to have
                been lost and not available, the prosecution is entitled
                to give secondary evidence thereof.”

    11.11 The questions that a court must ask when dealing with

         a case concerning a dying declaration, as listed out by

         this Court in
Irfan@Naka v. State of U.P.29
along with

         the principles culled out hereinabove form the complete

         gamut of consideration required on part of a court when

         deciding the weightage to be awarded to a dying

         declaration.
12. Ocular evidence undoubtedly fares better than other kinds

of evidence and is considered evidence of a strong nature. The

principle is that if the eyewitness testimony is “wholly reliable”,

then the court can base conviction thereupon. This applies even

in cases where there is a sole eyewitness.30
13. The facts at hand, the trial court has disbelieved such

evidence. The discarding of eye-witness testimony is a fact-
specific inquiry, and therefore the correction of such an action by

the trial court shall be discussed later.




29 2023 SCC Online SC 1060 [3-Judge Bench]
30 (1993) 3 SCC 282 [2 Judge Bench]

                               22- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
14. The law on circumstantial evidence, is well settled. The locus

classicus on the issue is
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda
, (supra)

which stands consistently followed up until very recently in
Kamal v. State (NCT of Delhi
)31.
14.1 Illustratively, in
Gargi v. State of Haryana32
this court

            has, referring to various earlier judgments, summarised

            the principles relating to circumstantial evidence. The

            principle, is that the sum total of circumstances, when

            examined should point to the guilt of the accused, while

            ruling out all other possible hypotheses including his

            innocence and absence of second party guilt.
Further

            reference may be made to
Indrajit Das v. State of

            Tripura33
and
Prakash          Nishad   v.   State   of

            Maharashtra34
.
CONSIDERATION BY THIS COURT
15. The dying declaration, which forms the primary basis for

prosecution of the above-named accused, reads as follows-
“T.V. Byregowda S/o Venkatappa, 41 years, Vokkaliga,
             Agriculture, R/o Thotliganahalli, Shidlaghatta Taluk.

             I am residing at the above mentioned address and eking
             out livelihood from agriculture. This day i.e., on 6/8/97

31 2023 SCC OnLine SC 933 [2 Judge Bench]
32 (2019) 9 SCC 738 [2 Judge Bench]
33 2023 SCC OnLine SC 201 [2 Judge Bench]
34 2023 SCC OnLine   SC 666 [3 Judge Bench]
                               23- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
          at about 8 AM, myself and my brothers, Nrayanaswamy,
          Rajanna and Gopalreddy and our workers Marappa
          went to our land for work. When we were doing our work
          in our land, at about 9.30 AM, the sons of bacchanna of
          our village namely (1) Manjunath, (2) Ramegowda (3)
          Rayappa S/o Narayanappa sons of Bacchanna (4)
          Ramesh s/o Chikkavenkatarayappa (5) Manjunatha (6)
          Ramanjanappa (7) Dyavappa S/o Narayanappa (8)
          Dyavappa S/o Chikka Munishamappa and others
          formed unlawful assembly and holding deadly weapons
          in their hands, came to our land and abused myself and
          my brothers in filthy language and assaulted with
          weapons. On seeing the Accused persons, my workers
          and my brothers ran away to escape from the accused
          persons. I also tried to escape from the Accused, at that
          time Manjunath forcibly assaulted with iron rod at my
          head, I fell down and immediately Ramesh assaulted me
          with sickle at my legs, Ramegowda assaulted me with
          sickle at right leg. Rayappa and others assaulted me
          with clubs holding in their hands and all over my body.
          My both hands and legs got dislocated resulting in blood
          injuries. I also sustained blood injuries. Thereafter,
          Marappa S/o Anjanappa, B.K. Ramesh Gowda, S/o
          Krishnappa and Chandrappa S/o Venkate gowda,
          residents of our village released me from the hands of
          the Accused and admitted me to Government Hospital,
          Shidlaghatta for treatment. I request to take legal action
          against the accused persons who have assaulted me
          causing grievous injuries and provide protection to us.
Read over and found correct
                               LTM of T.V. Byregowda”

                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
16. It emanates from the testimony of the PW1(The Doctor) and

PW19 (The Police Officer) that the dying declaration of the

deceased was made in their presence. PW1 stated “When police

recorded the statement of the injured. I was present and also

endorsed that statement in Ex.P.1 statement now marked,

Ex.P.1 (a) is my endorsement and Ex.P.1 (b) is my signature” and

PW19 stated “I rushed to the hospital and enquired the injured
                          24- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
Byregowda in presence of the doctor and recorded the statement.

The statement is marked as Ex. P.1 and my signature is marked

Ex. P.1 (b). The Doctor has also signed on the said statement”
17.    It further emanates from the record, i.e., the testimony of

PW19 that although he signed on the dying declaration made by

the deceased, but the cross-examination reveals that he had not

himself written the same. It was stated: -
“The contents in Ex. P.1 are not in my handwriting. The
          said document does not contain the endorsement as
          who has written the said document.”


       Further, in his re-examination, he states that-

          “The contents in Ex. P1 are in the hand writing of
          Nataraj, staff of our station. The said statement was
          taken as stated by the deceased and as told by me. Since
          the deceased had sustained injury on his right hand
          also, he was not in a position to sign the same…”



      And PW1 stated in regards of the person who recorded the

dying declaration as under :-
“I cannot say by name designation of the police person
          who recorded the statement of the injured. Again our
          records also do not disclose as to the time of recording
          of alleged statement of the injured. It is true that, before
          recording of the alleged statement of injured, neither the
          police had requested me to writing nor I had permitted
          them in writing for recording the statement of the
          injured. It is true when alleged statement of injured was
          recorded there were many persons around him. It is not
          true to suggest that on that day the injured was not in
          a position to give any statement and police did not
                           25- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
          record his statement at that point of time as stated in
          Ex. P.1.”
18. Well then, who recorded the same?, What was his name?,

What was his designation if he was a police personnel? remains

unstated by her. Significantly, this witness also does not testify to

the correctness or otherwise of the contents thereof. It was

testified that at the time of recording of such statement “there were

many persons around”. Who these persons were, is another

aspect that remains unclear. Whether these persons were

examined is unknown. The dying declaration was signed by

thumb impression by the deceased but, it is not the case of the

prosecution that the deceased was illiterate. The Doctor also does

not state that the injured was in a condition to sign. Then why the

thumb impression, remains a mystery casting a serious doubt

about its authenticity or correctness of such declaration.
19. The reason for the non-examination of the scribe, however,

does not bear itself. Nowhere has it been stated, either by the trial

court or the High Court that scribe could not be examined for

which or what particular reason.
In
Sudhakar
(supra) this Court

has held that if the original dying declaration is lost and therefore

not available, the prosecution could adduce secondary evidence

in support thereof. The logical extension of such holding would be


                         26- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
that, if the scribe, for reasons beyond control, such as

incapacitation or death, would be unavailable, it would be open

for the prosecution to take necessary aid of secondary evidence.
That not being the case however, such unexplained non-

examination would, as a consequence of the holdings in
Govind

Narain
(supra),
Kans Raj
(supra) and
Sudhakar
(supra), render

the case to be doubtful if not, land a fatal blow to the prosecution

case.
20. It is trite in law that given the nature of a dying declaration,

it is required that such statement be free from tutoring,

prompting, or not be a product of imagination. But it has

emanated from the statement of the Doctor, PW1, that at the time

of the dying declaration being made, there were numerous people

present near him. In such a case, can it be categorically ruled out

that the statement made by the deceased, is free from tutoring or

prompting?
21. For finding an answer, we have independently evaluated the

testimonies, relevant to adjudication of the present appeal,

forming part of record.
27- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
21.1 Prosecution has endeavoured to establish the guilt of the

     accused by way of ocular evidence through the

     testimonies of numerous independent witnesses.

21.2 PW-2 has not supported the prosecution and despite

     being declared hostile and cross examined extensively,

     nothing fruitful, benefitting the prosecution case could

     be elicited from his testimony. All that he states is that

     “a group of 50 to 60 persons from the direction of the

     village approached towards the land. Seeing the same, I

     went towards the village.” The ladies of the house of the

     deceased came and informed that the deceased had to be

     treated in the hospital for he has sustained injuries. He

     has denied having affixed his thumb impression on the

     documents prepared by the police and significantly the

     same has not been proved through any scientific

     evidence.
21.3 On this issue we also take note of the testimony of PW-9

     (mother of the deceased) who only states that in the

     hospital, the deceased informed her that the “accused

     persons before the Court” had beaten and wounded him

     but then this does not in any manner help the

     prosecution for the same is in the nature of not only
                     28- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
   hearsay but also not to have been taken note by the

   police during the course of the investigation and as such

   appears to be a mere improvement and exaggeration. To

   similar effect, is the testimony of PW-10 (wife of the

   deceased). Testimony of PW-11 and PW-12 is of no

   consequence for they are not witnesses to the occurrence

   of the incident.
21.4 PW3 stated that a group of 25 to 30 people were

   proceeding towards the deceased and others, i.e., PW5,

   PW6, PW7, and PW2, who were working in lands near the

   village. It is he who had taken the deceased to the

   hospital. However, in the cross-examination part of his

   questioning, it comes forth that his recollection of events

   on the fateful day was vague. He had been examined

   thrice.   It also is revealed that numerous aspects, this

   witness had not deposed before the investigating

   authorities. He does state the presence of eucalyptus

   trees at the place where the deceased was laid. It however

   does not appear in his testimony as to who laid the

   accused at that particular spot.
21.5   According to PW4, the brother of the deceased, prior

   to the date of the incident, on 4th August, 1997 another
                      29- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
   quarrel had taken place, in regards to the use of a

   pathway, between PW4 and one Shankarappa. On the

   fateful day, he has testified that a group of 25 to 30

   persons holding weapons such as iron chains, sticks,

   and sickles came to the lands where he along with

   others, were working. He stated that when they returned,

   after 10 or 15 minutes, having run away out of fear, upon

   approach by this armed group of persons, others

   including PW6 were present near the deceased person.

   He has also testified to the fact of enmity between the

   accused persons and the family of the deceased. He has

   stated it to be false that after assaulting his brother,

   certain persons had dumped him in the land of PW11.

21.6 PW15, in his testimony has stated that upon returning

   from the eucalyptus plantation he found the accused in

   an injured state lying towards the southern side of the

   Plantation Garden. PWs 4 and 5 were present there. With

   the deceased having been taken to the hospital, this

   witness returned to the village. He testified that,

   approximately   a    week        after        the   incident   several

   recoveries were made and he, being present there signed

   on various mahazars. In respect of the enmity between
                   30- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
   the accused and the deceased, he submitted that the

   same had ended in a compromise.
21.7 Having noted that no other witness has deposed the

   manner in which they saw the deceased laid on the

   eucalyptus leaves, similar to the manner as deposed by

   PW15, the trial court concluded that not much was to be

   gained from the ocular evidence on record.

21.8 We find that none of these witnesses, eye-witnesses as

   they may be, to have established beyond reasonable

   doubt, the guilt of the accused persons. There is a

   contradiction in testimonies in regard to the number of

   persons who formed part of the unlawful assembly- one

   witness testified the presence of 50-60 persons while

   others testified to the group being of 25-30 persons; there

   is no clarity as to how the deceased ended up in the lands

   of PW11 - a material contradiction between two supposed

   eye-witnesses, PW3 and PW15. PW3 in his Examination

   in Chief stated that he had signed the mahazar, but, in

   his cross-examination, it was stated that he was not able

   to read/write. No reasons stand supplied for his presence

   at the scene of the incident- neither is he a resident of

   the village, nor does he have lands in said village.
31- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
Further, the reasons for him being examined thrice, are

left to imagination. Similarities, differences in such

statements, if any, have not been brought forth. After all,

it is also well-settled that a testimony cannot be given

value, in isolation. It does not apply to logic that a person

who is not a resident of the village would visit the spot

only to see as to what is happening, whereas the other

close relative(s) have attempted to flee from the scene. We

notice that the police had thrice made enquiries from him

and recorded his statements. Why is it so? Is left to the

imagination. His version that the accused had said “this

fellow has come to end now and come let us go” is not

recorded in his previous statement in which he was

confronted. It has to be read as a whole. It is evident from

a bare perusal of the testimony of PW15 that the

deceased was seen by him in an already injured state,

meaning thereby that he has not actually witnessed the

accused persons assaulting the deceased. Therefore, his

status as an ocular witness is rendered questionable.

PW2 has deposed that he had seen a large group of

people approaching from the direction of the village

towards the lands where they were and seeing the same,
                 32- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
   he had proceeded towards the village, i.e., in the opposite

   direction. PW-4 is the brother of the deceased, but his

   conduct at best can be described as unusual, or it other

   words, one that defies logic. Despite being a relative, his

   act, is that of a stranger, i.e., running away from the

   dispute; leaving the deceased defenceless; he did not

   accompany the deceased who was in an injured state to

   the hospital. After all, immediately preceding the instant

   occurrence was the altercation involving him, and

   therefore, if the assailants had any motive- the same

   would be against him, and none else. Having noticed

   such conduct, we do not find his testimony worthy of

   credence.
21.9 We cannot, in our considered view, say that this

   witness, has deposed the truth. Not only that, when we

   perused the cross-examination part of the testimony, we

   found his version to be uninspiring in confidence. He

   does not remember as to whether the police have carried

   out an investigation on the spot where his brother was

   lying. He does not remember the police having visited the

   village. Does such an unexplained denial render the

   witness unreliable and unworthy of credit? It appears
                   33- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
   that the witness was not present on the spot and was

   introduced by the prosecution with suggestions, in fact,

   as put to him by the accused.
21.10 We notice that the testimony of PW-5 is on similar

   lines as that of PW-4. He added that the accused persons

   came armed and started shouting “catch hold them, and

   we shall kill them”. He also states that seeing the

   accused all the members of the victim party fled away

   from the spot, while the deceased was fleeing, and the

   assailants attacked him with rod, stick and sickle.

   Significantly, in his cross-examination, he admits several

   improvements made by him; he does not remember

   having informed the police of the accused moving

   towards the village holding the weapons they had

   brought. In fact, not only is his version self-contradictory

   but also in contradiction to that of other witnesses. He

   states that persons other than the assailants were also

   present and were part of their group. The whereabouts

   of such persons are undisclosed and, significantly, this

   witness does not state as to which one of the accused

   was carrying which weapon and which one of them had

   actually assaulted or inflicted injuries on the body of the
                    34- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
           deceased. He admits to having run to a distance of about

           a furlong and hidden under/behind the trees for about

           10 minutes and returned to the spot only after the

           accused had left the spot and since long.

     21.11 PW-19 admits that “on 06.08.1997, the AW2 to 10, 12

           to 17 did not inform me as to who assaulted the

           deceased, where and how. All the said persons were not

           available for giving statement”.
21.12 Having noted the above aspects of the testimonies of

           the prosecution witnesses we find them to be unreliable,

           unworthy of credence. The testimonies differ on essential

           material facts, such as the number of persons, how the

           accused came to lay where he did, when discovered etc.
22. For an eye-witness to be believed, his evidence, it has been

held, should be of sterling quality. It should be capable of being

taken at face value. The principle has been discussed in Rai

Sandeep @ Deepu alias
Deepu v. State (NCT of Delhi
)35 as

follows-
“22. In our considered opinion, the “sterling witness”
             should be of very high quality and caliber whose version
             should, therefore, be unassailable. The court
             considering the version of such witness should be in a
             position to accept it for its face value without any
             hesitation. To test the quality of such a witness, the
             status of the witness would be immaterial and what

35 (2012) 8 SCC 21 [2 Judge Bench]

                                35- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
             would be relevant is the truthfulness of the statement
             made by such a witness. What would be more relevant
             would be the consistency of the statement right from the
             starting point till the end, namely, at the time when the
             witness makes the initial statement and ultimately
             before the court. It should be natural and consistent
             with the case of the prosecution qua the accused. There
             should not be any prevarication in the version of such a
             witness. The witness should be in a position to
             withstand the cross-examination of any length and
             howsoever strenuous it may be and under no
             circumstance should give room for any doubt as to the
             factum of the occurrence, the persons involved, as well
             as the sequence of it. Such a version should have co-
             relation with each and every one of other supporting
             material such as the recoveries made, the weapons
             used, the manner of offence committed, the scientific
             evidence and the expert opinion.
The said version
             should consistently match with the version of every
             other witness. It can even be stated that it should be
             akin to the test applied in the case of circumstantial
             evidence where there should not be any missing link in
             the chain of circumstances to hold the accused guilty of
             the offence alleged against him. Only if the version of
             such a witness qualifies the above test as well as all
             other such similar tests to be applied, can it be held that
             such a witness can be called as a “sterling witness”
             whose version can be accepted by the court without any
             corroboration and based on which the guilty can be
             punished. To be more precise, the version of the said
             witness on the core spectrum of the crime should
             remain intact while all other attendant materials,
             namely, oral, documentary and material objects should
             match the said version in material particulars in order
             to enable the court trying the offence to rely on the core
             version to sieve the other supporting materials for
             holding the offender guilty of the charge alleged.”
                                                  (emphasis supplied)

This was quoted with profit by this Court in
Ganesan v State36
.
Recently, this principle was further reiterated in
Naresh @ Nehru

v State of Haryana37
.
36 (2020) 10 SCC 573 [3 Judge Bench]
37 Criminal Appeal No.1786 Of 2023 [2 Judge Bench]

                               36- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
23. As the above discussion would show vis-à-vis the delineation

on the qualities of a sterling witness, none of the witnesses of the

prosecution    would    qualify     per      this      standard.    Numerous

contradictions and inconsistencies have borne from record,

rendering such witnesses to be unreliable and undependable so

as to place reliance on the same to hold the accused persons guilty

of having committed an offence.
24. On circumstantial evidence, the trial court has examined the

testimonies of PWs 1-5, 10, 13 and 15. We have, above, discussed

PWs 1, 2, 3, and 4 along with 15. We now proceed to discuss PWs

10, and 13, independently. PW5, although classified as a

circumstantial witness, a reading of the same suggests the

witness to be an eyewitness.
24.1     PW10 stated that upon seeing the group of persons,

              I ran in different directions with him running

              towards Thadhooru. While there, he heard of his

              brother   (deceased)        having        sustained    various

              injuries. Pursuant to such information he went to

              the hospital where he stated that the deceased

              himself stated that “Manjunath and his henchmen

              of our village assaulted him” he stated, he never

              went to the place where the deceased was lying nor
                         37- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
       could he say who informed him of his brother’s

       injuries. Hence, his statement is the nature of

       hearsay.
24.2   The circumstances, which are mentioned within the

       testimonies relied on by the trial court, we find, that

       they do not, conclusively point to the guilt of all the

       accused.   The      following        conclusions   from   the

       circumstantial evidence on record, support our

       conclusion- apart from PW15 none of the witnesses

       relied on, name all accused persons; a group of 25

       to 30 people is generally referred to- a general

       description does not indicate guilt. Secondly, the

       factum of enmity although repeatedly testified to by

       numerous witnesses, upon itself cannot thrust upon

       the accused, the guilt for having killed the deceased

       person. This view is supported by the fact that the

       criminal case lodged as a result of the altercation

       between a brother of the deceased and certain

       accused persons resulted in their acquittal, as has

       been noted by the trial court.
38- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
24.3      It is true that certain witnesses such as PW4

          categorically mentioned certain accused persons

          holding particular weapons. As a solitary aspect, it

          can be seen as indicating a particular act done by

          the accused, aiding the death of the deceased

          person. However, the medical evidence of PW1

          negates that possibility as well. The relevant extract

          of the testimony is reproduced: –

       “ I see the clubs at M.O. 3. they are of about 4 feet length
       and 3 inches in diameter. If a person is assaulted
       repeatedly by such clubs, he would sustain several
       abrasions, contusions and lacerations.

       When I examined the deceased Byregowda clinically, I
       did not found any abrasions lacerations of contusions
       on his back or chest and so also on the abdomen. I did
       not find any incised injury on the body of the deceased.”



24.4 While it may be true that the deceased had died due

       to injuries sustained, as the above-extracted

       testimony of PW1 shows, the said injuries could not

       have been caused as a result of the weapons that

       the accused persons were allegedly yielding, and

       the ones that were supposedly recovered at their

       instance.
24.5 It    is   on    both      these       counts,      we     find   the

       circumstantial        evidence          on     record,    not    to
                        39- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
          conclusively point towards guilt of the accused

          persons. We further find the eyewitness testimony

          to also be rendered questionable, since the

          weapons, which the accused were holding, and

          were subsequently recovered at their instance, do

          not correspond to the injuries found on the body of

          the deceased, as borne out from the cross-

          examination of PW1, reproduced supra.
25. The next aspect is the recovery of the alleged weapons, we

have noted the particulars thereof while discussing the findings

of the Trial Court. Such recoveries were discarded by the trial

court stating that the clubs were recovered from a place

accessible to the public and, the chopper and the rods were

recovered from a house where other persons were also residing

which compromises the sanctity of such recovery and takes away

from the veracity thereof.
26. Further    discovery     made,       to    be     one   satisfying   the

requirements of
Section 27
, Indian Evidence Act it must be a fact

that is discovered as a consequence of information received from

a person in custody. The conditions have been discussed by the




                        40- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
Privy Council in
Pulukuri Kotayya v. King Emperor38
and the

position was reiterated by this Court in
Mohd. Inayatullah v.

State of Maharashtra39
, in the following terms:-
“12…It will be seen that the first condition necessary for
             bringing this section into operation is the discovery of a
             fact, albeit a relevant fact, in consequence of the
             information received from a person accused of an
             offence. The second is that the discovery of such fact
             must be deposed to. The third is that at the time of the
             receipt of the information the accused must be in police
             custody. The last but the most important condition is
             that only “so much of the information” as relates
             distinctly to the fact thereby discovered is admissible.
             The rest of the information has to be excluded. The word
             “distinctly” means “directly”, “indubitably”, “strictly”,
             “unmistakably”. The word has been advisedly used to
             limit and define the scope of the provable information.
             The phrase “distinctly relates to the fact thereby
             discovered” is the linchpin of the provision. This phrase
             refers to that part of the information supplied by the
             accused which is the direct and immediate cause of the
             discovery…”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
27. Prima facie, in the present facts, the 3 conditions above

appear to be met. However, the Trial Court held, given that the

discoveries made were either from a public place or from an area

where other persons also resided, reliance thereupon, could not

be made. We find this approach of the trial court to be correct.




38 1946 SCC OnLine PC 47
39 (1976) 1 SCC 828

                             41- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
      27.1 This court has, in various judgments, clarified this

      position. Illustratively, in
Jaikam Khan v. State of U.P40
it was observed: –


             “One of the alleged recoveries is from the room where
             deceased Asgari used to sleep. The other two recoveries
             are from open field, just behind the house of deceased
             Shaukeen Khan i.e. the place of incident.
It could thus
             be seen that the recoveries were made from the places,
             which were accessible to one and all and as such, no
             reliance could be placed on such recoveries.”

                                                          (Emphasis supplied)


      27.2 Also, in
Nikhil Chandra Mondal v. State of W.B.41
the

      Court held:-
“20. The trial court disbelieved the recovery of clothes
             and weapon on two grounds. Firstly, that there was no
             memorandum statement of the accused as required
             under
Section 27
of the Evidence Act, 1872 and
             secondly, the recovery of the knife was from an open
             place accessible to one and all. We find that the
             approach adopted by the trial court was in accordance
             with law. However, this circumstance which, in our
             view, could not have been used, has been employed by
             the High Court to seek corroboration to the extra-
             judicial confession.”

                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
28. As reflected from record, and in particular the testimony of

PW-15 it is clear that the discoveries (stick as shown by A10, for

instance) was a eucalyptus stick, found from the eucalyptus




40 (2021) 13 SCC 716
41 (2023) 6 SCC 605

                            42- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
plantation, which indisputably, is a public place and was found

a week later. A second and third stick purportedly found half

kilometre away on that day itself, was found by a bush, once

again, a place of public access. Two further sticks recovered at

the instance A6 and A7, were also from public places. An iron

chain produced from the house of A1 and A2, is not free from the

possibility that any of the other occupants of their house were

not responsible for it. We, further cannot lose sight of the fact

that sticks, whether bamboo or otherwise, are commonplace

objects in village life, and therefore, such objects, being hardly

out of the ordinary, and that too discovered in places of public

access, cannot be used to place the gauntlet of guilt on the

accused persons.
CONCLUSIONS
29. Our conclusions, therefore, are thus:
29.1 The dying declaration, although undoubtedly a

          substantive piece of evidence upon which reliance can

          be placed, in the present facts is rendered nugatory as

          the person who took down such declaration was not

          examined, nor did the police officer (PW19) endorse

          the said document with details of who took down the

                        43- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
          declaration. It is also not clear as to in front of which

          of the relatives of deceased was the same taken down.

     29.2 The circumstantial evidence present on record does

          not point to the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused

          persons, for the reasons discussed above.

     29.3 None of the eyewitnesses-PWs 2, 3, 15, as referred to

          by the trial court have succeeded in attributing a

          particular role to any of the accused persons and

          equally so, to A-1 to A-5 and A-7, whose acquittals

          have been overturned by the High Court.
30. In our considered view, the view taken by the Trial Court was

a possible view and there being no error in correct and complete

appreciation of evidence as also application of law; the High Court,

without assigning any cogent reasons ought not to have interfered

with such findings.
31. For the aforesaid reasons, the judgment impugned before us

in Criminal Appeal Number 1795 of 2004 dated 21 September

2010, is set aside. The appeal is, accordingly, allowed.
32. Having allowed the appeals as above, we are constrained to

observe that the Criminal Appeal
u/s 378
Code of Criminal

Procedure, 1973 the High Court has not appreciated the severity

                        44- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
of the allegations involved to the full extent. That a Court of Appeal

should be circumspect in overturning its judgment of acquittal, is

not a principle that requires reiteration. It has been held time and

again that an acquittal will only be overturned in the presence of

very compelling reasons.42 Further, right from the Privy Council43

onwards, it is been held that the presumption of innocence in

favour of the accused is bolstered if the trial court hands down an

acquittal.44 We find the High Court not to have observed the said

principles in deciding the appeals. Quite opposite thereto,

perfunctory reasons stand recorded to restore the convictions of

the Appellants herein. The observations of the trial court along

with the principle of a bolstered principle of innocence, were

summarily cast aside. The same cannot be said to be in

accordance with the law.
33. As a result, the acquittals handed down by judgment and

order dated 25th September 2004 in S.C. No. 162 of 1999, passed

by the Additional Sessions Judge- Presiding Officer, Fast Track

Court-II, Kolar, are restored. The judgment of conviction and

sentence, as awarded by the High Court, stands set aside.




42 Tulsiram Kanu v State
AIR 1954 SC 1
43 Sheo Swarup v King Emperor
AIR 1934 PC 227(2)
44 Ghurey Lal v State of U.P. (2008) 10 SCC 450

                                45- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]
34. Since the sentence awarded by the High Court under Section

304 Part II of the
IPC
was for 4 years, and the application of

exemption from surrender was disallowed by this Court, vide

order dated 13th December 2010, the Appellants appear to have

already served the sentence awarded to them.
35. It is however directed, that the fine made payable by each of

the accused, as a result of the impugned judgment be refunded to

them. Consequently, bail bonds, if in effectuation, shall stand

discharged. The appeal is accordingly, allowed.
36. In view of the above, interlocutory applications, if any, shall

stand disposed of.
……..……………..J.
                                                       (ABHAY S. OKA)



                                                      …………………….J.
                                                      (SANJAY KAROL)


 Date: 6th November, 2023;
Place: New Delhi.
46- [Cr. A No. 866 of 2011]