[Cites
48
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Vishnu Kumar Shukla vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 November, 2023
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
1


 2023 INSC 1026                                                           REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL No.3618 OF 2023
                         [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO.8658 OF 2017]


                VISHNU KUMAR SHUKLA & ANR.                             … APPELLANTS
                          A1: VISHNU KUMAR SHUKLA
                          A2: VINEETA SHUKLA

                                                    VERSUS


                THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ANR.                      … RESPONDENTS

                                                  R1: THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH
                                                              R2: RAM KUMAR GARG



                                             J U D G M E N T
AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.
Leave granted.
2.
Signature Not Verified
This    appeal   is    directed    against    the   Final
Digitally signed by
GEETA AHUJA
Judgment           and   Order    dated   02.08.2017     (hereinafter
Date: 2023.11.28
17:09:41 IST
Reason:
referred to as the “Impugned Judgment”) passed by
2
the Lucknow Bench of the High Court of Judicature at

Allahabad          (hereinafter    referred        to    as    the    “High

Court”) in Case U/S 482/378/407
Cr.P.C
. No.4929 of

2017, by which the Order dated 02.06.2017 passed by

the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Lucknow rejecting the

prayer       for    discharge     of       the   appellants,        who   are

husband and wife, respectively, has been upheld.
THE FACTUAL PRISM:
3.      In    brief,      the     allegations           are    that       the

Complainant/Respondent No.2 (hereinafter referred to

as “R2”) was a tenant of a shop situated in the

house of one Hari Narayan Shukla. On 29.06.2011, the

appellants, along with others, locked the door of

R2’s shop from inside, broke the wall and looted

wheat (APL), sale money, about INR 21,000 worth of

kerosene oil, goods in stock, all the registers of

the     shop,       documents     and       a    two-wheeler        bearing

Registration          Number    UP32BX2356         which      led    to    R2

filing of the Hazratganj P.S. Case No.341 of 2011

dated    01.07.2011       (hereinafter           referred     to     as   the
3
“FIR”) under
Sections 448
,
454
and
380
of the Indian

Penal    Code,       1860       (hereinafter          referred         to   as   the

“
IPC
”).
SUBMISSIONS BY THE APPELLANTS:
4.      The     learned           counsel           for         the    appellants

submitted       that        FIR    itself           would       show    that     the

allegation(s)          is/are        frivolous                 in     nature     and

levelled       with         a     view        only        to     frustrate       the

appellants           from       enjoying            their           property,     as

admittedly, Appellant No.2 (hereinafter referred to

as “A2”) is the owner of the shop referred to supra,

being the bona fide purchaser through a registered

Sale Deed.
5.      Learned      counsel       for        the    appellants         submitted

that    R2,     who    claimed           to    be     the        tenant     of   the

property       in     question,          had         on     31.05.2011         filed

Regular       Suit    No.104/2011             for    permanent         injunction

before    the        Civil      Judge        (Senior           Division)    South,

Lucknow which was based on a so-called ‘Memorandum

of Agreement of Tenancy’ dated 24.11.2005, in which
4
the        present            symbol            of      the        Indian          National             Rupee

       i.e., ₹, has been shown but the said symbol came

       into being only in the year 20101 and thus, could not

       have been reflected in a ‘Memorandum’ of the year

       2005,          which           clearly             exposes             the      falsity             of       the

       claim. Moreover, it was submitted that this would

       also         amount             to       perjury              by      filing          of       a      forged

       document              before            a      Court          of       Law,        for       which           the

       appellant(s) had filed an application under
Section

       3402
of        the         Code          of       Criminal              Procedure,                 1973
1
To be precise, the symbol was officially approved on 26.08.2010 vide F.No.03/17/10-Cy., Government of India, Ministry
of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Cy. Section).
2
340. Procedure in cases mentioned in
Section 195
.—(1) When, upon an application made to it in this behalf or otherwise,
any Court is of opinion that it is expedient in the interests of justice that an inquiry should be made into any offence referred
to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
Section 195
, which appears to have been committed in or in relation to a proceeding in
that Court or, as the case may be, in respect of a document produced or given in evidence in a proceeding in that Court,
such Court may, after such preliminary inquiry, if any, as it thinks necessary,—
(a) record a finding to that effect;
(b) make a complaint thereof in writing;
(c) send it to a Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction;
(d) take sufficient security for the appearance of the accused before such Magistrate, or if the alleged offence
              is non-bailable and the Court thinks it necessary so to do, send the accused in custody to such Magistrate; and
(e) bind over any person to appear and give evidence before such Magistrate.
         (2) The power conferred on a Court by sub-section (1) in respect of an offence may, in any case where that Court
has neither made a complaint under sub-section (1) in respect of that offence nor rejected an application for the making of
such complaint, be exercised by the Court to which such former Court is subordinate within the meaning of sub-section (4)
of
Section 195
.
(3) A complaint made under this section shall be signed,—
(a) where the Court making the complaint is a High Court, by such officer of the Court as the Court may ap -
              point;
(b) in any other case, by the presiding officer of the Court or by such officer of the Court as the Court may au -
              thorise in writing in this behalf.
(4) In this section, “Court” has the same meaning as in
Section 195
.
5
(hereinafter referred to as the “
CrPC
”) before the

       concerned Court.
6.        It was further submitted that the FIR lodged by

       R2      on      01.07.2011               was       for       alleged            offences             under
Sections 4483
,
4544
and
3805
of the IPC. However, it

       was       contended             that        though           no      case        was       made        out,

       still         the       police           in      collusion              with        R2      submitted

       Charge Sheet No.189 of 2011 dated 07.08.2011 under
Section 448
, IPC against the appellants upon which

       the appellants were summoned and were put on trial.
It was submitted that R2 also filed an application

       under
Section 1446
, CrPC before the Additional City
3
448. Punishment for house-trespass.—Whoever commits house-trespass shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
4
454. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking in order to commit offence punishable with imprisonment .—Whoever
commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, in order to the committing of any offence punishable with imprisonment,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be
liable to fine; and if the offence intended to be committed is theft, the term of the imprisonment may be extended to ten
years.
5
380. Theft in dwelling house, etc.—Whoever commits theft in any building, tent or vessel, which building, tent or vessel is
used as a human dwelling, or used for the custody of property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
6
144. Power to issue order in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger.—(1) In cases where, in the opinion of a
District Magistrate, a Sub-Divisional Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate specially empowered by the State Gov -
ernment in this behalf, there is sufficient ground for proceeding under this section and immediate prevention or speedy rem-
edy is desirable, such Magistrate may, by a written order stating the material facts of the case and served in the manner
provided by
Section 134
, direct any person to abstain from a certain act or to take certain order with respect to certain
property in his possession or under his management, if such Magistrate considers that such direction is likely to prevent, or
tends to prevent, obstruction, annoyance or injury to any person lawfully employed, or danger to human life, health or
safety, or a disturbance of the public tranquillity, or a riot, or an affray.
(2) An order under this section may, in cases of emergency or in cases where the circumstances do not admit of the
serving in due time of a notice upon the person against whom the order is directed, be passed ex parte.
6
Magistrate                (First),              Lucknow,              registered                as       Suit

       No.01 of 2012 against the appellants which, by Order

       dated 09.08.2012, was rejected as not maintainable.
It      was       further            submitted              that        A2      moved          the       High

       Court in Rent Control Case No.125 of 2012 and vide

       order dated 14.12.2012, the High Court directed the

       said         Rent        Control             Case          proceeding              to       remain           in

       abeyance.
7.         Learned counsel submitted that the Trial Court,

       upon the Charge Sheet submitted by the police in the

       FIR, took cognizance on 07.08.2011, against which

       the appellants moved the High Court under
Section

       4827
, CrPC, in Case No. U/S 482/378/407 No. - 2413 of
         (3) An order under this section may be directed to a particular individual, or to persons residing in a particular
place or area, or to the public generally when frequenting or visiting a particular place or area.
(4) No order under this section shall remain in force for more than two months from the making thereof:
Provided that, if the State Government considers it necessary so to do for preventing danger to human life, health
or safety or for preventing a riot or any affray, it may, by notification, direct that an order made by a Magistrate under this
section shall remain in force for such further period not exceeding six months from the date on which the order made by the
Magistrate would have, but for such order, expired, as it may specify in the said notification.
(5) Any Magistrate may, either on his own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved, rescind or alter
any order made under this section, by himself or any Magistrate subordinate to him or by his predecessor-in-office.
(6) The State Government may, either on its own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved, rescind or
alter any order made by it under the proviso to sub-section (4).
(7) Where an application under sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) is received, the Magistrate, or the State Govern-
ment, as the case may be, shall afford to the applicant an early opportunity of appearing before him or it, either in person
or by pleader and showing cause against the order; and if the Magistrate or the State Government, as the case may be, re -
jects the application wholly or in part, he or it shall record in writing the reasons for so doing.
7
482. Saving of inherent powers of High Court.—Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or affect the inherent
powers of the High Court to make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to any order under this Code, or to prevent
7
2012          which           was        disposed              of        vide          order          dated

       10.04.2014 with the direction that the appellants

       may file application for discharge before the Court

       concerned.
8.         It was submitted that on 18.12.2014, the Civil

       Judge            (Junior               Division),                  South,              Lucknow               in

       Miscellaneous                    Suit         No.540031                C/2012,             which           was

       instituted                 on         the         application                   filed           by         the

       appellants               under
Section             340
,         CrPC,          prima          facie

       found that offence under
Section 4638
, IPC had been

       committed                by        R2         and          directed              initiation                  of

       proceedings against him.
9.       Furthermore, it was pointed out that in terms of

       the         High         Court’s              Order           dated           10.04.2014,                  the

       appellants                on        16.01.2016                filed           application                  for

       discharge               before           the        Chief           Judicial              Magistrate,

       Lucknow, in Case Crime No.368 of 2011, wherein one

       of the grounds taken was the order dated 18.12.2014

abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.
8
463. Forgery.—Whoever makes any false documents or false electronic record or part of a document or electronic record,
with intent to cause damage or injury, to the public or to any person, or to support any claim or title, or to cause any person
to part with property, or to enter into any express or implied contract, or with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be
committed, commits forgery.
8
passed by the Civil Judge (Junior Division), South,

Lucknow.
10.    Learned      counsel        submitted     that        Order     dated

18.12.2014 was a clear-cut finding by a Court of Law

that   the    entire       suit    was   premised       on    forged     and

fabricated document(s). He submitted that once the

same has been established, the contention of R2 to

be in possession of the property in question does

not arise and clearly the FIR itself was a misuse

and abuse of the process of law. Learned counsel

submitted      that        despite       there    being        sufficient

material     for    discharge,       the    Trial   Court       by     order

dated 02.06.2017 rejected the application on vague

grounds and thus, the appellants had to move the

High   Court       under
Section      482
,    CrPC    in     Case     U/S

482/378/407
Cr.P.C
.        No.4929   of    2017,        which     was

dismissed by the Impugned Judgment.
11.    Learned counsel pointed out that innocence of

the appellants would be further established by the

fact   that      despite      the     initial     FIR        having     been
9
registered under
Sections 448
,
454
and
380
, IPC, the

police did not find any case under
Sections 454
and
380
, IPC, to which R2 neither objected nor filed any

protest. Thus, it was contended that the acceptance

of the fact that there was no lurking house-trespass

or     housebreaking        in     order        to     commit          offence

punishable with imprisonment (
Section 454
, IPC) and

no theft in dwelling house, etc. (
Section 380
, IPC)

also    make    it    amply      clear     that      R2    was    never    in

possession      of    the     property      in       question      and    his

entire case falls flat.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENT-STATE:
12.    Per     contra,      learned       counsel         for    the    State

opposed      the     prayer      by       the     appellants           seeking

discharge,      and      supported        the     Impugned        Judgment.
Learned counsel sought dismissal of the appeal.
NON-APPEARANCE OF THE RESPONDENT NO.2:
13.     Despite service, nobody appeared on behalf of

R2.
10
ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:
14.     Having examined the matter in detail, a case

for interference has been made out. The fact is that

the Indian National Rupee symbol i.e., ₹ was not in

existence during the time the purported ‘Memorandum’

was    signed.    Furthermore,         R2    has    based    his    entire

claim of tenancy on a document which has been, prima

facie, found to be forged and fabricated, for which

the    Court     concerned      has     directed          lodging    of    a

criminal case. There is no other claim by R2 to show

that he was in possession. When coupled with the

fact    that     the   police    did        not    find    any    offences

having been made out against the appellants under
Sections    454
and
380
,    IPC,        the    case    against       the

appellants under
Section 448
, IPC finds itself on

shaky ground. R2 never objected to the above nor

took any further steps. R2, as noted above, has not

entered appearance before this Court. Thus, the case

against    the     appellants         finds       itself     on     shakier

ground. We are of the firm view that A2 being the
11
undisputed landlord, the criminal case filed by R2,

       in     the       facts         and       circumstances                 supra,          amounts           to

       clear abuse of the process of the Court. Moreover,

       we find that the Impugned Judgment and the judgment

       dated 02.06.2017 of the Chief Judicial Magistrate,

       Lucknow are unreasoned as to why discharge is to be

       denied. Thus far on facts and merits. Now, on the

       law.
15.        Although the instant case pertains to Trial of

       Warrant-Cases                   by        Magistrates                  and         is        a       case

       instituted on a police report, meaning
Sections 239-
2409
, CrPC are relevant, we also propose to glance at
Section           24510
,        CrPC        (concerning                trial         of      warrant-
cases          by        Magistrates                 apropos             cases          instituted
9
239. When accused shall be discharged.—If, upon considering the police report and the documents sent with it under
Section 173
and making such examination, if any, of the accused as the Magistrate thinks necessary and after giving the
prosecution and the accused an opportunity of being heard, the Magistrate considers the charge against the accused to be
groundless, he shall discharge the accused, and record his reasons for so doing.
240. Framing of charge.—(1) If, upon such consideration, examination, if any, and hearing, the Magistrate is of
opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence triable under this Chapter, which
such Magistrate is competent to try and which, in his opinion, could be adequately punished by him, he shall frame in writ-
ing a charge against the accused.
(2) The charge shall then be read and explained to the accused, and he shall be asked whether he pleads guilty of
the offence charged or claims to be tried.
10
245. When accused shall be discharged.—(1) If, upon taking all the evidence referred to in
Section 244
, the Magistrate
considers, for reasons to be recorded, that no case against the accused has been made out which, if unrebutted, would war-
rant his conviction, the Magistrate shall discharge him.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a Magistrate from discharging the accused at any previous
stage of the case if, for reasons to be recorded by such Magistrate, he considers the charge to be groundless.
12
otherwise than on police report), as also
Sections

       227-22811
,             CrPC,         which          pertain            to      Trial          before          a

       Court of Session.
16.       The       extent            of      scrutiny              permissible                 when        an

       application for discharge is being considered has

       attracted             this         Court’s            attention              on       a     number          of

       occasions. It is appropriate to take note of the

       leading            precedents                 on       the         subject.
Insofar           as
Section 245
, CrPC is concerned, the decision of this

       Court         in
Ajoy        Kumar         Ghose          v     State         of       Jharkhand
,

       (2009) 14 SCC 115 is instructive:
‘19. The essential difference of procedure
                in the trial of warrant case on the basis
                of a police report and that instituted
                otherwise than on the police report is
                particularly marked in
Sections 238
and
239
CrPC on one side and
Sections 244
and
245
CrPC on the other. Under
Section 238
,
                when in a warrant case, instituted on a
11
227. Discharge.—If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the documents submitted therewith, and after
hearing the submissions of the accused and the prosecution in this behalf, the Judge considers that there is not sufficient
ground for proceeding against the accused, he shall discharge the accused and record his reasons for so doing.
228. Framing of charge.—(1) If, after such consideration and hearing as aforesaid, the Judge is of opinion that
there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence which—
(a) is not exclusively triable by the Court of Session, he may, frame a charge against the accused and, by or -
der, transfer the case for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or any other Judicial Magistrate of the first
             class and direct the accused to appear before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or, as the case may be, the Judi-
             cial Magistrate of the first class, on such date as he deems fit, and thereupon such Magistrate shall try the of-
             fence in accordance with the procedure for the trial of warrant-cases instituted on a police report;
(b) is exclusively triable by the Court, he shall frame in writing a charge against the accused.
         (2) Where the Judge frames any charge under clause (b) of sub-section (1), the charge shall be read and explained
to the accused, and the accused shall be asked whether he pleads guilty of the offence charged or claims to be tried.
13
police report, the accused appears or is
brought   before    the    Magistrate, the
Magistrate has to satisfy himself that he
has been supplied the necessary documents
like the police report, FIR, statements
recorded under sub-section (3) of
Section
161
CrPC of all the witnesses proposed to
be examined by the prosecution, as also
the confessions and statements recorded
under
Section 164
and any other documents
which   have   been     forwarded   by the
prosecuting agency to the court.
20.After   that,   comes  the   stage   of
discharge, for which it is provided in
Section 239
CrPC that the Magistrate has
to consider the police report and the
documents sent with it under
Section 173
CrPC and if necessary, has to examine the
accused and has to hear the prosecution
of   the   accused,   and   if   on   such
examination and hearing, the Magistrate
considers the charge to be groundless, he
would discharge the accused and record
his reasons for so doing. The prosecution
at that stage is not required to lead
evidence. If, on examination of the
aforementioned documents, he comes to the
prima facie conclusion that there is a
ground for proceeding with the trial, he
proceeds to frame the charge. For framing
the charge, he does not have to pass a
separate order. It is then that the
charge is framed under
Section 240
CrPC
and the trial proceeds for recording the
evidence. Thus, in such trial prosecution
has only one opportunity to lead evidence
and that too comes only after the charge
is framed.
Xxx
14
2212.In  the  warrant   trial  instituted
                    otherwise than the police report, the
                    complainant gets two opportunities to
                    lead evidence, firstly, before the charge
                    is framed and secondly, after the framing
                    of the charge. Of course, under
Section
                    245(2)
CrPC, a Magistrate can discharge
                    the accused at any previous stage of the
                    case, if he finds the charge to be
                    groundless.
23. Essentially, the applicable sections
                    are
Sections 244
and
245
CrPC since this
                    is a warrant trial instituted otherwise
                    than on police report. There had to be an
                    opportunity for the prosecution to lead
                    evidence under
Section 244(1)
CrPC or to
                    summon its witnesses under
Section 244(2)
CrPC.This did not happen and instead, the
                    accused proceeded to file an application
                    under
Section 245(2)
CrPC on the ground
                    that the charge was groundless.
24.Now, there is a clear difference in
Sections 245(1)
and
245(2)
of CrPC. Under
Section 245(1)
, the Magistrate has the
                    advantage of the evidence led by the
                    prosecution before him under
Section 244
and he has to consider whether if the
                    evidence    remains     unrebutted,    the
                    conviction   of  the   accused   would  be
                    warranted. If there is no discernible
                    incriminating material in the evidence,
                    then the Magistrate proceeds to discharge
                    the accused under
Section 245(1)
CrPC.
25.The situation under
Section 245(2)
CrPC
                    is, however, different. There, under sub-
                    section (2), the Magistrate has the power
                    of discharging the accused at any previous
                    stage of the case i.e. even before such
12
Paragraph 22 was corrected vide Official Corrigendum F.3/Ed.B.J./124/2009 issued on 22.08.2009 by the Court.
15
evidence is led. However, for discharging
an accused under
Section 245(2)
CrPC, the
Magistrate has to come to a finding that
the charge is groundless. There is no
question of any consideration of evidence
at that stage, because there is none. The
Magistrate can take this decision before
the accused appears or is brought before
the court or the evidence is led under
Section 244
CrPC. The words appearing in
Section 245(2)
CrPC “at any previous stage
of the case”, clearly bring out this
position.
Xxx
36. The Magistrate has the power to
discharge the accused under
Section 245(2)
CrPC at any previous stage i.e. before the
evidence is recorded under
Section 244(1)
CrPC, which seems to be the established
law, particularly in view of the decision
in
Cricket Assn. of Bengal v. State of
W.B.
[(1971) 3 SCC 239 : 1971 SCC (Cri)
446], as also the subsequent decision of
the Bombay High Court in Luis de
Piedade
Lobo v. Mahadev Vishwanath Parulekar
[1984
Cri LJ 513 (Bom)].
The same decision was
followed by Kerala High Court in
Manmohan
Malhotra v. P.M. Abdul Salam
[1994 Cri LJ
1555 (Ker)] and Hon'ble Justice K.T.
Thomas, as the learned Judge then was,
accepted   the    proposition   that   the
Magistrate has the power under
Section
245(2)
CrPC to discharge the accused at
any previous stage.
The Hon'ble Judge
relied on a decision of the Madras High
Court in
Mohd. Sheriff Sahib v. Abdul
Karim Sahib
[AIR 1928 Mad 129 (1)], as
also the judgment of the Himachal Pradesh
High Court in
Gopal Chauhan v. Satya
[1979
Cri LJ 446 (HP)].
16
37. We are convinced that under
Section
       245(2)
CrPC the Magistrate can discharge
       the accused at any previous stage i.e.
       even before any evidence is recorded under
Section 244(1)
CrPC. In that view, the
       accused could have made the application.
       It is obvious that the application has
       been rejected by the Magistrate. So far,
       there is no difficulty.’
                              (emphasis supplied)
17.    Turning to
Sections 239-240
, CrPC, this Court

held   as   under   in
Minakshi   Bala   v   Sudhir   Kumar
,

(1994) 4 SCC 142:
‘6. Having regard to the fact that the
       offences,   for   which   charge-sheet    was
       submitted   in   the    instant   case    and
       cognizance   taken,   were   triable   as   a
       warrant case the Magistrate was to proceed
       in accordance with
Sections 239
and
240
of
       the Code at the time of framing of the
       charges. Under the above sections, the
       Magistrate is first required to consider
       the police report and the documents sent
       with it under
Section 173
CrPC and examine
       the accused, if he thinks necessary, and
       give an opportunity to the prosecution and
       the accused of being heard. If on such
       consideration, examination and hearing the
       Magistrate finds the charge groundless he
       has to discharge the accused in terms of
Section 239
CrPC; conversely, if he finds
       that there is ground for presuming that
       the accused has committed an offence
       triable by him he has to frame a charge in
       terms of
Section 240
CrPC.
17
7. If charges are framed in accordance
with
Section 240
CrPC on a finding that a
prima facie case has been made out — as
has been done in the instant case — the
person    arraigned    may,    if    he    feels
aggrieved,      invoke      the      revisional
jurisdiction of the High Court or the
Sessions Judge to contend that the charge-
sheet submitted under
Section 173
CrPC and
documents sent with it did not disclose
any   ground   to   presume     that    he   had
committed any offence for which he is
charged and the revisional court if so
satisfied can quash the charges framed
against him. To put it differently, once
charges are framed under
Section 240
CrPC
the    High   Court    in    its     revisional
jurisdiction would not be justified in
relying upon documents other than those
referred to in
Sections 239
and
240
CrPC;
nor would it be justified in invoking its
inherent jurisdiction under
Section 482
CrPC to quash the same except in those
rare cases where forensic exigencies and
formidable compulsions justify such a
course. We hasten to add even in such
exceptional cases the High Court can look
into only those documents which are
unimpeachable     and    can      be     legally
translated into relevant evidence.
8. Apart from the infirmity in the
approach of the High Court in dealing with
the matter which we have already noticed,
we further find that instead of adverting
to and confining its attention to the
documents referred to in
Sections 239
and
240
CrPC the High Court has dealt with the
rival contentions of the parties raised
through their respective affidavits at
length and on a threadbare discussion
thereof passed the impugned order. The
18
course so adopted cannot be supported;
firstly,    because     finding    regarding
        commission    of   an  offence   cannot   be
        recorded   on    the  basis   of   affidavit
        evidence and secondly, because at the
        stage of framing of charge the Court
        cannot usurp the functions of a trial
        court to delve into and decide upon the
        respective merits of the case.’
                                (emphasis supplied)
18.     With great respect, we express our reservations

in fully acceding to what has been stated above.
If

Paragraph 8 of Minakshi Bala
(supra) is accepted as

it    is,    the     necessary        concomitant        would   be     that

despite      examining          the   matter    in     detail,   a    Court

would    find       its    wings      clipped     to    intercede.      This

would amount to forcing a person to stand trial,

even     when       the     overwhelming        material       points     to

his/her innocence. Obviously, the hands of a Court

ought not to be tied down, and especially not by a

higher       Court,       and     moreso     not       against   liberty.
Paragraph       7   of     Minakshi      Bala
(supra)       does    enable

examining unimpeachable documents.
We are conscious

that
Minakshi          Bala
(supra)     has       been   followed    in

later       decisions       by    the    Court.      However,    we     have
19
chosen to survey the precedents further, and then

         decide on the road we wish to take13.
19.
In
Rumi Dhar v State of West Bengal
, (2009) 6

         SCC 364, this Court held that the Judge concerned

         with an application under
Section 239
, CrPC has to

         ‘…      go      into        the       details             of    the         allegations      made

         against each of the accused persons so as to form an

         opinion as to whether any case at all has been made

         out or not as a strong suspicion in regard thereto

         shall subserve the requirements of law.’
20.
In
State of Tamil Nadu v N Suresh Rajan
, (2014)

         11      SCC       709,        it       was       observed            notwithstanding          the

         difference in language of
Sections 227
and
239
, CrPC,

         the approach of the Court concerned is to be common

         under         both        provisions.               The        principles          holding      the

         field under
Sections 227
and
228
, CrPC are well-
settled,            courtesy,              inter          alia,
State   of   Bihar    v

         Ramesh          Singh
,          (1977)          4    SCC       39;
Union   of   India    v

         Prafulla K Samal
, (1979) 3 SCC 4; Stree Atyachar
13
Yes, the allusion is to Robert Frost’s celebrated poem – The Road Not Taken.
20
Virodhi Parishad v Dilip N Chordia
, (1989) 1 SCC 715;
Niranjan       Singh    Karam   Singh    Punjabi       v       Jitendra    B

Bijjaya, (1990) 4 SCC 76;
Dilawar B Kurane v State of

Maharashtra
, (2002) 2 SCC 135; Chitresh K Chopra v

State (Government of NCT of Delhi), (2009) 16 SCC

605;
Amit Kapoor v Ramesh Chander
, (2012) 9 SCC 460;
Dinesh Tiwari v State of Uttar Pradesh
, (2014) 13 SCC

137;
Dipakbhai      Jagdishchandra         Patel       v    State     of

Gujarat
, (2019) 16 SCC 547; and
State (NCT of Delhi)

v Shiv Charan Bansal
, (2020) 2 SCC 290.
We need only

refer     to    some,    starting       with
Prafulla         K   Samal
(supra),       where,     after   considering
Ramesh        Singh
(supra),
K P Raghavan v M H Abbas
, AIR 1967 SC 740

and Almohan Das v State of West Bengal, (1969) 2 SCR

520, it was laid down as under:
‘10. Thus, on a consideration of the
        authorities    mentioned     above,   the
        following principles emerge:
(1) That the Judge while considering
            the question of framing the charges
            under
Section 227
of the Code has the
            undoubted power to sift and weigh the
            evidence for the limited purpose of
            finding out whether or not a prima
            facie case against the accused has
            been made out.
21
(2) Where the materials placed before
the Court disclose grave suspicion
against the accused which has not
been properly explained the Court
will be fully justified in framing a
charge and proceeding with the trial.

(3) The test to determine a prima
facie case would naturally depend
upon the facts of each case and it is
difficult to lay down a rule of
universal application. By and large
however if two views are equally
possible and the Judge is satisfied
that the evidence produced before him
while giving rise to some suspicion
but not grave suspicion against the
accused, he will be fully within his
right to discharge the accused.
(4)    That     in     exercising    his
jurisdiction under
Section 227
of the
Code   the   Judge    which  under   the
present    Code    is   a   senior   and
experienced court cannot act merely
as a Post Office or a mouthpiece of
the prosecution, but has to consider
the broad probabilities of the case,
the total effect of the evidence and
the documents produced before the
Court,     any      basic    infirmities
appearing in the case and so on. This
however does not mean that the Judge
should make a roving enquiry into the
pros and cons of the matter and weigh
the evidence as if he was conducting
a trial.’
                     (emphasis supplied)
22
21.
In Niranjan Singh Karam Singh Punjabi (supra),

this Court was alive to reality, stating that ‘… it

cannot    be    expected      even    at    the    initial   stage   to

accept    all    that   the    prosecution         states    as   gospel

truth even if it is opposed to common sense or the

broad probabilities of the case.’ If a view gives

rise to suspicion, as opposed to grave suspicion,

the Court concerned is empowered to discharge the

accused, as pointed out in
Sajjan Kumar v Central

Bureau    of     Investigation
,           (2010)   9   SCC   368.
The

Court, in
Dinesh Tiwari
(supra) had reasoned that if

the Court concerned opines that there is ground to

presume the accused has committed an offence, it is

competent to frame a charge even if such offence is

not mentioned in the Charge Sheet.
As to what is

‘strong         suspicion’,          reference         to
Dipakbhai

Jagdishchandra Patel
(supra) is warranted, where it

was explained that it is ‘… the suspicion which is

premised on some material which commends itself to

the court as sufficient to entertain the prima facie

view that the accused has committed the offence.’
23
22.      In a recent judgement viz.
State of Gujarat v

         Dilipsinh Kishorsinh Rao
, 2023 INSC 89414, this Court

         held:
‘7. It is trite law that application of
                 judicial   mind    being   necessary    to
                 determine whether a case has been made
                 out by the prosecution for proceeding
                 with trial and it would not be necessary
                 to dwell into the pros and cons of the
                 matter by examining the defence of the
                 accused when an application for discharge
                 is filed. At that stage, the trial judge
                 has to merely examine the evidence placed
                 by the prosecution in order to determine
                 whether or not the grounds are sufficient
                 to proceed against the accused on basis
                 of charge sheet material. The nature of
                 the evidence recorded or collected by the
                 investigating agency or the documents
                 produced in which prima facie it reveals
                 that there are suspicious circumstances
                 against the accused, so as to frame a
                 charge would suffice and such material
                 would be taken into account for the
                 purposes of framing the charge. If there
                 is no sufficient ground for proceeding
                 against the accused necessarily, the
                 accused would be discharged, but if the
                 court is of the opinion, after such
                 consideration of the material there are
                 grounds for presuming that accused has
                 committed the offence which is triable,
                 then necessarily charge has to be framed.
8. At the time of framing of the charge
                 and taking cognizance the accused has no
14
2023 SCC OnLine SC 1294.
24
right to produce any material and call
upon the court to examine the same. No
provision in the Code grants any right to
the accused to file any material or
document at the stage of framing of
charge. The trial court has to apply its
judicial mind to the facts of the case as
may be necessary to determine whether a
case has been made out by the prosecution
for trial on the basis of charge-sheet
material only.
9. If the accused is able to demonstrate
from the charge-sheet material at the
stage of framing the charge which might
drastically      affect      the      very
sustainability of the case, it is unfair
to suggest that such material should not
be considered or ignored by the court at
that   stage.   The  main   intention   of
granting a chance to the accused of
making submissions as envisaged under
Section 227
of the Cr. P.C. is to assist
the court to determine whether it is
required to proceed to conduct the trial.
Nothing in the Code limits the ambit of
such hearing, to oral hearing and oral
arguments only and therefore, the trial
court can consider the material produced
by the accused before the I.O.
10. It is settled principle of law that
at   the    stage    of   considering    an
application for discharge the court must
proceed   on   an   assumption   that   the
material which has been brought on record
by the prosecution is true and evaluate
said material in order to determine
whether the facts emerging from the
material   taken   on   its   face   value,
disclose the existence of the ingredients
necessary of the offence alleged. …
25
xxx
11. The defence of the accused is not to
be looked into at the stage when the
accused seeks to be discharged. The
expression “the record of the case” used
in
Section 227
Cr. P.C. is to be
understood as the documents and articles,
if any, produced by the prosecution. The
Code does not give any right to the
accused to produce any document at the
stage of framing of the charge. The
submission of the accused is to be
confined to the material produced by the
investigating agency.
12. The primary consideration at the stage
of framing of charge is the test of
existence of a prima-facie case, and at
this   stage,   the  probative    value   of
materials on record need not be gone into.
This Court by referring to its earlier
decisions in the
State of Maharashtra v.
Som Nath Thapa
, (1996) 4 SCC 659 and the
State of MP v. Mohan Lal Soni, (2000) 6
SCC 338 has held the nature of evaluation
to be made by the court at the stage of
framing of the charge is to test the
existence of prima-facie case. It is also
held at the stage of framing of charge,
the court has to form a presumptive
opinion to the existence of factual
ingredients   constituting    the    offence
alleged and it is not expected to go deep
into probative value of the material on
record and to check whether the material
on   record   would   certainly    lead   to
conviction at the conclusion of trial.’
                        (emphasis supplied)
26
23. On a careful conspectus of the legal spectrum,

         juxtaposed with our view on the facts and merits

         expressed hereinbefore, we are satisfied that there

         is no suspicion, much less strong or grave suspicion

         that        the      appellants             are        guilty        of         the    offence

         alleged.            It     would         be      unjustified              to      make        the

         appellants            face       a     full-fledged              criminal             trial    in

         this backdrop.
In an appeal dealing with the refusal

         of the High Court to quash an FIR under
Section 482
,

         CrPC       albeit,         this        Court,        while       setting          aside       the

         judgment            impugned         therein           and     quashing           that       FIR,

         took       the       view       that       ‘…the        Appellants               are    to    be

         protected against vexatious and unwarranted criminal

         prosecution,               and         from       unnecessarily                  being        put

         through          the      rigours         of      an     eventual          trial.’15          The

         protection                against              vexatious                and            unwanted

         prosecution              and      from        being       unnecessarily                dragged

         through         a     trial       by     melting          a    criminal           proceeding

         into          oblivion,                either           through             quashing            a

         FIR/Complaint or by allowing an appeal against an
15
Priyanka Mishra v State of Uttar Pradesh
, 2023 INSC 729 | 2023 SCC OnLine SC 978.
27
order rejecting discharge or by any other legally

permissible route, as the circumstances may be, in

the   deserving        case,   is    a   duty     cast      on    the       High

Courts. The High Court should have intervened and

discharged       the     appellants.        But      this    Court           will

intervene, being the sentinel on the qui vive.
24.     Accordingly,        this     appeal       is     allowed.             The

appellants,       on     bail,      stand       discharged             of     the

liabilities       of     their      bail    bonds.       The       Impugned

Judgment of the High Court as well as the order of

the Trial Court dismissing the prayer for discharge

are     set     aside.     Consequently,          there          not        being

sufficient       material      on   record      to     proceed         against

them,     the     appellants        stand       discharged             in     the

criminal       case.    Our    judgment      shall       not      influence

pending       civil    proceeding(s),       if    any,      between          the

private parties.
25.
Insofar as
Minakshi Bala
(supra) is concerned,

having taken the view that we have and expressed our

doubt on the limited aspect, yet we do not find any
28
need to burden a larger Bench to reconsider
the said

judgment
, at this juncture. ‘In a more appropriate

case…’, perhaps, as the saying goes.
........................J.
                                       [VIKRAM NATH]




                          ........................J.
                              [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]


NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 28, 2023