[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Anil Kumar vs The State Of Kerala on 1 November, 2023
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023 INSC 965

          Criminal Appeal No.2697 of 2023


                                                                       REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2697 OF 2023


          ANIL KUMAR                                                  …APPELLANT

                                                VERSUS


          THE STATE OF KERALA                                         …RESPONDENT


                                         J U D G M E N T
PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.              The appellant Anil Kumar has been convicted under
Sections

                         302
and
498A
of the Indian Penal Code 1 by both the courts

                         below and has been sentenced to life imprisonment and to pay

                         fine of Rs.50,000/­, and in default to undergo simple

                         imprisonment for one year under
Section 302
IPC and rigorous
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.11.01
14:42:12 IST
Reason:
1 “
IPC
”, for short




                                                                           Page 1 | 14
Criminal Appeal No.2697 of 2023


      imprisonment of one year under
Section 498A
IPC with

      direction that both the sentences would run concurrently.
2.    The incident is of 26.09.2010 and had taken place at 9:00 am

      in the morning at the house of the appellant. The allegation is

      that the appellant, with the intention to kill his wife, lighted a

      matchstick and threw it upon her when she had already

      poured kerosene upon herself due to the quarrel with the

      appellant.
3.    The FIR No.621/2010 dated 26.09.2010 was initially regis­

      tered under
Section 307
IPC wherein it has been stated that

      the deceased wife, due to unbearable mental and physical ha­

      rassment caused to her by the appellant, poured kerosene

      upon herself to deter the appellant from causing further

      torture to her and that the appellant with the clear intention to

      kill her took advantage of the situation and lighted the

      matchstick and threw it on her body uttering “You Die”. Thus,



                                                             Page 2 | 14
Criminal Appeal No.2697 of 2023


      the deceased wife was inflicted with burn injuries at their

      residence by the appellant with clear intention of killing her.

      Subsequently, when the deceased wife died in the hospital, the

      case was converted into that under
Sections 302
and
498A
of

      IPC.
4.    On the basis of the aforesaid FIR, the appellant was charged

      for uxoricide.
5.    There is a clear and clinching evidence on record that the

      appellant used to harass the deceased wife by making

      demands for dowry and that both of them used to quarrel a

      lot. The marriage between the two was solemnized about 11

      years before the date of incident and from the wedlock they

      had a boy and a girl.       At the time of the incident, their

      children were playing in the courtyard and that the boy,

      though of a tender age, had deposed that appellant was in




                                                          Page 3 | 14
Criminal Appeal No.2697 of 2023


      habit of beating his wife and there used to be frequent

      quarrels between his parents.
6.    In the trial court as well as before the High Court, the defence

      of the appellant was that he is not at all guilty of burning his

      wife. She had the suicidal tendency and had tried to immolate

      herself on one earlier occasion and had once even tried to cut

      her veins. She herself had poured kerosene upon herself and

      set herself on fire. The appellant had simply tried to douse the

      fire by pouring water from the bucket.
7.    The defence so set up by the appellant was not accepted by

      either of the courts below in view of the overwhelming evidence

      on record regarding their frequent quarrel and the harassment

      meted out to the deceased wife.    The ocular evidence of the

      witnesses clearly proved that on the date of the incident, there

      was again a quarrel between both of them though on a petty

      matter but the deceased wife, in order to avoid torture at the



                                                           Page 4 | 14
Criminal Appeal No.2697 of 2023


      hands of the appellant and to deter him, went inside the

      kitchen and poured kerosene on herself.         Thereafter, the

      appellant took advantage of the situation and set her on fire.
8.    We had heard the learned counsel for the parties.
9.    Learned counsel for the appellant had argued that the

      appellant had no premeditated mind to kill the deceased wife

      and that he had no intention even to kill her. Therefore, the

      provisions of
Section 302
IPC are not applicable and at best he

      can be charged under
Section 304
Part­II of
IPC
.
10. The above submission has been strongly opposed on the

      ground that the appellant had burnt the deceased wife with a

      matchstick fully knowing that she was drenched in kerosene

      oil and that lightning of matchstick and throwing it upon her

      would certainly cause her death.
Page 5 | 14
Criminal Appeal No.2697 of 2023
11. In the case at hand, admittedly, there are multiple dying

      declarations on record.     The first dying declaration is in the

      form of the statement Ext.P1. This statement of the deceased

      wife before her death was made before the Judicial First Class

      Magistrate, Ernakulam, i.e. PW5. The said statement clearly

      reveals the cause and circumstances of the death of the

      deceased wife.
12. The other statement which can be read as a dying declaration

      is Ext.P10 recorded by PW16, Head Constable, Kuruppampady

      Police at General hospital, Ernakulam, wherein also the

      deceased wife repeated the same narration as in Ext.P1 in

      relation to the incident of her death.
13. Both the above statements, if read together, would reveal that

      on the fateful day, the appellant had assaulted the deceased

      wife under the influence of alcohol. He even struck a blow on

      her chest and pushed her. At the time of the said incident, the



                                                            Page 6 | 14
Criminal Appeal No.2697 of 2023


      children were playing in the courtyard. When the assault of

      the appellant became unbearable, she took the cane of

      kerosene from kitchen and poured it on her body whereupon

      her husband lighted a matchstick and burnt her.
14. The     Magistrate     (PW5),   before   whom   one   of   the   dying

      declarations was recorded, proves the correctness of the

      statement and that when the statement of the deceased was

      recorded, she was coherent and oriented.        He also accepted

      that there was no reason for him to believe that the deceased

      was not in a position to make the statement or that the

      statement made by her stands vitiated for any reason.           The

      statement of PW5 was supported by that of PW14 (Dr. K.

      Venugopal).
15. The statement of the deceased wife further categorically states

      that the appellant was in habit of drinking alcohol and used to

      assault her frequently in inebriated condition. She also stated



                                                               Page 7 | 14
Criminal Appeal No.2697 of 2023


      that various criminal cases are pending against the appellant

      in connection with similar kind of assaults. The above aspect,

      as stated by the deceased, was corroborated by the testimony

      of PW21 (Investigating Officer). Even the DW1 (Saji Mathew)

      also proved that the deceased, at the time of the admission in

      the hospital, narrated about her burn injuries and alleged that

      her husband assaulted her and that she had poured kerosene

      on herself whereupon her husband had set her on fire. The

      medical report reveals that the deceased had suffered 96%

      burn injuries.
16. The incident was also proved by the oral testimony of PW1

      (Sahajan) and PW2 (Gopalakrishnan), the neighbours who

      took the deceased to the hospital in a jeep and have seen the

      deceased in burning state.
17. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances and the

      overwhelming evidence on record, there is no escape from the



                                                          Page 8 | 14
Criminal Appeal No.2697 of 2023


      conclusion that the deceased died of burn injuries. She had

      herself poured kerosene upon her body and that the appellant

      set her ablaze and later tried to douse the fire by pouring

      water. The appellant also accompanied the deceased to the

      hospital.
18. Now the only point for consideration is whether in the above

      circumstances, the appellant had any premeditated mind to

      kill the deceased or was it due to grave and sudden

      provocation which would not amount to murder or would at

      best be a case of culpable homicide not amounting to murder

      punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend

      up to 10 years or with fine or with both under
Section 304
Part­II of
IPC
.
19.
In support of his above argument, learned counsel for the

      appellant relied upon
Kalu Ram v. State of Rajasthan2
2 (2000) 10 SCC 324




                                                        Page 9 | 14
Criminal Appeal No.2697 of 2023


      which was case of a similar kind in connection with uxoricide

      by burning.     However, it would be relevant and material to

      refer to Exception 4 to
Section 300
IPC which defines “Murder”

      before extending the benefit of
the above decision
to the

      appellant. The said exception reads as under:
“Exception 4.—Culpable homicide is not
              murder if it is committed without
              premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat
              of passion upon a sudden quarrel and
              without the offender having taken undue
              advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual
              manner.
Explanation.—It is immaterial in such cases
              which party offers the provocation or
              commits the first assault.”
20. It is on the strength of the above exception that from the side

      of the appellant it has been argued that the appellant is not

      guilty of murder as he had no premeditated mind and that the

      action of the appellant arose out of a sudden fight. In the first

      place, the fight was not sudden.       The appellant and the




                                                            Page 10 | 14
Criminal Appeal No.2697 of 2023


      deceased wife had a past history of quarrel and that they had

      been quarrelling on the fateful day also since before the actual

      incident.     During their quarrel, a neighbour/(Sahajan) i.e.

      PW1 had visited their house and the deceased wife had shown

      some injuries received by her during the assault.        However,

      realizing the quarrel between the two, he left saying that he

      would come later on.        It was thereafter that the incident of

      pouring kerosene and burning took place.           So, there was

      sufficient time in between the two acts and it cannot be said

      that there was a sudden quarrel and provocation leading to

      burning.    The appellant saw the deceased wife drenched in

      kerosene and was conscious that if lighted, she would be

      burnt to death even then ignited her to fire.         This shows

      premeditated mind to kill her. More particularly, the appellant

      cannot take advantage of the 4th Exception only on the pretext

      that it was not on account of premeditated mind or out of a




                                                            Page 11 | 14
Criminal Appeal No.2697 of 2023


      sudden fight or that his intentions were not bad as he tried his

      best to douse the fire and to save the life of the deceased wife

      for the reason that the benefit of the above exception would

      have been available to him, had he not taken undue advantage

      of the situation.
21. The exception clearly in unequivocal term states that it would

      be applicable where culpable homicide is committed not only

      without premeditated mind in a sudden fight or quarrel but

      also without the offender taking “undue advantage” of the

      situation. In the instant case, the appellant upon seeing the

      deceased drenched in kerosene clearly took advantage of the

      situation and lighted a matchstick and threw it upon her so

      that she can be burnt.      The appellant having taken “undue

      advantage” of the situation cannot be extended the benefit of

      Exception 4 to
Section 300
IPC so as to bring the case within

      the ambit of Part­II of 304
IPC
.
Page 12 | 14
Criminal Appeal No.2697 of 2023
22. In view of the above legal position, the ruling cited above, viz.
Kalu Ram
(supra) would not benefit the appellant.
23. The First Information Report and the dying declarations on

      record clearly contain the statement of the deceased that when

      she had poured kerosene upon herself to deter the appellant

      from fighting and assaulting, he lighted a matchstick and with

      the intention to kill her, threw it upon her by saying “You Die”.
24. The aforesaid evidence clinches the issue and establishes

      beyond doubt that the appellant is guilty of the offence of

      culpable homicide amounting to murder and is not entitled to

      benefit of the Exception 4 to
Section 300
IPC.
25. Accordingly, we are of the opinion that the courts below have

      not committed any error of fact or law in convicting and

      sentencing     him     to   a   maximum   punishment     of   life

      imprisonment.
Page 13 | 14
Criminal Appeal No.2697 of 2023
26. The     appeal    accordingly   lacks   merit    and   is   dismissed.
However, we would observe that the appellant who is in jail

      may, in usual course, be at liberty to apply for remission in

      accordance with the prevailing policy of the State.
……………………….. J.
(ABHAY S. OKA)




                                                    ……………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 01, 2023.
Page 14 | 14