[Cites
35
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Tarun Kumar vs Assistant Director Directorate Of ... on 20 November, 2023
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
,
Aniruddha Bose
2023 INSC 1006                                                                      REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.        OF 2023
                                         (@ SLP (Crl.) No. 9431 of 2023)

          TARUN KUMAR                                                      …APPELLANT(S)


                                                    VERSUS


          ASSISTANT DIRECTOR DIRECTORATE
          OF ENFORCEMENT                                                …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                JUDGMENT
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.
1.             Leave granted.
2.             The Appellant-accused being aggrieved by the Judgment and Order

                         dated 18.07.2023 passed by the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in

                         Bail Application No. 152 of 2023 has preferred the present appeal.

                         The High Court vide the impugned order has dismissed the said bail

                         application of the appellant seeking bail in connection with the
Signature Not Verified   Complaint Case No. 20/2021 bearing ECIR /DLZO-1/12/2021 arising
Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
Date: 2023.11.20
16:41:27 IST
Reason:
out of FIR No. RC0742020E0014, registered for the offence under

                         Section 13(2) read with 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1
1988 and under Section 120B read with
sections 420
,
465
,
467
,
468
and
471
of IPC. The appellant was arrested on 22.06.2022 on the

     fourth supplementary complaint having been filed by the respondent

     under
Sections 44
and
45
of the Prevention of Money Laundering

     Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘
PML Act
’), in continuation of

     the complaint dated 01.09.2021, 11.10.2021 and 18.11.2021 in Case

     No. 20/2021, for the commission of the offence of money laundering

     as defined under
Section 3
punishable under
Section 4
of PML Act.
3.   The broad facts and events as discernible from the record may be

     stated as under:
(i)   M/s. Shakti Bhog Foods Ltd. (SBFL) was engaged in

           manufacturing and selling food items under the brand name of

           “Shakti Bhog”. The company was managed through its

           Directors/Guarantors – Sh. Kewal Krishan Kumar, Sh. Siddharth

           Kumar and Smt. Sunanda Kumar. The appellant is the nephew

           of Sh. Kewal Krishan Kumar, and was shown as one of the

           employees in SBFL.
(ii) The consortium of banks led by the State Bank of India vide the

           Letter of Engagement dated 18.05.2018 engaged the services
2
of a Forensic Auditor – BDO India LLP for conducting the

    Forensic Audit of SBFL.
(iii) The Forensic Auditor conducted audit review for the period

    01.04.2013 to 31.03.2017 and submitted the report on

    25.06.2019, disclosing several financial irregularities and

    discrepancies in the functioning of SBFL, and alleged that SBFL

    had failed to discharge its loan liability and caused loss to the

    consortium member banks to the tune of Rs.3269.42 crores.
(iv) An FIR being NO. RC0742020E0014 came to be registered on

    31.12.2020 by the CBI, Bank Securities and Fraud Cell, New

    Delhi for the offences under
Section 13(2)
read with 13(1)(d) of

    the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
and under Section 120B

    read with
Sections 420
,
465
,
467
,
468
and
471
of IPC, on the

    basis of a written complaint given by the Bank Officials against

    the   Directors/Guarantors       of   SBFL   and   against   the

    Employees/servants and other unknown persons.
(v) Since the offences under Section 120B read with
Sections 420
,
467
and
471
of IPC and
Section 13(2)
read with
Section

    13(1)(d)
of the Prevention of Corruption Act were specified as

    the scheduled offences under the
Schedule to the PML Act
, an
3
ECIR bearing No. ECIR/DLZO-1/12/2021 came to be recorded

    on 31st January, 2021 against SBFL and others with regard to

    the said FIR registered by the CBI against the accused for

    investigation of the commission of offence under
Section 3
punishable under
Section 4
of the PML Act.
(vi) The appellant was summoned by the respondent-authorities for

    the purposes of investigation and interrogation for about seven

    times till the first complaint was filed by the respondent on

    01.09.2021. Second and third supplementary complaints were

    filed by the respondent on 11.10.2021 and 18.11.2021

    respectively. However, the appellant was not named in the said

    three complaints.
(vii) When the appellant was in attendance before the respondent

    pursuant to the call by the investigating authorities on

    22.06.2022, he was arrested and on 18.08.2022 the fourth

    supplementary complaint came to be filed by the respondent

    arraigning the appellant as the Accused No. 10.
(viii) The appellant filed a bail application in complaint case

    no.20/2021 before the Special Judge (PC-ACT), Rouse Avenue

    Court Complex, New Delhi on 18.10.2022, which came to be
4
dismissed by the Special Judge vide the order dated

         23.12.2022.
(ix) The bail application being No. 152 of 2023 preferred by the

         appellant before the High Court of Delhi also came to be

         rejected vide the impugned order dated 18.07.2023.
4.   The allegations against the appellant have been detailed in

     paragraph nos. 7, 7.1,7.2, & 7.11 and the summary thereof is stated

     in para 10 of the fourth Supplementary Complaint filed by the

     respondent. The role of the appellant in the commission of the

     alleged offence of money laundering in terms of
Section 3
of PML

     Act reads as under:
“Tarun Kumar was Vice President (Purchases) in Shakti Bhog
             Limited and was also a director in various Shakti Bhog Group
             companies. He was actively involved in the bank fraud committed
             by Shakti Bhog Foods Ltd. Tarun Kumar was directly involved in
             procuring fake invoices from shell companies operated by Devki
             Nandan Garg and Ashok Kumar Goel, Entry Operators.
             Investigation revealed that emails from and related to the shell
             entities supplying fake invoices to Shakti Bhog Foods Ltd. were
             also marked to Tarun Kumar. Further, Tarun Kumar used to
             transfer proceeds of crime to the shell companies for procuring
             fake invoices without any genuine business transactions and
             collected part thereof in cash from Vivek Prasad, Entry Operator.
             Besides, he used to verify the fake bills for LC settlement with the
             lending banks. He also was involved in the criminal conspiracy of
             stock manipulation and inflation of the financial results of Shakti
             Bhog Foods Ltd. Tarun Kumar also used the platform of group
             companies under his directorship and control for diversion, rotation
             and siphoning of the proceeds of crime. Further, he played active
             role in the export activities of Shakti Bhog Foods Ltd. and then in
             siphoning and stashing the proceeds of crime abroad.
5
Tarun Kumar along with his directed company Goal Securities Pvt.
Ltd. acquired proceeds of crime to the tune of Rs.3.69 Crore.
               Tarun Kumar was knowingly a party and actually involved in
               process and activity connected with proceeds of crime including its
               acquisition, use, possession, concealment and/or projecting as
               well claiming the same as untainted. He was beneficiary of
               proceed of crime acquired through the criminal activities related to
               scheduled offences. Therefore, Tarun Kumar has committed
               offence of money laundering u/s r.w.s. 4 of PMLA, 2002.”
5.   The learned Senior Counsel Mr. Sidharth Luthra for the appellant

     taking the Court through the documents on record made the

     following submissions:
(i)   The offending transactions in the ECIR/Prosecution Complaints

           and FIR were common, yet the appellant was not named in the

           FIR or in the first three prosecution/supplementary complaints.
(ii) The co-accused Raman Bhuraria, who is similarly placed as the

           appellant has been granted bail by the High Court of Delhi vide

           the judgment and order dated 08.02.2023, and therefore the

           appellant is entitled to the bail on the ground of parity.
(iii) The investigation qua the appellant is complete and the further

           investigation is kept open with regard to the other accused

           persons, if any, and the trial of the case is likely to take long

           time. Hence, the appellant ought not to be incarcerated

           indefinitely. The right to bail in cases of delay, coupled with

           incarceration for a long period, depending on the nature of the
6
allegations, should be read into
Section 439
of the Cr.P.C. and
Section 45
of PML Act.
In this regard, Mr. Luthra has relied

         upon the observations made by this Court in case of
Manish

         Sisodia vs. Central Bureau of Investigation1
in Criminal

         Appeal arising out of SLP (Crl) No. 8167 of 2023 and in case of
Sanjay      Raghunath     Agarwal      Vs.    Directorate    of

         Enforcement2
.
(iv) Bail cannot be denied merely on account of the crime being an

         economic offence.
In this regard, Mr. Luthra has relied upon the

         decision in case of
Satender Kumar Antil vs. Central Bureau

         of Investigation and Another3
.
(v) ED failed to establish the rationale behind discriminating

         between the appellant and the individuals with similar roles who

         have not been taken as accused.
In this regard, learned Senior

         Counsel has relied upon the observations made in
State of

         Madhya Pradesh vs. Sheetla Sahai and Others4
.
(vi) Taking the Court to the allegations made against the appellant,

         the learned Senior Counsel submitted that the allegations and

1 (2023) SCC Online SC 1393
2 (2023) SCC Online SC 455
3 (2022) 10 SCC 51
4 (2009) 8 SCC 617
7
the roles attributed to the appellant in the commission of the

           alleged offences are baseless.
(vii) Lastly, Mr. Luthra submitted that the parameters of bail under
Section 45
of the PML Act having been made out, and the

           custodial detention of the appellant being not necessary, the

           appellant should be released on bail.
6.   The learned Additional Solicitor General, Mr. S.V. Raju for the

     respondent however, made the following submissions:
(i)   The appellant was the Vice President (Purchases) in Shakti

           Bhog Limited and was also a Director in various Shakti Bhog

           Group Companies and was actively involved in the bank fraud

           committed by the SBFL.
(ii) The appellant along with other accused who were the Directors,

           promoters and shareholders were directly involved in diversion,

           rotation and siphoning of proceeds of crime. During the period

           2007-08 to 2016-17, under the Directorship of the appellant

           crores of proceeds of crime were transferred to the shell

           companies without any genuine business transactions. The

           appellant had played active role in diverting the loan funds
8
availed by the SBFL to shell entities on the basis of fake bills

         generated without any genuine business transactions.
(iii) The appellant was also involved in the export activities of SBFL.
(iv) The twin conditions contained in
Section 45(1)
of the PML Act

         would apply to the appellant having regard to the seriousness of

         the offence and the investigation qua other accused being still

         in process, the appellant could not be granted bail on the

         ground that the other persons allegedly involved have not been

         arrested. Mr. Raju has relied upon the number of decisions of

         this Court which shall be dealt with as found necessary.
7.   At the outset, before adverting to the submissions made by the

     learned counsels for the parties, it would be apt to note that the
PML

     Act
has been enacted to prevent money laundering and to provide

     for confiscation of property derived from, or involved in money

     laundering, and for the matters connected therewith and incidental

     thereto. The said Act was enacted in view of the political declaration

     adopted by the special session of United Nations General Assembly

     in June, 1998 calling upon the member states to adopt national

     money laundering legislation and programme.
9
8.
Section 3
of the PML Act which pertains to the offence of money

     laundering, reads as under: -
“3. Offence of money-laundering. - Whosoever directly or
              indirectly attempts to indulge or knowingly assists or knowingly is a
              party or is actually involved in any process or activity connected
              with the proceeds of crime including its concealment, possession,
              acquisition or use and projecting or claiming it as untainted
              property shall be guilty of offence of money-laundering.
              Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that,
              —
(i) a person shall be guilty of offence of money-laundering if such
              person is found to have directly or indirectly attempted to indulge
              or knowingly assisted or knowingly is a party or is actually involved
              in one or more of the following processes or activities connected
              with proceeds of crime, namely: —
(a) concealment; or
(b) possession; or
(c) acquisition; or
(d) use; or
(e) projecting as untainted property; or
(f) claiming as untainted property,
              in any manner whatsoever;
(ii) the process or activity connected with proceeds of crime is a
              continuing activity and continues till such time a person is directly
              or indirectly enjoying the proceeds of crime by its concealment or
              possession or acquisition or use or projecting it as untainted
              property or claiming it as untainted property in any manner
              whatsoever.”
9.
Section 45
of the said Act being relevant for the purpose of the

     instant appeal is reproduced hereunder for ready reference: -
“45. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable. — (1)
              Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal
              Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974), no person accused of an offence
              [under this Act] shall be released on bail or on his own bond unless
-
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose
              the application for such release; and
10
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the court
             is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he
             is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any
             offence while on bail:
Provided that a person, who, is under the age of sixteen years, or
             is a woman or is sick or infirm, or is accused either on his own or
             along with other co-accused of money-laundering a sum of less
             than one crore rupees may be released on bail, if the Special
             Court so directs:
Provided further that the Special Court shall not take cognizance of
             any offence punishable undersection 4 except upon a complaint in
             writing made by—
(i) the Director; or
(ii) any officer of the Central Government or a State Government
             authorised in writing in this behalf by the Central Government by a
             general or special order made in this behalf by that Government.
             (1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal
             Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974), or any other provision of this Act, no
             police officer shall investigate into an offence under this Act unless
             specifically authorised, by the Central Government by a general or
             special order, and, subject to such conditions as may be
             prescribed.
(2) The limitation on granting of bail specified in sub-section (1) is
             in addition to the limitations under the
Code of Criminal Procedure
,
             1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time being in force on
             granting of bail.
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that the
             expression "Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable" shall
             mean and shall be deemed to have always meant that all offences
             under this Act shall be cognizable offences and non-bailable
             offences notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974), and accordingly the
             officers authorised under this Act are empowered to arrest an
             accused without warrant, subject to the fulfillment of conditions
             under
section 19
and subject to the conditions enshrined under
             this section.
10. The constitutional validity of certain provisions of the
PML Act
and

    the procedure followed by the Enforcement Directorate while

    inquiring into/ investigating offences under the said Act having been
11
challenged before this Court in case of
Vijay Madanlal Choudhary

    and Others vs. Union of India and Others5
, a three Judge Bench

    had considered the said provisions of the Act in detail. After

    considering the submissions of the learned counsels for the parties

    with regard to the interpretation of
Section 3
of the said Act, it was

    held therein as under: -
“269. From the bare language of
Section 3
of the 2002 Act, it is
             amply clear that the offence of money-laundering is an
             independent offence regarding the process or activity connected
             with the proceeds of crime which had been derived or obtained as
             a result of criminal activity relating to or in relation to a scheduled
             offence. The process or activity can be in any form — be it one of
             concealment, possession, acquisition, use of proceeds of crime as
             much as projecting it as untainted property or claiming it to be so.
             Thus, involvement in any one of such process or activity
             connected with the proceeds of crime would constitute offence of
             money-laundering. This offence otherwise has nothing to do with
             the criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence — except the
             proceeds of crime derived or obtained as a result of that crime.
270. Needless to mention that such process or activity can be
             indulged in only after the property is derived or obtained as a result
             of criminal activity (a scheduled offence). It would be an offence of
             money-laundering to indulge in or to assist or being party to the
             process or activity connected with the proceeds of crime; and such
             process or activity in a given fact situation may be a continuing
             offence, irrespective of the date and time of commission of the
             scheduled offence. In other words, the criminal activity may have
             been committed before the same had been notified as scheduled
             offence for the purpose of the 2002 Act, but if a person has
             indulged in or continues to indulge directly or indirectly in dealing
             with proceeds of crime, derived or obtained from such criminal
             activity even after it has been notified as scheduled offence, may
             be liable to be prosecuted for offence of money-laundering under


52022 SCC Online SC 929
12
the 2002 Act — for continuing to possess or conceal the proceeds
             of crime (fully or in part) or retaining possession thereof or uses it
             in trenches until fully exhausted. The offence of money-laundering
             is not dependent on or linked to the date on which the scheduled
             offence or if we may say so the predicate offence has been
             committed. The relevant date is the date on which the person
             indulges in the process or activity connected with such proceeds of
             crime. These ingredients are intrinsic in the original provision
             (
Section 3
, as amended until 2013 and were in force till
             31.7.2019); and the same has been merely explained and clarified
             by way of Explanation vide Finance (No. 2) Act, 2019. Thus
             understood, inclusion of Clause (ii) in Explanation inserted in 2019
             is of no consequence as it does not alter or enlarge the scope of
Section 3
at all.
271 to 282 …………
283. Even though, the 2002 Act is a complete Code in itself, it is
             only in respect of matters connected with offence of money-
laundering, and for that, existence of proceeds of crime within the
             meaning of
Section 2(1)(u)
of the Act is quintessential. Absent
             existence of proceeds of crime, as aforesaid, the authorities under
             the 2002 Act cannot step in or initiate any prosecution.
284. In other words, the Authority under the 2002 Act, is to
             prosecute a person for offence of money-laundering only if it has
             reason to believe, which is required to be recorded in writing that
             the person is in possession of “proceeds of crime”. Only if that
             belief is further supported by tangible and credible evidence
             indicative of involvement of the person concerned in any process
             or activity connected with the proceeds of crime, action under the
             Act can be taken forward for attachment and confiscation of
             proceeds of crime and until vesting thereof in the Central
             Government, such process initiated would be a standalone
             process.”
11. As regards the twin conditions for the grant of bail contained in
Section 45(1)
of the said Act, it has been held in
the said decision
of
Vijay Madanlal
(supra) as under: -
13
“412. As a result, we have no hesitation in observing that in
               whatever form the relief is couched including the nature of
               proceedings, be it under Section 438 of the 1973 Code or for that
               matter, by invoking the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court, the
               underlying principles and rigors of
Section 45
of the 2002 must
               come into play and without exception ought to be reckoned to
               uphold the objectives of the 2002 Act, which is a special legislation
               providing for stringent regulatory measures for combating the
               menace of money-laundering.”
12.
In
Gautam Kundu vs. Directorate of Enforcement (Prevention of

    Money-Laundering Act), Government of India Through Manoj

    Kumar, Assistant Director, Eastern Region6
, it was observed as

    under: -
“30. The conditions specified under
Section 45
of PMLA are
               mandatory and need to be complied with, which is further
               strengthened by the provisions of
Section 65
and also
Section 71
of PMLA.
Section 65
requires that the provisions of
CrPC
shall
               apply insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
               Act and
Section 71
provides that the provisions of PMLA shall
               have overriding effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
               therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
               PMLA has an overriding effect and the provisions of
CrPC
would
               apply only if they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
               Act. Therefore, the conditions enumerated in
Section 45
of PMLA
               will have to be complied with even in respect of an application for
               bail made under
Section 439
CrPC. That coupled with the
               provisions of Section 24 provides that unless the contrary is
               proved, the authority or the Court shall presume that proceeds of
               crime are involved in money-laundering and the burden to prove
               that the proceeds of crime are not involved, lies on the appellant.”




6(2015) 16 SCC 1
14
13. Keeping in view of the aforestated legal position let us consider the

    submissions made by the learned counsels for the parties. It is trite

    that the court while considering an application seeking bail, is not

    required to weigh the evidence collected by the investigating agency

    meticulously, nonetheless, the court should keep in mind the nature

    of accusation, the nature of evidence collected in support thereof,

    the severity of the punishment prescribed for the alleged offences,

    the character of the accused, circumstances which are peculiar to

    the accused, reasonable possibility of securing the presence of the

    accused at the trial, reasonable apprehension of the witness being

    tampered with, the larger interests of the public/State etc. Though,

    the findings recorded by the Court while granting or refusing bail

    would be tentative in nature, nonetheless the Court is expected to

    express prima facie opinion for granting or refusing to grant bail

    which would demonstrate an application of mind, particularly dealing

    with the economic offences.
14. The first and foremost contention raised by learned Senior Counsel

    Mr. Luthra would be that the appellant was not named in the FIR nor

    in first three prosecution/ supplementary complaints and has been

    implicated only on the basis of the statements of witnesses recorded
15
pursuant to the summons issued under
Section 50
of the PML Act,

    without there being any material in support thereof.
15. In our opinion, there is hardly any merit in the said submission of

    Mr. Luthra.
In
Rohit Tandon vs. Directorate of Enforcement7
, a

    three Judge Bench has categorically observed that the statements

    of witnesses/ accused are admissible in evidence in view of
Section

    50
of the said Act and such statements may make out a formidable

    case about the involvement of the accused in the commission of a

    serious offence of money laundering.
Further, as held in
Vijay

    Madanlal
(supra), the offence of money laundering under
Section 3
of the Act is an independent offence regarding the process or activity

    connected with the proceeds of crime which had been derived or

    obtained as a result of criminal activity relating to or in relation to a

    scheduled offence. The offence of money laundering is not

    dependent or linked to the date on which the scheduled offence or

    predicate offence has been committed. The relevant date is the date

    on which the person indulges in the process or activity connected

    with the proceeds of crime. Thus, the involvement of the person in

    any of the criminal activities like concealment, possession,


7(2018) 11 SCC 46
16
acquisition, use of proceeds of crime as much as projecting it as

    untainted property or claiming it to be so, would constitute the

    offence of money laundering under
Section 3
of the Act.
16. So far as facts of the present case are concerned, as transpiring

    from the supplementary complaint filed against the appellant, apart

    from the statements of witnesses recorded under
Section 50
of the

    said Act, there has been sufficient material collected in the form of

    documents which prima facie show as to how the appellant was

    knowingly a party and actually involved in the process and in the

    activities connected with the proceeds of crime, and how he was

    projecting/ claiming such proceeds of crime as untainted and how he

    was the beneficiary of the proceeds of crime acquired through the

    criminal activities relating to the scheduled offences .
17. As well settled by now, the conditions specified under
Section 45
are mandatory. They need to be complied with. The Court is

    required to be satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for

    believing that the accused is not guilty of such offence and he is not

    likely to commit any offence while on bail. It is needless to say that

    as per the statutory presumption permitted under
Section 24
of the

    Act, the Court or the Authority is entitled to presume unless the
17
contrary is proved, that in any proceedings relating to proceeds of

    crime under the Act, in the case of a person charged with the

    offence of money laundering under
Section 3
, such proceeds of

    crime   are   involved   in   money   laundering.   Such   conditions

    enumerated in
Section 45
of PML Act will have to be complied with

    even in respect of an application for bail made under
Section 439
Cr.P.C. in view of the overriding effect given to the
PML Act
over the

    other law for the time being in force, under
Section 71
of the PML

    Act.
18. The submission of learned Counsel Mr. Luthra to grant bail to the

    appellant on the ground that the other co-accused who were

    similarly situated as the appellant, have been granted bail, also

    cannot be accepted. It may be noted that parity is not the law. While

    applying the principle of parity, the Court is required to focus upon

    the role attached to the accused whose application is under

    consideration. It is not disputed in that the main accused Sh. Kewal

    Krishan Kumar, Managing Director of SBFL, and KMP of group

    companies and the other accused Devki Nandan Garg, owner/

    operator/ controller of various shell companies were granted bail on

    the ground of infirmity and medical grounds. The co-accused Raman
18
Bhuraria, who was the internal auditor of SBFL has been granted

    bail by the High Court, however the said order of High Court has

    been challenged by the respondent before this Court by filing being

    SLP (Crl.) No. 9047 of 2023 and the same is pending under

    consideration. In the instant case, the High Court in the impugned

    order while repelling the said submission made on behalf of the

    appellant, had distinguished the case of Raman Bhuraria and had

    observed that unlike Raman Bhuraria who was an internal auditor of

    SBFL (for a brief period statutory auditor of SBFL), the applicant was

    the Vice President of Purchases and as a Vice President, he was

    responsible for the day-to-day operations of the company. It was

    also observed that the appellant’s role was made out from the

    financials, where direct loan funds have been siphoned off to the

    sister concerns of SBFL, where the appellant was either a

    shareholder or director. In any case, the order granting bail to

    Raman Bhuraria being under consideration before the coordinate

    bench of this Court, it would not be appropriate for us to make any

    observation with regard to the said order passed by the High Court.
19. It is axiomatic that the principle of parity is based on the guarantee

    of positive equality before law enshrined in
Article 14
of the
19
Constitution. However, if any illegality or irregularity has been

    committed in favour of any individual or a group of individuals, or a

    wrong order has been passed by a judicial forum, others cannot

    invoke the jurisdiction of the higher or superior court for repeating or

    multiplying the same irregularity or illegality or for passing similar

    wrong order.
Article 14
is not meant to perpetuate the illegality or

    irregularity. If there has been a benefit or advantage conferred on

    one or a set of people by any authority or by the court, without legal

    basis or justification, other persons could not claim as a matter of

    right the benefit on the basis of such wrong decision.
20. It is also difficult to countenance the submission of learned Counsel

    Mr. Luthra that the investigation qua the appellant is complete and

    the trial of the cases likely to take long time. According to him the

    appellant ought not to be incarcerated indefinitely merely because

    the investigation is kept open with regard to the other accused. In

    this regard, it may be noted that the appellant has not been able to

    overcome the threshold stipulations contemplated in
Section 45
namely he has failed to prima facie prove that he is not guilty of the

    alleged offence and is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.

    It cannot be gainsaid that the burden of proof lies on the accused for
20
the purpose of the condition set out in the
Section 45
that he is not

    guilty of such offence. Of course, such discharge of burden could

    be on the probabilities, nonetheless in the instant case there being

    sufficient material on record adduced by the respondent showing the

    thick involvement of the appellant in the alleged offence of money

    laundering under
Section 3
of the said Act, the Court is not inclined

    to grant bail to the appellant.
21. The apprehension of the learned counsel for the appellant that the

    trial is likely to take long time and the appellant would be

    incarcerated for indefinite period, is also not well founded in view of

    the observations made by this Court in case of
Vijay Madanlal
(supra). On the application of
Section 436A
of the Code of Criminal

    Procedure, 1973, it has been categorically held therein that: -
“419. Section 436A of the 1973 Code, is a wholesome beneficial
             provision, which is for effectuating the right of speedy trial
             guaranteed by
Article 21
of the Constitution and which merely
             specifies the outer limits within which the trial is expected to be
             concluded, failing which, the accused ought not to be detained
             further. Indeed, Section 436A of the 1973 Code also contemplates
             that the relief under this provision cannot be granted mechanically.
             It is still within the discretion of the Court, unlike the default bail
             under Section 167 of the 1973 Code. Under Section 436A of the
             1973 Code, however, the Court is required to consider the relief on
             case-to-case basis. As the proviso therein itself recognises that, in
             a given case, the detention can be continued by the Court even
             longer than one-half of the period, for which, reasons are to be
             recorded by it in writing and also by imposing such terms and
21
conditions so as to ensure that after release, the accused makes
                   himself/herself available for expeditious completion of the trial.”
22. Lastly, it may be noted that as held in catena of decisions, the

        economic offences constitute a class apart and need to be visited

        with a different approach in the matter of bail. The economic

        offences having deep-rooted conspiracies and involving huge loss

        of public funds need to be viewed seriously and considered as

        grave offences affecting the economy of the country as a whole

        and thereby posing serious threat to the financial health of the

        country.       Undoubtedly,        economic         offences       have      serious

        repercussions on the development of the country as a whole. To

        cite a few judgments in this regard are
Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy

        vs. Central Bureau of Investigation8
,
Nimmagadda Prasad vs.

        Central       Bureau       of    Investigation9
,
Gautam        Kundu      vs.

        Directorate of Enforcement
(
supra), State of Bihar and Another

        vs. Amit Kumar
alias Bachcha Rai10.
This court taking a serious

        note with regard to the economic offences had observed as back




8  (2013) 7 SCC 439
9  (2013) 7 SCC 466
10 (2017) 13 SCC 751
22
as in 1987 in case of
State of Gujarat vs. Mohanlal Jitamalji

      Porwal and Another11
as under:-
“5… The entire community is aggrieved if the economic offenders
              who ruin the economy of the State are not brought to books. A
              murder may be committed in the heat of moment upon passions
              being aroused. An economic offence is committed with cool
              calculation and deliberate design with an eye on personal profit
              regardless of the consequence to the community. A disregard for
              the interest of the community can be manifested only at the cost of
              forfeiting the trust and faith of the community in the system to
              administer justice in an even-handed manner without fear of
              criticism from the quarters which view white collar crimes with a
              permissive eye unmindful of the damage done to the National
              Economy and National Interest…”
23. With the advancement of technology and Artificial Intelligence, the

   economic offences like money laundering have become a real threat

   to the functioning of the financial system of the country and have

   become a great challenge for the investigating agencies to detect and

   comprehend the intricate nature of transactions, as also the role of

   the persons involved therein. Lot of minute exercise is expected to be

   undertaken by the Investigating Agency to see that no innocent

   person is wrongly booked and that no culprit escapes from the

   clutches of the law. When the detention of the accused is continued

   by the Court, the courts are also expected to conclude the trials within
11 (1987) 2 SCC 364
23
a reasonable time, further ensuring the right of speedy trial

   guaranteed by
Article 21
of the Constitution.
24. With the afore-stated observations, the appeal is dismissed.
…………………………. J.
[ANIRUDDHA BOSE]




                                               …………………………. J.
[BELA M. TRIVEDI]

NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 20th, 2023
24