[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Pavnesh Kumar vs Union Of India on 28 November, 2023
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S. Oka
Civil Appeal No. 3641 of 2023


 2023 INSC 1025                                                    NON-REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.3641 OF 2023


          PAVNESH KUMAR                                                  …APPELLANT

                                                 VERSUS


            UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                        …RESPONDENT



                                          J U D G M E N T
PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.              Learned counsel appearing for the parties were heard.
2.              The appellant who was working as a constable with the Border

                         Security Force (BSF), applied for the post of Sub-Inspector

                         General Duty (GD) through Limited Departmental Competitive

                         Examination (LDCE) 2018-19 but was declared medically unfit

                         and the said order was not disturbed even in the review medical

                         examination by Board of three doctors.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
3.
Date: 2023.11.28
14:41:30 IST
Reason:
Aggrieved by the above action of the respondent BSF declaring

                         him medically unfit for the post of Sub-Inspector (GD) through
Page 1 of 9
Civil Appeal No. 3641 of 2023
LDCE, the appellant preferred a writ petition before the Delhi

     High Court for quashing the medical result dated 27.02.2020 of

     the review medical examination and for a direction to the

     respondent BSF to treat him medically fit.
4.   The writ petition (civil) so filed by the appellant was dismissed

     by the High Court vide impugned order dated 24.09.2020.
5.   In the above factual scenario, the appellant has preferred this

     appeal.
6.   Learned Counsel for the appellant submitted that the appellant

     was found medically fit on 16.12.2019 and as such the

     respondent BSF was not competent to declare him unfit

     subsequently on 23.12.2019. The appellant underwent a small

     surgery whereupon he was found to be medically fit for the post

     but even then, the review medical examination on 27.02.2020

     declined to clear him as medically fit to hold the post of Sub-

     Inspector (GD).
7.   The appellant was appointed as a Constable (GD) with the BSF

     w.e.f. 04.04.2012. After the appellant had put in about 8 years

     of service as a Constable, an advertisement was issued by the
Page 2 of 9
Civil Appeal No. 3641 of 2023
respondent BSF inviting applications from serving                        BSF

Male/Female Constables (GD), Head Constables (GD), ASI (GD)

etc for selection to the post of Sub Inspector (GD) through LDCE

2018-19.   The    advertisement         provided   for    the     eligibility

conditions and for the scheme of examination. The eligibility

conditions provided; (i) the upper age limit of 32 years on the

closing date of application for appearing in LDCE; (ii) that the

candidate should have completed 4 years of service including

basic training; (iii) graduation with unblemished clean record of

entire service until the issuance of offer of appointment; and (iv)

must fulfil the physical standards laid down. Another eligibility

condition was that candidate should qualify SHAPE-I medical

category. The scheme of examination consisted of five stages. In

the stage-I, service records were to be checked and verified, in

stage-II, the candidates were to undergo written examination

(OMR based), stage-III was of a physical measurements (PST)

and stage-IV was a physical efficiency test (PET). Upon

successful completion of all the above four stages, the

candidates were to undergo detailed medical examination i.e.

stage-V wherein they must be declared medically fit for the post.
Page 3 of 9
Civil Appeal No. 3641 of 2023
8.   In view of the above terms and conditions of the advertisement

     for the post of Sub-Inspector (GD) through LDCE, the

     candidates were supposed to successfully complete the first

     four stages of the examination and then have to be medically

     declared fit for the post in the fifth stage. The declaration of

     medically fit after undergoing the four stages of the examination

     was in addition to the eligibility condition of being in the medical

     category SHAPE-I which was a condition precedent for

     participating in LDCE. The declaration of any candidate in the

     medical category SHAPE-I was not sufficient enough to treat

     him to be medically fit for the post.
9.   The appellant was issued a call letter dated 16.11.2019 by the

     recruitment    officer   to    appear       in   the     detailed       medical

     examination for selection to the post of Sub-Inspector (GD) in

     BSF through LDCE 2018-19. The said letter indicates that the

     appellant was called for stage-V detailed medical examination

     on 23.12.2019. Upon such medical examination on the

     aforesaid date, the appellant was not found medically fit for the

     reason that he suffered from Right Sided Varicocele, Varicose
Page 4 of 9
Civil Appeal No. 3641 of 2023
Vein left calf, Tachycardia pulse rate 110/min (normal range

     60-110/min).
10. The appellant appealed against the above decision whereupon

     the review medical examination by Board of three members on

     27.02.2020 confirmed the medical report and declared the

     appellant to be unfit. The Medical Board recorded the reasons

     of unfitness of the appellant noticing the fact that he was

     operated upon on 28.12.2019.
11. The submission of the Counsel for the appellant that once the

     appellant was declared medically fit, the respondent BSF could

     not have reviewed the matter to take a contrary decision

     declaring him medically unfit.
12. The above submission of the counsel is ex-facie bereft of merit

     as the appellant was never declared medically fit for the post of

     Sub-Inspector (GD) pursuant to his candidature for the said

     post through LDCE. The appellant had undergone routine

     annual medical check-up as a constable and was declared in

     medical category SHAPE-I, which was the eligibility condition

     for applying to the post of Sub-Inspector (GD) through LDCE.
Page 5 of 9
Civil Appeal No. 3641 of 2023
The appellant was never declared medically fit in the process of

    selection for the post of Sub-Inspector (GD). The appellant may

    have qualified stage-I to stage-IV of the process of examination

    but never qualified stage-V which consisted of the detailed

    medical examination. The said detailed medical examination as

    per the call letter referred to above was done only on 23.12.2019

    and not on any earlier date. In the said detailed medical

    examination the appellant was declared unfit which decision

    was upheld by the review medical examination by the board of

    three members despite appellant having undergone a minor

    surgery for the cure of medical deficiencies pointed out earlier.

    The medical examination of the appellant conducted on

    16.12.1999 was a routine annual examination which declared

    him in medical category SHAPE-I. It was not a part of

    examination process for selection to the post of Sub-Inspector

    (GD) through LDCE. The appellant never successfully qualified

    all the five stages of examination as advertised for the selection

    to the post of Sub-Inspector (GD) through LDCE.
13. It was next contended that the appointment through LDCE is

    like fast-track promotion and is not a fresh appointment.
Page 6 of 9
Civil Appeal No. 3641 of 2023
Therefore, recruitment rules and guidelines applicable to the

    normal mode of promotion would have been applied and not any

    different medical standards.
14. No doubt appointment to a higher post of an incumbent working

    on lower post is in the form of an accelerated promotion but it

    cannot be equated with normal mode of promotion. This is

    evident from the advertisement itself which in unequivocal

    terms states that applications are invited for selection to the

    post of Sub-Inspector (GD) in BSF through LDCE. The very fact

    that the applications were invited for selection to the post of

    Sub-Inspector (GD) connotes that it was not a normal

    promotion rather selection to the higher post from amongst the

    eligible candidates working on the lower post. Thus, the

    submission that the normal rules of promotion or medical

    examination ought to have been applied, is not acceptable.
15. This apart, selection was to be conducted in terms of the

    advertisement. The scheme of the selection contained in the

    advertisement    categorically         provided   clearing        of      the

    examination in all the five stages which included detailed
Page 7 of 9
Civil Appeal No. 3641 of 2023
medical examination. This was independent and in addition of

    the eligibility condition that a candidate must possess the

    medical category SHAPE-I while working on the lower post.
16. Additionally, a distinction has to be drawn between a normal

    promotion    and   promotion      by    selection   through        LDCE.

    Promotion by selection through LDCE vis-à-vis competitive

    examination is a facility or a chance given for out of their

    promotion without waiting for the normal course of promotion.

    It in effect is selection through competitive examination within

    the limited category of candidates and cannot be equated with

    normal promotion. This being the position, the argument that

    regular promotion criteria had to be applied with regard to

    medical fitness even in the matter of selection through LDCE is

    not acceptable.
17. In view of the above facts and circumstances, we find no

    substance in the appeal. There is no review of the medical of the

    appellant and the declaration that he is “medically unfit”, is not

    contrary to any earlier reports as he was never declared to be
Page 8 of 9
Civil Appeal No. 3641 of 2023
medically fit in the process of examination for selection to Sub-

    Inspector (GD) through LDCE.
18. The judgment and order of the High Court dismissing the writ

    petition upholding the decision of the Medical Board declaring

    the appellant as medically unfit does not suffer from any error

    of law or fact. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed with no order

    as to cost.
……………………….. J.
(ABHAY S. OKA)




                                              ……………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 28, 2023.
Page 9 of 9