[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Multicon Builders vs Sumandevi on 6 November, 2023
Author:
Rajesh Bindal
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
,
Vikram Nath
NON-REPORTABLE


                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).8400-8401 OF 2015



M/s MULTICON BUILDERS                                            … Appellant(s)



                                        VERSUS


SUMANDEVI AND OTHERS                                             … Respondent(s)




                                  JUDGMENT
RAJESH BINDAL, J.
1.            The present appeals have been filed against the orders1

passed by the High Court2, vide which the order3 passed by the Trial

Court4 was set aside by the learned Single Judge.
1
Dated 10.09.2014 in FA NO.285/2012 & 24.04.2015 in MCA No.1222/2014 in FA No.295/2012
2
High Court of Bombay at Nagpur
3
Dated 27.02.2012 in Special Civil Suit No.1017 of 1994
4 th
  4 Joint Civil Judge, Senior Division, Nagpur
1
2.         Briefly stating the facts of the case are that a civil suit was

filed by Sheela widow of Narendra Fiske for declaration, partition and

separate possession of the family property.       In the aforesaid suit,

counter claim was filed by the defendant nos.1, 4 to 8. The preliminary

decree was passed by the Trial Court on 27.02.2012 determining the

shares of the plaintiff and defendant nos.1 to 8. The defendants were

restrained from alienating the suit property till partition takes place by

metes and bounds. The preliminary decree passed by the Trial Court

was not challenged by the plaintiff and defendant nos.1 to 8.

Defendant no.9-appellant herein was held to be having no right, title or

claim in the suit property. The defendants were directed to demolish

the construction raised in violation of the Municipal Laws. It is the

aforesaid preliminary decree which was challenged only by the

defendant no.9, namely, the present appellant before the High Court.

The appeal was dismissed, while modifying the operative part of the

order of the Trial Court only to the extent that the defendant nos.2 and

9 were directed to demolish the construction on the suit plot forthwith.
3.         The issue was sought to be raised only by the appellant,

who is not a member of the family as such but is claiming his rights

through some of the co-sharers. The plea of the appellant was that the

respondent no.2 – Chandrashekhar Deshmukh had transferred his
2
share to him with the partition of the property amongst the plaintiff and

defendant nos.1 to 8, his rights are adversely affected as he has spent

huge amount in raising construction on the plot.
4.         After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, in our

view, the order passed by the Trial Court passing the preliminary

decree in a partition suit as upheld by the High Court, does not deserve

interference by this Court as admittedly there is no challenge to the

same by any of the co-sharers (family members) of the property in

dispute with reference to their respective shares. The final decree is

yet to be passed. At that stage the property will be divided by metes

and bounds. The preliminary decree is being contested only by the

appellant who claimed that defendant no.2 – Chandrashekhar

Deshmukh had transferred his share to him.         In some part of the

property two residential houses are located which are stated to be in

occupation of Chandrashekhar Deshmukh (Respondent No.2) and

Chandrakant Deshmukh (Respondent No.3) whereas on the other part

commercial complex has been constructed, in which the appellant is

claiming interest.
5.         We have no doubt that in the process of passing final decree

for partition of the property by metes and bounds, the court below will

consider all aspects in terms of settled principles of law for that
3
purpose. In case any property in possession of any of the co-sharers

comes to his share it can very well be protected.
6.         In our view, demolition of the already constructed buildings

may not be in the interest of any of the parties as the same can be

considered at the time of passing of final decree, with reference to the

construction, authorised by the local authority. We are not expressing

any opinion on the construction raised unauthorisedly.
7.         For the aforesaid reasons, the impugned orders of the High

Court are modified to the extent mentioned above. The appeals are

accordingly disposed of. The Trial Court will proceed further for

passing the final decree. There shall be no order as to costs.
8.         As the matter is quite old, the Trial Court is directed to

expedite the disposal of the case. We may clarify that we have not

expressed any opinion on the merits of the controversy.
…..……………..J
                                                       (VIKRAM NATH)




                                                      …………………..J
                                                      (RAJESH BINDAL)

New Delhi
November 06, 2023.
4