[Cites
20
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Aditi Alias Mithi vs Jitesh Sharma on 6 November, 2023
Author:
Rajesh Bindal
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
,
Vikram Nath
2023 INSC 981                                                             REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 3446 OF 2023
                               (Arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) No.11954 of 2023)


             ADITI ALIAS MITHI                                         … Appellant(s)
                                                            VERSUS
             JITESH SHARMA                                             … Respondent(s)



                                                      JUDGMENT
RAJESH BINDAL, J.
1.               Leave granted.
2.               As per the office report dated 30.10.2023, the respondent

             had refused to receive notice, hence, the service is deemed to be

             complete.
3.               The appellant-minor daughter of the respondent-father is

             aggrieved of the order1 passed by the High Court2 by which the order3

             passed by the Family Court4 was modified. The Family Court had fixed
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Neetu Khajuria
1
Date: 2023.11.07
   14:08:13 IST
   Reason:
Dated 28.06.2023 in Criminal Revision No.4939 of 2022
2
High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Gwalior
3
Dated 30.11.2022
4
Family Court, Guna
1
maintenance for the appellant ₹20,000/- per month, which was reduced

to ₹7,500/- per month by the High Court.
4.         Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the

marriage between the mother of the appellant and the respondent was

solemnized in the year 2008. Out of the wedlock a boy and a girl were

born. The custody of the boy is with the respondent whereas the

appellant is living with the mother. A divorce petition was filed by the

respondent-husband in January 2018 before the Family Court. In May

2018 the appellant and her mother-Shikha Sharma filed an application

under
Section 125
Cr.P.C. before the Family Court.         The divorce

petition filed by the respondent-husband was allowed by the Family

Court on 10.09.2022. Vide order dated 30.11.2022, the Family Court

partly allowed the application filed by the appellant and her mother

under
Section 125
Cr.P.C. and awarded maintenance of ₹20,000/- per

month for the appellant-minor daughter. The wife was denied any

maintenance. The order qua that became final.
5.         The High Court vide impugned cryptic order has reduced

the amount of maintenance from ₹20,000/- to ₹7,500/-. Despite service

the respondent has not chosen to appear before this Court. He is

shirking to take care of the appellant (minor daughter) who is 6-7 years

of age at present. Prayer is that the impugned order passed by the
2
High Court be set aside and that the order of the Family Court be

restored.
6.            We have heard learned counsel for the appellant and

perused the paper book.
7.            From a perusal of the order passed by the Family Court

awarding maintenance of ₹20,000/- per month to the appellant (minor

daughter), it is evident that the court had considered the material

placed before it. However, the High Court in revision, filed against the

aforesaid order by the respondent, recorded that earlier the

respondent was doing private work and at present he is financially

distressed.
8.            The manner in which maintenance payable under
Section

24
of the Hindu Mariage Act, 1955 or
Section 125
Cr.P.C. is to be

assessed, was considered by this Court in its celebrated judgment in
Rajnesh v. Neha and Another
, (2021) 2 SCC 324. Detailed guidelines

were issued. It was noticed that the terms of maintenance are decided

on the basis of pleadings of parties and on the basis of some amount of

guess work. It is often seen that both the parties submit scanty material

and do not disclose correct details. The tendency of the wife is to

exaggerate her needs, whereas the husband tends to conceal his actual
3
income. Keeping that in view, this Court laid down the procedure to

streamline grant of maintenance. The judgments of various courts

were referred to and response from various State Legal Services

Authorities was sought. This Court even requested the National Legal

Services Authority to submit a report on the suggestions received from

the State Legal Services Authorities for framing guidelines on the

affidavit of disclosure of assets and liabilities to be filed by the parties.
Guidelines were issued in exercise of powers under
Article 136
read

with
Article 142
of the Constitution of India, prescribing a uniform

format of Affidavit of Disclosure of Assets and Liabilities to be filed in

maintenance proceedings.           The judgment was delivered on

04.11.2020.     The affidavit was to be submitted in all maintenance

proceedings including pending proceedings. The directions given are

extracted as under:
“72.           Keeping in mind the need for a uniform format
         of Affidavit of Disclosure of Assets and Liabilities to be filed in
         maintenance proceedings, this Court considers it necessary
         to frame guidelines in exercise of our powers under
Article
         136
read with
Article 142
of the Constitution of India:
72.1.          (a) The Affidavit of Disclosure of Assets and
         Liabilities annexed at Enclosures I, II and III of this judgment,
         as may be applicable, shall be filed by the parties in all
         maintenance proceedings, including pending proceedings
4
before the Family Court/District Court/Magistrate's Court
concerned, as the case may be, throughout the country;
72.2.         (b) The applicant making the claim for
maintenance will be required to file a concise application
accompanied with the Affidavit of Disclosure of Assets;
72.3.         (c) The respondent must submit the reply along
with the Affidavit of Disclosure within a maximum period of
four weeks. The courts may not grant more than two
opportunities for submission of the Affidavit of Disclosure of
Assets and Liabilities to the respondent. If the respondent
delays in filing the reply with the affidavit, and seeks more
than two adjournments for this purpose, the court may
consider exercising the power to strike off the defence of the
respondent, if the conduct is found to be wilful and
contumacious        in      delaying       the      proceedings
[
Kaushalya v. Mukesh Jain
, (2020) 17 SCC 822 : 2019 SCC
OnLine SC 1915] . On the failure to file the affidavit within the
prescribed time, the Family Court may proceed to decide the
application for maintenance on the basis of the affidavit filed
by the applicant and the pleadings on record;
72.4.         (d) The above format may be modified by the
court concerned, if the exigencies of a case require the same.
It would be left to the judicial discretion of the court concerned
to issue necessary directions in this regard.
72.5.         (e) If apart from the information contained in the
Affidavits of Disclosure, any further information is required,
the court concerned may pass appropriate orders in respect
thereof.
5
72.6.         (f) If there is any dispute with respect to the
declaration made in the Affidavit of Disclosure, the aggrieved
party   may   seek   permission      of    the   court    to     serve
interrogatories, and seek production of relevant documents
from the opposite party under
Order 11 CPC
. On filing of the
affidavit, the court may invoke the provisions of
Order 10 CPC
or
Section 165
of the Evidence Act, 1872, if it considers it
necessary to do so. The income of one party is often not within
the knowledge of the other spouse. The court may invoke
Section 106
of the Evidence Act, 1872 if necessary, since the
income, assets and liabilities of the spouse are within the
personal knowledge of the party concerned.
72.7.         (g) If during the course of proceedings, there is
a change in the financial status of any party, or there is a
change of any relevant circumstances, or if some new
information comes to light, the party may submit an
amended/supplementary         affidavit,    which        would     be
considered by the court at the time of final determination.
72.8.         (h) The pleadings made in the applications for
maintenance and replies filed should be responsible
pleadings; if false statements and misrepresentations are
made, the court may consider initiation of proceeding under
Section 340
CrPC, and for contempt of court.
72.9.         (i) In case the parties belong to the economically
weaker sections (“EWS”), or are living below the poverty line
(“BPL”), or are casual labourers, the requirement of filing the
affidavit would be dispensed with.
6
72.10.         (j) The Family Court/District Court/Magistrate's
        Court concerned must make an endeavour to decide the IA for
        interim maintenance by a reasoned order, within a period of
        four to six months at the latest, after the Affidavits of Disclosure
        have been filed before the court.
72.11.         (k) A professional Marriage Counsellor must be
        made available in every Family Court.”
9.         Criteria was also laid down for determining the quantum of

maintenance. Guidelines were laid down regarding maintenance to

minor children in paras 91 and 92 thereof, which are extracted below:
“Permanent alimony
91.     The living expenses of the child would include
           expenses for food, clothing, residence, medical expenses,
           education of children. Extra coaching classes or any other
           vocational training courses to complement the basic
           education must be factored in, while awarding child
           support. Albeit, it should be a reasonable amount to be
           awarded for extracurricular/coaching classes, and not an
           overly extravagant amount which may be claimed.
92.         Education expenses of the children must be
           normally borne by the father. If the wife is working and
           earning sufficiently, the expenses may be shared
           proportionately between the parties.”
7
10.        The Formats of Affidavits required to be filed for Disclosure

of Assets and Liabilities for non-agrarian deponents, agrarian

deponents and the parties residing in the State of Meghalaya in terms

of Enclosure-I to Enclosure-III to the aforesaid judgment, which are

extracted below:
“ENCLOSURE I
                   Affidavit of Assets and Liabilities for Non-Agrarian
                                       Deponents
          I _________, d/o _______ or s/o______, aged about ______years,
          resident of______, do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:
A. Personal Information
1. Name:
2. Age/Sex:
3. Qualifications (Educational and Professional):
4. Whether the Applicant is staying in the matrimonial
                 house/parental home/separate residence. Please provide the
                 current residential address of matrimonial home or place of
                 residence and details of ownership of residence, if owned by
                 other family member.
5. Date of marriage:
6. Date of separation:
7. General monthly expenses of the Applicant (rent, household
                 expenses, medical bills, transportation, etc.):
          B. Details of Legal Proceedings and Maintenance being paid
1. Particulars of any ongoing or past legal proceedings with
                 respect to maintenance or child support between the Applicant
                 and Non-Applicant.
2. Whether any maintenance has been awarded in any proceeding
                 arising under the
DV Act
,
CrPC
, HMA, HAMA, etc.? If yes,
                 provide details of the quantum of maintenance awarded in the
                 proceedings.
3. If so, provide particulars thereof, along with a copy of the
                 order(s) passed.
4. Whether the order of maintenance passed in earlier
                 proceedings has been complied with. If not, arrears of
                 maintenance.
8
5. Whether any voluntary contribution towards maintenance has
      been made/will be made in the future? If yes, provide details
      of the same.
C. Details of dependent family members
1. Details of dependent family members, if any.
(a) Relationship with dependants:
(b) Age and sex of dependant(s):
2. Disclose if any independent source(s) of income of the
       dependants, including interest income, assets, pension, tax
       liability on any such income and any other relevant details.
3. The approximate expenses incurred on account of the
       dependant.
D. Medical details if any, of the deponent and/or dependent
family members
1. Whether either party or child/children is suffering from any
      physical/mental disability, or any other serious ailment. If yes,
      produce medical records.
2. Whether any dependent family member has serious disability,
      requiring continuous medical expenditure. If yes, produce
      disability certificate and approximate medical expenditure
      incurred on such medical treatment.
3. Whether either party or child/children or any other dependent
      family member is suffering from life-threatening diseases,
      which would entail expensive and regular medical
      expenditure? If yes, provide details of the same along with
      summary of previous details of hospitalisation/medical
      expenses incurred.
E. Details of children of the parties
1. Number of children from the existing marriage/marital
       relationship/previous marriage.
2. Name and age of children.
3. Details of the parent who has the custody of the children.
4. Expenditure for maintenance of dependent children.
(a) Towards food, clothing and medical expenses.
(b) Towards expenses for education, and a summary of general
          expenses.
(c) Towards expenses, if any, of any extra educational,
          vocational or professional/educational course, specialised
          training or special skills programme of dependent children.
(d) Details of any loan, mortgage, charge incurred or instalment
          plan (being paid or payable), if any, on account of any
          educational expenses of children.
5. Whether any voluntary contribution by either of the parties is
       being made towards these educational expenses? If yes,
9
provide details of the same. Also provide an estimate of any
     additional contribution that may be required.
6. Whether any financial support is being provided by a third party
     for the educational expenses of the children?
F. Details of Income of the Deponent
1. Name of employer:
2. Designation:
3. Monthly income:
4. If engaged in government service, furnish latest salary
      certificates or current pay slips or proof of deposit in bank
      account, if being remitted directly by employer.
5. If engaged in the private sector, furnish a certificate provided
      by the employer stating the designation and gross monthly
      income of such person, and Form 16 for the relevant period of
      current employment.
6. If any perquisites, benefits, house rent allowance, travel
      allowance, dearness allowance or any other service benefit is
      being provided by the employer during the course of current
      employment.
7. Whether assessed to income tax?
If yes, submit copies of the Income Tax Returns for the periods
      given below:
(i) One year prior to marriage
(ii) One year prior to separation
(iii) At the time when the application for maintenance is filed
8. Income from other sources, such as rent, interest, shares,
      dividends, capital gains, FDRs, Post office deposits, mutual
      funds, stocks, debentures, agriculture, or business, if any,
      along with TDS in respect of any such income.
9. Furnish copies of bank statement of all accounts for the last 3
      years.
G. Assets (movable and immovable) owned by the Deponent
1. Self-acquired property, if any:
2. Properties jointly owned by the parties after marriage:
3. Share in any ancestral property:
4.       Other       joint     properties     of    the      parties
      (accounts/investments/FDR/mutual funds, stocks, debentures,
      etc.), their value and status of possession:
5. Status of possession of immovable property and details of rent,
      if leased:
6. Details of loans taken or given by the Deponent:
7. Brief description of jewellery and ornaments of parties acquired
      during/after marriage:
10
8. Details of transfer deeds or transactions of alienation of
      properties previously owned by the applicant, executed
      during the subsistence of the marriage. Also provide brief
      reasons for such sale or transaction, if any.
H. Details of Liabilities of the Deponent
1. Loans, liabilities, mortgage, or charge outstanding against the
       Deponent, if any.
2. Details of any EMIs being paid.
3. Date and purpose of taking loan or incurring any such liability:
4. Actual amount borrowed, if any, and the amount paid up to date
       of filing the Affidavit:
5. Any other information which would be relevant to describe
       current liabilities of the Deponent.
I.   Self-employed   persons             /Professionals       /Business
Persons/Entrepreneur
1. Brief description of nature of business/profession/vocation/self-
       employed/work activity.
2. Whether the business/profession/self-employment is carried on
       as an individual, sole proprietorship concern, partnership
       concern, LLP, company or association of persons, HUF, joint
       family business or any other form? Give particulars of
       Applicant's share in the partnership/business/professional
       association/self-employment. In case of partnership, specify
       the share in the profit/losses of the partnership.
3. Net Income from the business/profession/partnership/self-
       employment.
4. Business/partnership/self-employment liabilities, if any, in case
       of such activity.
5. In case of business of company, provide brief details of last
       audited balance sheet to indicate profit and loss of the company
       in which such party is in business in the company.
6. In case of a partnership firm, provide details of the filings of the
       last Income Tax Return of partnership.
7. In case of self-employed individual, provide the filings of the last
       Income          Tax       Return       from        any        such
       professional/business/vocational activity.
J. Information provided by the Deponent with respect to the
income, assets and liabilities of the other Spouse
1. Educational and professional qualifications of the other spouse:
2. Whether spouse is earning? If so, give particulars of the
     occupation and income of the spouse.
3. If not, whether he/she is staying in his/her own accommodation,
     or in a rented accommodation or in accommodation provided by
     employer/business/partnership?
11
4. Particulars of assets and liabilities of spouse as known to the
    deponent, along with any supporting documents.
K. Details of Applicant or the other Spouse, in case parties are
Non-Resident Indians, Overseas Citizens of India, Foreign
Nationals or Persons living abroad outside India
1. Details of Citizenship, Nationality and current place of
       residence, if the Applicant or other spouse is residing abroad
       outside India, temporarily or permanently.
2. Details of current employment and latest income in foreign
       currency of such applicant/spouse, duly supported by relevant
       documentation of employment and income from such foreign
       employer or overseas institution by way of employment letter
       or testimonial from foreign employer or overseas institution or
       latest relevant bank statement.
3. Details of household and other expenditure of such
       applicant/spouse in foreign jurisdiction.
4. Details of tax liability of applicant/other spouse in foreign
       jurisdiction.
5. Details of income of applicant/other spouse from other sources
       in India/foreign jurisdiction.
6. Details of expenses incurred or contribution made on account of
       spousal maintenance, child support or any other educational
       expenses, medical treatment of spouse or children.
7. Any other relevant detail of expenses or liabilities, not covered
       under any of the above headings and any other liabilities to any
       other dependent family members in India or abroad.
Declaration
1. I declare that I have made a full and accurate disclosure of my
     income, expenditure, assets and liabilities from all sources. I
     further declare that I have no assets, income, expenditure and
     liabilities other than as stated in this affidavit.
2. I undertake to inform this Court immediately with respect to any
     material change in my employment, assets, income, expenses or
     any other information included in this affidavit.
3. I understand that any false statement in this affidavit, apart from
     being contempt of court, may also constitute an offence under
     Section 199 read with
Sections 191
and
193
of the Indian Penal
     Code punishable with imprisonment up to seven years and fine,
     and
Section 209
of the Indian Penal Code punishable with
     imprisonment up to two years and fine. I have read and
     understood
Sections 191
,
193
,
199
and
209
of the Indian Penal
     Code, 1860.
DEPONENT
                                 Verification
     Verified at ___on this _____day of _____ that the contents of the
     above affidavit are true to my personal knowledge, no part of it
12
is false and nothing material has been concealed therefrom,
 whereas the contents of the above affidavit relating to the assets,
 income and expenditure of my spouse are based on information
 believed to be true on the basis of record. I further verify that the
 copies of the documents filed along with the affidavit are the
 copies of the originals.
DEPONENT
                            ENCLOSURE II
      Details for Affidavit for Agrarian Deponents (Krishi)
1. Total extent of the rural land(s) owned, or the specific
     shareholding in the same land:
2. Jamabandis/Mutations to show ownership.
3. Location of the land owned by the party.
4. Nature of land : whether wet land or dry land.
5. Whether such land is agricultural land or non-agricultural land:
6. Nature of agriculture/horticulture:
7. Nature of crops cultivated during the year:
8. If rural land is not cultivable, whether the same is being used
     for business, leasing or other activity:
9. Income generated during the past 3 years from the land.
10. Whether any land is taken on lease/battai (or any other term
     used for a lease in the local area of the jurisdiction concerned
     where rural/agricultural land is located.)
11. (a) Whether owner of any livestock, such as buffaloes, cows,
     goats, cattle, poultry, fishery, bee keeping, piggery, etc. the
     number thereof and income generated therefrom?
(b) Whether engaged in dairy farming, poultry, fish farming or
     any other livestock activity.
12. Loans, if any obtained against the land. Furnish details of such
     loans.
13. Any other sources of income:
14. Liabilities, if any.
15. Any other relevant information:
Declaration
1. I declare that I have made a full and accurate disclosure of my
     income, expenditure, assets and liabilities from all sources. I
     further declare that I have no assets, income, expenditure and
     liabilities other than as stated in this affidavit.
2. I undertake to inform this Court immediately with respect to
     any material change in my employment, assets, income,
     expenses or any other information included in this affidavit.
3. I understand that any false statement in this affidavit, apart from
     being contempt of court, may constitute an offence under
     Section 199 read with
Sections 191
and
193
of the Indian Penal
     Code punishable with imprisonment up to seven years and
13
fine, and
Section 209
of the Indian Penal Code punishable with
     imprisonment up to two years and fine. I have read and
     understood
Sections 191
,
193
,
199
and
209
of the Indian Penal
     Code, 1860.
DEPONENT
                             Verification
     Verified at ___on this ___day of_____that the contents of the
     above affidavit are true to my personal knowledge, no part of
     it is false and nothing material has been concealed therefrom.
     I further verify that the copies of the documents filed along
     with the affidavit are the copies of the originals.
DEPONENT

                             ENCLOSURE III
                     Affidavit for the State of Meghalaya
1. Whether the woman is the youngest daughter of the family.
2. Whether the woman is staying with her husband in her family
    property.
3. Whether she has any maternal uncle, who plays a very important
    role in their family matters, which includes settlement of
    matrimonial disputes. The woman should also disclose her clan
    and her lineage.
4. The woman should disclose if her children have adopted the
    surname of her mother, inasmuch as Khasi has been defined as
    “a person who adopts the surname of his or her mother”.
5. The woman should disclose if she gets any financial assistance
    from her clan or family member.
6. The woman should disclose if her parents are alive more
    specifically, her mother, and how many siblings she has.
7. In event of a woman not being the youngest daughter, she has to
    disclose who the youngest daughter is.
8. The woman should disclose if she has any movable or any
    immovable property, self-acquired or inherited from her clan.
9. The woman should disclose if she is married to tribal or non-
    tribal.
The above format may be modified or adapted by the court
    concerned, as may be considered appropriate.
Declaration
1. I declare that I have made a full and accurate disclosure of my
    income, expenditure, assets and liabilities from all sources. I
    further declare that I have no assets, income, expenditure and
    liabilities other than as stated in this affidavit.
2. I undertake to inform this Court immediately with respect to any
    material change in my employment, assets, income, expenses or
    any other information included in this affidavit.
14
3. I understand that any false statement in this affidavit, apart from
                 being contempt of court, may also constitute an offence under
                 Section 199 read with
Sections 191
and
193
of the Indian Penal
                 Code punishable with imprisonment up to seven years and fine,
                 and
Section 209
of the Indian Penal Code punishable with
                 imprisonment up to two years and fine. I have read and
                 understood
Sections 191
,
193
,
199
, and
209
of the Indian Penal
                 Code, 1860.
DEPONENT
                                             Verification
                 Verified at ___on this _____day of _____ that the contents of the
                 above affidavit are true to my personal knowledge, no part of it
                 is false and nothing material has been concealed therefrom,
                 whereas the contents of the above affidavit relating to the assets,
                 income and expenditure of my spouse are based on information
                 believed to be true on the basis of record. I further verify that the
                 copies of the documents filed along with the affidavit are the
                 copies of the originals.
DEPONENT”
11.        Separate Affidavits were provided for agrarian and non-
agrarian deponents as the particulars to be furnished by the deponents

living in the urban areas are entirely different from those who are living

in rural and tribal areas.        Separate format of Affidavit has been

provided for the residents of the State of Meghalaya considering its

special status. It is predominantly a tribal area and follows matrilineal

system of society.
12.
In
Neha Tyagi v. Lieutenant Colonel Deepak Tyagi
,

(2022) 3 SCC 86, this court while upholding the decree of divorce

granted by the courts below, opined that even after the divorce, the

husband is not absolved of his liability and responsibility to maintain

child/son till he attains the age of majority. In a dispute between the
15
husband and wife, the child should not be made to suffer. Relevant

para 6 thereof is extracted below:
“6.           However, at the same time, the respondent
         husband cannot be absolved from his liability and
         responsibility to maintain his son Pranav till he attains the age
         of majority. Whatever be the dispute between the husband
         and the wife, a child should not be made to suffer. The liability
         and responsibility of the father to maintain the child continues
         till the child/son attains the age of majority. It also cannot be
         disputed that the son Pranav has a right to be maintained as
         per the status of his father. It is reported that the mother is not
         earning anything. She is residing at her parental house at
         Jaipur. Therefore, a reasonable/sufficient amount is required
         for the maintenance of her son including his education etc.
         which shall have to be paid by the respondent husband,
         irrespective of the decree of dissolution of marriage between
         the appellant wife and the respondent husband. The amount
         which was being paid pursuant to the order passed by the
         Army authorities on 15-11-2012 has also been stopped by the
         respondent husband since December 2019.”
                                                     (emphasis supplied)

However, in a given case, where the earning of the wife is also good,

that factor can always be considered as joint parenting is always best

for upbringing of the child. The basic object is the welfare of the child.
16
13.        A perusal of the order passed by the High Court shows that

the amount of maintenance awarded to the appellant was reduced from

₹20,000/- to ₹7,500/- per month, merely noticing that earlier, the

respondent was in business. However, at that point in time he was in

debt and in financial distress, hence, not able to pay huge amount of

maintenance to the minor daughter.            The respondent is not

represented before this Court to justify the stand taken by him before

the High Court. The Family Court had passed a detailed order giving

reasons.
14.        Nothing is evident from the record or even pointed out by

the learned counsel for the appellant at the time of hearing that

affidavits were filed by both the parties in terms of judgment of this

Court in Rajnesh’s case (supra), which was directed to be

communicated to all the High Courts for further circulation to all the

Judicial Officers for awareness and implementation. The case in hand

is not in isolation.   Even after pronouncement of the aforesaid

judgment, this Court is still coming across number of cases decided by

the courts below fixing maintenance, either interim or final, without

their being any affidavit on record filed by the parties. Apparently, the

officers concerned have failed to take notice of the guidelines issued

by this Court for expeditious disposal of cases involving grant of
17
maintenance. Comprehensive guidelines were issued pertaining to

overlapping jurisdiction among courts when concurrent remedies for

grant of maintenance are available under the
Special Marriage Act,

1954
,
Section 125
Cr.P.C., the Protection of Women from Domestic

Violence Act, 2005,
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
and
Hindu Adoptions and

Maintenance Act, 1956
, and Criteria for determining quantum of

maintenance, date from which maintenance is to be awarded,

enforcement of orders of maintenance including fixing payment of

interim maintenance. As a result, the litigation which should close at

the trial level is taken up to this Court and the parties are forced to

litigate.
15.         As in the case in hand, the impugned order passed by the

High Court is cryptic and is bereft of reasons. In our opinion, the same

deserves to be set aside and the matter is liable to be remitted to the

High Court for consideration afresh. Ordered accordingly. As the

respondent remained unrepresented, the High Court may issue notice

for his appearance on the date so fixed by it.
16.         Considering the facts of the case in hand and the other

similar cases coming across before this Court not adhering to the

guidelines given in Rajnesh’s case (supra), we deem it appropriate to

direct the Secretary General of this Court to re-circulate the aforesaid
18
judgment not only to all the Judicial Officers through the High Courts

concerned but also to the National Judicial Academy and the State

Judicial Academies, to be taken note of during the training

programmes as well. Ordered accordingly.
17.        The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
…..……………..J
                                                     (VIKRAM NATH)



                                                    …………………..J
                                                    (RAJESH BINDAL)

New Delhi
November 06, 2023.
19