[Cites
26
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India . vs K.Suri Babu on 29 November, 2023
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
,
C.T. Ravikumar
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
1


2023 INSC 1033                                                           REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.1320 OF 2010

                 UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                 …APPELLANTS

                                                  VERSUS

                    K. SURI BABU                                      …RESPONDENT

                                                    WITH

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.1323 OF 2010

                    UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                              …APPELLANTS

                                                  VERSUS

                    M. KIRAN KUMAR                                    …RESPONDENT


                                              JUDGMENT
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.
1.             These are the two appeals filed by the Union of India; Appeal

                            No.1320/2010, is against the order dated 14.10.2008

                            passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature,

                            Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad in Writ Petition No.9541 of

                            2008 and Appeal No. 1323/2010 is against the order dated
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
22.01.2009, of a Division Bench of the High Court of
   Date: 2023.11.30
   16:59:56 IST
   Reason:
Judicature, Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad passed in Writ
2
Petition No.494/2009. The issue in both the Civil Appeals

     raised is identical, but for the sake of convenience, for facts

     we would be only referring to Civil Appeal No.1320 of 2010.
2.   The High Court in the impugned order dated 14.10.2008 has

     allowed the Writ Petition of the respondent by setting aside

     the order (dated 18.03.2008), passed by the Central

     Administrative Tribunal, Hyderabad (for short ‘CAT’) which

     upheld the initiation of the disciplinary proceedings by the

     Nuclear Fuel Complex-Hyderabad (hereinafter referred to as

     ‘NFC’ or ‘Department’), against the respondent under the

     Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal)

     Rules, 1965 (for short ‘CCA Rules 1965’). The short question

     which was there before the High Court and which is now

     before us, is whether the disciplinary proceedings against

     the respondent (who is admittedly a workman), could be

     initiated under the CCA Rules 1965 or it could be done only

     under the Standing Orders certified for the NFC-Hyderabad

     on 27.08.1973 (hereinafter referred to as “Standing Orders”),

     under the
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act,

     1946
(hereinafter referred to as ‘1946 Act’).
3.   NFC was set up in the 1970s, as a constituent unit of the

     Department of Atomic Energy, Government of India. The
3
respondent was appointed as a ‘helper’ w.e.f. 05.05.2001 in

NFC. Helper is the class IV post and it seems that the

eligibility requirement for the post was a Class VI certificate

which the respondent had submitted in order to get the

appointment. On 23.04.2003 he received a memorandum

which said that he had given a false declaration that he had

passed Class VI as the transfer certificate of Class VI

submitted by him was found to be fake for which a

disciplinary action was to be initiated against him under

CCA Rules 1965. In response, the respondent denied the

allegations and asserted that his certificate is genuine and

further contended that the disciplinary proceedings, if any,

would be governed by the Standing Orders and not under

the CCA Rules 1965, and ultimately, he filed an OA before

the CAT, Hyderabad, with a prayer to set aside the

proceedings against him, inter alia, on the grounds that the

disciplinary proceedings against him can only be initiated

under the “Standing Orders”, and not under the CCA Rules.
The CAT, dismissed his O.A. vide its order dated 18.03.2008.

The CAT relied on his appointment order, as well as the

circular dated 12.05.2005 issued by the Department to

clarify that their employees were governed by the CCA Rules
4
and not Standing Orders. This order of CAT, was challenged

     by the respondent in a writ petition before the High Court

     which was allowed and the order of the CAT was set aside

     and the disciplinary proceedings against the respondent

     were quashed.
4.   The case of the respondent is that he being a workman will

     be covered by the Standing Orders which contain provisions

     to deal with matters, inter alia, of disciplinary proceedings,

     and therefore the proceedings initiated against him under

     the CCA Rules, 1965 are without jurisdiction. On the other

     hand, the appellants before this Court would argue that the

     respondent-workman is governed by the CCA Rules 1965,

     being an employee of NFC, Hyderabad. One of the terms and

     conditions stated in his appointment order was that he

     would be governed under the CCA Rules, even for

     disciplinary proceedings. Further, it is under the CCA Rules

     where a large number of benefits are liable to be given to the

     employees of the Department. On the date, an employee

     reaches the age of superannuation, he gets his pension only

     under the CCA Rules 1965, apart from a large number of

     other benefits and therefore it is not open for the employee

     to say that as long he enjoys the benefits, the Rules will be
5
applicable, but the same Rules will not be applicable in the

     disciplinary proceedings against him. Such an argument is

     not tenable under the law, the department would argue.
5.   We have heard Mr. Arkaj Kumar, learned counsel for the

     appellants and Mr. Anand Padmanabhan R. learned counsel

     for the respondent workman, at length and have perused the

     material on record.
6.   Learned counsel appearing for the Department has drawn

     our attention to the appointment order dated 05.05.2001,

     which states that in matters of disciplinary proceedings the

     employee will be governed by the CCA Rules. The relevant

     provision mentioned in the appointment order is as under:
“3. I am to add that other terms and
               conditions of your service including
               discipline will be governed by the rules as
               applicable     to    Central   Government
               employees of your status in NFC from time
               to time. Your leave entitlement will be
               admissible to Industrial employees in
               departmental        undertakings      under
               Appendix-XI of CSR Vol. II (8th Edition)
               (Ref. Ministry of finance Memo No. 7(84) E-
               IV(A)/B1, dt. 17.11.61 as amended vide
               Ministry of Finance Memo No. B(1)-E-
               IV(A)/70, dt. 27.03.71). Other conditions of
               service will be governed by the Rules and
               Orders of the Central Government in force
               from time to time.”
6
Since     the    Rules    applicable   to    Central   Government

            employees are the CCA Rules 1965, the reference in the

            appointment order to the applicable Rules, is of CCA Rules,

            1965.
7.          Standing Orders made under the
Industrial Establishment

            (Standing Orders) Act, 1946
are however Rules specific to

            workmen         in   an   industrial   establishment.
Industrial

            Employment           (Standing   Orders)    Act
1946,
Industrial

            Disputes Act, 1947
and a number of other legislations of this

            period, are worker friendly legislations, which were enacted

            with a purpose i.e., to regulate the working conditions of

            workmen. Standing Orders grant a protection to a workman,

            inter alia, when he faces a disciplinary proceeding initiated

            by the employer. The employer is undoubtedly on a much

            powerful position than a workman and has much stronger

            bargaining power and consequently the statute has been

            made to create a balance. This position has been held by this

            Court in a catena of decisions, namely,
Salem-Erode

            Electricity Distribution Co. (P) Ltd. v. Employees’ Union
(
1966) 2 SCR 4981, Management, Shahdara (Delhi)
1
Paragraph No. 8
7
Saharanpur Light Railway Co. Ltd. v. S.S. Railway

            Workers Union
(1969) 2 SCR 1312 and Agra Electric

            Supply Co. Ltd. v. Sri Alladdin and Others (1969) 2 SCC

            5983 etc.
8.          The protection of the 1946 Act, cannot be denied to a

            workman merely for the reason that the employer grants him

            other services benefits such as pension, gratuity etc. under

            CCA Rules.          The purpose behind this worker-friendly

            legislation was explained by this Court in
Sudhir Chandra

            Sarkar v. Tata Iron & Steel Co. Ltd.
(1984) 3 SCC 369:
“11.    Parliament     enacted      the
Industrial
                      Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946
(“1946
                      Act” for short). The long title of the Act provides
                      that it was an act to require employers in
                      industrial establishments formally to define
                      conditions of employment under them. The
                      preamble of the Act provides that it is expedient
                      to require employers in industrial establishments
                      to define with sufficient precision the conditions
                      of employment under them and to make the said
                      conditions known to workmen employed by
                      them. By
Section 3
, a duty was cast on the
                      employer governed by the Act to submit to the
                      Certifying Officer draft standing orders proposed
                      by him for adoption in his industrial
                      establishment. After going through the procedure
                      prescribed in the Act, the Certifying Officer has to
                      certify the draft standing orders.
Section 8
requires the Certifying Officer to keep a copy of
2
Paragraph No. 7
3
Paragraph No. 5
8
standing orders as finally certified under the Act
in a register to be maintained for the purpose.
Sub-section (2) of
Section 13
imposes a penalty
on employer who does any act in contravention
of the standing orders finally certified under the
Act.
The Act
was a legislative response to the
laissez faire rule of hire and fire at sweet will. It
was an attempt at imposing a statutory contract
of service between two parties unequal to
negotiate, on the footing of equality. This was
vividly noticed by this Court in
Western India
Match Company Ltd. v. Workmen
[(1974) 3 SCC
330 : 1974 SCC (L&S) 531 : (1974) 1 SCR 434 :
(1973) 2 LLJ 403] as under : [SCC para 10, p. 334
: SCC (L&S) p. 536]

      “In the sunny days of the market
      economy theory people sincerely
      believed that the economic law of
      demand and supply in the labour
      market would settle a mutually
      beneficial bargain between the
      employer and the workman. Such a
      bargain, they took it for granted,
      would secure fair terms and
      conditions of employment to the
      workman. This law they venerated
      as natural law. They had an abiding
      faith in the verity of this law. But the
      experience of the working of this law
      over a long period has belied their
      faith.”
The intendment underlying the Act and the
provisions of the Act enacted to give effect to the
intendment and the scheme of the Act leave no
room for doubt that the Standing Orders certified
under the 1946 Act become part of the statutory
terms and conditions of service between the
employer and his employee and they govern the
relationship between the parties. Workmen v.
Firestone Tyre & Rubber Co [(1973) 1 SCC 813,
832 : 1973 SCC (L&S) 341, 360 : (1973) 3 SCR
9
587, 612 : (1973) 1 LLJ 278] Workmen v.
Buckingham and Carnatic Mills [(1970) 1 LLJ 26,
           29 (SC)] and Glaxo Laboratories v. Presiding
           Officer Labour Court, Meerut [(1984) 1 SCC 1 :
1984 SCC (L&S) 42]”
9.   The submission made by the learned counsel for the NFC

     Shri Arkaj Kumar is that since the appointment order itself

     provides that disciplinary issues will be governed by the CCA

     Rules 1965, there should be no room for any doubt as to the

     applicability of the Rules in the disciplinary proceedings.
This may not be always correct. An appointment order

     cannot lay down terms of service which are against what is

     provided in the Standing Orders, as they are binding on the

     employer. This Court in the case of
Western India Match

     Co. Ltd. v. Workmen
(1974) 3 SCC 330 had directed

     reinstatement of a worker, who had been illegally terminated

     from service during his probation period, as this period was

     wrongly extended beyond what was permissible in the

     Standing Orders. This is what was said by this Court in

     Paragraph 11:
“11. The special agreement, in so far as it
               provides for additional four months of
               probation, is an act in contravention of the
               Standing Order. We have already held
               that. It plainly follows from
Sections 4
,
10
and
13(2)
that the inconsistent part of the
10
special agreement cannot prevail over the
                 Standing Order. As long as the Standing
                 Order is in force, it is binding on the
                 Company as well as the workmen. To
                 uphold the special agreement would mean
                 giving a go-by to the Act’s principle of
                 three-party participation in the settlement
                 of terms of employment. So we are of the
                 opinion that the inconsistent part of the
                 special agreement is ineffective and
                 unenforceable.”


      In
Sudhir Chandra Sarkar
(supra) it was ultimately held

      by this Court that the terms of a statutory contract of service

      was illegal because it denied gratuity to an employer which

      was against the Standing Orders that were legally binding

      on the employer.
10.   Standing Orders are defined under
Section 2(g)
of the 1946

      Act as under:
“2(g) “standing orders’ means rules relating
             to matters set out in the Schedule”

      In the schedule to the 1946 Act, a whole list of topics is given

      which are related to workman, such as classification of

      workmen, their attendance, closing and reopening of the

      industrial establishment to suspension or dismissal for

      misconduct and as to what constitutes misconduct, etc.
11
The 1946 Act mandates under
Section 3
that the

employer shall submit before the certifying officer, draft

standing orders proposed by him, for adoption in his

industrial establishment. The draft standing orders after

scrutinization under
Section 4
of the 1946 Act are finally

certified under
Section 5
of the 1946 Act.
The standing orders are then notified under
Section 7
of

the Act, when it becomes effective. However, before these

standing orders are notified under
Section 7
, it may go

through a quasi-judicial process, as any party aggrieved by

any provisions of the standing orders has a right to appeal

under
Section 6
of the 1946 Act before the Appellate

Authority. The standing orders which are finally notified are

then prominently posted by the employer in English as well

as in the language understood by the majority of the

workmen.
Section 10
of the 1946 Act provides that the

standing orders shall not be modified except by agreement

between the parties within six months of the certification or

the last modification of the Standing Orders. The Standing

Order which the workman/respondent claims in the present

case have gone through the above process and there is no
12
order under
Section 10
of the 1946 Act which modifies the

      Standing Order applicable herein.
11.   A standing order is hence no ordinary order.         It has a

      statutory mandate. The 1946 Act mandates all owners of

      industrial establishments which are employing 100 or more

      workmen to prepare standing orders which should cover all

      matters relating to employment of a workman which have

      been given in the schedule of the 1946 Act and then these

      standing orders further need to be certified by the authority

      under the 1946 Act. The objective and purpose of the 1946

      Act was to have a certainty in service conditions of workmen

      and a responsibility was placed upon the employer to

      formulate   fair   conditions   of   industrial   employment,

      including in its disciplinary proceedings against a workman.
In other words, standing orders are a set of Rules which have

      to be strictly followed and cannot be ignored, modified or

      changed, except in accordance with law.
12.   The CCA Rules, 1965 on the other hand were framed under

      the proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution of India which

      are applicable to employees of Central Government.       The

      CCA Rules, 1965 are not specific to workmen as these are
13
general service rules applicable to all employees who work

under the Central Government. These are not workman

specific Rules, unlike the standing orders. Rule 3 of the CCA

Rules, 1965 provides for the applicability of the Rules, which

reads as under:
“3. Application.– (1) These rules shall apply to
      every government servant including every
      civilian Government servant in the Defence
      Services, but shall not apply to–
(a) any railway servant, as defined in rule 102
      of Volume I of the Indian Railway
      Establishment Code,
(b) any member of the All India Services.
(c) any person in casual employment,
(d) any person subject to discharge from service
      on less than one month’s notice,
(e) any person for whom special provision is
      made, in respect of matters covered by these
      rules, by or under any law for the time being in
      force or by or under any agreement entered
      into by or with the previous approval of the
      President before or after the commencement of
      these rules, in regard to matters covered by
      such special provisions.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
rule (1), the President may by order exclude
      any class of Government servants from the
      operation of all or any of these rules.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
      rule (1), or the Indian Railway Establishment
      Code, these rules shall apply to every
      Government servant temporarily transferred to
      a Service or post coming within exception (a) or
(e) in sub-rule (1), to whom, but for such
      transfer, these rules would apply.
14
(4) If any doubt arises–
(a) whether these rules or any of them apply to
            any person, or
(b) whether any person to whom these rules
            apply belongs to a particular Service.
the matter shall be referred to the President,
            who shall decide the same.
13.   The standing orders, on the other hand, as we have seen,

      cover a whole range of activities of work related to a

      workman in an industrial establishment which not only

      includes his working hours, the facilities to be given to a

      workman, his duties and responsibilities but even minor

      activities of a workman in an industrial establishment.

      There is hardly any area which is not covered under these

      standing orders. Another important feature of the standing

      orders is that it is totally focused on the activities, nature of

      work of a workman and the treatment he deserves vis-a-vis

      the employer and the duties towards his employer. All these

      are comprehensively laid down. The CCA Rules, 1965 do not

      comprehensively cover the service conditions of a workman

      as a standing order does.
14.   The purpose and the scope of 1946 Act is explained best in

      the words of Justice O. Chinnappa Reddy in
U.P. State
15
Electricity Board and Another v. Hari Shankar Jain

and Others
, AIR 1979 SC 65, which held as under:
“6.     Let us now examine the various
       statutory provisions in their proper context
       with a view to resolve the problem before us.
First, the Industrial Employment (Standing
       Orders) Act, 1946
. Before the passing of the
       Act, conditions of service of industrial
       employees were invariably ill-defined and
       were hardly ever known with even a slight
       degree of precision to the employees. There
       was no uniformity of conditions of service for
       employees discharging identical duties in the
       same establishment. Conditions of service
       were generally ad-hoc and the result of oral
       arrangements which left the employees at
       the mercy of the employer. With the growth
       of the trade union movement and the right of
       collective bargaining, employees started
       putting forth their demands to end this sad
       and confusing state of affairs. Recognising
       the rough deal that was being given to
       workers by employers who would not define
       their conditions of service and the
       inevitability of industrial strife in such a
       situation, the legislature intervened and
       enacted       the
Industrial     Employment
       (Standing Orders) Act
. It was stated in the
       statement of objects and reasons:
“Experience has shown that ‘Standing
          Orders’, defining the conditions of
          recruitment, discharge, disciplinary
          action, holidays, leave etc., go a long
          way      towards     minimising     friction
          between the management and workers
          in industrial undertakings. Discussion
          on the subject at the tripartite Indian
          Labour      Conferences      revealed      a
          consensus of opinion in favour of
          legislation. The Bill accordingly seeks to
16
provide for the framing of ‘Standing
   Orders’ in all industrial establishments
   employing one hundred and more
   workers.”
It was, therefore, considered, as stated in the
preamble “expedient to require employers in
industrial establishments to define with
sufficient precision the conditions of
employment under them and to make the
said conditions known to workmen
employed by them”. The scheme of the Act,
as amended in 1956 and as it now stands,
requires every employer of an industrial
establishment as defined in the Act to submit
to the Certifying Officer draft Standing
Orders, that is, “Rules relating to matters set
out in the Schedule”, proposed by him for
adoption in his industrial establishment.
This is mandatory. It has to be done within
six months after the commencement of the
Act. Failure to do so is punishable and is
further made a continuing offence. The draft
Standing Orders are required to cover every
matter set out in the schedule. The Schedule
enumerates the matters to be provided in the
Standing     Orders     and    they    include
classification of workmen, shift working,
attendance and late coming, leave and
holidays, termination of employment,
suspension or dismissal for misconduct,
means of redress for wronged workmen etc.
Item 11 of the Schedule is “Any other matter
which may be prescribed”. By a notification
dated November 17, 1959 the Government of
Uttar Pradesh has prescribed “Age of
superannuation or retirement, rate of
pension or any other facility which the
employer may like to extend or may be
agreed upon between the parties” as a
matter requiring to be provided in the
Standing Orders. On receipt of the draft
Standing Orders from the employee, the
17
Certifying Officer is required to forward a
copy of the same to the trade union
concerned or the workmen inviting them to
prefer objections, if any. Thereafter the
Certifying Officer is required to give a hearing
to the employer and the trade union or
workmen as the case may be and to decide
“whether or not any modification of or
addition to the draft submitted by the
employer is necessary to render the draft
Standing Orders certifiable under the Act”.
Standing Orders are certifiable under the Act
only if provision is made therein for every
matter set out in the schedule, if they are in
conformity with the provisions of the Act and
if the Certifying Officer adjudicates them as
fair and reasonable. The Certifying Officer is
invested with the powers of a civil court for
the purposes of receiving evidence,
administering       oaths,     enforcing      the
attendance of witnesses etc. etc. The order of
the Certifying Officer is subject to an appeal
to the prescribed Appellate Authority. The
Standing Orders as finally certified are
required to be entered in a register
maintained by the Certifying Officer. The
employer is required to prominently post the
Certified Standing Orders on special boards
maintained for that purpose. This is the
broad scheme of the Act.
The Act
also
provides for exemptions. About that, later.
The Act
, as originally enacted, precluded the
Certifying Officer from adjudicating upon the
fairness or reasonableness of the Draft
Standing Orders submitted by the employer
but an amendment introduced in 1956 now
casts a duty upon the Certifying Officer to
adjudicate      upon      the     fairness     or
reasonableness of the draft Standing
Orders. The scheme of the Act has been
sufficiently explained by this Court
in Associated     Cement      Co.     Ltd. v.P.D.
Vyas [AIR 1960 SC 665 : (1960) 2 SCR 974 :
18
(1960) 1 LLJ 563 : 20
FJR 59] , Rohtak
        Hissar District Electricity Supply Co.
        Ltd. v. State of U.P.
[AIR 1966 SC 1471 :
        (1966) 2 SCR 863 : (1966) 2 LLJ 330 : 29 FJR
        76] , and Western India Match Co.
Ltd. v. Workmen
[(1974) 3 SCC 330 : 1973
        SCC (L&S) 531 : (1974) 1 SCR 434] .
The
        Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act
is thus seen to be an Act specially designed
        to define the terms of employment of
        workmen in industrial establishments, to
        give the workmen a collective voice in
        defining the terms of employment and to
        subject the terms of employment to the
        scrutiny of quasi-judicial authorities by the
        application of the test of fairness and
        reasonableness. It is an Act giving
        recognition and form to hard-won and
        precious rights of workmen.
We have no
        hesitation in saying that it is a special Act
        expressly and exclusively dealing with the
        schedule-enumerated conditions of service of
        workmen in industrial establishments.”
                                 (emphasis supplied)



    Thus, it was held in
Hari Shankar Jain
(supra) that

the
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act
is a special

act under which Standing Orders are laid down which deals

with specific conditions of a workman in an “industrial

establishment”, and the hard won right of a workman

cannot be taken away by a general enactment such as CCA

Rules, 1965.
19
“10. We have already shown that the
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act
is a special Act dealing with a specific
                  subject, namely the conditions of service,
                  enumerated in the schedule, of workmen in
                  industrial establishments. It is impossible to
                  conceive that Parliament sought to abrogate
                  the provisions of the
Industrial Employment
                  (Standing Orders) Act
embodying as they do
                  hard-won and precious rights of workmen
                  and prescribing as they do an elaborate
                  procedure,     including     a    quasi-judicial
                  determination, by a general, incidental
                  provision like
Section 79(c)
of the Electricity
                  (Supply) Act. It is obvious that Parliament did
                  not have before it the Standing Orders Act
                  when it passed the
Electricity Supply Act
and Parliament never meant that the
                  Standing Orders Act should stand pro tanto
                  repealed by
Section 79(c)
of the Electricity
                  Supply Act. We are clearly of the view that
                  the provisions of the Standing Orders Act
                  must prevail over
Section 79(c)
of the
                  Electricity Supply Act, in regard to matters to
                  which the Standing Orders Act applies.”
15.   The NFC was established in the 1970s as a unit of

      department of Atomic Energy, Government of India.              The

      management of NFC after its establishment, in the capacity

      of an employer submitted draft Standing Orders under
Section 3
of the 1946 Act before the certifying officer which

      was duly certified on 27th August, 1973, and thereafter

      notified.      These Standing Orders are applicable to all

      industrial employees of NFC Hyderabad who are workmen
20
as defined under the 1946 Act. There is no doubt that the

      private respondents come under the definition of workman.

      Clauses 38 to 44 of the Standing Orders certified for the

      NCF-Hyderabad      in   1973      provided   for    misconduct,

      disciplinary action, penalties, procedure, appeal and review.

      It is, however, true that the Ministry of Labour, Government

      of India had issued an OM dated 29th July, 1977 where it

      had clarified that wherever
Section 13B
of the 1946 Act was

      applicable for the establishments, the standing orders need

      not be certified any longer and in case they have already

      been certified they would become invalid. All the same, the

      High Court of Andhra Pradesh in its impugned order

      correctly makes a distinction here which is that whereas for

      the Madras Atomic Power Project (similarly constituted as

      NFC-Hyderabad) there is an exclusionary clause in terms of
Section 13B
of the 1946 Act in its Standing Orders but in

      the Standing Orders certified for NFC-Hyderabad, there is

      no mention of
Section 13-B
of the 1946 Act.
16.   It is also true that in the present case, both the private

      respondents when they were given employment, their

      appointment    orders   clearly    said   that     their   service
21
conditions, including disciplinary proceedings, if any, would

be governed under the CCA Rules, 1965. Therefore, the case

of the employer is that disciplinary proceedings also have to

be initiated under the CCA Rules, 1965 and the standing

orders will have no applicability in the present case.

The employer also relies upon
Section 13B
of the 1946 Act,

which reads as follows:
“13B. Act not to apply to certain industrial
     establishments.—Nothing in this Act shall apply
     to an industrial establishment in so far as the
     workmen employed therein are persons to
     whom the Fundamental and Supplementary
     Rules, Civil Services (Classification, Control and
     Appeal) Rules, Civil Services (Temporary
     Services) Rules, Revised Leave Rules, Civil
     Service Regulations, Civilians in Defence Service
     (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules or the
     Indian Railway Establishment Code or any
     other rules or regulations as may be notified in
     this behalf by the appropriate Government in the
     Official Gazette, apply.”

Relying on the above provision, the argument of the

employer is that the 1946 Act will not apply to an industrial

establishment, if for the industrial establishment CCA

Rules, 1965 have been made applicable, and since the CCA

Rules, 1965 have been made applicable and it was

specifically stated in the appointment orders of the

respondents, the standing orders will have no application.
22
17.
Section 13B
of the 1946 Act declares that to those workmen

      in an industrial establishment to whom the CCA Rules, 1965

      are applicable, the provisions of the 1946 Act will not apply.

      The question which still remains is whether in order to oust

      the 1946 Act a separate notification under
Section 13 B
would be necessary as
Section 13 B
speaks of “…as may be

      notified in this behalf by the appropriate Government in the

      Official Gazette, apply”.
The Andhra Pradesh High Court, in the impugned

      judgment, though is of the opinion that there is some

      ambiguity in
Section 13B
of the 1946 Act as to whether a

      separate notification is required for only unspecified rules

      mentioned in
Section 13B
or will a separate notification also

      be necessary for the specified Rules such as CCA Rules,

      1965. All the same, this question has been answered to a

      large extent by this Court in
Hari Shankar Jain
(supra).

      The question before this Court was whether the standing

      orders would be applicable to a workman or will it be the

      regulations framed under the
Electricity Supply Act, 1948
.

      In the said case, there were standing orders for the

      workmen, who were working for the U.P. State Electricity
23
Board (as it was then), but subsequently a notification was

issued by the Government of India on 28th May, 1970

specifically under
Section 13B
of the 1946 Act. The

notification read as under:
“In pursuance of the provision of
Section 13-B
of the Industrial Employment (Standing
        Orders) Act, 1946 (Act No. 20 of 1946), the
        Governor is pleased to notify in the official
        Gazette that the U.P. State Electricity Board
        has made the following Regulations under
        sub-section (c) of
Section 79
of the Electricity
        (Supply) Act, 1948 (Act No. 54 of 1948):
Notwithstanding any rule if an order or
        practice hitherto followed, the date of
        compulsory retirement of an employee of the
        Board will be the date on which he attains the
        age of 58 years; provided that—
(i) in the case of the inferior servants of the
        Board, whose counterparts under State
        Government are at present entitled to serve up
        to the age of 60 years, the age of compulsory
        retirement will be the date on which they
        attain the age of 60 years.
(ii) the Board or its subordinate appointing
        authority may require an employee to retire
        after he attains or has attained the age of 55
        years on three months' notice or three months'
        salary in lieu thereof without assigning any
        reason.”

We have also noticed that
in
the above case
, there was a

specific notification under
Section 13B
of the 1946 Act,

which admittedly is not there in the case at hand. What is

important is that the notification
(
in
the above case
), was not
24
of a general nature but it was specific to “compulsory

retirement”, of employees of the Electricity Board. An

employee was to be compulsory retired after attaining the

age of 58 years, subject to certain provisions. This Court

held that essentially the Regulations, made under the
Electricity Supply Act
are of a general nature, and the

Standing Orders are the special rules. Therefore, the special

rules would override the general. Nevertheless, since there

is also an exclusion clause under
Section 13B
of the 1946

Act and there was indeed a notification under the said Act

which we have already
referred above
, it will be the

regulations made under the 1948 Act which will be

applicable, but only so far as it relates to compulsory

retirement, since the notification dated, 28th May, 1970 was

only limited to compulsory retirement. It has been held as

under:
“17. … In our view the only reasonable
         construction that we can put upon the
         language of
Section 13-B
is that a rule or
         regulation, if notified by the Government, will
         exclude the applicability of the Act to the
         extent that the rule or regulation covers the
         field. To that extent and to that extent only
         ‘nothing in the Act shall apply’. To understand
Section 13-B
in any other manner will lead to
         unjust and uncontemplated results. For
         instance, most of the Service Rules and
25
Regulations expressly mentioned in
Section
       13-B
do not deal with a large number of the
       matters enumerated in the schedule such as
       ‘Manner of intimating to workmen periods and
       hour of work, holidays, pay-days and wage
       rates’, ‘shift working’, ‘Attendance and late
       coming”, ‘conditions of, procedure in applying
       for, and the authority which may grant leave
       and holidays’, ‘Closing and reopening of
       sections of the industrial establishments and
       temporary stoppages of work and the rights
       and liabilities of the employer and workmen
       arising therefrom, etc. To exclude the
       applicability of Standing Orders relating to all
       these matters became the Fundamental
       Rules, the Civil Service Rules or the Civil
       Services Control, Classification and Appeal
       Rules provide for a few matters like
       ‘Classification of workmen’ or ‘suspension or
       dismissal for misconduct’ would be to reverse
       the processes of history, apart from leading to
       unjust and untoward results. It will place
       workmen once again at the mercy of the
       employer be he ever so benign and it will
       certainly promote industrial strife. We have
       indicated what according to us is the proper
       construction of
Section 13-B
. That is the only
       construction which gives meaning and sense
       to
Section 13-B
and that is a construction
       which can legitimately be said to conform to
       the Directive Principles of State Policy
       proclaimed in
Articles 42
and
43
of the
       Constitution.”

It, then, went on to hold as further:
“18. We, therefore, hold that the
Industrial
       Employment (Standing Orders) Act
is a
       special law in regard to the matters
       enumerated in the schedule and the
       regulations made by the Electricity Board
       with respect to any of those matters are of no
       effect unless such regulations are either
26
notified by the Government under
Section 13-
       B
or certified by the Certifying Officer under
Section 5
of the Industrial Employment
       (Standing Orders) Act. In regard to matters in
       respect of which regulations made by the
       Board have not been notified by the Governor
       or in respect of which no regulations have
       been made by the
Board, the Industrial
       Employment (Standing Orders) Act
shall
       continue to apply. In the present case the
       regulation made by the Board with regard to
       age of superannuation having been duly
       notified by the Government, the regulation
       shall have effect notwithstanding the fact that
       it is a matter which could be the subject-
       matter of Standing Orders under the
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders)
       Act
.”

Relying upon the aforesaid decision, the Delhi High Court in

Air India v. Union of India, ILR (1991) 1 Del 88 held that

in order to make the exclusion clause (under
Section 13B
of

the 1946 Act) applicable a notification is required to be made

and that too by none other than the Government of India.
The logical conclusion therefore would be that CCA

Rules, 1965 are the general Rules whereas Standing Orders

are the Special Rules, and therefore the Standing Orders

would override the CCA Rules, 1965. Moreover, the Standing

Orders cover a wide area of activities of a workman and are

workmen specific yet in view of
Section 13B
of 1946 Act a

specific notification can be made applying CCA Rules, 1965
27
to that specific aspect. But a notification is necessary.
In

      view of the
Hari Shankar Jain
(supra), this can be the only

      interpretation of
Section 13B
of the 1946 Act.
18.   The NFC was established much after the 1946 Act and the

      CCA Rules, 1965 had come into force. Yet a conscious

      decision was taken by the management of NFC to submit

      draft Standing Orders under
Section 3
of the 1946 Act,

      which was duly certified by the certifying authority and then

      notified which then became applicable since then. Once the

      standing orders have been notified and have come into force,

      there is a procedure prescribed under the 1946 Act for

      modifying or withdrawing such a standing order, which we

      have stated in the preceding paragraphs. There is nothing

      or record to show that after the standing orders, which stood

      certified in the year 1973 and were in force, any subsequent

      modification was made or any order passed curtailing these

      standing orders, under
Section 10
of the 1946 Act.

          Nothing has also been placed on record to suggest that

      a notification under
Section 13B
of the 1946 Act was made

      by Government of India, making its intentions clear that

      from henceforth for such and such matters, it will be the
28
CCA Rules, 1965 which will be applicable and not the

            standing orders. In the absence of such notification, we do

            not find any fault with the order of the Andhra Pradesh High

            Court which has held that it will be the standing orders and

            not the CCA Rules, 1965 which will be applicable.
19.         This Court in the case of
Hari Shankar Jain
(supra)4 held

            that Standing Orders have the nature of Special Rules. It is

            a settled principle of law that only in those cases, where the

            Special Rules fail to lay down provisions for dealing with

            certain subjects, can the General Rules be pressed into

            service. The CCA Rules are General Rules which apply to all

            Government Servants. When the Standing Orders for the

            Department have clearly laid down a procedure to be

            followed in cases of Disciplinary proceedings under Order

            Nos. 38, 39 & 40, there is no reason for the Department to

            initiate the said proceedings under the CCA Rules.
20.         Any modification sought to be made to the service conditions

            of the respondent can only be done as per the procedure

            which is given under
Section 10
of the Standing Orders Act,

            1946. This Court in the case of
Oil and Natural Gas
4
Paragraph No. 10
29
Corporation Ltd. v. Petroleum Coal Labour Union & Ors.
(2015) 6 SCC 494 was deciding the validity of a policy

decision taken by ONGC to appoint CISF personnel to

security posts. The temporary workmen who were appointed

on the said posts were opposing this decision and it was

their contention that their services should be regularised

instead. This Court observed that the temporary workmen

who had completed 240 days in 12 months had acquired a

right to be regularised under Clause 2(ii) of the ‘Certified

Standing Orders for Contingent Employees of the Oil and

Natural Gas Commission’. Further, that any modification to

the service conditions of the temporary workmen could only

be done as per
Section 10
of the 1946 Act.
Replying upon

the seminal decision of this Court in
Hari Shankar Jain
(supra), it reads as under :-
“For the Corporation to implement such a
         provision which affects the service
         conditions of its employees, it is necessary
         for the Corporation to first modify the
         Certified Standing Orders by following the
         procedure provided under
Section 10
of
         the Industrial Employment (Standing
         Orders) Act, 1946 as the same is a special
         enactment and therefore, prevails over the
         provisions under the ONGC Act and the
         Recruitment Rules. The Corporation
         undisputedly has not made any such
         modification to its Certified Standing
30
Orders by following the procedure for
         modification of conditions of service as per
Section 10
of the Industrial Employment
         (Standing Orders) Act, 1946.”


As we have already stated above NFC, Hyderabad has failed

to place on record any modification made under
Section 10
of the 1946 Act to show that the Standing Orders certified

for NFC-Hyderabad      would   not be applicable to      the

respondent.
Service conditions of respondents will be governed by

the ‘Standing Orders’ as far as the disciplinary proceedings

are concerned.   ‘Standing Orders’ being in the nature of

special Rules will override any other general Rule including

CCA Rules, 1965. Further, in view of the law
laid down in
Hari Shankar Jain
(supra) the ‘Standing Order’ will in any

case prevail until modified under
Section 10
of the 1946 Act,

which has not been done.
This position has been reiterated

by this Cout in
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited
(supra) where conditions of appointment were held to be void

and inapplicable to a worker if it makes any other Rule

applicable in suppression of the ‘Standing Orders’ without
31
there being a modification under
Section 10
of the Standing

      Orders.
21.   In view of our findings given above, we dismiss these appeals

      and uphold the order dated 14.10.2008 passed by the High

      Court of Judicature, Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad. The

      order of status quo granted by this Court on 02.03.2009 is

      hereby vacated.
No orders as to cost.
……..............................J.
                                       [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]


                                       ……..............................J.
                                       [C.T. RAVIKUMAR]


                                       .…….............................J.
                                        [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]


      New Delhi,
      November 29, 2023.