[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Lajja Ram vs Rati Chand on 9 November, 2023
Author:
Hrishikesh Roy
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Hrishikesh Roy
REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 1091
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 2835-2836/2011
     LAJJA RAM & ORS.                                                        APPELLANT(S)
                                                 VERSUS


     RATI CHAND & ORS.ETC.                                                   RESPONDENT(S)
                                                ORDER
1.        Heard Mr. Shubham Seth, the learned counsel appearing for the

               appellants. Also, heard Mr. Sujit Kumar Mishra, learned counsel

               appearing for the respondents.
2.        The          present   appeals   have   been      preferred    challenging   the

               judgement and order dated 12.08.2009 in RSAs No. 4041/2007 &

               2552/2008, passed by the High Court of Punjab & Haryana.

               Under the impugned order, the High Court upheld the decision

               dated 15.10.2007 of the Additional District Judge, Faridabad

               (‘First Appellate Court’), reversing the Civil Judge (Jr. Division),

               Palwal (‘Trial Court’) order dated 28.02.2003, and thereby, decreed

               the Respondents’ suit and declared Narain Dass (Defendant No.

               1/Dfdt. 1) as only a bhondedar but not the owner of the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora
Date: 2024.02.03
shamlatdeh land (land reserved & used for common purpose in
   12:28:08 IST
   Reason:
villages). It was held that the Dfdt. No. 1 had been granted limited
Page 1 of 12
possessory rights, to the shamlatdeh land, in lieu of service

     rendered to the village temple and when he, as the bhondedar,

     ceased to render such service, the land would automatically revert

     back to the common village pool.
3.   In the year 1982, Narain Dass (Dfdt. No. 1) initiated an earlier

     proceeding for declaration and occupancy rights, before Asst.

     Collector (Grade-I), Faridabad against the Gram Panchayat, Palwal.

     The Asst. Collector while disposing the said proceeding observed in

     the order dated 06.03.1986 that Narain Dass was entitled to

     hereditary rights, under Sections 5 & 8 of the Punjab Mujara Act,

     1887 (also referred to as the
Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887
) and the
Punjab Occupancy Tenants (Vesting of Proprietary Rights) Act, 1953
.

     This arises from the longstanding service of Narain Dass’ ancestors

     as mujaras (tenants) relating to the shamlatdeh land, for over 60

     years. Additionally, it was held that the land did not vest in the

     Gram Panchayat.
4.   Subsequently, Narain Dass sold the shamlatdeh land to Lajja Ram

     & his sons (Defendant Nos. 2-5) through multiple sale deeds on

     24.07.1987, 31.08.1987 and 07.06.1988, respectively.
5.   Aggrieved by the above alienation of the common village land, the

     inhabitants of the village & biswedars (proprietors) of the land
Page 2 of 12
(‘Respondents’) filed the Suit No. 878/1996 for declaration,

     possession & injunction before the Civil Judge (Jr.), Palwal.

     However, the Trial Court dismissed the suit on 28.02.2003 as non-

     maintainable on the grounds that it was time-barred and also that

     the plaintiffs had no locus standi to file the suit. It was also held

     that the sale deeds transferring ownership rights from Narain Dass

     (Dfdt. 1) to Lajja Ram & sons (Dfdts. 2-5) were valid. The Court

     noted that Narain Dass, while serving as the bhondedar of the

     shamlatdeh land, continued to provide service to the landlord, and

     such service would be considered equivalent to payment of rent,

     thereby making Narain Dass also a tenant of the suit land.
6.   Displeased with the Trial Court’s decision favouring Dfdt. No. 1,

     the Respondents approached the Additional District Judge,

     Faridabad by filing the Civil Appeal No. 17 on 01.04.2003.

     Simultaneously, Respondents (Defendant Nos. 5-12) also filed a

     separate Civil Appeal No. 25.     The First Appellate Court with the

     common    judgment    dated     15.10.2007   decreed   the   suit   for

     declaration, injunction, and possession of land measuring 33

     kanals 5 marlas. Simultaneously, the Court negated Narain Dass’

     (Dfdt. 1) claim, since he had limited right and was not competent

     to alienate the suit property. The Court also found that Dfdt. 1 had
Page 3 of 12
taken recourse to self-contradictory pleas asserting ownership

     rights as well as occupancy rights. Thus, the annulment of sale

     deeds to Dfdts No. 2-5 with a directive to restore the suit land

     possession to the common village pool was ordered.
7.   The transferee Lajja Ram & sons (Dfdts. No. 2-5) then filed the

     RSA No. 4041 of 2007 and RSA No. 2552 of 2008 before the High

     Court. In the impugned order dated 12.08.2009, the High Court

     noted that the prior decree granted by the Asst. Collector against

     the Gram Panchayat could not have been used against the

     biswedars of the village given their absence as parties in the

     previous   proceedings.   Additionally,     it   was   found   that   the

     ownership of the shamlatdeh land did not vest with the Gram

     Panchayat.
8.   The High Court particularly noted that Narain Dass had no title or

     authority to sell the suit land to Dfdts. No. 2-5. The sale, executed

     by an incompetent party without a valid title, was deemed by the

     High Court as insufficient to confer valid title to Dfdts. No. 2-5.

     Moreover, the sale by a vendor without any title could be

     disregarded even in a collateral proceeding, i.e., the present suit by

     the proprietors. The High Court deemed the later suit to be within

     the period of limitation since reckoning time would not commence
Page 4 of 12
from the date of sale deed's registration but from the date of

     knowledge of the sales, by the biswedars. Consequently, the High

     Court upheld the First Appellate Court's decision decreeing the

     suit against Dfdts. No. 2-5, and dismissed the second appeal

     under the impugned judgment.
9.   In order to adjudicate the present lis, we need to briefly refer to the

     concept of a bhondedar, and the nature & extent of rights that a

     bhondedar exercises with respect to shamlatdeh lands.
10. The term ‘bhondedar’ has no statutory or legislative definition. But

     over a period of time, the term is equated with limited grant of land

     for service to be rendered by the grantee. It is a customary practice

     in the Punjab region (present-day areas comprising largely in the

     states of Punjab & Haryana)1 for proprietors of land as well as the

     larger village community, to set apart a parcel of land to be held

     rent-free towards a temple, mosque or shrines, or granted on

     favourable terms to a saint, pandit or any other person belonging

     to a religious order. As long as such grant (also known as a ‘dholi’

     in erstwhile Punjab) was being used for the assigned purpose, the

     person assigned such dholi (referred to as a ‘dholidar’ in erstwhile

     Punjab), could not be asked to vacate the same. The terms


1 Gurgaon District Gazetteer, Gurgaon DG – Administrative Section A to C, 1910,
pg. 177.
Page 5 of 12
dholidar and bhondedar are often interchangeably used albeit with

   minor variance. While a dholi is granted in lieu of a service directly

   connected with religion, a bhonda would ordinarily be granted

   towards rendering secular services like that of a village messenger

   or watchman, towards the proprietors of the said land. 2 The

   bhondedar could be ejected upon failure to fulfil the conditions of

   such grant or even at the will of the proprietors. Essentially, it was

   a method of compensation for certain services, by granting rent-

   free land.
11. A   bhondedar typically possesses the following characteristic

   features:
(i) He renders secular services towards the village community

            as well as the biswedars (proprietors),
(ii) He is granted a parcel of land rent-free, within a village by

            the biswedars in lieu of payment for services rendered, and
(iii) A bhondedar can be ejected from such piece of land in case

            of failure to render assigned services or fulfil conditions of

            such grant.
12. The aforementioned characteristic features suggest that the rights

   available to Dfdt. No. 1 as the bhondedar, were conditional and not

   boundless. He could exercise limited rights as long as he rendered

2 Mamala & Ors. vs. ISA & Anr., 1983 Punjab Law Journal 231; Gurgaon District
Gazetteer, Gurgaon DG – Administrative Section A to C, 1910, pg. 177.
Page 6 of 12
service towards the village in his capacity as the bhondedar.
13. Proceeding with the above understanding, let us now examine the

   nature & extent of a bhondedar’s right over a shamlatdeh property

   and also whether the bhondedar can exercise ownership rights

   over the granted land. The conditional and limited rights a dholi or

   a bhonda can exercise over the granted land, can be culled out

   from the decision in Lahore High Court in Sewa Ram vs. Udegir3

   where the following was expressed

       “…… in the revenue records the proprietary body are
       recorded as the owners of the property, and the grantee is
       recorded as a tenant in the column of cultivation. So long as
       the purpose, for which the grant is made, is carried out, it
       cannot be resumed, but should the holder fail to carry out
       the duties of his office, the proprietors can eject him and put
       in someone else under a like tenure……. …….. It is beyond
       dispute that tenure of this kind cannot be alienated by sale
       or mortgage, and there can be little doubt that any
       alienation of that character, if made by the Dohlidar, would
       be absolutely void……… As the transaction was altogether
       void, we consider that even the alienor could have
       successfully pleaded in answer to the plaintiff's suit that the
       latter could not enforce it in a Court of law……. For the
       foregoing reasons we are of opinion that the Dohlidar had
       no right to make the alienation relied upon by the plaintiff,
       and that the defendant is not precluded from impeaching its
       validity………”
14. The above would suggest that a bhondedar had only limited right

   and should he fail to carry out his assigned duties, even this

   limited right becomes unavailable to the grantee of the property.


3 1921 SCC OnLine Lah 237.
Page 7 of 12
The very nature of the tenure(s) does not bestow upon the holder,

   any right to alienate the granted land, by sale or mortgage.

   Consequently, all alienation made by the limited holder of property,

   would be manifestly void. This is because bhondedar or dholidar do

   not possess title or ownership right of the property that is granted

   to him, as a bhonda or dholi.
15. The inter-play of claims over shamlatdeh category land vis-à-vis the

   bhondedar, the Gram Panchayat and the proprietors of such land,

   may now be seen.          The ownership to such lands rested in

   proportion to other lands of the village. For instance, an individual

   owning some land in the village also possessed additional

   proprietary rights and interest over shamlatdeh lands.4 However,

   with the enactment of the
Punjab Village Common Lands

   (Regulation) Act, 1961
, the nature of vesting of such lands with the

   village community was somewhat altered. The following discussion

   in
State of Haryana vs. Jai Singh & Ors.
5 would assist us in

   understanding the implication for community lands in the village:
“¶24. Shamilat land in terms of
Section 4
of the 1961
        Act vested in the Gram Panchayat of the village. The
        vesting of shamilat land in a village panchayat brought
        about a paradigm shift in the ownership of rights in
        ‘shamilat deh’. The proprietary rights of the proprietary
        body of the village in shamilat land were extinguished

4
Gram Panchayat of Village Jamalpur vs. Malwinder Singh
, (1985) 3 SCC 661.
5 2022 SCC OnLine SC 418.
Page 8 of 12
by a statutory declaration. The proprietary and
       possessory rights of proprietors and non-proprietors
       in shamilat deh were to henceforth vest in a Gram
       Panchayat and used for common purposes of the entire
       village community, under the aegis of the Gram
       Panchayat. The shamilat deh lands as defined under
Section 2 (g)
of the 1961 Act now vest completely, that
       is, with ownership and title, in the Panchayat of the
       village concerned. The vesting of the shamilat deh lands
       or the village common lands in the Panchayat has been
       for agrarian reforms and such vesting is protected by
Article 31A
of the Constitution.”
16. While such lands owned by the proprietors came to be vested in

   the Gram Panchayat, the
Section 4
of the Punjab Village Common

   Lands (Regulation) Act, 1961, noted certain important exceptions.

   The existing rights, title or interest of persons, who though not

   entered as occupancy tenants in the revenue records are accorded

   a similar status by custom like a bhondedar, dholidar, etc. and

   those would not be affected by such vesting of lands in the Gram

   Panchayat.
17. In the present matter, the Dfdt. No.1 (Narain Dass) held conditional

   and limited possessory rights as a bhondedar, subject to services

   being rendered towards the village community, as recorded in the

   jamabandi. Such limited right remains unaffected and unaltered

   as long as the bhondedar fulfills their service obligations toward

   the village. The facts in this case however indicates that the Dfdt.

   No. 1 not only ceased to render the required services but also
Page 9 of 12
relocated to a different place soon after unauthorisedly selling the

   suit land to Dfdts. 2-5. Consequently, the bhondedar Narain Dass

   can have no legitimate claim whatsoever, over the suit land.
18. Addressing the issue of limitation on account of the decision of

   Asst. Collector favouring Narain Dass in the previous proceeding,

   the High Court observed that the biswedars or other inhabitants of

   the village were not parties in the proceedings before Asst.

   Collector. It was therefore held that the decree obtained from the

   Asst. Collector against the Gram Panchayat, could not be invoked

   to argue that the biswedars had relinquished their rights, title,

   and/or interest in the land.
19. Observing that the sale deeds were executed by an individual

   lacking valid title, the High Court opined that those could also be

   disregarded in collateral proceedings as well. It was also found that

   the decision in the previous proceeding cannot extinguish the

   rights of the plaintiffs and the Gram Panchayat in the suit simply

   because the biswedars were unaware of the Asst. Collector’s order.

   As soon as the biswedars learnt of such decree in Narain Dass’

   favour against the Gram Panchayat, they filed Suit No.878/1996

   before the Trial Court and as such the suit was found to be in

   order.   In our assessment, the High Court has rightly held that
Page 10 of 12
the suit was filed within time as the biswedars' right to challenge

   the sales by the bhondedar would commence only from the date on

    which they became aware of such sales.
20. The upshot of the aforementioned discussion is that when the

   services were ceased to be rendered towards the management,

   maintenance and upkeep of the shamlatdeh land, the limited grant

   so made to the bhondedar, by the proprietors i.e., the biswedars, in

   lieu of such services, stood extinguished.
21. No specific material is produced before us to show the precise

   terms of arrangement between the biswedars and the bhondedar.

   However, it is evident that Narain Dass could have retained

   possession of the land only till such time that he continued to

   discharge the services tied to the limited grant.       Moreover, by

   relocating to Nangli Gurdhana, i.e., a different village over 50 years

   ago (around 1970-71), he obviously ceased rendering services to

   the village temple. By the very nature of the conditional grant, the

   grantee was naturally incompetent to alienate the shamlatdeh land

   to any third parties, including the Dfdts. Nos. 2-5.
22. The limited right available to Narain Dass to continue to avail the

   rent-free land would be extinguished immediately upon cessation

   of service. To attract the exception, Narain Dass could not prove

   that the suit land was gifted by the biswedars. The only
Page 11 of 12
exceptional circumstance that could have possibly validated

   ownership and subsequent sales to the Appellants is also not

   applicable here.
23. The oft-quoted statement full of wisdom – “Before the reward, there

   must be labour. You plant before you harvest. You sow in tears before

   you reap joy.” – attributed to author Ralph Ransom perfectly

   encapsulates the current situation, emphasising upon the inherent

   connection between effort and reward. As soon as the bhondedar

   had ceased rendering services, the concerned land should have

   returned to the common village pool. The bhondedar could not

   have transferred his limited possessory rights or alienated the said

   property to the Appellants. In turn, the Appellants, as transferees,

   could not have derived any legal right over the suit land either.
24. Therefore, the High Court’s decision in favour of the plaintiffs and

   the Gram Panchayat is consistent with the above opinion of this

   Court. Accordingly, the appeals are dismissed without any

   imposition of costs.
..............................J.
                                                [ HRISHIKESH ROY ]


                                                   ..............................J.
                                                  [ SANJAY KAROL ]

NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 9, 2023
Page 12 of 12