[Cites
35
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Vijay vs Union Of India on 29 November, 2023
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023 INSC 1030                                                                       REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4910 OF 2023




                 VIJAY                                                            …Appellant(s)


                                                          Versus


             UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                              ...Respondent(s)




                                                  JUDGMENT
SANJAY KAROL J.
1. The issues that arise for consideration of this Court in the
                            present appeal are:
1.1   Whether the bar of admissibility created by
Section 35
of the Indian Stamp Act 18991 applies to the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2023.11.29
17:31:44 IST
Reason:
1
Hereinafter referred to as ‘
Stamp Act
’

                                              1-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
                agreement(s) to sell dated 04.02.1988 executed by the

                parties?
1.2    Can a copy of a document be adduced as secondary

                evidence when the original instrument is not in

                possession of the party?
1.3    Whether, in the facts of the present case, would the

                decision of this Court in Jupadi Kesava Rao v.
Pulavarthi Venkata Subha Rao2 be binding as held by

                both the Courts below?
FACTUAL MATRIX
2. Plaintiff and Defendant entered into an agreement to sell on

         04.02.1998, and pursuant to that, Plaintiff was allegedly put

         in possession by Defendant. When Defendant denied the

         existence of such an agreement, Plaintiff filed a suit for

         specific performance of contract. In the said suit, Plaintiff

         moved an application to file a copy of the agreement to sell,

         among other documents, as secondary evidence.
2
(1971) 1 SCC 545 (2-Judge Bench)

                              2-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
3. Initially, the said application was allowed by the 4th

  Additional District Judge vide order dated 17.07.2001. But

  when Defendant sought review of this order, the Court vide

  its order dated 16.12.2003 reviewed it and held that

  secondary evidence of an agreement to sell could not be

  allowed as it was not executed on a proper stamp, thus

  barred under
section 35
of the Stamp Act. While holding so,

  it relied on the decision of this Court in Jupadi Kesava Rao

  (supra).
4. Subsequently, the Plaintiff filed a writ petition before the High

  Court of Madhya Pradesh challenging the review order and

  the constitutional validity of
Section 35
of the Stamp Act. The

  High Court, vide the impugned order dated 30.11.2009 in

  W.P. No. 741/2004, upheld the validity of the said section

  and the order of the Review Court.
5. The present appeal is preferred against this order of the High

  Court.
6. Learned Senior Counsel Dr. Menaka Guruswamy, for the

  Appellant-Plaintiff, submits that the prohibition of
Section 35
of the Stamp Act is not applicable as there was no

  requirement for either party to have paid stamp duty at the


                    3-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
  time of execution (before the 1989 Amendment) of the

  agreement to sell. Thus, the Plaintiff ought to have been

  permitted to lead a copy of the agreement to sell as secondary

  evidence under
Section 65
of the Evidence Act.
7. Respondent no.2/Defendant, in its counter affidavit, has

  stated that a copy of an original document that is unstamped

  or deficiently stamped can neither be impounded nor

  validated or admitted as secondary evidence. Once the

  original document is inadmissible under the
Stamp Act
, the

  photocopy or any other copy cannot be allowed as secondary

  evidence.
ISSUE 1
8. To adjudicate this issue, it is pertinent to reproduce
Section

  35
of the Stamp Act:
"
Section 35-
Instruments not duly stamped inadmissible in
     evidence, etc. - No instrument chargeable with duty shall be
     admitted in evidence for any purpose by any person having by law
     or consent of parties authority to receive evidence, or shall be acted
     upon, registered or authenticated by any such person or by any
     public officer, unless such instruments are duly stamped:
Provided that-
(a) any such instrument (shall] be admitted in evidence on
     payment of the duty with which the same is chargeable or, in the
     case of an instrument insufficiently stamped, of the amount
     required to make up such duty, together with a penalty of five
     rupees, or, when ten times the amount of the proper duty or
     deficient portion thereof exceeds five rupees, of a sum equal to ten
     times such duty or portion;
xxxx”



                       4-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
9. It is evident from a bare perusal of the section that it prohibits

  admission in evidence of instruments that are chargeable

  with duty unless they are "duly stamped." Duly stamped as

  defined under
Section 2(11)
of the Stamp Act means that the

  instrument bears a stamp and that such stamp has been

  affixed or used in accordance with law for the time being in

  force in India.
10.     Further, it is required to consider when the document

  becomes chargeable with duty—during its execution or when

  it is produced before the Court.
11.     The word 'chargeable,' as defined under
Section 2(6)
,

  means chargeable under the Act in force at the date of the

  execution of the instrument. The crucial date which

  determines the law in force is the date of execution of the

  instrument, and the stamp duty is to be charged with

  reference to the date of execution. For stamp duty, the

  relevant date is the date of execution and not the date of

  adjudication or the date of presentation and registration of

  the document.
5-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
12.    Entry 44 of List III of the Constitution of India is Stamp

  duties other than duties or fees collected by means of judicial

  stamps, but not including rates of stamp duty. Under Entry

  44 of List III, the power to levy stamp duty on all documents

  is concurrent. But the power to prescribe “the rate” of such

  levy is with the Parliament and subjected to the same with

  the State Legislature. The State Legislature is competent to

  levy the stamp duty under Entry 44 of List III and prescribe

  rates of duty under Entry 63 of List II.
13.    However, if the instrument falls under the categories

  mentioned in Entry 91 of List I, the power to prescribe the

  rate would be only with the Parliament, and for all other

  instruments or documents, such power would be with the

  State legislature under Entry 63 of List II.
14.    Instruments chargeable with duty is defined under
Section 3
of the Act, which denotes that every instrument

  mentioned in the Schedule, subject to exceptions or

  exemptions, shall be chargeable with duty of the amount

  which is indicated in that Schedule as the proper duty

  thereof. From time to time, amendments have been carried

  out in the
Stamp Act
, and Schedule I-A, as applicable to the


                   6-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
         State of Madhya Pradesh, was inserted.3 This Schedule

         specifies the stamp duty that must be paid on specific

         instruments. Importantly, instruments not mentioned in the

         Schedule are not subject to duty.
15.
Article 23
of Schedule 1
A of the Stamp Act
deals with

         conveyances. The definition of “conveyance” is contained in
Section 2(10)
of the Stamp Act which reads as under:
“(10)     ‘Conveyance.'—'Conveyance'       includes     a
               conveyance on sale and every instrument by which
               property, whether movable or immovable, is transferred
               inter vivos and which is not otherwise specifically provided
               for by Schedule I;”



               At the time of execution of an agreement to sell (1988),

         the conveyance was subjected to stamp duty and
Article 23
stood as:
“23. Conveyance, not being a transfer charges or exempted
              under Article No.62: Where market of the property which is
              the subject matter of conveyance-
does not exceed Rs. 50      Four percent of such market
                                          value subject to a minimum of
                                          One Rupee
              does not exceed Rs. Seven percent of such market
              10,000                      value
              exceed Rs. 10,000           Seven and half percent of such
                                          market value.
Provided that if the total
                                          amount of the duty payable is
                                          not a multiple of fifty paisa it
3
The Central Provinces and Berar Indian Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1939

                               7-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
                                          shall be rounded off to the
                                          nearest rupee half of a rupee or
                                          over being counted as one
                                          rupee and less than half a
                                          rupee being disregarded.”
16.
Article 23
was substituted vide M.P. Amendment Act No.

       19 of 19894 and stood as:
Seven and half percent of
           “Article 23. Conveyance,         such market value:
not being a transfer
           charged    or    exempted        Provided that if the total
           under No.62 irrespective of      amount of the duty payable is
           the market value of the          not a multiple of fifty paise,
           property which is the            nearest rupee half of a rupee
           subject     matter       of      or over being counted as one
           conveyance                       rupee and less than half of a
                                            rupee being disregarded.
Exemptions

           xxx”
17.          Further, an Explanation was inserted into this Article

       vide M.P. Amendment Act No. 22 of 19905,


           "Explanation.- For the purpose of this Article, where in the
           case of agreement to sell immovable property, the possession
           of any immovable property is transferred to the purchaser
           before execution or after execution of such agreement
           without executing the conveyance in respect thereof, then
           such agreement to sell shall be deemed to be a conveyance
           and stamp duty thereon shall be levied accordingly:
xxx”




4 The Indian Stamp (Madhya Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1989
5 The Indian Stamp (Madhya Pradesh Second Amendme



nt) Act, 1990

                           8-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
18.       The sub-issue that the Court is confronting is whether

         an agreement to sell, handing over possession prior to the

         amendment brought in the year 1989 or 1990, is a

         conveyance so as to be covered under
Article 23
as existing

         on the date of execution of the agreement(s). On this aspect

         we may only observe that the causal amendment was brought

         in only in 1990, i.e., prior to the transaction in question. And

         a three-judge Bench of this Court in
Suraj Lamp and

         Industries Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Haryana6
in considering the

         scope of an agreement to sell observed thus:
“18. It is thus clear that a transfer of immovable property by
             way of sale can only be by a deed of conveyance (sale deed).
             In the absence of a deed of conveyance (duly stamped and
             registered as required by law), no right, title, or interest in an
             immovable property can be transferred.
19. Any contract of sale (agreement to sell) which is not a
             registered deed of conveyance (deed of sale) would fall short
             of the requirements of
Sections 54
and
55
of the T.P. Act and
             will not confer any title nor transfer any interest in an
             immovable property (except to the limited right granted
             under
Section 53-A
of the T.P. Act). According to the T.P. Act,
             an agreement of sale, whether with possession or without
             possession, is not a conveyance.
Section 54
of the T.P. Act
             enacts that sale of immovable property can be made only by
             a registered instrument and an agreement of sale does not
             create any interest or charge on its subject-matter.”

                                                         (Emphasis supplied)
6
(2012) 1 SCC 656

                             9-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
19.       The decision stand considered in
G.T. Girish v. Y.

         Subba Raju7
, and relied upon in
Ghanshyam Sarda v. J.K.

         Jute Mills Co. Ltd.8
, without any change.
This principle was

         recently restated in Munishamappa v M.Rama Reddy &

         Ors.9
20.       It be observed that now, in many states, amendments

         were brought in whereby agreements of sale acknowledging

         delivery of possession are charged with the same duty as

         leviable on conveyance.
21.       Now the question arises if we can retrospectively read

         the Explanation added vide M.P. Act 22 of 1990 so as to apply

         to an agreement to sell executed on 04.02.1988.
22.       A Two-Judge bench of this Court10 while culling out the

         principles on the role of a clarification/explanation to a

         statute and how the same is identified and distinguished

         from a substantive amendment, observed that only because

         a provision is described as a clarification or explanation, the

         Court is not bound by the said statement, but must analyze

         the nature of the amendment so as to conclude whether it is,
7
(2022) 12 SCC 321
8 (2017) 1 SCC 599
9
Civil Appeal No. 10327 Of 2011
10
2023 SCC OnLine SC 640

                               10-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
          indeed, a clarificatory or declaratory provision or whether it

          is a substantive amendment which is intended to change the

          law and which would apply prospectively.
23.       The mere description of a provision as an "Explanation

          " or "clarification" does not determine its actual effect.            On

          this aspect, this Court in
Virtual Soft Systems Ltd. vs.

          Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi11
observed as follows:
“Even if the statute does contain a statement to the effect
                that the amendment is declaratory or clarificatory, that is
                not the end of the matter. The Court will not regard itself
                as being bound by the said statement in the statute itself,
                but will proceed to analyse the nature of the amendment
                and then conclude whether it is in reality a clarificatory or
                declaratory provision or whether it is an amendment which
                is intended to change the law and which applies to future
                periods.”
24.
In
Govind Das v. ITO12
, this Court has observed that:
“11. Now it is a well-settled rule of interpretation hallowed
                by time and sanctified by judicial decisions that, unless
                the terms of a statute expressly so provide or necessarily
                require it, retrospective operation should not be given to a
                statute so as to take away or impair an existing right or
                create a new obligation or impose a new liability otherwise
                than as regards matters of procedure. The general rule, as
                stated by Halsbury in Vol. 36 of the Laws of England (3rd
                Edn.) and reiterated in several decisions of this Court as
                well as English courts, is that
                “all statutes other than those which are merely declaratory
                or which relate only to matters of procedure or of evidence
                are prima facie prospective”
11
(2007) 9 SCC 665
12
(1976) 1 SCC 906

                             11-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
           and If the enactment is expressed in language which is fairly
           capable of either interpretation, it ought to be construed as
           prospective only.”

                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
25.        A Constitution Bench of this Court in
CIT v. Vatika

       Township (P) Ltd.13
reiterated this principle that the

       amendments that create rights and obligations are generally

       prospective in nature. It is a well-established principle of law

       that clarification or Explanation must not have the effect of

       imposing an unanticipated duty or depriving a party of an

       anticipated benefit.
26.        Hence, in our considered view, the Explanation inserted

       in
Article 23
of Schedule I-A contained in the Act creates a

       new obligation for the party and, therefore, cannot be given

       retrospective application. Thus, it will not affect the

       agreement(s) executed prior to such amendments.
27.        The object of the
Stamp Act
is to collect proper stamp

       duty on an instrument or conveyance on which such stamp

       duty is payable.
Section 35
is a provision to cater for the

       instruments not being properly stamped and, as such, not

       being admissible in evidence. A document not duly stamped




13 (2015) 1 SCC 1


                          12-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
     cannot be admitted for any purposes. To impose the bar of

     admissibility provided under this section, the following twin

     conditions are required to be fulfilled:
(i)    Instrument must be chargeable with duty;
(ii)   It is not duly stamped.
28.     If the documents sought to be admitted are not

     chargeable with duty,
Section 35
has no application. Thus,

     in the present case, since the document was dated

     04.02.1988, the instrument was not chargeable with duty. It

     follows therefrom that when such document(s) are not

     required to be stamped, then no bar could be imposed due to

     it being not duly stamped.
ISSUE II & III
29.     Plaintiff claims in the application that after executing

     the document, Defendant kept the original copy, and a

     photocopy of the same was given to Plaintiff. However, as per

     the averments made in the application, the Defendant had

     stated in an affidavit that the documents were not with her

     but with her counsel.
13-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
30.    Before proceeding with the discussion, it is imperative to

  reproduce the relevant provisions of the
Evidence Act
and discuss

  the law relating to secondary evidence:
"
Section 61-
Proof of contents of documents- The
        contents of documents may be proved either by primary
        or by secondary evidence.
Section 63-Secondary evidence.-Secondary evidence
        means and includes-
(1) certified copies given under the provisions
        hereinafter contained;
(2) copies made from the original by mechanical
        processes which in themselves insure the accuracy of
        the copy, and copies compared with such copies;
        (3) copies made from or compared with the original;
        (4) counterparts of documents as against the parties
        who did not execute them; (5) oral accounts of the
        contents of a document given by some person who has
        himself seen it.
Section 65-
Cases in which secondary evidence relating
        to documents may be given.-Secondary evidence may
        be given of the existence, condition, or contents of
        a document in the following cases-
(a) When the original is shown or appears to be in
        the possession or power-
of the person against whom the document is sought
        to be proved, or of any person out of reach of, or not
        subject to, the process of the Court, or
        of any person legally bound to produce it,
        and when, after the notice mentioned in
Section 66
,
        such a person does not produce it;
(b) when the existence, condition or contents of the
        original have been proved to be admitted in writing by
        the person against whom it is proved or by his
        representative in interest;
(c) when the original has been destroyed or lost, or when
        the party offering evidence of its contents cannot, for
        any other reason not arising from his own default or
        neglect, produce it in reasonable time;
(d) when the original is of such a nature as not to be
        easily movable;
(e) when the original is a public document within the
        meaning of
Section 74
;
14-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
(f) when the original is a document of which a certified
                 copy is permitted by this Act, or by any other law in
                 force in 91[India], to be given in evidence;92
(g) when the originals consist of numerous accounts or
                 other documents which cannot conveniently be
                 examined in Court, and the fact to be proved is the
                 general result of the whole collection.
                 In cases (a), (c) and (d), any secondary evidence of the
                 contents of the document is admissible.
                 In case (b), the written admission is admissible.
                 In case (e) or (f), a certified copy of the document, but
                 no other kind of secondary evidence, is admissible.
                 In case (g), evidence may be given as to the general
                 result of the documents by any person who has
                 examined them, and who is skilled in the examination
                 of such documents."
31.       Primary and Secondary Evidence stands explained by a

          Constitutional Bench of this Court in
Cement Corpn. of India

          Ltd. v. Purya,14 (5-Judge Bench
) as the former being evidence

          that the law requires to be given first, the latter being evidence

          that may be given in the absence of that original evidence when a

          proper explanation of its absence has been given. The terms

          "primary and secondary evidence" apply to the kinds of proof that

          may be given to the contents of a document, irrespective of the

          purpose for which such contents, when proved, may be received.
32.
Section 63
of the Evidence Act gives an exhaustive definition

          declaring that secondary evidence "means and includes" the five

          kinds of evidence mentioned therein.
Section 65
of the Evidence
14
(2004) 8 SCC 270

                            15-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
       Act allows secondary evidence to be given of the existence,

       condition, or contents of documents under the circumstances

       therein mentioned. It provides for the circumstances in which

       secondary evidence can be used when the original document is

       unavailable or inaccessible. It is imperative to adhere to the

       principles outlined in these sections, including the proper

       documentation and authentication, to successfully produce

       secondary evidence in legal proceedings.
33.      After perusing various judgments of this Court, we can

       deduce the following principles relevant for examining the

       admissibility of secondary evidence:
33.1 Law requires the best evidence to be given first, that is,

              primary evidence.15

       33.2
Section 63
of the Evidence Act provides a list of the

              kinds of documents that can be produced as secondary

              evidence, which is admissible only in the absence of

              primary evidence.16

       33.3 If the original document is available, it has to be

              produced and proved in the manner prescribed for
15
Neeraj Dutta v. State (NCT of Delhi) (5-Judge Bench
) (2023) 4 SCC 731;
Yashoda v. K.
Shobha Rani (2-Judge Bench
) (2007) 5
SCC 730
16
Yashoda
(supra)

                             16-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
             primary evidence. So long as the best evidence is within

             the possession or can be produced or can be reached,

             no inferior proof could be given.17

      33.4 A party must endeavor to adduce primary evidence of

             the contents, and only in exceptional cases will

             secondary evidence be admissible. The exceptions are

             designed to provide relief when a party is genuinely

             unable to produce the original through no fault of that

             party.18

      33.5 When the non-availability of a document is sufficiently

             and properly explained, then the secondary evidence

             can be allowed.19

      33.6 Secondary evidence could be given when the party

             cannot produce the original document for any reason

             not arising from his default or neglect.20

      33.7 When the copies are produced in the absence of the

             original    document,       they     become      good     secondary

             evidence.
Still, there must be foundational evidence that

             the alleged copy is a true copy of the original.21
17
Yashoda
(supra)
18
M. Chandra v. M. Thangamuthu (2-Judges Bench) (2010) 9
SCC 712
19
Neeraj Dutta
(supra)
20
Surendra Krishna Roy v. Muhammad Syed Ali Matwali Mirza
1935 SCC OnLine PC 56
21
H. Siddiqui v. A. Ramalingam, (2-Judge Bench) (2011) 4 SCC 240

                          17-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
       33.8 Before producing secondary evidence of the contents of

              a document, the non-production of the original must be

              accounted for in a manner that can bring it within one

              or other of the cases provided for in the section.22

       33.9 Mere production and marking of a document as an

              exhibit by the Court cannot be held to be due proof of

              its contents.23 It has to be proved in accordance with the

              law.24
34.      A reading of
Section 65(a)
of the Evidence Act displays

       the following:
a. Secondary evidence can be presented as a substitute

             when the original document/ primary evidence is in the

             possession of the opposing party or held by a third party;
b. Such a person refuses to produce the document even

             after due notice,

           c. It must be ensured that the alleged copy is a true copy of

             the original.
35.      Applying the constituents of
Section 65 (a)
of the

       Evidence Act to the present facts, in reference to the
22
H. Siddiqui v. A. Ramalingam (2-Judges Bench) (2011) 4
SCC 240
23
Neeraj Dutta
(supra)
24
H. Siddiqui (supra)

                            18-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
  averments made, we find that the exact status of the

  documents in question could not be ascertained as one party

  claims that the other has the said documents and the other

  has allegedly stated that it was with her counsel. However,

  the said documents could not be recovered from the said

  counsel, as per records. In such a situation, therefore, the

  presentation of secondary evidence could be allowed, if other

  requirements are complied with.
36.    We may now consider
Section 35
of the Stamp Act which

  forbids the letting of secondary evidence in proof of its

  contents. The section excludes both the original instrument

  and secondary evidence of its contents if it needs to be

  stamped or sufficiently stamped. This bar as to the

  admissibility of documents is absolute. Where a document

  cannot be received in evidence on the ground that it is not

  duly stamped, the secondary evidence thereof is equally

  inadmissible in evidence.
37.    In     relation       to       secondary      evidence   of

  unstamped/insufficiently stamped documents, the position

  has been succinctly explained by this Court in Jupudi

  Kesava Rao (supra) wherein it dealt with an issue, i.e.,


                  19-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
whether reception of secondary evidence of a written

agreement to grant a lease is barred by the provisions of
Sections 35
and
36
of the Stamp Act and answered it in

affirmative. It observed:
"12.
The Indian Evidence Act
, however, does not purport to deal
   with the admissibility of documents in evidence which require to
   be stamped under the provisions of the
Indian Stamp Act
.
   ……
13. The first limb of
Section 35
clearly shuts out from evidence any
   instrument chargeable with duty unless it is duly stamped. The
   second limb of it which relates to acting upon the instrument will
   obviously shut out any secondary evidence of such instrument, for
   allowing such evidence to be let in when the original admittedly
   chargeable with duty was not stamped or insufficiently stamped,
   would be tantamount to the document being acted upon by the
   person having by law or authority to receive evidence. Proviso (a)
   is only applicable when the original instrument is actually before
   the Court of law and the deficiency in stamp with penalty is paid
   by the party seeking to rely upon the document. Clearly secondary
   evidence either by way of oral evidence of the contents of the
   unstamped document or the copy of it covered by
Section 63
of the
   Indian Evidence Act would not fulfil the requirements of the
   proviso which enjoins upon the authority to receive nothing in
   evidence except the instrument itself.
Section 25
is not concerned
   with any copy of an instrument and a party can only be allowed to
   rely on a document which is an instrument for the purpose of
Section 35
. "Instrument is defined in
Section 2(14)
as including
   every document by which any right or liability is, or purports to be
   created, transferred, limited, extended, extinguished or recorded.
There is no scope for the inclusion of a copy of a document as an
   instrument for the purpose of the
Stamp Act
.

   If
Section 35
only deals with original instruments and not copies,
Section 36
cannot be so interpreted as to allow secondary evidence
   of an instrument to have its benefit.”

                                                (Emphasis supplied)




                   20-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
38.       This Court, in
Hariom Agrawal v. Prakash Chand

          Malviya25
, reiterated the principle
laid down in
Judupi

          Kesava Rao (supra) and observed that:
“10. It is clear from the decisions of this Court and a plain
             reading of
Sections 33
,
35
and
2(14)
of the Act that an
             instrument which is not duly stamped can be impounded
             and when the required fee and penalty has been paid for such
             instrument it can be taken in evidence under
Section 35
of
             the Stamp Act.
Sections 33
or 35 are not concerned with any
             copy of the instrument and party can only be allowed to rely
             on the document which is an instrument within the meaning
             of
Section 2(14)
. There is no scope for the inclusion of the
             copy of the document for the purposes of the
Stamp Act
. Law
             is now no doubt well settled that copy of the instrument
             cannot be validated by impounding and this cannot be
             admitted as secondary evidence under the
Stamp Act, 1899
.”
39.       Thus, if a document that is required to be stamped is not

          sufficiently stamped, then the position of law is well settled

          that a copy of such document as secondary evidence cannot

          be adduced. The present facts, however, differ.
40.       The Trial Court and the High Court have relied on Jupadi

          Kesava Rao (supra) to hold that the Plaintiffs cannot lead

          secondary evidence as the document sought to be produced

          needed to be duly stamped. However, we find that Jupadi

          Kesava Rao (supra) is distinguishable on facts as the

          document which the Court was concerned with therein was
25
(2007) 8 SCC 514

                            21-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
  one which was chargeable with duty, but in the case at hand,

  such is not the case, that is, the document to be produced is

  not one which was chargeable with duty at the time of its

  execution i.e., 04.02.1988. This being a material difference,

  the principle of law held in this case, correct as it may be, shall

  not apply to the instant case.
41.    It is a settled position of law that where the question is

  whether the document is liable to stamp duty and penalty, it

  has to be decided at the threshold even before marking a

  document. In the present case, in view of the discussions

  above, the document in question was not liable to stamp

  duty.
42.       Thus, keeping in view the above-stated principle as well

  as the above-discussed case law and facts of the case, we are

  of the opinion that in the instant case, the Plaintiff's prayer for

  leading the secondary evidence ought to be allowed in so far

  as the documents sought to be introduced as secondary

  evidence be taken by the concerned Court and exhibited, with

  its admissibility being decided independently, in accordance

  with law under the
Evidence Act
.
22-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
43.    The issues raised in this instant dispute are adjudicated

  in the following terms:
43.1 The first issue is answered negatively as the documents

       in question were not required to be stamped at the

       relevant period to attract the bar of
Section 35
of the

       Stamp Act.
43.2 The second issue is answered in the affirmative. A copy

       of a document can be adduced as secondary evidence if

       other legal requirements are met.
43.3 As discussed above, the third issue is answered

       negatively.
44.    The appeal is allowed accordingly. Consequently, the

  order dated 16.12.2003 passed by the 19th Additional District

  Judge in Civil Suit No. 46/A/03 titled as
Shri Vijay v. Dr. Mrs.

  Mrinalini Devi Pour
as affirmed by the High Court vide order

  dated 30.11.2009 in W.P. No. 741/2004 titled as
Vijay

  Choudhary v. Union of India & Ors.
are quashed and set aside.
The order dated 17.07.2001 passed by 4th Additional District

  Judge is restored.
23-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023
45.   No order as to costs.
….............……….J.
                                                     (ABHAY S. OKA)



                                                   ….....……………….J.
                                                    (SANJAY KAROL)


  Place: New Delhi;
Date: 29th November, 2023.
24-Civil Appeal No. 4910 of 2023