[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Digvijaysinh Himmatsinh Jadeja vs The State Of Gujarat on 29 November, 2023
1

                                                                                               NON-REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 1045
                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.3259/2023



        DIGVIJAYSINH HIMMATSINH JADEJA                                          .....         APPELLANT(S)

                                                  VERSUS

        THE STATE OF GUJARAT & ORS.                                             .....        RESPONDENT(S)



                                                            O R D E R
We have heard learned counsel for the parties at some length.

                            The     examination        of   the     common     impugned       judgment     dated

        05.05.2017, passed by the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in

        Special                   Criminal    Application         (Quashing)    No.     4758    of     2015   and

        Special                   Criminal     Application         No.4759     of     2015,     allowing      and

        accepting                  the   prayer      for    quashing    of    First    Information       Report1

        No.CR                I/2/2015        dated   23.01.2015        registered       at    Police     Station

        Gandhinagar Zone, District – Gandhinagar, Gujarat, would show that

        a detailed factual examination and evaluation has been undertaken.

        We are of the opinion that the said examination and evaluation

        should not have been done by the High Court. There are disputed

        questions of fact, as the private respondent(s) have taken a plea

        that the two agreements dated 25.07.2013 and 13.08.2013 are not
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
binding               on     the     company    –   Geetanjali       Jewellery       Retail    Limited2,
   Date: 2023.12.04
   09:43:19 IST
   Reason:
1 For short “FIR”
        2 For short “GJRL”
2
which is a subsidiary of Gitanjali Gems Limited. Learned counsel

appearing    on   behalf   of   the     appellant            –    Digvijaysinh          Himmatsinh

Jadeja in fact submits that the agreements are valid and binding.
It   is    also   submitted     that     in        terms         of    the    agreement       dated

13.08.2013, the private respondent(s) had agreed to return 24 karat

pure gold bars for which the consideration or price stood paid, but

were in deposit with GJRL in fiduciary capacity.
Learned counsel for the appellant – Digvijaysinh Himmatsinh

Jadeja has also drawn our attention to documents in the form of

confirmation letters, which are signed by Mr. Santosh Srivastava as

the Managing Director at GJRL and Mr. Shivendra Singh, Associate

Vice-President     (Finance),     on     behalf          of       GJRL,      as   well       as   the

statement    of   accounts,     which    again          is       signed      by   the    aforesaid

persons. These documents, it is submitted, confirm the fiduciary

nature of the deposit.
The stand of the private respondent(s) is that Mr. Santosh

Srivastava had resigned on 09.12.2013, and the agreements executed

by him were without authority.
But     these   assertions        noted           above         are    disputed        factual

questions. The private respondents have not disputed the signatures

of   Mr.    Santosh   Srivastava        or        Mr.    Shivendra           Singh,     or    their

designation. Some documents are also signed by Mr. Shivendra Singh

      The impugned judgment refers to the requirements of
Sections

406
and
420
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 3. We are not examining

the said aspects in detail, as first, facts have to be ascertained,

including the nature and character of the deposit.

3 For short “
IPC
”
3
We     must    also       take    note       of     the    contention     raised    by   the

learned      counsel        for    the        private       respondent(s)       that     there   are

contradictions         emerging          in    the     stand      taken   by    the    appellant    –

Digvijaysinh          Himmatsinh         Jadeja       in    the     notice     dated    15.07.2014,

which refers to breach of contract and another notice/letter dated

23.08.2014.
We should not go into these aspects, as it is a matter to be

considered and examined in the investigation. A wrong may be civil

wrong, or in a given case be a civil wrong and equally constitute a

criminal offence. The ingredients of a criminal offence should be

satisfied. We would refrain to make detailed observations in this

regard, though we have considered the said notice before passing

this     order.       The     contention          of       the     appellant     -     Digvijaysinh

Himmatsinh Jadeja is that assertions and all allegations have to

read holistically and not in a pedantic manner.
Another       contention         raised        by    the    learned     counsel    for    the

private        respondent(s)         is        that        the     appellant     –     Digvijaysinh

Himmatsinh Jadeja has not accounted and paid for the sale proceeds

in     terms    of     the    agreement          dated       13.08.2013,        which     has    been

described        as     “Operational             and        Commercial         Agreement.”       This

submission on behalf of the private respondent(s) has been accepted

in the impugned judgment.
The appellant – Digvijaysinh Himmatsinh Jadeja has taken an

exception to the said reasoning on several grounds. One of the

arguments is that the reasoning does not take into account the

specific clause in the agreement dated 13.08.2013, which agreement

in fact accepts the agreement dated 25.07.2013, but does not, in
4
any way, override the fiduciary relationship with respect to the

gold bars. Set off, it is submitted, is not available. Suffice it

is to observe that the High Court should not have examined and

recorded conclusion on the disputed fact to quash the FIR. At this

stage, we record that pursuant to the registration of the FIR, the

investigation had proceeded. The order dated 14.09.2016 passed by

the High Court states that 17 persons had been examined by the

investigating officer(s) and statements under
Section 161
of the

Code of Criminal Procedure, 19734 had been recorded. The High Court

notes that statements under
Section 164
of the Code had also been

recorded. These were not considered.
Our    attention      is    drawn     to    paragraph      49     of       the   impugned

judgment,     with   specific       reference       to    respondent          –    Priti   Mehul

Choksi. We believe that these observations are general observations

to the effect that a wife/spouse could not be said to be involved

vicariously. The appellant – Digvijaysinh Himmatsinh Jadeja submits

to the contrary. We would not like to make any comments as it is

only   upon    investigation,        that    a     specific     role     attributable         to

respondent – Priti Mehul Choksi, if any, would be ascertained.
In view of the aforesaid, the impugned judgment is set aside

and the appeal is allowed in the above terms.
The observations in this order will not be read as comments

or   observations       on   the    merits    of    the   case.        Investigation        will

continue      without    being      influenced      by    any     of    the       findings    or

observations made in the impugned judgment or in the present order.

We   also     clarify    that      while    conducting      the    investigation,            the

4 For short “Code”
5
Investigating Officer(s) will keep in mind the rulings of this

Court and High Courts interpreting
Sections 406
,
420
,
464
and
465
etc. of the
IPC
.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
..................J.
                                                   (SANJIV KHANNA)



                                              ..................J.
                                                   (S.V.N. BHATTI)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 29, 2023.