[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ashwini Kumar Upadhyay vs Union Of India on 9 November, 2023
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
2023 INSC 991                                                                             REPORTABLE

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                          WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 699 OF 2016

             ASHWINI KUMAR UPADHYAY                                                   ...PETITIONER(S)

                                                            VERSUS

             UNION OF INDIA & ANR.                                                 …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                       JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI
1.             This Writ Petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India, in the nature

             of Public Interest, seeks two distinct reliefs. The first prayer relates to expeditious

             disposal of criminal cases against elected members of the Parliament and

             Legislative Assemblies1. The second prayer relates to the constitutional validity of
Section 8
of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951. By this order, we dispose of

             this Writ Petition as regards the first prayer after formulating certain guidelines for

             expeditious disposal of the subject cases. We have also requested the learned

             Chief Justices of the respective High Courts to constitute a Special Bench to review

             and monitor the progress of these cases from time to time.
2.             A short reference to the orders passed by this Court from time to time,

             affidavits of the State Governments, and reports of the High Courts as analyzed by
Signature Not Verified
the Amicus in his written submissions are necessary before articulating the
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2023.11.09
14:50:35 IST
Reason:
1 Hereinafter referred to as the ‘subject cases’.
Page 1 of 15
guidelines and disposing of the writ petition with appropriate directions. These

proceedings commenced with notices being issued to the Union of India, State

Governments and High Courts. At a later stage, this Court also appointed Shri Vijay

Hansaria, Ld. Senior Advocate as Amicus Curiae. We place on record appreciation

for his invaluable contribution and assistance.
3.     In fact, this is not the first case in which the need for an expeditious disposal

of criminal cases against elected members of the Parliament and Legislative

Assemblies is examined.
In
Public Interest Foundation v. Union of India2
, this

court held:
“10. We, accordingly, direct that in relation to sitting MPs and
              MLAs who have charges framed against them for the offences
              which are specified in Sections 8(1), 8(2) and 8(3) of the RP
              Act, the trial shall be concluded as speedily and expeditiously
              as may be possible and in no case later than one year from
              the date of the framing of charge(s). In such cases, as far as
              possible, the trial shall be conducted on a day-to-day basis. If
              for some extraordinary circumstances the court concerned is
              not being able to conclude the trial within one year from the
              date of framing of charge(s), such court would submit the
              report to the Chief Justice of the respective High Court
              indicating special reasons for not adhering to the above time-
              limit and delay in conclusion of the trial. In such situation, the
              Chief Justice may issue appropriate directions to the court
              concerned extending the time for conclusion of the trial.”
4.     At an early stage, this Court recorded the statement of the Ld. Additional

Solicitor General that these proceedings are not adversarial in nature and that the

Union would not be averse to setting up special courts for expeditious trial and

disposal of the subject cases. By order dated 01.11.2017, this Court called upon




2 (2015) 11 SCC 433
Page 2 of 15
the Union, States and the High Courts to respond to the idea of setting up special

courts and the financial implications involved in its implementation.
5.    After gathering the necessary information, the Union filed an affidavit as is

evident from the order dated 14.12.2017, contemplating setting up twelve special

courts exercising jurisdiction over multiple states. By the same order, the High

Courts were called upon to identify and transfer the subject cases to the special

courts that were to be established. The Union was also directed to bear the

estimated expenditure of about Rs. 7.80 crores for running these twelve special

courts.
6.    However, as the above-referred decision had policy and financial

implications, after much deliberation, this Court reconsidered the matter and

accepted the suggestion of the Amicus. That is, instead of setting up special courts,

a specified court in each district, both at the sessions and magistrate level, be

identified and earmarked for prioritized hearing of the subject cases. The Union,

State Governments and High Courts were asked to respond to the new suggestion.
7.    On 04.12.2018, the High Courts were directed to examine the matter and

constitute as many sessions and magisterial courts within their jurisdiction as is

considered proper and expedient. By the same order, it was also directed that the

subject cases punishable with death/life against sitting and former MPs/MLAs

should be taken up on a priority basis, followed by cases punishable with

imprisonment up to 5 years or more. Thereafter, all other criminal cases against

sitting MPs/MLAs, followed by similar cases against former MPs/MLAs were to be
Page 3 of 15
taken up. This order also suggested that the designated courts will take up and

hear the subject cases on a day-to-day basis.
8.     On 05.03.2020, the High Courts were directed to provide information about

the (i) the MP/MLA involved in a case, (ii) whether sitting or former, (iii) date of FIR,
(iv) offence alleged, (v) date of filing of charge sheet, (vi) date of framing of charges,
(vii) present status, (viii) stay of trial, if any by the High Court, (ix) expected time of

completion of trial, (x) name of the court, and (xi) the district in which the case is

filed. The initial information received from the High Courts related only to
IPC
offences. In order to have a comprehensive understanding of the subject cases,

by an order dated 10.09.2020, this Court called for information about prosecution

of MPs and MLAs under special legislations. The High Courts compiled the said

information and submitted their reports to us in the form of affidavits.
9.     On the basis of the above information, a comprehensive protocol, in the

nature of guidelines for identification of designated courts, the number of such

courts, the procedure and practice that they need to adopt and follow, witness

protection, etc. was prepared by the learned Amicus. These were noted by this

Court in the order dated 10.09.2020 and they are reproduced hereinbelow for ready

reference:
(i) Special Courts in every district for MPs/MLAs:-
a.     Each High Court may be directed to assign/allocate
              criminal cases involving former and sitting legislators to as
              many Sessions Courts and Magisterial Courts as the
              respective High Courts may consider proper, fit and expedient
              having regard to the number and nature of pending cases.
              Such decisions may be taken by the High Courts within four
              weeks of the order.
Page 4 of 15
b.      The State Governments will issue necessary
        notification in terms of the recommendation of the High Court
        within two weeks from the receipt of the recommendation.
        c.      Case records to be transferred expeditiously to the
        Special Courts.
(ii) Practice Directions :-
a.       Special Courts will give priority to the trial of cases in
        the following order:-
i. Offences punishable with death/life imprisonment;
            ii. Offences punishable with imprisonment for 7 years or
            more;
iii. Other offences.
b.       Cases involving sitting legislators to be given priority
        over former legislators.
c.       Forensic laboratories will give priority in furnishing the
        report in respect of cases being tried by the Special Courts
        and will submit all pending reports within one month.
        d.       State Governments/UTs will appoint/designate at least
        two Special Public Prosecutors for prosecuting cases in the
        Special Courts in consultation with District and Sessions
        Judge in the concerned District.
e.       No adjournment shall be granted except in rare and
        exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded.
        f.       The Superintendent of Police of respective Districts
        shall be responsible to ensure production of accused persons
        before the respective courts on the dates fixed and the
        execution of NBWs issued by the Courts.
g.       The SHO of the concerned police station shall be
        personally responsible for service of summons to the
        witnesses and their appearance and deposition in the court.
        h.       Courts will use technology of video conferencing for
        examination of witnesses and appearance of the accused
        persons, to the extent possible.
(iii) Cases under stay :-
a.   This Hon’ble Court in
Asian Resurfacing of Road
        Agency Pvt. Ltd vs. CBI
, 2018 (16) SCC 299, held as under:-
“If stay is granted, it should not normally be unconditional or
        of indefinite duration. Appropriate conditions may be imposed
        so that the party in whose favour stay is granted is
        accountable if court finally finds no merit in the matter and the
        other side suffers loss and injustice. To give effect to the
        legislative policy and the mandate of
Article 21
for speedy
        justice in criminal cases, if stay is granted, matter should be
        taken on day-to-day basis and concluded within two-three
        months. Where the matter remains pending for longer period,
        the order of stay will stand vacated on expiry of six months,
Page 5 of 15
unless extension is granted by a speaking order showing
        extraordinary situation where continuing stay was to be
        preferred to the final disposal of trial by the trial Court. This
        timeline is being fixed in view of the fact that such trials are
        expected to be concluded normally in one to two years.”

              In view of the law
laid down in
the aforesaid case, trial
        courts to proceed with the trial notwithstanding any stay
        granted by the High Court unless fresh order is passed
        extending the stay by recording reasons.
        b.     In the alternative, Registrar Generals may be directed
        to place the matters involving MPs and MLAs before Hon’ble
        the Chief Justice for appropriate orders for urgent listing of
        such cases.
(iv) Witness Protection :-
a.     Witness protection in all such cases is essential having
        regard to vulnerability of the witnesses and the influence
        exercised by the legislators facing criminal trials. This Hon’ble
        Court in the case of
Mahender Chawla vs Union of India
, 2018
        (16) SCC 299 has framed “Witness Protection Scheme, 2018”
        and made it applicable to all the States till the enactment of
        suitable legislation by the Parliament or State legislatures.
b.     Trial Courts shall consider granting of protection under
        the aforesaid scheme to all the witnesses, without any
        application by the respective witnesses.
(v) Monitoring by High Courts
        a.       Each High Court shall register a Suo Moto case with
        the title “In Re: Special Courts for MPs/MLAs” to monitor the
        progress of cases pending in the State and ensure
        compliance of direction of this Hon’ble Court.
b.       The writ petition, so registered shall be heard by a
        Division Bench of the High Court to be constituted by the Chief
        Justice.
c.       A Senior Advocate shall be appointed as Amicus
        Curiae.
d.       The State shall be represented by the Advocate
        General or an Additional Advocate General.
e.       A senior Police Officer of the rank not below Inspector
        General of Police shall be present in the Court in each hearing
        to furnish requisite information, as and when required.
        f.       Each Special Court will send a monthly status report to
        the High Court and the High Court, on examination of the
        same, will issue necessary directions to ensure speedy
        disposal of cases.
g.       The case shall be heard by the High Court at such
        interval as may be necessary; however, at least once three
        months.”
Page 6 of 15
10.    After hearing the Union and State Governments, we sought the opinion on

the above referred suggestions along with an action plan for rationalization of the

special courts from the Chief Justices of the respective High Courts3. This being

an important order, the relevant portion is extracted herein;
“16. With respect to increasing the number of Special
               Courts and rationalizing the pending criminal cases, we deem
               it appropriate that, before passing any specific direction in
               respect thereto, it would be appropriate to direct the learned
               Chief Justice of each High Court to formulate and submit an
               action plan for rationalization of the number of Special Courts
               necessary, with respect to the following aspects:
a.    Total number of pending cases in each district
               b.    Required number of proportionate Special Courts
               c.    Number of Courts that are currently available
               d.    Number of Judges and the subject categories of the
               cases
               e.    Tenure of the Judges to be designated
               f.    Number of cases to be assigned to each Judge
               g.    Expected time for disposal of the cases
               h.    Distance of the Courts to be designated
               i.    Adequacy of infrastructure
17.   The learned Chief Justices while preparing the action
               plan should also consider, in the event the trials are already
               ongoing in an expeditious manner, whether transferring the
               same to a different Court would be necessary and
               appropriate.
18.   The learned Chief Justices of the High Courts shall also
               designate a Special Bench, comprising themselves and their
               designate, in order to monitor the progress of these trials.
19.    The learned Chief Justices are also requested to give
               their comments on the other suggestions of the learned
               amicus, as extracted by us in our order dated 10.09.2020 and
               this order. They are also requested to send us additional
               suggestion, if any, for the purpose of expedient disposal of
               pending criminal cases against legislators. The action plan,
               with the comments and suggestions of the learned Chief
               Justices of the High Courts, are to be sent to the Secretary
               General of this Court, preferably within a week. A copy may
               also be sent to the learned amicus curiae by way of e-mail.
3 See order dated 16.09.2020.
Page 7 of 15
20.    We further request the learned Chief Justices of all the
                High Courts to list forthwith all pending criminal cases
                involving sitting/former legislators (MPs and MLAs),
                particularly those wherein a stay has been granted, before an
                appropriate bench(es) comprising of the learned Chief Justice
                and/or their designates. Upon being listed, the Court must first
                decide whether the stay granted, if any, should continue,
                keeping in view the principles regarding the grant of stay
                enshrined in the judgment of this Court in
Asian Resurfacing
                of Road Agency Private Limited v. CBI
, (2018) 16 SCC 299.
In the event that a stay is considered necessary, the Court
                should hear the matter on a day-to-day basis and dispose of
                the same expeditiously, preferably within a period of two
                month, without any unnecessary adjournment. It goes without
                saying that the Covid-19 condition should not be an
                impediment to the compliance of this direction, as these
                matters could be conveniently heard through video
                conferencing.”
11.
In continuation of the above referred order dated 16.09.2020, further

directions were issued and information was sought regarding – (a) available

infrastructural facilities4; (b) extension of witness protection as provided in
Mahender Chawla v. Union of India
, (2019) 14 SCC 6155; (c) orders withdrawing

prosecution under
section 321
Cr.P.C.6; and (d) transfer of judicial officers7. The

necessary information was provided through affidavits.
12.     Present status on case pendency: A comprehensive picture of the pending

subject cases in various courts spread across the States and Union Territories is

made available to us. The following table evidences the number of cases pending

against MPs and MLAs in each State and Union Territory as of December 2018,

December 2021 and the latest being November 2022.
4 order dated 06.10.2020.
5 order dated 04.11.2020.
6 order dated 10.08.2021.
7 order dated 10.08.2021 clarified later by order dated 10.10.2021 and 12.07.2023.
Page 8 of 15
Sr.    State/UT         Case      Cases       Cases as in November 2022
No.                     in        in         Total   More     Case load
                        Dec.      Dec.       cases than 5     per judge
                        2018      2021               years
 1            2            3         4          5        6         7
 1.    Andhra Pradesh   109       146        92      50       92

  2.   Arunachal        6         16         4      1        Between 1
       Pradesh                                               to 4
  3.   Assam            38        69         75     33       Between 0
                                                             to 2.5
  4.   Bihar            304       571        546    381      Average
                                                             7.3
  5.   Chhattisgarh     24        12         10     2        Average
                                                             1.1
  6.   Delhi            124       97         93     27       Average 16

  7.   Goa              15        12         19     5        Between 2
                                                             to 8
  8.   Gujarat          119       33         28     11       Between 1
                                                             to 3
  9.   Haryana          35        46         48     18       Between 0
                                                             to 2
  10. Himachal          34        68         70     17       Between 1
      Pradesh                                                to 19
  11. Jharkhand         160       207        198    72       Between 1
                                                             to 37
  12. Karnataka         161       150        221    61       Between
13
to 156
  13. Kerala            312       401        384    22       Between 0
                                                             to 59
  14. Madhya Pradesh 168          260        329    51       Between
25
to 210
  15. Maharashtra       303       470        482    169      Between 1
                                                             to 31
  16. Manipur           12        4          10     1        Between 1
                                                             to 4
  17. Meghalaya         3         5          4      4        Between 1
                                                             to 2
  18. Mizoram           4         1          0      0        Not
                                                             applicable
  19. Nagaland          1         0          0      0        Not
                                                             applicable
Page 9 of 15
20. Orissa            331       360        454     323       Between 0
                                                                   to 30
      21. Punjab            34        74         91      16        Between 0
                                                                   to 4
      22. Rajasthan         46        56         57      21        Between 1
                                                                   to 4
      23. Sikkim            0         0          0       0         0

      24. Tamil Nadu        321       328        260     60        Between 1
                                                                   to 22
      25. Telangana         99        50         17      4         Between 1
                                                                   to 16
      26. Tripura           16        0          0       0         Not
                                                                   Applicable
      27. Uttar Pradesh     992       1339       1377    719       Average
                                                                   9.31
      28. Uttarakhand       34        10         15      2         Not
                                                                   furnished
      29. West Bengal       269       136        244     23        Between 0
                                                                   to 31
      30. Andaman &         0         0          0       0         Not
          Nicobar (U.T.)                                           applicable
      31. Chandigarh (U.T.) —         10         10      1         Between 0
                                                                   to 5
      32. Dadra & Nagar     2         0          0       0         Not
          Haveli (U.T.)                                            applicable
      33. Jammu &           12        7          6       6         Not
          Kashmir (U.T.)                                           furnished
      34. Ladakh (U.T.)     —         —          —       —         —

      35. Lakshadweep       —         —          —       —         —
          (U.T.)
      36. Puducherry (U.T.) 34        36         31      16        Between 1
                                                                   to 12
  Total                     4122      4974       5175    2116
13.   Analysis: The above referred table shows that there are as many as 5,175

subject cases pending as of November, 2022. Of these, cases that are pending for

more than 5 years are as many as 2,116, which figure is more than 40% of such

pendencies. This is a large number.
Page 10 of 15
14.    These cases have a direct bearing on our political democracy. Hence, there

is a compelling need to make every effort to ensure that these cases are taken up

on priority and decided expeditiously. Confidence and trust of the constituency in

their political representative, be it an MP or an MLA, is necessary for an interactive,

efficient and effective functioning of a parliamentary democracy. However, such

confidence is difficult to expect when figures, as indicated in the above referred

table, loom large in our polity.
15.    In fact, there are no two views about the compelling need to take up and

dispose of the subject cases expeditiously. We have no doubt in our mind that even

the political representative, be it MP or an MLA, involved in the prosecution would

also seek a quick disposal of these cases. However, the problem lies elsewhere.

It seems systemic, perhaps institutional, and takes within its sweep many factors

including the method of adversarial litigation that we have adopted. Yet, at every

stage of the practice and procedure that we adopt, there is scope for reform. It is

in this context that we have earnestly conducted and monitored this case for the

last seven years.
16.    Having analyzed the all India data on the pendency of subject cases in

States and Union Territories, we have at the outset noted a considerable

asymmetric disposition between states and even between districts within a State,

on factors that have a bearing on early disposal. This is evident from the stark

difference that exists in the actual number of pending cases between States and

even districts within States. There are also variations in the availability of judges to

decide the cases, the case load per judge, the speed at which the cases are

decided, the state of physical and technological infrastructure, availability of
Page 11 of 15
prosecutors, etc. There is yet another aspect, and this may not be amenable to

data collection, but has a direct bearing on our endeavor for an early disposal of

these cases. The practice and procedure prevalent in every court is distinct and is

sometimes deep-rooted. There are many factors, which may be historical, cultural,

regional or linguistic, that influence the work ethic in a court. This is where the role

of the Bar becomes important, and therefore, their participation becomes crucial.

Once we recognize the inextricable connection and interdependence of the Bar

and the Bench, the need to focus and address these issues comes to light. At this

stage, we are merely attempting to identify factors that must be taken into account

while making an accurate assessment for an effective and expeditious disposal of

the subject cases.
17.    Having analyzed the data and information available on record, two

conclusions emerged - first, there are multiple factors that have a direct bearing on

the disposal of the subject cases, and second, there is substantial variation from

state to state, and district to district, with respect to each of these factors. These

conclusions – the plurality of considerations and their asymmetry between State to

State and even district to district, have a direct bearing on the decision or a

measure that we may adopt for early disposal of the subject cases.
18.    We have monitored these proceedings from 2017 onwards and have

examined the data and information brought to our notice by the High Courts. We

have also gone through the affidavits filed on behalf of the State Governments

which have shown equal concern and earnestness in ensuring early disposal of

the subject cases. With the assistance of the learned Amicus, we have formulated
Page 12 of 15
certain guidelines that will enable the completion of investigation, smooth conduct

of trial, removal of impediments and conclusion of the subject cases at the earliest.
19.     Having considered the matter in detail, we are of the opinion that there exist

multiple factors. Each of these influences early disposal of the subject cases. This,

coupled with their dissimilarity from State to State, makes it difficult for this Court

to form a uniform or standard guideline for trial courts across the length and breadth

of this country to dispose of the subject cases. We have gone through the affidavits

filed by the High Courts explaining the situation that exists within their jurisdiction.

The High Courts have been dealing with these issues on the judicial as well as on

the administrative side, and they are alive to the position that exists in each of their

district courts. Under
Article 227
, the High Courts are entrusted with the power of

superintendence over the district judiciary8. We deem it appropriate to leave it to

the High Courts to evolve such method or apply such measure that they deem

expedient for an effective monitoring of the subject cases.
20.     Having considered the matter in detail, we direct that:
(i)      Learned Chief Justices of the High Courts shall register a suo-motu
               case with the title, “In Re: designated courts for MPs/MLAs” to monitor
               early disposal of criminal cases pending against the members of
               Parliament and Legislative Assemblies. The suo-motu case may be
               heard by the Special Bench presided by the Learned Chief Justice or
               a bench assigned by them.
(ii)     The Special Bench hearing the suo-motu case may list the matter at



8 Though Constitution uses the expression ‘subordinate’ to describe the district judiciary, it is not to be

understood in the literal sense.
In fact, this Court in
All India Judges Association v. Union of India &
Ors.
, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 673, has held that district judiciary is a part of our basic structure.
Page 13 of 15
regular intervals as is felt necessary. The High Court may issue such
        orders and/or directions as are necessary for expeditious and effective
        disposal of the subject cases. The Special Bench may consider calling
        upon the Advocate General or the Public Prosecutor to assist the
        Court.
(iii)   The High Court may require the Principal District and Sessions Judge
        to bear the responsibility of allocating the subject cases to such court
        or courts as is considered appropriate and effective. The High Court
        may call upon the Principal District and Sessions Judge to send
        reports at such intervals as it considers expedient.
(iv)    The designated courts shall give priority:
(i) first to criminal cases against MP’s & MLA’s punishable with death
        or life imprisonment then to (ii) cases punishable with imprisonment
        for 5 years or more, and then hear (iii) other cases.
The Trial Courts shall not adjourn the cases except for rare and
        compelling reasons.
(v)     The learned Chief Justices may list cases in which orders of stay of
        trial have been passed before the Special Bench to ensure that
        appropriate orders, including vacation of stay orders are passed to
        ensure commencement and conclusion of trial.
(vi)    The Principal District and Sessions Judge shall ensure sufficient
        infrastructure facility for the designated courts and also enable it to
        adopt such technology as is expedient for effective and efficient
        functioning.
(vii)    The High Courts shall create an independent tab on their website

         providing district-wise information about the details of the year of
Page 14 of 15
filing, number of subject cases pending and stage of proceedings. We

             make it clear that while monitoring the subject cases, the Special

             Bench may pass such orders or give such additional directions as are

             necessary for early disposal of the subject cases.
21.   With these directions, we dispose of this Writ Petition with respect to the first

prayer concerning the expeditious disposal of criminal cases against elected

members of Parliament and Legislative Assemblies.
22.   This Writ Petition will now be listed for hearing on the other issue relating to

the constitutional validity of
Section 8
of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951.

We also place on record our appreciation for the efforts taken by the learned

Amicus Curiae.
……..……………………………….CJI.
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]



                                            ……………….………………………….J.
                                               [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha]



                                            ……………….………………………….J.
                                                        [Manoj Misra]

New Delhi;
November 09, 2023
Page 15 of 15