[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Jyotirmay Ray vs The Field General Manager, Punjab ... on 6 November, 2023
Author:
J.K. Maheshwari
Bench:
J.K. Maheshwari
2023 INSC 979                                                              REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6611 OF 2015


            JYOTIRMAY RAY                                                  …APPELLANT

                                                     Versus

            THE FIELD GENERAL MANAGER,
            PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK & ORS.                                   ...RESPONDENT(s)


                                               JUDGMENT
J.K. Maheshwari, J.
1.              Appellant, who was compulsorily retired as Sr. Manager,

            was             denied   the   benefit   of   leave   encashment,   employer’s

            contribution of provident fund, gratuity and pension by the

            Punjab National Bank (hereinafter referred to as the “Bank”). On

            rejection of his representation by the authorities, a challenge was

            made by filing a writ petition before the High Court. The said writ

            petition was contested by the Bank, taking the plea that due to

            irregularities in granting loans and cash credit facilities under the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora
Date: 2023.11.07
10:22:40 IST
Reason:
Credit Guarantee Fund Trust Scheme for Micro & Small
1
Enterprises (for short “CGTMSE”) and otherwise in routine loans,

loss was caused to the Bank.
2.   The background facts were that earlier, the appellant was

charge­sheeted   on   16.10.2009     and   also   served   with   a

supplementary chargesheet on 20.11.2009. On submitting of

reply by the appellant, departmental enquiry was conducted and

the enquiry report dated 11.01.2010 was submitted to the

disciplinary authority who found him guilty and vide order dated

29.01.2010, penalty of compulsory retirement was inflicted. The

appeal filed by the appellant was also dismissed by appellate

authority on 28.07.2010.
3.   The appellant by filing the writ petition did not challenge the

order of compulsory retirement and only claimed the terminal

benefits i.e., leave encashment, employer’s contribution of

provident fund, gratuity and pension. In the meantime, the review

filed by the appellant before the appellate authority was also

dismissed on 06.01.2011. During pendency of the writ petition,

the Board of Directors of the Bank vide resolution dated

20.12.2010 refused to give employer’s contribution of provident

fund to the tune of Rs. 8,80,085/­ to the appellant.       Learned
2
Single Judge vide order dated 03.04.2012 allowed the said writ

petition in part and directed the Bank to release the employer’s

contribution of the provident fund as well as gratuity with interest

@ 8.5% p.a. and leave encashment in terms of Regulation 38 of

the Punjab National Bank (Officers’) Service Regulations, 1979

(for short “1979 Regulations”). It was also clarified that the dues

be calculated from the date of compulsory retirement and be

released within a period of eight weeks from the date of

communication.     Learned Single Judge denied the benefit of

pension because the appellant was not an in­service candidate

when the scheme for shifting to the pension regime became

operational.
4.   On filing the Special Appeal by the Bank, the Division Bench

allowed the same in part maintaining the order of grant of leave

encashment, but set­aside the grant of provident fund (Bank’s

contribution) and gratuity on the pretext that by an act of the

appellant, loss has been caused to the Bank.
5.   In view of the foregoing facts, grant of leave encashment to

appellant is no more res integra. The appellant is not challenging
3
the refusal to grant pension as he was not an in­service candidate

at the time of change of scheme. The only question that falls for

consideration is whether the denial of employer’s contribution of

Provident Fund and non­payment of gratuity to appellant because

of the order of compulsory retirement, as directed by the

impugned order, is justified or not?
6.   Mr. Irshad Ahmad, learned counsel appearing for the

appellant contends that Rule 13 of the Punjab National Bank

Employees’ Provident Fund Trust Rules (for short “P.F. Trust

Rules”) gives first lien to the Bank on the contributions made by it

to recover any loss, damages and liabilities which the Bank may

at any time sustain or incur by reasons of any dishonest act,

deed or omission or gross misconduct by a member of the

provident fund. It is submitted that in the main chargesheet or in

the supplementary chargesheet, it is not alleged that due to grant

of loan under the scheme or in other loans, any loss has been

caused to the Bank. In the report of enquiry, finding of loss

having been caused to the Bank has not been recorded. Learned

counsel contends that the Board of Directors unilaterally passed
4
a resolution which has rightly been interfered with by the learned

Single Judge.
7.   Learned counsel      contends    that   while   reversing   those

findings, the Division Bench has not assigned any cogent reason

or even discussed the issue. It is also submitted that the Punjab

National Bank, Personnel Division, Head Office, New Delhi issued

Circular No. 1563 on 16/01/1997 having due reference to the

provisions of the
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
(for short

“
Gratuity Act
”) and payment under the 1979 Regulations.

Explanation to clause 14(1)(a) of the said circular makes it clear

that the gratuity is payable on termination of service to an officer

on completion of at least 10 years of service. It is clarified that the

said termination should not be by way of punishment as

dismissal or removal. Learned Single Judge has rightly observed

that
Regulation 4
of the Punjab National Bank Officer Employees’

(Discipline and Appeal) Regulations 1977 (for short “1977

Regulations”) makes it clear that a dismissal of an employee shall

ordinarily be a disqualification for future employment whereas

removal from service shall not be a disqualification for future

employment. It is also stated that no aggravating circumstance of
5
causing loss by appellant or finding as to loss being caused has

been recorded in the enquiry. There was no quantification of loss

or damage. It is urged that on inflicting a penalty of compulsory

retirement after enquiry, ipso facto would not result in forfeiture

of the gratuity as directed by the impugned order. Even otherwise

the forfeiture of gratuity affects the civil right of an employee

having adverse consequence which cannot be directed in violation

of the principles of natural justice.
8.   Per contra, Mr. Rajesh Kumar Gautam, learned counsel for

the respondent Bank argued in support of the findings recorded

in the impugned order passed by the Division Bench and

contends that the normal retirement of an employee cannot be

equated with compulsory retirement inflicted by way of penalty.

Therefore, gratuity and Bank’s contribution towards provident

fund have rightly been withheld by the order impugned.
In

support of his contention, reliance has been placed on the Full

Bench judgment of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in LPA No.

566 of 2012 titled
UCO Bank and others vs. Anju Mathur
decided on 07.03.2013.
It is urged that
the said judgment
was

cited and relied upon by the High Court of Delhi in
B.R. Sharma
6
vs. Syndicate Bank and others
, 2015 SCC Online Del 13989.
Learned counsel has also placed reliance on the judgment of this

Court in
Canara Bank and another vs. Lalit Popli (Dead
)

through Legal Representatives (2018) 11 SCC 87.
9.    We have heard learned counsel for the parties at length. The

issue of payment of provident fund (Bank’s contribution) and

payment of gratuity and its forfeiture are required to be analysed

with reference to the relevant provisions of the Act, Rules,

Regulations and the circulars issued by the Bank from time to

time. They are being considered in the subsequent sub­headings

and the paragraphs.
GRANT OF PROVIDENT FUND AND WHEN IT CAN BE
FORFEITED:
10.   Chapter IX of 1979 Regulations deals with the terminal

benefits.   As per Regulation 45(1), every officer shall become a

member of the Provident Fund constituted by the Bank and shall

be bound by the Rules governing such fund. The Rules governing

such fund are known as P.F. Trust Rules. As per Rule 2 of the

Trust Rules, the contribution of the employee and employer shall

be deposited in the provident fund trust account, which shall be a
7
contributory provident fund. Rules 13 and 14 whereof are

relevant for the purpose of this case and are reproduced as thus:
“13.      The Bank shall have first lien on the
         contributions made by it to the individual account of
         any member together with interest thereon or
         accretions thereto, to recover any loss, damages and
         liabilities which the Bank may at any time sustain or
         incur by reasons of any dishonest act, deed or
         omission or gross misconduct of or by such member.
14.     In case where the Bank shall have first lien
         as provided in Rule No. 13 above, the Trustees shall
         on receipt of the resolution passed by the Bank’s
         Board of Directors pay to the Bank out of such
         member’s individual account in the Fund, such
         portion    thereof   not   exceeding    the   Bank’s
         contribution to it, as the Board might ask the
         Trustees to pay, and the receipt of the Bank for any
         payment so made, shall be complete discharge to the
         Trustees. In the event of any such payment, the
         remaining amount out of the Provident Fund
         balance shall be paid to him. The recovery of such
         losses by the Bank shall be limited to the extent of
         such financial loss only.”




On perusal, it is clear that the Bank shall have first lien on the

contributions made by it to the individual account of any member

together with interest thereon or accretions thereto, to recover

any loss, damages and liabilities, sustained any time by the Bank

or incurred by reasons of any dishonest act, deed or omission or

gross misconduct of the member. It is further apparent that the
8
Board of Directors shall pass an order to pay the contribution of

the Bank which is in the account of fund to the Bank to the

extent of recovery of the loss, damages and liabilities.
11.   Let us apply the said Rules to the facts of the present case

in the context of the allegations made in the chargesheet dated

16.10.2009 and supplementary chargesheet dated 20.11.2009 to

consider the position that emerges.
12.   It was alleged that while granting the loans or extending

cash credit facilities under the CGTMSE or otherwise, due

diligence of the procedure was not followed by the appellant. In

the charge­sheet, it is not alleged that by such an act, the Bank

has suffered loss nor has the quantification of the amount of loss

been done. In the report of enquiry, finding about loss being

caused or quantification of the amount of loss has not been

recorded. The contribution of Bank to provident fund was

forfeited as per resolution dated 20/12/2010 of the Board of

Directors based on the communication dated 19/11/2010 as

referred by the learned Single Judge. The said resolution refers

that the Bank has suffered a loss of Rs. 77.59 lakhs by an act of

the appellant for which the penalty of compulsory retirement has
9
been directed. However, the recommendations were made for

appropriation of the Bank’s contribution of provident fund to the

tune of Rs. 8,80,085/­ and it was withheld from the provident

fund account of the appellant. By filing this appeal, the appellant

has averred and produced the report of the internal auditor dated

27/7/2009 (Annexure P­1). The said report was of the prior date,

from the date of issuance of the chargesheet. However, relying on

the said report, it is submitted that no loss has been caused to

the Bank. It is contended that nothing is alleged towards loss in

the chargesheet.
13.   In the counter affidavit to this appeal, it is stated that the

Report (Annexure P­1) was not part of the record of the writ

petition before the High Court and without an application to take

the additional evidence on record, it cannot be read by this Court.

On perusal of the averments of the counter affidavit, the existence

of the report (Annexure P­1) has not been denied by the

respondents. In the finding of the enquiry report, quantification of

the loss caused is not recorded. The resolution of the Board of

Directors dated 20/12/2010 is subsequent to the order of penalty

of compulsory retirement. Thus, prior to the chargesheet as per
10
report of the internal auditor, loss has not been reported to the

Bank. Presumably, it appears to us, for the said reasons in the

chargesheet, allegations causing loss and quantifying the amount

of loss have not been specified. The Board of Directors on the

basis of information unilaterally passed the resolution alleging

loss of Rs. 77.59 lakhs. Prior to passing the resolution, notice

asking response and opportunity was not afforded to the

appellant. In the facts as discussed, the unilateral report cannot

be relied upon by the Board of Directors to deny the benefit of

payment of employer’s contribution of provident fund. In this view

of the matter, learned Single Judge was right in observing that

the Board of Directors has not afforded an opportunity to the

appellant on the issue of causing loss or damage to the Bank,

prior to the passing of the resolution of appropriation of the

contribution of the Bank from the provident fund account of the

appellant. Moreover, in the absence of any allegation in the

chargesheet about the quantifiable amount of loss, the argument

as advanced by respondents is bereft of any merit. In view of the

above discussions, the findings recorded by learned Single Judge

with regard to payment of Bank’s contribution of provident fund
11
is equitable, just and is liable to be upheld, setting aside the

findings of the Division Bench.
PAYMENT OF GRATUITY AND WHEN IT CAN BE WITHHELD:
14.   Regulation 46 of Chapter IX of 1979 Regulations deals with

gratuity.      The relevant extract of the said Regulation is

reproduced as thus:
“46.    Gratuity:
46.(1) Every officer shall be eligible for gratuity on:
a) retirement
b) death
c) disablement rendering him unfit for further service as
            certified by a medical officer approved by the Bank
d) resignation after completing ten years of continuous
            service; or
e) termination of service in any other way except by way
            of punishment after completion of 10 years of service.
15.   In view of the above, an officer of the Bank shall be eligible

for gratuity on retirement; death; disablement rendering him unfit

as certified by an approved medical officer; resignation after

completion of 10 years of continuous service or termination of

service after completion of 10 years except in a case if such

termination is by way of punishment.                      However, the said

Regulations are silent on the contingency as to what would
12
happen if an officer is met with a penalty of compulsory

retirement.
16.   Further if we look at
Section 4
of the Gratuity Act, it

elucidates the conditions of payment of gratuity to an employee

on termination of his services. In particular, sub­section (6) of
Section 4
highlights the conditions when gratuity can be withheld

to an employee on his termination. The relevant portion has been

reproduced as under:
(6)     Notwithstanding anything contained in sub­
          section (1)­
(a) the gratuity of an employee, whose services have
          been terminated for any act, wilful omission or
          negligence causing any damage or loss to, or
          destruction of, property belonging to the employer
          shall be forfeited to the extent of the damage or loss
          so caused;
(b) the gratuity payable to an employee shall be
          wholly forfeited­
(i) if the services of such employee have been
          terminated for his riotous or disorderly conduct or
          any other act of violence on his part, or
(ii) if the services of such employee have been
          terminated for any act which constitutes an offence
          involving moral turpitude, provided that such
          offence is committed by him in the course of his
          employment.
17.   The provisions of
Gratuity Act
make it clear that forfeiture of

gratuity may be directed to the extent of damage or loss so
13
caused or destruction of property belonging to employer. In twin

situations where the termination is due to riotous or disorderly

conduct or involvement of the employee in a criminal case

involving moral turpitude, the gratuity shall be wholly forfeited.
18.   This Court in the case of
Y.K. Singla vs. Punjab National

Bank and others
(2013) 3 SCC 472, while considering the issue

of interest on the late payment of gratuity to a retired employee of

Punjab National Bank held that the payment of
Gratuity Act
will

override    the   Punjab     National     Bank     (Employees’)    Pension

Regulations, 1995 (for short “1995 Pension Regulations”). While

dealing with the issue of recovery from gratuity under Regulation

46 or withholding of pension under Regulation 46(2) of the said

Regulations, this Court in paragraph 22, after referring to
Section

14
of the Gratuity Act, has held as under:
“22.    In order to determine which of the two
           provisions   (the
Gratuity   Act
,   or   the    1995
           Regulations) would be applicable for determining the
           claim of the appellant, it is also essential to refer
           to
Section 14
of the Gratuity Act, which is being
           extracted hereunder:­


               “14. Act to override other enactments,
               etc. – The provisions of this Act or any rule
               made thereunder shall have effect
               notwithstanding     anything    inconsistent
14
therewith contained in any enactment
               other than this Act or in any instrument or
               contract having effect by virtue of any
               enactment other than this Act.”
                                        (emphasis supplied)


          A perusal of
Section 14
leaves no room for any doubt
          that a superior status has been vested in the
          provisions of the
Gratuity Act
vis­à­vis any other
          enactment (including any other instrument or
          contract) inconsistent therewith. Therefore, insofar
          as the entitlement of an employee to gratuity is
          concerned, it is apparent that in cases where
          gratuity of an employee is not regulated under the
          provisions of the
Gratuity Act
, the legislature having
          vested superiority to the provisions of the
Gratuity
          Act
over all other provisions/enactments (including
          any instrument or contract having the force of law),
          the provisions of the
Gratuity Act
cannot be ignored.
          The term “instrument” and the phrase “instrument
          or contract having the force of law” shall most
          definitely be deemed to include the 1995
          Regulations, which regulate the payment of gratuity
          to the appellant.”
19.   In view of the above, it is apparent that the provisions of the
Gratuity Act
have superiority over all other provisions of

Regulations.
20.   The Bank harmonizing the provisions of Regulation 46 of

1979 Regulations and the Gratuity Act issued Circular No. 1563

on    16.01.1997     through      its     personnel     division.   Therein

harmonizing the Regulations with the provisions of the Gratuity
15
Act and in clauses 8 and 14 of the Circular, the instances as to

when gratuity could be forfeited, have been specified. Those

clauses are relevant and have been reproduced as under:
“8. FORFEITURE OF GRATUITY UNDER ACT
         The gratuity payable under the payment of gratuity
         act, is liable to full or partial forfeiture under
         different circumstances.
Section 4(1)
of payment of
         gratuity act deals to payment of gratuity whereas
section 4(6)
of the act deals with forfeiture of
         gratuity.
Section 4(1)
reads as under:
         Gratuity shall be payable to an employee on the
         termination of his employment after he has rendered
         continuous service for not less than five Years,
         a. On his superannuation, or
         b. On his retirement or resignation, or
         c. On his death or disablement due to accident or
         disease.
Provided that the completion of continuous service of
         five years shall not be necessary where the
         termination of the employment of any employee is
         due to death or disablement.
Section 4(6)
provides as under:
"Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (1)
         a. The gratuity of an employee, whose services have
         been terminated for any act, wilful omission or
         negligence causing any damage or loss to, or
         destruction of, property belonging to the employee,
         shall be forfeited to the extent of the damage or loss
         so caused:
b. The gratuity payable to an employee may be
         wholly or partially forfeited.
I) If the services of such employee have been
         terminated for his riotous or disorderly conduct or
         any other act of violence on his part, or
16
II) If the services of such employee have been
        terminated for any act which constitutes an offence
        involving moral turpitude, provided that such
        offence is committed by him in the course of his
        employment.
14. PAYMENT UNDER OFFICERS SERVICE REGULATIONS
        Rules relating to payment of gratuity of officers staff
        have been laid down under Regulation 46 of PNB
        Officers Service Regulations, 1979 which is as
        under:­
        (I) Every officer shall be eligible for gratuity on:
(a) Retirement, (b) death (c) disablement rendering
        him unfit for further service as certified by a medical
        officer approved by the bank, or (d) resignation after
        completing ten years of continuous service or
        termination of service in any other way except by
        way of punishment after completion of 10 years of
        service.
Explanation: We have to clarify that gratuity may be
        paid in case of termination of service, subject to the
        condition that the officers has put in at least 10
        years of service with the bank and provided that the
        termination is not by way of dismissal or removal
        from service as punishment.
(II) The amount of gratuity payable to an officer shall
        be one month's pay for every completed year of
        service, subject to a maximum of 15 months’ pay.
        Provided that where an officer has completed more
        than 30 years of service, he shall be eligible by way
        of gratuity for an additional amount at the rate of
        one half of month pay for each completed year of
        service beyond thirty years.
Pay for the purpose of gratuity in case of officer shall
        mean basic pay only. While calculating gratuity, that
        part of PQA & FPA drawn by an officer, which rank
        for superannuation benefit, shall also be taken into
        account.
Note: If the fraction of service beyond completed
        years of service is six months or more, gratuity will
17
be paid pro­rata for the period. In this connection,
          we have to clarify that for the purpose of calculating
          gratuity, the number of days, beyond 6 months
          period is also to be taken into account.
On a combined reading of the provisions of the
Gratuity Act, 1979
Regulations and the circular, it becomes clear that the gratuity

shall become payable to every officer on retirement, death,

disablement or on resignation except in a case of termination of

service in any other way, by way of punishment after completion

of 10 years of continuous service.
21.   At this stage, it is relevant to refer to the provisions of 1977

Regulations.
Regulation 4
of the said Regulations specifies major

penalties: ­

 “Major penalties :
(f) ……..
(g) ……..
(h) Compulsory retirement;
(i) Removal from service which shall not be a disqualification
      for future employment;
(j) Dismissal which shall ordinarily be a disqualification for
      future employment. ”
18
The explanation to
Regulation 4
under the heading “Major

Penalties” specifies some of the situations which shall not amount

to penalty within the meaning of this Regulation. As those

conditions are not relevant for the present case, they are not

being referred to.
22.   Under
Regulation 4
of the 1977 Regulations, the compulsory

retirement of an officer is a major penalty. The explanation as

given in clause 14(1)(a) of the said Circular clarifies that in case of

termination after at least 10 years of service in the Bank, if such

termination is not by way of punishment as dismissal or removal,

the gratuity may be paid. In the said explanation, the denial of

gratuity to an employee, who is inflicted with the major penalty of

compulsory retirement, has not been included. Therefore, the

gratuity is payable to the appellant under the 1979 Regulations in

terms of the explanation under the said Circular.                Even

otherwise, if we see the provisions of the
Gratuity Act
, gratuity

can be withheld in case of damages or loss so caused or

destruction of property belonging to the employer or otherwise

where the termination of service is due to riotous or disorderly

conduct or due to criminal case involving moral turpitude.
19
23.   The facts of the case at hand are not a case of riotous

behaviour of appellant or his involvement in any criminal case.

As discussed hereinabove, while dealing with the issue of

forfeiture of employers’ contribution of provident fund in the

enquiry report, no finding regarding causing loss to the bank or

on quantification of the amount of loss has been recorded.
24.   While   passing    an   order    of   withholding     of   gratuity,

opportunity of hearing has not been afforded to the appellant.
In

this regard, the judgment of the Full Bench of Punjab & Haryana

High Court in
UCO Bank
(supra) is relevant, wherein the Full

Bench has duly considered the issue of forfeiture of gratuity and

the relevant paras of the said judgement are reproduced as

under:
“22. ……. No doubt, in the charge­sheet as many as
         24 accounts are mentioned where the respondent
         had given loans or other financial accommodation
         either beyond her powers or without obtaining
         proper securities. That would show that certain
         accounts were overdrawn. Even the operation of
         these accounts was not satisfactory. However,
         whether the appellant­Bank ultimately suffered loss
         and what was the actual loss is not reflected. No
         doubt, the irregularities committed by the
         respondent may have exposed the Bank to such
         losses. However, that is entirely different from loss
         having been actually suffered by the bank. Even if
         some accounts became bad and the Bank had to file
20
suits for recovery concerning those accounts against
          the defaulting parties, that would not automatically
          lead to the conclusion that the loss/damage has
          been suffered. It is possible that Bank is able to
          recover full money in those proceedings. Whether
          that happened in fact or not and whether loss is
          actually suffered or not is not discernible from either
          the charge­sheet or the enquiry report.
23. It is for this reason that it was incumbent upon
         the appellant­Bank to mention specifically about the
         actual loss having been suffered, if it suffered, in the
         show cause notice itself with particulars of that loss
         in order to enable the respondent to meet the same.
That has not been done even in the final order.
Though the figure of 4 crores is given, in the final
         order, even that is not substantiated by giving
         particulars thereof. We are, therefore, of the opinion
         that the show cause notice or the final orders
         passed, forfeiting the gratuity, do not meet the legal
         requirements and have to be set aside.”
25.   In the facts of the present case, the said judgement squarely

applies looking to the situation wherein the quantification of loss

has not been proved in the enquiry.             Even otherwise, prior to

passing of an order of forfeiture of gratuity, opportunity of hearing

has not been afforded to the appellant. We acknowledge the view

taken by the Full Bench in
the said judgment
and reaffirm the

same.
[
26.   The counsel for appellant also relied upon the judgement of
B.R. Sharma
(supra), in which the riotous behaviour of the

employee was found proved. However
,
the said judgment
does not
21
apply in the facts of the present case.
Similarly, reliance was also

placed on the case of
Canara Bank
(supra) wherein as per the

Regulations of the Canara Bank, the withholding of the amount of

gratuity to the extent of loss caused was permissible. In the facts

of the present case and contents of Regulations and Circular of

the Bank
,
the said judgment
being distinguishable, has no

application. The learned Single Judge has correctly observed that

as per the 1977 Regulations, compulsory retirement; removal

from service which shall not be a disqualification for future

employment     and   dismissal   which    shall   ordinarily   be   a

disqualification for future employment are distinct and separate

punishments. The act of forfeiture of gratuity is not envisaged in

the present case as the provisions are silent on the aspect of

forfeiture in case of compulsory retirement. As per Circular No.

1563 dated 16.01.1997 of the Bank, in our view, the Division

Bench erred in reversing the judgment of the learned Single

Judge.
27.   Therefore, taking a wholistic view of the 1977 Regulations,

1979 Regulations, Circular dated 16.01.1997 and the facts on

record, we are of the view that the present civil appeal deserves to
22
be allowed. We affirm the findings of the learned Single Judge and

set­aside the judgement rendered by the Division Bench.              The

appeal is allowed. No order as to costs.
……...............................J.
                                      (J.K. MAHESHWARI)




                                        ………...........................J.
                                       (K.V. VISWANATHAN)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 06, 2023.
23