[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Markash Jajara vs The State Of Assam on 3 November, 2023
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
,
Surya Kant
1

                                                                                                      REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 1015
                                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                              CRIMINAL APPEAL No.3405 OF 2023
                                        (Arising out of SLP(Crl.)No.10495 of 2022)


        MARKASH JAJARA                                                                            … APPELLANT

                                                                    Versus


        THE STATE OF ASSAM & ANR.                                                                 … RESPONDENTS

                                                           J U D G M E N T
1.                        Leave granted.
2.                        The Gauhati High Court has dismissed the jail appeal,

        vide                the    impugned       judgment      dated       12.03.2019,    preferred       by    the

        appellant against the judgment and order dated 03.10.2016, passed

        by the learned Sessions Judge, Jorhat whereby the appellant was

        held                guilty       of    having    committed       the   murder    of     his    son-in-law,

        namely,                   late        Markush     Borja      and     sentenced     to     undergo       life

        imprisonment                     with     a     fine   of    Rs.10,000/-        with    the     stipulated

        imprisonment of six months on default of payment of the fine amount

        in Sessions Case No.188(J-T)/2015, arising out of Titabar P.S. Case

        No.65/2015.
3.                        The     above-stated         FIR,        under
Section      302
IPC,     was

        registered on the receipt of an ejahar submitted by P.W.8 (Well

        Borja), on the same day, to the effect that his younger brother –
Signature Not Verified
Markush Borja had been assaulted and killed by the appellant with a
Digitally signed by
satish kumar yadav
Date: 2023.11.22
18:46:13 IST
Reason:
bamboo stick. The occurrence took place inside the house of the

        appellant.                   The informant had gone to the house of the appellant
2
and found his brother, who had been staying with his in-laws for

the last 3/4 months, lying dead.
4.       Following the registration of the FIR, the appellant was

arrested and a chargesheet under
Section 302
IPC was filed against

him. The prosecution examined nine witnesses including the wife of

the appellant – Mononit Jajara (P.W.5) and his daughter – Sarani

Boria (P.W.6). The appellant’s wife supported the prosecution’s

case to the extent that her son-in-law was killed by the appellant.

However, she did not witness the occurrence as she could not enter

the house out of fear. The statement of the appellant’s daughter,

who is the wife of the deceased (P.W.6), has a direct and material

bearing on the fate of this appeal. Hence, we propose to reproduce

her statement in extenso, which reads as under:
“I know accused Sri Markash Jajara who is present
      in the dock of the court today. The accused is my father.
I also knew deceased Markush Borha who happened to
      be my husband.
The incident occurred about one & a half years
      back. On the date of incident I alongwith my husband
      proceeded towards the house of our parents as they were
      suffering from illness.
On the date of incident I was present at my work
      place. When I returned back home at about 4 P.M. I came to
      know that my husband had been murdered by my father
      [accused].
Out of fear I did not enter into the house. When
      police arrived at our house then only I entered into my
      house. I noticed the dead body of my husband lying in the
      floor of the kitchen of the house.
I questioned my father about the incident and he
      confessed before me that he had murdered my husband.
      Police took the dead body of my husband to the hospital
      for post-mortem examination. My father was also taken to
      the police station.
CROSS-EXAMINATION : ON BEHALF OF ACCUSED

              I do not know anything about the incident. I did
      not witness the incident.
We reside separately from our parents. My parents
3
resided alongwith my brother and his wife.
My husband was an alcoholic person. Prior to the
        date of incident my husband used to quarrel with me as
        well as with my father after consuming alcohol.
My father murdered my husband as he used to ill-
        treat me after consuming alcohol. My father confessed
        before me that he had murdered my husband with a piece of
        bamboo.”
5.        The other material witness examined by the prosecution

includes P.W.8 (Well Borja) – the brother of the deceased, who is

also admittedly not an eye witness. Having come to know that his

brother had been assaulted by the appellant, he reached the place

of occurrence and saw his younger brother lying dead on the floor.
6.        It may also be mentioned at this stage that as per the

postmortem report, the deceased suffered the following injuries:
“1. Laceration of size 7 cm x 1 cm x muscle deep is
         present over right forehead, 3 cm from mid-line and
         2.5 cm above eyebrow.
2. Laceration of size 2 cm x 1 cm x muscle deep is
         present over left mastoid region.
3. Laceration of size 2 cm x 1 cm x muscle deep is
         present just below the chin and placed obliquely.”
7.        Dr. Ved Prakash Gupta, who conducted the autopsy of the

dead   body,   entered   into    the   witness   box   as   P.W.4   and   while

acknowledging the postmortem report prepared by him, opined that

“the injury sustained over the head by the deceased is fatal to

cause instantaneous death.”
8.        The   Trial    Court   on    consideration   of   the   above-stated

evidence held the appellant guilty of committing an offence under
Section 302
IPC and consequently, sentenced him to undergo life

imprisonment.
4
9.       It appears that owing to his poor financial conditions,

the appellant’s appeal was forwarded by the Jail Authorities and

with the able assistance of an amicus curiae, the High Court on

re-evaluation   of   the   entire   evidence   came   to   the   following

conclusion:
“14. In view of the facts and circumstances, which are
       well supported by the witnesses, we disagree with the
       submission of the learned Amicus Curiae that the
       conviction of the accused appellant was based on
       suspicion only. We also disagree with the submission of
       the learned counsel that the word of the "confession"
       has to be recorded in the exact words of the accused
       specifically when it is extra judicial confession. At
       para 8 of the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court passed
       in the case of Ajay Sing -Vs- State of Maharashtra
       reported in (2007) 12 sec 341, it has been stated that
       though it is not necessary that the witness should speak
       the exact words, but there cannot be vital and material
       difference. This very sentence shows that it is not
       necessary that the witness should give the exact words
       spoken by the accused who confessed but it would be
       sufficient if the material and vital parts of the
       confession has been stated by the witness. In this case,
       under the facts and circumstances, the fact that the PW-
       6 has stated in her deposition that her father confessed
       to her that he had murdered her husband when she
       questioned him is sufficient enough as the same is
       clear, specific, unambiguous and trustworthy.”
10.      As regards the defence plea taken by the appellant that

there was no eye witness to the occurrence and that the alleged

confession made by him before his daughter (P.W.6) could not be

relied upon, the High Court found no merit in those contentions

and opined that:
17. Further, the PW-6 (daughter of the accused) stated
       that "I questioned my father about the incident and he
       confessed before me that he had murdered my husband" and
       PW-1 has stated that "the accused confessed before the
       villagers that he had committed the murder of his son-
in-law with the help of bamboo lathi. The statements of
       the two witnesses are simple, clear and unambiguous and
       they clearly conveyed that the accused appellant had
       confessed that he had committed the murder of the victim
5
deceased. It is true that the exact words of the accused
       appellant were not stated by the two witnesses but the
       material substance of the fact stated by the accused
       have been conveyed. Moreover, the defence did not
       question the two witnesses on the same and not even
       tried to either controvert or discredit their statement.
       Thus, we find no reason not to believe the statement of
       the witnesses.
Further, the confessional statement of the accused
       as stated by the two witnesses is well supported by the
       circumstantial evidence that the incident took place in
       the precinct of the house of the accused- appellant
       himself and, the accused-appellant was alone with the
       dead body of the victim at the time of the incident”
11.      We    have    heard   Mr.   Gaurav    Agarwal,    learned   counsel

appearing on behalf of the appellant as well as Mr. Nalin Kohli,

learned Senior Additional Advocate General, State of Assam, and

carefully perused the material placed on record.
12.      The   short    question     that   arises   for   consideration   is

whether the offence attributed to the appellant falls within the

ambit of Exception I of
Section 300
IPC which defines “murder”.

Exception I reads as follows:
“Exception 1. —When culpable homicide is not
         murder. — Culpable homicide is not murder if the
         offender, whilst deprived of the power of self-
         control by grave and sudden provocation, causes the
         death of the person who gave the provocation or
         causes the death of any other person by mistake or
         accident.
The above exception is subject to the following
         provisos:—

         First.—That   the  provocation   is  not   sought  or
         voluntarily provoked by the offender as an excuse for
         killing or doing harm to any person.
Secondly.—That the provocation is not given by
         anything done in obedience to the law, or by a public
         servant in the lawful exercise of the powers of such
         public servant.
6
Thirdly.—That the provocation is not given by
            anything done in the lawful exercise of the right of
            private defence.
Explanation.—Whether the provocation was grave and
            sudden enough to prevent the offence from amounting
            to murder is a question of fact.”
13.         We    ought    to     analyse         the   aforementioned         issue     with

reference to the statement of P.W.6 (Sarani Boria), daughter of

the appellant, as reproduced in para 5.
14.         It may be seen that the Trial Court as well as the High

Court have heavily relied upon the statement of the daughter of

the   appellant    -     Sarani       Boria   (P.W.6)      to     hold   him     guilty   of

committing the murder of his son-in-law predominantly in view of

his purported confession made before his daughter.
15.         In our considered view, the statement of P.W.6 - Sarani

Boria needs to be appreciated in its entirety.                            In her cross-

examination, P.W.6 has candidly admitted that her husband was an

alcoholic   and    he     used    to    quarrel     with    her    and    also    with    the

appellant after consuming alcohol. She has affirmatively deposed

that the deceased used to ill-treat her after consuming alcohol.
16.         It   seems     to    us    from   the       version    of    P.W.6    that    the

deceased was an alcoholic and he used to misbehave not only with

his wife but also with her family members. This version deserves

appreciation in its right perspective. Such being the conduct of

the deceased, the appellant’s only concern was to protect the life

and dignity of his daughter, who was his only child. Reading the

evidence on record, it is perceived that the appellant just wanted

to create some kind of psychological fear and restraint in the
7
deceased’s mind, so that he could no longer assault or humiliate

the appellant’s daughter.             The appellant and the deceased were the

only ones present in the house at the time of occurrence.                      The

daily consumption of liquor by the deceased was an apparent factor

that exhorted the appellant to assault the deceased not with an

intent to commit his murder but only to force the deceased to mend

his ways and mend his drinking problem.                The appellant seemingly

attacked the deceased without any intention to commit his murder.

It was rather a crude attempt to forcibly change the deceased’s

habits and help the appellant’s daughter to have peaceful and

dignified life.
17.   The appellant’s motive at best was to prevent the deceased

from misbehaving with his daughter after consuming alcohol. The

manner in which the occurrence appears to have taken place inside

the house, does indicate that the appellant lost his self-control

on account of persistent provocation and suddenly thrashed his

son-in-law with the bamboo stick.              It is a case where provocation

seems   to    be    brewing      up    since   the   deceased   shifted   to   the

appellant’s        house.   It    acquired      enormous   gravity   with      each

recurrence of humiliating stances of the appellant’s daughter. The

fatal occurrence was seemingly the final culmination of loss of

the power of self-control. The fact that the deceased was living

as a `ghar javai’ with the appellant, sufficiently indicates that

the appellant did not have any pre-meditated intention to commit

the murder of his son-in-law.              But for the continuous harassment

of the appellant’s daughter by the deceased who was a habitual

drunkard, the appellant would not have lost his senses suddenly.
8
The   simmering      discontent     of   a       frustrated   and   hapless    father

unfortunately led him to strike the deceased with a bamboo stick.

The series of provocative acts attributable to the deceased indeed

laid the foundation of sustained provocation.
18.       In the facts and circumstances of the present case, as

noticed above, it appears to us that the act of the appellant in

causing injuries to the deceased falls within the expression of

`culpable homicide’ which does not amount to `murder’. We hold

accordingly. The impugned judgments of the Trial Court as well as

the High Court are modified to that extent.
19.       We have considered the submissions of learned counsel for

the   parties   on    the   quantum      of      sentence.     In   our   considered

opinion, the ends of justice would be adequately met by converting

the sentence of life imprisonment awarded to the appellant to

rigorous imprisonment of ten years.                  The sentence as awarded by

the   courts    below    stands     modified       accordingly.     The   appeal     is

allowed in part.        The appellant shall be released on completion of

the   requisite   and     reduced    period        of   sentence,   if    he   is   not

required in any other case.
20.       As a sequel thereto, pending interlocutory applications,

if any, also stand disposed of.
.........................J.
                                                     (SURYA KANT)


                                                     ..............…….........J.
                                                     (DIPANKAR DATTA)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 03, 2023.