[Cites
29
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Modi Naturals Ltd vs The Commissioner Of Commercial Tax Up on 6 November, 2023
Author:
Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud
2023 INSC 974                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 5822-5823 OF 2023

                            M/S MODI NATURALS LTD                                   …… APPELLANT

                                                             VERSUS

                            THE COMMISSIONER OF COMMERCIAL                         …… RESPONDENT
                            TAX UP



                                                            JUDGMENT
J. B. PARDIWALA, J.
1.    Since the issues raised in both the captioned appeals are the same, the

                            parties are also the same and the challenge is also to the self-same judgment

                            passed by the High Court, those were taken up for hearing analogously and

                            are being disposed of by this common judgment and order.
2.    For the sake of convenience, the appellant shall hereinafter be referred

                            to as the assessee and the respondent shall hereinafter be referred to as the

                            revenue.
3.    These appeals are at the instance of an assessee, duly registered under
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2023.11.06
16:06:41 IST
Section 17
of the Uttar Pradesh Value Added Tax Act, 2008 (for short, ‘the
Reason:
UP VAT Act
’) and are directed against the common judgment and order dated
Page 1 of 36
03.05.2019 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in the

Commercial Tax Revisions Nos. 315 of 2017 and 148 of 2018 respectively,

by which the High Court allowed both the Commercial Tax Revisions filed by

the revenue against the Orders dated 04.05.2016 and 05.07.2017 respectively

passed by the Commercial Tax Tribunal, Bareilly Bench, Bareilly and thereby

took the view that the assessee is not entitled to the full benefit of Input Tax

Credit (for short, ‘ITC’) claimed on the goods purchased by it for

manufacturing its final product.
FACTUAL MATRIX
4.     The assessee is a company engaged in the business of manufacture and

sale of Rice Bran Oil (for short, ‘RBO’) and Physical Refined RBO. The

assessee as stated above is a registered dealer under the
UP VAT Act
and the

RBO manufactured by the assessee falls within the ambit of “taxable goods”

under the
UP VAT Act
. For the purpose of manufacturing RBO, the assessee

procures Rice Bran (for short, ‘inputs’/‘purchased goods’) and follows the

Solvent Extraction Process. During the manufacturing process of RBO a by-

product in the form of “De-Oiled Rice Bran” (for short, ‘DORB’) is also

produced. DORB falls within the category of exempted goods under S. No. 4

of Schedule – I of the UP VAT Act.
5.    The dispute between the parties relates to the assessment years 2013-

14 and 2015-16 respectively.
Page 2 of 36
6.    The assessee by processing Rice Bran in its solvent extraction plant

produced 13.77% taxable goods i.e., RBO and 83.63% by-product i.e.,

DORB. As stated, aforesaid by further refining the RBO, the physical refined

RBO is also produced. The record reveals that for the Assessment Year 2013-

14, the assessee purchased 8,21,935.71 quintals of Rice Bran for a sum of Rs.

93,69,53,404.00 and paid tax of Rs. 4,68,47,670.00. By processing the inputs,

1,13,180.54 quintals of RBO was produced and 6,87,138.25 quintals of

DORB was produced. Out of 1,13,180.54 quintals of RBO, 93,241.15 quintals

of RBO was further refined to produce 76,068.37 quintals of physical refined

RBO. The said quantity of physical refined RBO and the balance quantity of

RBO (19,939.40 quintals) was sold within the State of Uttar Pradesh for Rs.

45,91,66,611 and Rs. 9,60,11,540 respectively aggregating to a total of Rs.

55,51,78,151/-. The assessee’s tax liability on the said sales was calculated at

Rs. 2,77,58,908/-.
7.    On the basis of the statutory provisions of
Section 13(1)(a)
read with S.

No. 2(ii) of the Table appended thereto and
Section 13(3)(b)
read with

Explanation (iii) to
Section 13
of the UP VAT Act, the assessee claimed full

amount of tax paid as ITC i.e., a sum of Rs. 4,68,47,670/-. The claim of the

assessee came to be rejected vide the Order of the Deputy Commissioner, Tax

Fixation, Div. – I, Pilibhit passed in terms of
Section 28(2)(i)
of the UP VAT

Act. It is the case of the revenue that had the assessee been permitted to avail
Page 3 of 36
the full ITC, it would have led to a loss of Rs. 1,90,88,763.00 to the State

exchequer.
8.    In connection with both the Assessment Years i.e. 2013-14 and 2015-

16, respectively vide two separate orders, the Deputy Commissioner took the

view that in terms of
Section 13(1)(f)
, the assessee could have availed the ITC

on the inputs only vis-à-vis the taxable sales, as the sale price of the final goods

was lesser than the manufacturing cost of the purchased goods. In other words,

according to the Deputy Commissioner the term “goods” in
Section 13(1)(f)
of the UP VAT Act means only the taxable goods. The matter ultimately

reached before the Additional Commissioner Grade II, (Appeals), 2nd

Commercial Tax, Bareilly. The Incharge Additional Commissioner for the

Assessment Year 2015-16 took the view that the assessee was entitled to claim

full ITC and accordingly allowed the appeal of the assessee. The Incharge

Additional Commissioner accepted the case put up by the assessee that the

word “goods” in
Section 13(1)(f)
of the UP VAT Act cannot be restricted to

only “taxable goods”. However, for the Assessment Year 2013-14, the

Additional Commissioner proceeded to remand the matter to the Tax Fixation

officer for passing the re-tax fixation order.
9.    The revenue being dissatisfied with the view taken by the Additional

Commissioner went in appeal before the Commercial Tax Tribunal, Bareilly

Bench, Bareilly in so far as the Assessment Year 2015-16 is concerned. We
Page 4 of 36
may clarify that so far as the Assessment Year 2013-14 is concerned, it was

the assessee who had to go before the Commercial Tax Tribunal by way of a

second appeal as the Additional Commissioner had allowed the appeal filed

by the assessee and had remanded the matter to the Tax Fixation Officer.
10.   Although the Commercial Tax Tribunal passed two separate orders with

respect to the two assessment years referred to above, yet the issues between

the parties remained common. Ultimately, it is the revenue who went before

the High Court with two Commercial Tax Revision Applications being the

Revision No. 148 of 2018 and Revision No. 315 of 2017 respectively. Both

the revision applications were heard analogously by the High Court.
11.   The High Court formulated the following substantial question of law

for its consideration: “Whether under the facts and circumstances of the case,

the Commercial Tax Tribunal was legally justified in granting the benefit of

ITC of Rs. 1,90,88,763.00 which was reversed by the Assessing Authority?”
12.   The High Court relying on the decision of this Court in the case of
State

of Karnataka v. M.K. Agro Tech Private Limited
, reported in (2017) 16 SCC

210 took the view that a dealer has no vested right to seek the benefit of ITC

as the same is just a concession by virtue of the provisions of the Act. The

High Court held that the provisions of
Section 13(1)(a)
read with S. No. 2(ii)

of the Table appended thereto and
Section 13(3)(b)
read with Explanation (iii)

of the
UP VAT Act
are not applicable as asserted by the assesee and the case
Page 5 of 36
of the assessee stood covered by
Section 13(1)(f)
of the UP VAT Act. The High

Court relying on
Section 13(1)(f)
of the UP VAT Act took the view that the

assessee is not entitled to claim full ITC on the inputs. The High Court

accordingly allowed both the revision applications filed by the revenue.
13.
In such circumstances
referred to above
, the asseesee is here before this

Court with the present appeals.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE ASSESSEE
14.   Mr. Arvind Datar, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the assessee

vehemently submitted that the High Court committed a serious error in

passing the impugned judgment. According to Mr. Datar the impugned

judgment of the High Court is incorrect as it has failed to take notice of the

fact that the case of the assessee herein is squarely covered by the provisions

of
Section 13(1)(a)
read with S. No. 2(ii) of the Table appended thereto and
Section 13(3)(b)
read with Explanation (iii) of the
UP VAT Act
. It was argued

that the High Court erroneously held that
Section 13(1)(f)
of the UP VAT Act

is applicable to the case on hand.
15.   Mr. Datar further argued that the entire edifice of the impugned

judgment of the High Court is based on incorrect application of the decision

of this Court in case of
M.K. Agro Tech
(supra). He would argue that the

statutory provisions under the
Karnataka Value Added Tax Act, 2003
and
UP

VAT Act
are distinct and different in all respects. He pointed out that the UP
Page 6 of 36
VAT Act
specifically carves out an exception for the by-products and waste

products respectively. Even if those are exempt goods or non-VAT Goods, the

ITC is permissible.
16.   Mr. Datar further argued that the definition of the word “goods” under
Section 2(m)
of the UP VAT Act does not differentiate between the exempted

and taxable goods and equally the word “goods” under
Section 13(1)(f)
of the

UP VAT Act cannot be said to be qualified by the word “taxable”. He pointed

out that, if the legislative intent was to qualify “goods” with the word

“taxable”, it could have been said so by the Legislature in
Section 13
of the

UP VAT Act itself. It was argued that if the legislative intent in the 2010

amendment was to limit the scope and ambit of the word “goods” under
Section 13(1)(f)
of the UP VAT Act solely to “taxable goods”, there was

nothing that prevented the concerned legislature from expressly utilising the

phrase “taxable goods” in
Section 13(1)(f)
of the UP VAT Act.
17.   In the last, Mr. Datar argued that in construing taxation statutes, the

court should apply the strict rule of interpretation. When the competent

legislature mandates taxing certain business/certain objects in certain

circumstances, it cannot be expounded/interpreted to those which were not

intended by the legislature.
18.   In such circumstances
referred to above
, Mr. Datar the learned Senior

Counsel prayed that there being merit in his appeals those may be allowed and
Page 7 of 36
the impugned judgment passed by the High Court be set aside and that of the

Tribunal be affirmed.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE REVENUE
19.   Mr. R.K. Raizada, the learned Additional Advocate General appearing

for the State of UP on the other hand vehemently opposed both the appeals

submitting that no error, not to speak of any error of law could be said to have

been committed by the High Court in passing the impugned judgment.
20.   The principal contention canvassed on behalf of the revenue is that the

use of the expression “except as by-product or waste product” in
Section

13(3)(b)
of the UP VAT Act is decisive and if the exempt goods or non-VAT

goods are being produced as the main products only and not being produced

as the “by-product or waste product” then in such circumstances,
Section

13(3)(b)
of the UP VAT Act would have no application. According to the

learned counsel,
Section 13(3)(b)
would be applicable only to a situation

wherein the manufacturing of the “VAT goods”, “exempt goods” and “non-

VAT goods” are not being produced as the “by-product” or “waste product”.
21.   It was argued that in the case on hand, the cumulative sale price of the

RBO and DORB respectively is more than the cost price and in such

circumstances,
Section 13(3)(b)
read with Explanation (iii) of the
UP VAT Act
would have no applicability. It was also argued that
Section 13(1)(f)
of the UP

VAT Act starts with a non-obstante clause having an overriding effect on the
Page 8 of 36
provision of
Section 13(1)(a)
of the UP VAT Act. The words and expressions

used in
Section 13(1)(f)
of the UP VAT Act require a textual interpretation

matching with the contextual interpretation that
Section 13(1)(f)
of the UP

VAT Act seeks to remedy the mischief, caused by the words used in the Table

of
Section 13(1)(a)
of the UP VAT Act.
Section 13(1)(f)
UP VAT Act restricts

the amount of ITC figuring in Table of
Section 13(1)(a)
UP VAT Act to the

extent of tax payable on the sale value of goods or manufactured goods, in

specific cases, i.e., costing of the manufactured taxable goods except the non-

VAT goods being lower than the costing of the taxable inputs.
22.   It was also argued that the High Court rightly placed reliance on the

decision of this Court in the case of
M. K. Agro Tech
(supra).
23.
In such circumstances
referred to above
, Mr. R.K. Raizada submitted

that there being no merit in both the appeals those may be dismissed.

ANALYSIS
24.   Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having

gone through the materials on record the following questions fall for our

consideration:
a.    Whether the assessee is entitled to claim full amount of tax paid towards

the purchase of raw Rice Bran as ITC on the basis of the provisions of Section
Page 9 of 36
13(1)(a) read with S. No. 2(ii) of the Table appended thereto and
Section

13(3)(b)
read with Explanation (iii) of
Section 13
of the UP VAT Act?
b.    Whether the scope of the word “goods” as defined under
Section 2(m)
of the UP VAT Act as outlined in
Section 13(1)(f)
of the UP VAT Act should

be limited to only “taxable goods”?
c.    Whether the decision of this Court in the case of
M.K. Agro Tech
(supra) has any application to the case on hand?
RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE UP VAT ACT, 2008
25.   Before we advert to the rival submissions canvassed on either side, we

must look into few relevant provisions of the
UP VAT Act
:
“2. Definitions
       xxx               xxx                 xxx
(m) “goods” means every kind or class of movable property and
       includes all materials, commodities and articles involved in the
       execution of a works contract, and growing crops, grass, trees
       and things attached to, or fastened to anything permanently
       attached to the earth which, under the contract of sale, are agreed
       to be severed, but does not include actionable claims, stocks,
       shares or securities;
Xxx                       xxx                       xxx
(p) “input tax” in relation to a registered dealer who has
       purchased any goods from within the State, means the aggregate
       of the amounts of tax, -
(i) paid or payable by such registered dealer to the registered
       selling dealer of such goods in respect of purchase of such goods;
and
Page 10 of 36
(ii) paid directly to the State Government by the purchasing
dealer himself in respect of purchase of such goods where such
purchasing dealer is liable to pay tax under this Act on the
turnover of purchase of such goods
Provided that tax paid or payable in respect of transfer of right
to use any goods shall not form part of the input tax
      Xxx                       xxx                       xxx
(u) “manufacturer” in relation to any goods mentioned or
described in column (2) of Schedule IV of this Act, means a dealer
who, by application of any process of manufacture, after
manufacture of a new commercial commodity inside the State,
makes first sale of such new commercial commodity within the
State, whether directly or otherwise; and includes a selling agent
who makes sale of such new commodity on behalf of the person
who has manufactured it;
(v) “non-vat goods” means any of the goods mentioned or
described in column (2) of Schedule-IV;
Xxx                       xxx                       xxx
(z) “registered dealer” means a dealer registered under
Section
17
or
Section 18
;
Xxx                       xxx                       xxx
(ah) “taxable dealer” means a dealer who is liable to pay tax
under this Act;
(ai) “taxable goods” means any goods except goods mentioned
or described in column (2) of Schedule I;
Xxx                      xxx                        xxx

“13. Input tax credit
(1) Subject to provisions of this Act, dealers referred to in the
following clauses and holding valid registration certificate under
this Act, shall, in respect of taxable goods purchased from within
the State and mentioned in such clauses, subject to conditions
given therein and such other conditions and restrictions as may
be prescribed, be allowed credit of an amount, as input tax credit,
to the extent provided by or under the relevant clause:
Page 11 of 36
(a) Subject to conditions given in column (2), every dealer
liable to pay tax, shall, in respect of all taxable goods except
non-vat goods, capital goods and captive power plant, where
such taxable goods are purchased on or after the date of
commencement of this Act, be allowed credit of the amount,
as input tax credit, to the extent provided in column 3 of the
table below:
TABLE
 Serial              Conditions                Extent        of
 No.                                           amount        of
                                               input tax credit
  (1)                      (2)                        (3)
1.          If purchased goods are          Full amount of
               re-sold-                        input tax
(i) inside the State, or
(ii) in the course of
               inter-state trade or
               commence; or
(iii) in the course of the
               export of the goods out
               of the territory of India.
2.         If purchased goods are          Full amount of
               used in manufacture of          input tax
-
(i) any goods except
                   non-vat goods and
                   where          such
                   manufactured
                   goods are sold in
                   the course of the
                   export of the goods
                   out of the territory
                   of India; or
(ii) any taxable goods
                   except       non-vat
                   goods and where
                   such manufactured
                   goods are sold
                   either inside the
                   State or in the
Page 12 of 36
course of inter-State
                       trade or commerce
3.         If purchased goods are         Partial amount
                    –                              of input tax,
(i) transferred       or       which is in
                         consigned outside         excess of four
                         the State otherwise       percent of the
                         than as a result of       purchase price
                         a sale; or                on which the
(ii) used             in       dealer has paid
                         manufacture      of       tax either to the
                         any taxable goods         registered
                         except      non-vat       selling dealer
                         goods and such            or to the State
                         manufactured              Government"
goods           are
                         transferred      or
                         consigned outside
                         the State otherwise
                         than as a result of
                         a sale.

      Xxx                        xxx                       xxx
(f) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this sub-
section where goods purchased are resold or goods manufactured
or processed by using or utilizing such purchased goods are sold,
at the price which is lower than
(i) purchase price of such goods in case of resale; or
(ii) cost price in case of manufacture,
      the amount of input tax credit shall be claimed and be
      allowed to the extent of tax payable on the sale value of
      goods or manufactured goods. (Clause (f) was inserted
      w.e.f. 20-08-2010 vide notif. no 1101(2) dt. 20-08-2010,
      U.P. Act No 19 of 2010)
              xxx                xxx                 xxx
(3) (a)Where purchased goods are to be used or disposed of
partially for the purpose specified in clause (a) of sub-section (1)
or otherwise, the input tax credit may be claimed and be allowed
Page 13 of 36
proportionate to the extent they are used or disposed of for the
purposes specified in such clause,
(b)Subject to the provisions of this section where during process
of manufacture of vat goods, exempt goods and non vat goods
except as by product or waste product are produced, the amount
of input tax credit may be claimed and be allowed in proportion to
the extent they are used or consumed in manufacture of taxable
goods other than non vat goods and exempt goods Explanation:-
For the purpose of this subsection the "exempt goods" shall
include taxable goods other than non vat goods, which are
disposed of otherwise than by way of sale within the State or in the
course of inter-State trade or commerce or sale in the course of
export of goods out of the territory of India or sale out side the
State."
xxx                 xxx                 xxx
      Explanation:-For the purposes of this section, –
(i) goods for use in manufacture of any goods includes
           goods required for use, consumption or utilization in
           manufacture or processing of such goods or goods
           required for use in packing of such manufactured or
           processed goods;
(ii) manufacture of any goods includes processing of
           such goods and packing of such manufactured or
           processed goods; and
(iii) where during the process of manufacture of any
           taxable goods any exempt goods are produced as by-
product or waste-product, it shall be deemed that
           purchased goods have been used in the manufacture of
           taxable goods. Conversely, where during the process of
           manufacture of any exempt goods any taxable goods
           are produced as by-product or waste product; it shall
           be deemed that purchased goods have been used in the
           manufacture of exempt goods.
(iv) where during the process of manufacture of any vat
           goods any non-vat goods are produced as by-product
           or waste-product, it shall be deemed that purchased
           goods have been used in the manufacture of vat goods.
           Similarly, where during the process of manufacture of
           any non-vat goods any vat goods are produced as by-
Page 14 of 36
product or waste-product, it shall be deemed that
                 purchased goods have been used in the manufacture of
                 non-vat goods. (w.e.f.01.01.2008).”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
26.   As the entire debate revolves around the interpretation of
Section 13
of

the UP VAT Act, we must look into the Statement of objects and reasons for

the enactment of
Section 13(1)(f)
by way of the 2010 Amendment Act. In the

Statement of objects and reasons of the Uttar Pradesh Value Added Tax

(Amendment) Bill, 2010 (for short, “the 2010 Amendment”), it has been

stated that the amendment was to provide for –

       “xxx
(d) limiting the input tax credit to the extent of tax payable on
       the sale value of goods or manufactured goods in cases where
       goods purchased are resold or goods manufactured or processed
       by using or utilizing such purchased goods are sold at a price
       lower than purchase price or cost price;”
                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
27.   The plain reading of the aforesaid would indicate that the legislative

intent was never to limit or circumscribe the scope of “goods” as outlined in
Section 13(1)(f)
to only “taxable goods”. The amendment was effected with

some definite purpose. The mischief that was sought to be addressed by virtue

of introducing
Section 13(1)(f)
to the scheme of the
UP VAT Act
was one

where the goods (including taxable, exempt goods, by-products or waste

products) manufactured were being sold at a price lower than the cost price.
Page 15 of 36
28.   It is in such cases that the extent of permissible or allowable ITC would

be limited to the tax payable on the sale value of the goods or manufactured

goods. We are at one with Mr. Datar that this was the sole purpose of the 2010

Amendment.
29.   We are also at one with Mr. Datar that the definition of “goods” under
Section 2(m)
of the UP VAT Act
referred to above
does not differentiate

between exempt and taxable goods and equally, the word “goods” under
Section 13(1)(f)
of the UP VAT Act has also not been qualified by the word

“taxable”.
30.   Mr. Datar is right in his submission that the necessary corollary to the

reading of the provision ought to be that the goods which are

manufactured/produced by using or utilizing the purchased goods and whose

sale price is being considered for applying
Section 13(1)(f)
of the UP VAT

Act, ought to be taxable goods.
31.   The aforesaid is further manifested from the fact that wherever the

legislative intent was to qualify “goods” with the word “taxable”, it has been

so done by the Legislature in
Section 13
of the UP VAT Act itself.
32.   Had the legislative intent of the 2010 Amendment been to limit the

scope and ambit of “goods” under
Section 13(1)(f)
solely to “taxable goods”,

there was nothing that could have prevented the Legislature from expressly

using the phrase “taxable goods” in
Section 13(1)(f)
of the UP VAT Act.
Page 16 of 36
33.   Mr. Datar is right in his submission that the said omission in
Section

13(1)(f)
is all the more glaring considering that the said amendment was

inserted in the year 2010.
34.   In the aforesaid context, our attention was also drawn by Mr. Datar to

the provisions of Rule 23(6) of the Uttar Pradesh Value Added Tax Rules, 2006

(for short, “the UP VAT Rules”) (which provides for the computation of

reverse ITC in cases of a dealer other than a trader), wherein the word “goods”

has not been qualified by “taxable” and rather has used the word “any” to

expressly convey the unequivocal legislative mandate. Rule 23(6) of the UP

VAT Rules is reproduced hereunder:
“23. Computation of reverse input tax credit in cases of a dealer
       other than trader:
(1) In case of a dealer, other than a dealer referred to in sub-rule
       (1) of rule 22, amount of reverse input tax credit, in respect of any
       quantity or measure of any goods-
xxx                  xxx                        xxx

       (6) In respect of any quantity or measure of any goods
       manufactured or processed by using or utilizing purchased
       goods, sold at the price which is lower than cost price, the
       amount of reverse input tax credit shall be equal to the
       differential amount of tax paid or payable on the purchase price
       of such goods and tax paid or payable on sale price of
       manufactured or processed goods sold.”
35.   We take notice of the fact that “taxable goods” has been separately

defined under
Section 2(ai)
of the UP VAT Act. The definition reads thus:
Page 17 of 36
“(ai) “taxable goods” means any goods except goods
          mentioned or described in column (2) of Schedule I;”


GENERAL PRINCIPLES FOR INTERPRETATION OF TAXING

STATUTES
36.      It is well accepted that a statute must be construed in accordance with

the intention of the Legislature and the courts should act upon the true

intention of the Legislation while applying law and while interpreting law. In

the litigation on hand, we have been asked to interpret the provisions of a

taxing statute.
37.      Justice G.P. Singh, in his treatise Principles of Statutory

Interpretation (14th Edn. 2016 p. 879) after referring to Micklethwait, In re;1

Partington v. Attorney General2, Rajasthan Rajya Sahakari Spg. &

Ginning Mills Federation Ltd. v.
CIT3, State Bank of Travancore v. CIT4
and Cape Brandy Syndicate v. IRC5, summed up the law in the following

manner:
“A taxing statute is to be strictly construed. The well-
          established rule in the familiar words of Lord Wensleydale,
          reaffirmed by Lord Halsbury6 and Lord Simonds7, means:
1
(1855) LR 11 Ex 452 : 156 ER 908
2
(1869) LR 4 HL 100
3
(2014) 11 SCC 672
4
(1986) 2 SCC 11 : 1986 SCC (Tax) 289
5
(1921) 1 KB 64
6
Ed: Tennant v. Smith, 1892 AC 150 at p. 154
7
Ed. :
St Aubyn v. Attorney General
, 1952 AC 15 at p. 32 (HL)
Page 18 of 36
“The subject is not to be taxed without clear words for
                that purpose; and also that every Act of Parliament must
                be read according to the natural construction of its
                words.””
38.      In a classic passage Lord Cairns stated the principle thus:
“If the person sought to be taxed comes within the letter of the
           law he must be taxed, however great the hardship may appear
           to the judicial mind to be. On the other hand, if the Crown
           seeking to recover the tax, cannot bring the subject within the
           letter of the law, the subject is free, however apparently within
           the spirit of law the case might otherwise appear to be. In other
           words, if there be admissible in any statute, what is called an
           equitable construction, certainly, such a construction is not
           admissible in a taxing statute where you can simply adhere to
           the words of the statute.”
39.      Viscount Simon quoted8 with approval a passage9 from Rowlatt, J.
expressing the principle in the following words: (Cape Brandy case10,

         KB p. 71)


                ‘… in a taxing Act one has to look merely at what is
                clearly said. There is no room for any intendment. There
                is no equity about a tax. There is no presumption as to a
                tax. Nothing is to be read in, nothing is to be implied. One
                can only look fairly at the language used.’”
40.      It was further observed:
“In all tax matters one has to interpret the taxation statute
           strictly. Simply because one class of legal entities is given a
           benefit which is specifically stated in the Act, does not mean that
           the benefit can be extended to legal entities not referred to in
           the Act as there is no equity in matters of taxation….”
8
Ed. : Canadian Eagle Oil Co. Ltd. v. Selection Trust Ltd., 1946 AC 119 at p. 140 (HL)
9
Cape Brandy Syndicate v. IRC, (1921) 1 KB 64
10
Ibid.
Page 19 of 36
41.     Yet again, it was observed:
“It may thus be taken as a maxim of tax law, which although not
          to be overstressed ought not to be forgotten that,
              ‘the subject is not to be taxed unless the words of the
              taxing statute unambiguously impose the tax [on] him’,
              (Russell v. Scott 11, AC p. 433).
The proper course in construing revenue Acts is to give a fair
          and reasonable construction to their language without leaning
          to one side or the other but keeping in mind that no tax can be
          imposed without words clearly showing an intention to lay the
          burden and that equitable construction of the words is not
          permissible       [Ormond         Investment        Co. v. Betts 12].
          Considerations of hardship, injustice or anomalies do not play
          any useful role in construing taxing statutes unless there be
          some real ambiguity [Mapp v. Oram 13]. It has also been said
          that if taxing provision is
              ‘so wanting in clarity that no meaning is reasonably
              clear, the courts will be unable to regard it as of any effect
              [IRC v. Ross and Coulter [IRC v. Ross and Coulter14]’.”
42.     Further elaborating on this aspect, the learned author stated as follows:
“Therefore, if the words used are ambiguous and reasonable
          open to two interpretations benefit of interpretation is given to
          the subject [Central India Spg. and Wvg. & Mfg. Co.
          Ltd. v. Municipal Committee, Wardha 15].
If the legislature fails
          to express itself clearly and the taxpayer escapes by not being
          brought within the letter of the law, no question of unjustness as
          such arises [
CIT v. Jalgaon Electric Supply Co. Ltd.16
].
But
          equitable considerations are not relevant in construing a taxing
          statute, [
CIT v. Central India Industries Ltd.17
], and similarly
          logic or reason cannot be of much avail in interpreting a taxing
          statute [
Azam Jah Bahadur v. Expenditure Tax Officer18
].
It is
          well settled that in the field of taxation, hardship or equity has
11
1948 AC 422 : (1948) 2 All ER 1 (HL)
12
1928 AC 143 (HL)
13
1970 AC 362 : (1969) 3 WLR 557 : (1969) 3 All ER 215 (HL)
14
(1948) 1 All ER 616 (HL)
15
AIR 1958 SC 341
16
AIR 1960 SC 1182
17
(1972) 3 SCC 311 : AIR 1972 SC 397
18
(1971) 3 SCC 621 : AIR 1972 SC 2319
Page 20 of 36
no role to play in determining eligibility to tax and it is for the
          legislature to determine the same [
Kapil Mohan v. CIT19
].
Similarly, hardship or equity is not relevant in interpreting
          provisions imposing stamp duty, which is a tax, and the court
          should not concern itself with the intention of the legislature
          when the language expressing such intention is plain and
          unambiguous [
State of M.P. v. Rakesh Kohli20
]. But just as
          reliance upon equity does not avail an assessee, so it does not
          avail the Revenue.”
43.      The passages extracted above, were quoted with approval by this Court

in at least two decisions being
CIT v. Kasturi
and
Sons Ltd.21 and State of

W.B. v. Kesoram Industries Ltd.22
(hereinafter referred to as “Kesoram

Industries case”, for brevity). In the later decision, a Bench of five Judges,

after citing the above passage from Justice G.P. Singh's treatise, summed up

the following principles applicable to the interpretation of a taxing statute:
“(i) In interpreting a taxing statute, equitable
                  considerations are entirely out of place. A taxing statute
                  cannot be interpreted on any presumption or assumption.
                  A taxing statute has to be interpreted in the light of what
                  is clearly expressed; it cannot imply anything which is not
                  expressed; it cannot import provisions in the statute so as
                  to supply any deficiency; (ii) Before taxing any person, it
                  must be shown that he falls within the ambit of the
                  charging section by clear words used in the section; and
(iii) If the words are ambiguous and open to two
                  interpretations, the benefit of interpretation is given to the
                  subject and there is nothing unjust in a taxpayer escaping
                  if the letter of the law fails to catch him on account of the
                  legislature's failure to express itself clearly.”
19
(1999) 1 SCC 430 : AIR 1999 SC 573
20
(2012) 6 SCC 312 : (2012) 3 SCC (Civ) 481
21
(1999) 3 SCC 346
22
(2004) 10 SCC 201
Page 21 of 36
44.   Applying the aforesaid principles of interpretation, we find it difficult

to accept the case put up by the revenue as doing so would permit the assessing

authority to do something indirectly what he cannot do directly i.e., get around

the mandate of the exception carved out by
Section 13(3)(b)
read with

Explanation (iii) by invoking
Section 13(1)(f)
of the UP VAT Act.
45.   It is also pertinent to note that indisputably, the DORB which is

produced as part of the Solvent Extraction process is a by-product of the

manufacturing process. Our attention was drawn by Mr. Datar to a letter dated

13.01.2015 addressed by the Additional Commissioner (Legal) Commercial

Tax, UP to all Zonal Additional Commissioner Grade-I, Commercial, Tax

Uttar Pradesh (Annexure P-1) which reads thus:
“Letter No. Legal-2(1)          Rice   export    (2014-15)/1458/
       Commercial Tax

       Sender:
The Commissioner
       Commercial Tax
       Uttar Pradesh

       To

       All Zonal Addl. Commissioner Grade-1
       Commercial Tax
       Uttar Pradesh
                                     Lucknow dated 13 Jan. 2015

       Sir,

       After examining the records of traders/ manufacturer of the rice
       bran oil, the Joint Commissioner (SIB) Commercial Tax Gonda
Page 22 of 36
vide his DO letter No. 47/ Jt. Comm. (SIB) Commercial Tax
       Gonda dated 16.7.2011 has submitted a detailed report. Copy
       of which is attached. In this context the Addi. Commissioner
       Grade-1 Commercial Tax Faizabad Zone, Faizabad has given
       the following report:
The Joint Commissioner (SIB) Commercial Tax Gonda in the
       perspective of provisions of
section 13(3) (B)
read with
section
       13(1)(f)
of the VAT Act has expressed this presumption that if
       the sale of any taxable goals is effected at the low price than the
       purchase cost of the raw material then the trader shall get the
       benefit of ITC only up to the extent of sale value of manufactured
       goods. The trader produce the rice bran oil by purchasing the
       rice bran in which de-oiled rice bran is received as a
       byproduct/waste product. In this way such produced is sold at
       much lower price in the perspective of cost of production
       whereas ITC is being claimed on the entire amount of utilized
       rice bran which is in contra to
Section 13(1)(f)
. In this manner
       the trader shall get the benefit of ITC on the utilized rice bran
       up to the limit of sale of produced rice bran.
Hence in relation to above please examine the records
       manufacturing units of your zone involved in the extraction of
       rice bran and oil cake. The details of action taken in this regard
       be please made available within a period of one week.
Encl: as above
                                                         Yours faithfully,

                                              Sd/- Sadhna Tripathi
                                              Addl. Commissioner
                                              (Legal) Comm. Tax HQ,
                                              UP”
                                              (Emphasis supplied)
46.   It is to be noted that the DORB falls within exempted goods under S.

No. 4 of
Schedule I of the UP VAT Act
. The relevant Entry is reproduced

below for ease of reference:
“SCHEDULE I
Page 23 of 36
[See clause (b) of
Section 7
of Uttar Pradesh Value Added Tax Act,
                                  2008]
                       LIST OF EXMEPTED GOODS

  SI. NO.                 Name and description of goods

      (1)                                (2)

   I [1.]               xxx           xxx                 xxx

      xxx               xxx           xxx                 xxx
4.     Aquatic feed; poultry feed including balanced poultry
             feed; cattle feed including balanced cattle feed; and cattle
             fodder including green fodder, chuni, bhusi, chhilka,
             choker, javi, gower, de-oiled rice polish, de-oiled rice
             bran, de-oiled rice husk, de-oiled paddy husk or outer
             covering of paddy; aquatic, poultry and cattle feed
             supplement, concentrate and additives thereof; wheat
             bran and de-oiled cake but excluding oil cake; rice polish;
rice bran and rice husk; sanai and dhaincha”
47.     A bare perusal of the scheme under
Section 13
of the UP VAT Act [and

specifically under
Section 13(1)(a)
] makes it abundantly clear that in cases

where the purchased goods (in the present case Rice Bran) are used in the

manufacture of taxable goods (in the present case RBO and physically refined

RBO) except the non-VAT goods, and where such manufactured goods are

sold within the State or in the course of inter-state trade and commerce, the

registered dealers (like the assessee herein) are entitled to claim input tax

credit of the full amount. The charging section of the
UP VAT Act
, therefore,

entitles the assessee to claim full amount of tax paid on the purchases as ITC.
Page 24 of 36
48.   Furthermore,
Section 13(3)(b)
of the UP VAT Act, introduces the

concept of proportionality in the scheme of the enactment and by means of a

deeming fiction provides that where during the manufacture of VAT goods,

exempt and non-VAT goods (except as by-product or waste product) are

produced, the amount of ITC credit may be claimed and may be allowed in

proportion to the extent they are used or consumed in manufacture of taxable

goods other than the non-VAT goods and exempt goods.
49.
Section 13(3)(b)
, however, leaves a grey area with respect to cases

where the process of manufacture (such as in the present case) results in the

production of VAT goods and by-products or waste products. In such cases,

the legislature has done well to take care of the grey area by providing for

another legal fiction in the form of Explanation (iii) to
Section 13
wherein it

is provided that during the manufacture of any taxable goods, any exempt

goods are produced as by-product or waste product, it shall be deemed that

the purchased goods have been used in the manufacture of taxable goods.
50.   Explanation (iii) to
Section 13
, therefore, forbids the Assessing

Authority as well as the assessee from raising any dispute in regard to the

allowability of the ITC in cases where exempted goods are being produced as

a by-product or waste product during the process of manufacture.
Page 25 of 36
WHETHER THE HIGH COURT WAS RIGHT IN PLACING

RELIANCE ON THE DECISION OF THIS COURT IN THE CASE
OF

M.K. AGRO TECH PRIVATE LIMITED
(SUPRA)
51.   The revenue has relied upon the decision of this Court in
M.K. Agro

Tech
(supra), as the basis for denying ITC to the assessee.
52.   The decision in the case of
M.K. Agro Tech
(supra), was rendered by

this Court, examining the claim of ITC by an assessee on the goods purchased

under the
Karnataka Value Added Tax Act, 2003
(for short “
Karnataka VAT

Act
”).
53.
In the case of
M.K. Agro Tech
(supra), the assessee was engaged in the

manufacture of sunflower oil (taxable goods), which is extracted from

sunflower cake, by employing solvent extraction process. Sunflower oil cake

is the input/raw material on which VAT was payable. During the extraction

process, a ‘by-product’ in the form of de-oiled sunflower oil is produced. The

said by-product was also exempted under the
Karnataka VAT Act
.
54.
Section 17
of the Karnataka VAT Act relates to partial rebate and deals

with contingencies where the final products are more than one and the output

tax is payable only on some products with the other remaining products being

exempted from the payment of tax. In the said case as no tax was payable on

the ‘by-product’, the ITC was only partially admissible. Rule 131 of the
Page 26 of 36
Karnataka Value Added Tax Rules, 2005 (for short “KVAT Rules”) relates to

the apportionment of ITC in cases of dealer falling under
Section 17
of the

Karnataka VAT Act.
55.   The relevant portion of
Section 17
of the Karnataka VAT Act and Rule

131 of KVAT Rules are reproduced below:
“17. Partial rebate.- Where a registered dealer deducting
         input tax.-
(1) makes sales of taxable goods and goods exempt under
Section 5
, or

             xxx        xxx                 xxx

          Rule 131. Apportionment.— Apportionment of input tax in
         the case of a dealer falling under
section 17
shall be
         calculated as follows.-
(1) All input tax directly relating to sale of goods exempt
         under
section 5
other than such goods sold in the course of
         export out of the territory of India, is non-deductible.
(2) All input tax directly relating to taxable sales may be
         deducted, subject to the provisions of
section 11
.
(3) Any input tax relating to both sale of taxable goods and
         exempt goods, including inputs used for non-taxable
         transactions, that is, the non-deductible input tax, may be
         calculated on the basis of the following formula:”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
56.   This Court while examining
Section 17
of the KVAT Act, read with

Rule 131 of the KVAT Rules, held that ITC was admissible to the extent of

inputs used in the sale of taxable goods. The relevant observations of this

Court are reproduced below:
Page 27 of 36
“28. The first mistake which is committed by the High Court is
to ignore the plain language of sub-section (1) of
Section 17
.
This provision which allows partial rebate makes the said
provision applicable on the ‘sales’ of taxable goods and goods
exempt under
Section 5
. Thus, this sub-section refers to ‘sale’
of the ‘goods’, taxable as well as exempt, and is not relatable to
the ‘manufacture’ of the goods. The High Court has been
swayed by the fact that while extracting oil from sunflower, cake
emerges only as a by-product. Relevant event is not the
manufacture of an item from which the said by-product is
emerging. On the contrary, it is the sale of goods which triggers
the provisions of
Section 17
of KVAT Act. Whether it is by-
product or manufactured product is immaterial and irrelevant.
Fact remains that de-oiled cake is a saleable commodity which
is actually sold by the respondent assessee. Therefore, de-oiled
cake fits into the definition of “goods” and this commodity is
exempt from payment of any VAT under
Section 5
of the KVAT
Act. Thus, provisions of
Section 17
clearly get attracted when
‘sale’ of these goods takes place.
29. Secondly, as rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for
the appellant, the High Court has not considered the import and
effect of sub-rule (3) of Rule 131 of the KVAT Rules. We have
already reproduced Rule 131, including sub-rule (3) thereof.
After perusing Rule 131 in its entirety, it becomes clear that sub-
rule (1) pertains to input tax directly relatable to sales of exempt
goods which is non-deductible. Likewise, sub-rule (2) mandates
that input tax directly relating to sale of goods shall be
deductible. On the other hand, sub-rule (3) covers those cases
where input tax is not directly relatable to exempt goods and
taxable goods. It is therefore, applied in those cases where input
tax relating to both sale and taxable goods and exempt goods is
known. In that situation, formula is given under this sub-rule to
work out the partial deduction. The High Court has neither take
note of nor discussed sub-rule (3).
xxx                       xxx                  xxx
32. On literal interpretation of
Section 17
it can be gathered
that it does not distinguish between by-product, ancillary
product, intermediary product or final product. The expressions
Page 28 of 36
used are ‘goods’ and ‘sale’ of such goods is covered under
Section 17
. Both these ingredients stand satisfied as de-oiled
       cakes are goods and the respondent assessee had sold those
       goods for 8 (1993) Supp 4 SCC 536 9 (2015) 15 SCC 125 Civil
       Appeal Nos. 15049-15069/2017 Page 24 of 26 valuable
       consideration. We may point out there that the assessing
       authorities recorded a clear finding, which was accepted by the
       Tribunal as well, that records and statement of accounts of the
       respondent assessee clearly stipulates that after solvent
       extraction is completed, 88% of de-oiled cake remains and only
       12% remains is the oil which is further refined in the refinery.
       This clearly shows that major outcome (88%) of the solvent
       extraction plant is de-oiled cake which in itself is a marketable
       good having market value.”
                                            (Emphasis supplied)
57.
In the case of
M.K. Agro Tech
(supra), this Court held that only partial

ITC was permitted to the assessee as they were making taxable and exempted

sales from the dutiable raw materials procured by them. In Para 28, this Court

has elaborated on the scheme under the
Karnataka VAT Act
, to emphasise that

the provision which allows partial rebate is made applicable on the ‘sales’ of

taxable goods and goods exempt under
Section 5
. It refers to ‘sale’ of ‘goods’,

taxable as well as exempt, and is not relatable to the ‘manufacture’ of the

goods. Further elaboration has been made to hold that upon the ‘sale’ of goods

exempted under
Section 5
of the Karnataka VAT Act, partial rebate shall only

be admissible.
58.   This Court in the said case, permitted only partial ITC as the wordings

of the provision relates only with ‘sale’ and not ‘manufacture. This distinction

has also been acknowledged.
Page 29 of 36
59.
In such circumstances as aforesaid, we are of the view that the decision

of
M.K. Agro Tech
(supra), is not applicable to the case on hand as the

provisions under the
Karnataka VAT Act
are quite different compared to that

of the
UP VAT Act
in regard to the scheme of ITC.
60.
Section 11
of the Karnataka VAT Act reads thus:
“11. Input tax restrictions. –
(a) Input tax shall not be deducted in calculating the net tax
           payable in respect of —

            tax paid on purchases attributable to sale of exempted
            goods exempted under
Section 5
, except when such goods
            are sold in the course of export out of the territory of India;”
61.
Section 11(a)(1)
of the Karanataka VAT Act as above specifically

stipulates that where a sale of exempt goods takes place i.e., there is no output

tax received on such sale, the input tax paid for manufacturing/processing

such exempt goods cannot be credited while calculating the net tax. It is

beyond any pale of doubt that the
UP VAT Act
does not provide for any such

scheme or provision that aims at achieving the same.
62.   Au contraire, Explanation (iii) to
Section 13
read with
Section

13(3)(b)
UP VAT Act, as outlined above, seeks to create a deeming fiction

where during the manufacture of any taxable goods any exempt goods are

produced as by-product or waste product, it shall be deemed that the

purchased goods have been used in the manufacture of taxable goods. The
Page 30 of 36
scheme under the
UP VAT Act
therefore, is wholly distinct from the one

provided in the
Karnataka VAT Act
.
63.
The Karnataka VAT Act
with the aid of
Section 17
read with Rule 131

of the Karnataka VAT Rules seeks to provide a statutory mechanism for grant

of partial rebate where a registered dealer deducting input tax makes sale of

taxable goods as well as exempt goods. The apportionment and attribution of

input tax deductible between such sales and dispatch of goods for such

purpose, shall be made in accordance with Rule 131 of the KVAT Rules and

any input tax deducted in excess becomes re-payable forthwith. Further, Rule

131 of the KVAT Rules specifically provides that all input tax directly relating

to sale of goods exempt under
Section 5
other than such goods sold in the

course of export out of the territory of India, is non-deductible.
64.   However, the scheme under the
UP VAT Act
is not the same as in

Karnataka and no such provision regarding calculation of the apportionment

etc., has been provided for under the
UP VAT Act
. The reliance by the High

Court therefore on this decision is not correct. It is not applicable to the facts

of the present case, and could not have been relied upon to deny the full ITC

to the assessee.
65.   Under
Section 13(1)(a)
read with S. No. 2 (ii) of the table appended and
Section 13(3)(b)
read with Explanation (iii) of
Section 13
, the scheme of ITC
Page 31 of 36
is concerned with the ‘manufacture’ of goods and not ‘sale’ as dealt with in
M.K. Agro Tech
(supra).
66.   Further, the deeming fiction as provided by the Explanation (iii) to
Section 13
makes all the difference. It says that where during the manufacture

of any taxable goods, any exempt goods are produced as by-products or waste

product, it shall be deemed that the purchased goods have been used in the

manufacture of taxable goods, creating a wholly distinct scheme to the one

envisaged under the
Karnataka VAT Act
.
67.   The following illustration highlights the difference between the ITC

scheme envisaged under the
Karnataka VAT Act
and the scheme under the
UP

VAT Act
:
I.   Karnataka VAT Act, 2003
Total Sales = Rs. 1,000/-
Taxable goods = Rs. 250/-
Exempt goods/By-product = Rs. 700
       Non-tax goods = Rs. 50
       Total ITC on purchases = Rs. 100
       In terms of the formula prescribed in Rule 131(3), the non-
       deductible ITC shall be as follows:
700 + 50/1000 * 100 = Rs. 75
       Only Rs. 25/- will be allowed as ITC and Rs. 75 will be
       disallowed under
Section 17
of the Karnataka VAT Act, read
       with Rule 131 of the KVAT Rules.
Page 32 of 36
II.   Uttar Pradesh VAT Act, 2008
Total Sales = Rs. 1,000/-
Taxable goods (RBO) = Rs. 250
       Exempt goods (DORB) = Rs. 700
       Non-VAT goods = Rs. 50
       Total ITC on purchases = Rs. 100/-
In terms of Explanation (iii) to
Section 13
of the UP VAT Act,
       both the taxable goods and the by-product will be eligible to
       claim ITC. The disallowance will be limited to non-VAT goods
       which is Rs. 50/-, thus the disallowance of ITC will be Rs. 5/-
       only.”
68.   The aforesaid discussion as regards the salient features of the two

enactments can be outlined briefly as under:
Provisions of the U.P. VAT Act       Provisions of the Karnataka VAT
         and U.P. VAT Rules               Act
and Karnataka VAT Rules
13. Input tax credit
Section 11
. Input tax restrictions. –
 (1) ...
(f) Notwithstanding anything to the    (a) Input tax shall not be deducted in
 contrary contained in this sub-        calculating the net tax payable in
 section where goods purchased are      respect of-
 resold or goods manufactured or
 processed by using or utilizing such
 purchased goods are sold, at the       (1)     tax paid on purchases
 price which in lower than              attributable to sale of exempted
                                        goods exempted under
Section 5
,
(a) purchase price of such goods in except when such goods are sold in
 case of resale; or                     the course of export out of the
                                        territory of India;”
(b) cost price in case of manufacture,

 the amount of input tax credit shall
 be claimed and be allowed to the
 extent of tax payable on the sale
Page 33 of 36
value of goods or manufactured
goods.
Section 17
. Partial rebate. –Where a
                                 registered dealer deducting input
                                 tax-
(1) makes sales of taxable goods
                                 and goods exempt under
Section 5
,
                                 or

                                 (2) in addition to the sales referred to
                                 in clause (1), dispatches taxable
                                 goods or goods exempted under
Section 5
outside the State not as a
                                 direct result of sale or purchase in
                                 the course of inter-State trade, or

                                 (3) puts to use the inputs purchased
                                 in any other purpose (other than
                                 sale, manufacturing, processing,
                                 packing or storing of goods), in
                                 addition to use in the course of his
                                 business,

                                 apportionment and attribution of
                                 input tax deductible between such
                                 sales and dispatches of goods or
                                 such purpose, shall be made in
                                 accordance with Rules or by special
                                 methods to be approved by the
                                 Commissioner or any other
                                 authorised person and any input tax
                                 deducted in excess shall become
                                 repayable forthwith."
Rule       131.       Apportionment.-
Apportionment of input tax in the
                                 case of a dealer falling under
Section
                                 17
shall be calculated as follows –
Page 34 of 36
(1) All input tax directly relating to
                                       sale of goods exempt under
Section 5
other than such goods sold in the
                                       course of export out of the territory
                                       of India, is non-deductible.
(2) All input tax directly relating to
                                       taxable sales may be deducted,
                                       subject to the provisions of Section
11.
(3) Any input tax relating to both sale
                                       of taxable goods and exempt goods
                                       including inputs used for non-
taxable transactions, that is, the non-
deductible input tax, may be
                                       calculated on the basis of the
                                       following formula:
(Sales of exempt goods + non-
taxable transactions) x Total input
                                       tax.
(i) Non-deductible input tax = -------
-----
Total sales (including non-taxable
                                       transactions)
                                       (4)….
(5) Where in the case of any dealer,
                                       the Commissioner is of the opinion
                                       that the application of the formula
                                       prescribed under clause (3) does not
                                       give the correct amount of deductible
                                       input tax, he may direct the dealer to
                                       adopt a special formula as he may
                                       specify. "
69.   For all the foregoing reasons, we have reached to the conclusion that

the High Court committed an error in passing the impugned judgment relying

on the decision of this Court rendered in
M.K. Agro Tech
(supra).
Page 35 of 36
70.   In the result, both the appeals succeed and are hereby allowed.
71.   The impugned common judgment and order passed by the High Court

of Allahabad is hereby set aside and the orders passed by the Commercial Tax

Tribunal dated 04.05.2016 and 05.07.2017 are hereby restored.
72.   Pending applications if any shall stand disposed of.
……………………………………….CJI.
(Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud)



                                     ……………………………………….J.
                                          (J.B. Pardiwala)



                                     ……………………………………….J.
                                          (Manoj Misra)
New Delhi:
November 6, 2023.
Page 36 of 36