[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shakeel Ahmed vs Syed Akhlaq Hussain on 1 November, 2023
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
,
Vikram Nath
2023 INSC 1016




                                                                      REPORTABLE
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO.1598 OF 2023
                            SHAKEEL AHMED                            …APPELLANT
                                                           VERSUS
                            SYED AKHLAQ HUSSAIN                     …RESPONDENT


                                                           ORDER
VIKRAM NATH,J.
1.     This appeal assails the correctness of the
                                   judgment and order dated 23.08.2018 passed
                                   by the High Court of Delhi in RFA No.191 of
                                   2013 between Shakeel Ahmed and Syed Akhlaq
                                   Hussain, whereby the appeal was dismissed
                                   and the judgment and decree of the Trial Court
                                   decreeing the suit for possession and mesne
                                   profits has been affirmed.
2.     The appellant is defendant in the suit for
Signature Not Verified          possession and mesne profits instituted by the
Digitally signed by
Jatinder Kaur
Date: 2023.11.23
13:49:14 IST
respondent with respect to the property in
Reason:
Civil Appeal No.1598 of 2023                  Page 1 of 11
question. The suit was filed on the basis of a
       Power of Attorney, an agreement to sell, an
       affidavit and a will executed in favour of the
       respondent. The appellant, admittedly, was in
       possession of the property in question. The suit
       was contested on several grounds that the
       appellant was the owner of the property having
       received the same on the basis of a Hiba (oral
       gift) from its owner Laiq Ahmed his own brother.
       Secondly, that the suit was not maintainable as
       none of the documents on the basis of which the
       suit was filed were neither admissible nor
       enforceable under law. Both parties led evidence
- oral and documentary. The Trial Court framed
       as many as eleven issues, which read as follows:
“1. Whether the plaintiff has locus-standi
               to file the suit? OPP
2. Whether it is collusive suit of the
               plaintiff and the defendant’s brother, if
               so, its consequences? BPD
3. Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder
               of necessary party, if so, whom and its
               consequences? BPD
4. Whether the suit is barred by provision
               of
Order II Rule 2 CPC
for want of suit for
               declaration? OPP
Civil Appeal No.1598 of 2023                             Page 2 of 11
5. Whether the plaintiff came to Court
               without clean hands by suppressing
               material facts, if so, its consequences?
OPD
6. Whether the defendant was licencee in
               the suit property and it was terminated
               by notice dated 23.01.2008 by plaintiff’s
               predecessor in interest? OPP
7. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for
               decree of possession of suit property, as
               prayed in prayer clause (a), against the
               defendant? OPP
8. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for
               decree of permanent injunction, as
               prayed in prayer clause (b), against the
               defendant? OPP
9. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for
               decree of recovery of damages of
               Rs.2,10,000/- as prayed in prayer clause
(c), against the defendant? OPP
10. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for
               decree of damages @ Rs.10,000/- per
               month, as prayed in prayer clause (c),
               against the defendant, if so, for what
               period? OPP
11. Relief.”
3.     Findings recorded by the Trial Court were that
       all the issues were decided against the appellant
       and in favour of the respondent except issue
Civil Appeal No.1598 of 2023                           Page 3 of 11
no.8 and decree for possession along with
       mesne profits was granted.
4.     While in regular appeal filed under
section 96
of
       the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the High
       Court confirmed the finding with regard to the
       claim of the appellant regarding Hiba in his
       favour and held that the appellant had failed to
       prove the same. With respect to the other
       argument regarding suit being maintained on
       the basis of an unregistered document, the High
       Court,       although     in   principle   agreed    but
       proceeded to uphold the decree of possession on
       the ground that the respondent had filed the
       suit as an Attorney for and on behalf of its owner
       Laiq Ahmed and that Laiq Ahmed was not
       objecting to the respondent seeking possession
       of the suit property. On this sole ground, it
       confirmed          the   decree   of   possession    and
       dismissed the appeal.
5.     The learned counsel for the appellant made the
       following submissions:
5.1. The Court below erred in decreeing the suit
               for possession and mesne profits on the
Civil Appeal No.1598 of 2023                          Page 4 of 11
basis of unregistered documents namely
               Agreement to Sell, Power of Attorney,
               Affidavit and a Will.
5.2. The Will, although filed, would be of no
               relevance in as much as it will come into
               force on the death of the testator i.e. Laiq
               Ahmed, who was said to be still alive at the
               time of the presentation of the suit. The
               other documents like Agreement to Sell
               and General Power of Attorney would not
               confer          any   ownership    right    on     the
               respondent nor could he derive any title
               thereunder.
5.3. The affidavit would also not confer any
               title. The unregistered agreement to sell by
               itself     is     a   document     which     is    not
               enforceable in law. However, its only
               admissibility         would   be    for    collateral
               purposes and not for claiming any rights
               thereunder of ownership in a Court of law.
6.     Further argument advanced on behalf of the
       appellant is that the appellant had successfully
       proved the Hiba (oral gift) by his brother Laiq
Civil Appeal No.1598 of 2023                               Page 5 of 11
Ahmed in his favour by adducing reliable and
       cogent evidence. However, the courts below
       wrongly discarded the same and decided the
       issue against him.
7.     Further, he referred to the reasoning given by
       the High Court that even though the documents
       relied upon by the respondent were not of any
       help but still the respondent could have
       maintained the suit for possession or mesne
       profits as an Attorney and on behalf of Laiq
       Ahmed, the owner of the property. This
       reasoning, it was submitted, was untenable in
       as much as a reading of the plaint would clearly
       indicate that the suit was not filed by the
       respondent as Attorney for Laiq Ahmed. It was
       in the individual capacity of the respondent
       claiming his own right, title and interest under
       the unregistered documents referred to above.
On such submissions, learned counsel for the
       appellant         submitted   that   the   impugned
       judgment be set aside and              the suit be
       dismissed.
Civil Appeal No.1598 of 2023                       Page 6 of 11
8.         On the other hand, learned counsel for the
           respondent submitted that all the documents
           relied upon by the respondent as basis for the
           suit were the customary documents and they
           conferred full title on the respondent to be the
           owner of the property in question and, therefore,
           he can maintain the suit.
9.         It was also submitted that there was a
           prohibition of registration of documents of
           transfer/conveyance with respect to the area
           where the property in question is situate and,
           therefore, the transfers affected under the
           customary documents was sufficient to confer
           title on the respondent. It was also submitted
           that the judgment in the case of
Suraj Lamps &
           Industries Pvt. Ltd. Vs. State of Haryana and
           Anr.1
, which was of the year 2011, had
           prospective application and would not have any
           bearing on the title of the respondents which
           came to him under the customary documents
           executed in the year 2008 much prior to the
1
183 (2011) DLT 1 (SC)
Civil Appeal No.1598 of 2023                       Page 7 of 11
judgment in the case of
Suraj Lamps &
       Industries
(supra).
10. Having considered the submissions at the
       outset, it is to be emphasized that irrespective
       of what was decided in the case of
Suraj Lamps
       and Industries
(supra) the fact remains that no
       title could be transferred with respect to
       immovable properties on the basis of an
       unregistered Agreement to Sell or on the basis
       of an unregistered General Power of Attorney.
The Registration Act, 1908
clearly provides that
       a     document          which     requires    compulsory
       registration under the Act, would not confer any
       right, much less a legally enforceable right to
       approach a Court of Law on its basis. Even if
       these documents i.e. the Agreement to Sell and
       the Power of Attorney were registered, still it
       could not be said that the respondent would
       have      acquired       title   over   the   property    in
       question. At best, on the basis of the registered
       agreement to sell, he could have claimed relief
       of      specific        performance      in   appropriate
       proceedings. In this regard, reference may be
Civil Appeal No.1598 of 2023                             Page 8 of 11
made to
sections 17
and
49
of the Registration
         Act and
section 54
of the Transfer of Property
         Act, 1882.
11. Law is well settled that no right, title or interest
         in immovable property can be conferred without
         a registered document. Even the judgment of
         this Court in the case of
Suraj Lamps &
         Industries
(supra)   lays   down   the   same
         proposition. Reference may also be made to the
         following judgments of this Court:
(i).
Ameer Minhaj Vs. Deirdre Elizabeth
                    (Wright) Issar and Others2
(ii).
Balram Singh Vs. Kelo Devi3
(iii).
M/S       Paul   Rubber     Industries
                    Private Limited Vs. Amit Chand Mitra
                    & Anr.4
12. The embargo put on registration of documents
         would not override the statutory provision so as
         to confer title on the basis of unregistered
         documents with respect to immovable property.
         Once this is the settled position, the respondent
2
(2018) 7 SCC 639
3
In Civil Appeal No. 6733 of 2022
4
In SLP (C) No. 15774 of 2022
Civil Appeal No.1598 of 2023                             Page 9 of 11
could       not     have      maintained      the   suit    for
       possession and mesne profits against the
       appellant, who was admittedly in possession of
       the property in question whether as an owner or
       a licensee.
13. The argument advanced on behalf of the
       respondent that the judgment in
Suraj Lamps
       & Industries
(supra) would be prospective is
       also misplaced. The requirement of compulsory
       registration        and       effect   on   non-registration
       emanates from the statutes, in particular the
Registration Act and the Transfer of Property
       Act
.
The ratio in
Suraj Lamps & Industries
(supra) only approves the provisions in the two
       enactments.             Earlier judgments of this Court
       have taken the same view.
14. In case the respondent wanted to evict the
       appellant treating him to be a licensee, he could
       have maintained a suit on behalf of the true
       owner         or        the   landlord      under     specific
       instructions of Power of Attorney as landlord
       claiming to have been receiving rent from the
Civil Appeal No.1598 of 2023                               Page 10 of 11
appellant or as Attorney of the true owner to
       institute the suit on his behalf for eviction and
       possession. That being not the contents of the
       plaint, we are unable to agree with the
       reasoning given by the High Court in the
       impugned order.
15. For        all    the      reasons   recorded        above,    the
       impugned judgment deserves to be set aside
       and      the     suit     deserves     to    be   dismissed.
       Accordingly,            the   appeal    is   allowed.      The
       impugned judgment is set aside and the suit is
       dismissed.
16. There shall be no order as to costs.
17. Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
………………………………………….J.
                                   (Vikram Nath)


                         ………………………………………….J.
                                   (Rajesh Bindal)
New Delhi,
November 01, 2023
Civil Appeal No.1598 of 2023                               Page 11 of 11