[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Nababuddin @ Mallu @ Abhimanyu vs State Of Haryana on 24 November, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023 INSC 1020

                                                                      NON­REPORTABLE

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2333 OF 2010

                            Nababuddin @ Mallu @ Abhimanyu               … Appellant


                                                       versus

                            State of Haryana                              … Respondent


                                                     JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1)   The appellant who is accused no. 3, along with two co­
                            accused, was convicted by the learned Special Judge under
                            the
Narcotic Drug and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985
(for
                            short, ‘
NDPS Act
’) for the offence punishable under Section 15
                            of NPDS Act. Learned Special Judge held that the prosecution
                            had brought home the charge against the accused that they
                            were found in conscious possession of poppy straw having the
                            quantity of 205 kilograms without any licence or permit. The
                            accused, including the appellant, were ordered to undergo
                            rigorous imprisonment for ten years and to pay a fine of Rs.
                            1,00,000/­ each. The default sentence was of imprisonment
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra           for two years. The conviction of the appellant and two others
   Date: 2023.11.24
   17:55:33 IST

                            has been confirmed by the High Court by the impugned
   Reason:
judgment.
Criminal Appeal No. 2333 of 2010                                         Page 1 of 10
2)     On 22nd May 2001, Assistant Sub Inspector Dhian Singh
      (PW­10), along with other police officials, was on patrolling
      duty in Ambala Cantonment. They received secret information
      in the afternoon that three parcels on platform no. 4 and two
      on platform no. 6 of Ambala Cantonment station contained
      contraband. The destination of the parcels was Kurail Railway
      Station. Therefore, a letter was addressed to the Chief Parcel
      Supervisor about the information with a request to arrange
      for an inspection. The inspector in charge of the Railway
      Protection Force (R.P.F) was summoned, and the parcel was
      shifted to the office of the Chief Parcel Supervisor. The parcels
      were opened. A total of ten bags were found in five parcels,
      five bags containing 20 Kilograms of poppy straw each and
      the other five bags containing 21 Kilograms each. Necessary
      formalities of drawing panchnama, drawing samples, sealing
      the parcels, etc., were done. After that, on 28 th May 2001,
      Inspector Ram Phal (PW­11) and Dhian Singh (PW­10) visited
      railway station Kurail, the destination of the parcels. Krishan
      Dev Joshi (PW­2), the station supervisor, was apprised of the
      facts of the case. After that, accused no. 2 – Rahish alias
      Munna, approached PW­2 with a railway receipt concerning
      the parcels in question. As per the instructions of the Police,
      he was asked to wait. PW­2 immediately informed the police.
After some time, the appellant–Nababuddin alias Mallu alias
      Abhimanyu, approached PW­2 and enquired about the same
      parcels. The accused no. 2, and the appellant were asked to
      wait. They were arrested. Subsequently, on 31 st May 2001,
      accused no. 1 was arrested at railway station Ambala Cantt.
Criminal Appeal No. 2333 of 2010                                      Page 2 of 10
It is alleged that accused no. 1 had got the parcel booked. The
      prosecution examined 10 witnesses. The Special Court
      recorded a finding that though the contraband was recovered
      during transit, the persons possessing railway receipt of the
      parcels shall be deemed to have control over the contraband
      and, thus, in conscious possession thereof. The High Court
      has confirmed the conviction.
SUBMISSIONS
3)     The submission of the learned counsel appearing for the
      appellant is that he is a rikshaw puller like the accused no. 2.
      According to the appellant, accused no. 2 had gone to enquire
      about the arrival of parcels on behalf of the owner to the
      railway station, and when he failed to return, the appellant
      went to the railway station to enquire about him. His
      submission is that even the railway receipt of the parcels was
      not produced by the appellant but by the accused no. 2. He
      submitted that the case made out by the prosecution that the
      railway receipt stood in the name of the appellant had not
      been put to the appellant in his examination under
Section
      313
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short,
      ‘
CrPC
’). He submitted that even the allegation that the
      appellant approached the station supervisor to enquire about
      the parcel was not put to the appellant in his examination
      under
Section 313
of CrPC.
4)     The learned counsel appearing for the respondent urged
      that both the material circumstances about which the
      appellant has made grievance were put to the appellant as
Criminal Appeal No. 2333 of 2010                                     Page 3 of 10
can be seen from question nos. 7 and 15. Her submission is
      that the railway receipts stood in the name of the appellant
      (as Abhimanyu), and the very fact that he visited the railway
      station along with the accused no. 2 to enquire about the
      parcels     containing       contraband   shows    not   only    his
      involvement       but    also   constructive   possession   of   the
      contraband as the railway receipt was in his name. She would
      submit that there is no reason to find fault with the
      concurrent findings of fact recorded by the Courts.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
5)     We have considered the submissions and perused the
      notes of evidence of the material prosecution witnesses. PW­2,
      Krishan Dev Joshi was the station superintendent at the
      Kurail railway station. On 28th May 2001, according to his
      version, accused no. 2 approached him at the railway station.
      He was carrying a parcel bilty (railway receipt of parcel
      booking). He enquired about the arrival of the parcels. He
      stated that as per the instructions of the police, he told
      accused no. 2 to sit and wait. After that, the appellant came
      there and enquired about the same parcels. He has not stated
      that the appellant either showed or produced the railway
      receipt. In fact, according to his version, the railway receipt
      was with accused no.2. In the cross­examination, he was
      confronted with the suggestion that the appellant was plying
      a rikshaw. He responded by stating that he was unable to
      deny the suggestion. However, he volunteered and stated that
      the appellant had been doing business in selling bed sheets,
      etc., on his bicycle. PW­10, Dhian Singh stated that the
Criminal Appeal No. 2333 of 2010                                         Page 4 of 10
accused no. 2 came to the railway station with a railway
      receipt to enquire about the consignment. Meanwhile, the
      appellant arrived to enquire about the same parcels. In the
      First Information Report of PW­10, Dhian Singh stated that
      the railway receipt was produced by accused no. 2. Thus, the
      incriminating circumstances brought on record against the
      appellant were:
a) The railway receipt of parcels containing contraband
                 was in his name (as Abhimanyu); and
b) He, along with the accused no. 2, enquired about the
                 parcels containing contraband.
The finding of the courts is that as the railway receipt was in
      the name of the appellant, he shall be deemed to be in the
      custody of the contraband.
6)     The material prosecution witnesses did not depose that
      the appellant produced the railway receipt. On the contrary,
      the said witnesses consistently say that accused no. 2 came
      to the railway station with the railway receipt.
7)     In his examination under
Section 313
of CrPC, the
      appellant came out with the following explanation:
“I never got booked any parcel through
                    railways. I have got nothing to do with any
                    parcels. No RR or builty was ever recovered
                    from me. In fact Rahish being rickshaw
                    puller had gone to enquire about the arrival
                    of luggage on behalf of the owner. On his
                    failure to return after 15 minutes I had gone
                    to verify about Rahish, I also being rickshaw
                    puller. Thereafter, I was also made to sit by
                    the police and implicated falsely in the
Criminal Appeal No. 2333 of 2010                                    Page 5 of 10
present case and on seeing us apprehended
                    owner fled from the spot. I am poor and is
                    meeting two times meals with great
                    difficulty.”
8)     We have carefully perused the examination of the
      appellant under
Section 313
of CrPC. The circumstance
      against the appellant that he visited the railway station and
      enquired with the station supervisor about the contraband
      parcels has not been put to the appellant during his
      examination under
Section 313
of Cr.P.C. Question no. 6
      asked to the appellant reads thus:
“Q.6 That on 28.5.2001, Ram Phal
                     Inspector took the investigation of this case
                     in his hand. He also alongwith other police
                     officials went to Railway Station, Kurali, in
                     Punjab and contacted Station Supervisor,
                     Krishan Dutt Joshi there. Meanwhile, your
                     co­accused Rahish alias Munna arrived at
                     Railway Station in the office of station
                     Supervisor and he produced a builty Ex.PC
                     to the said station Supervisor and inquired
                     whether their parcels had reached or not.
                     The said station supervisor disclosed the
                     fact to the police. Meanwhile your co
                     accused also came there, what you have to
                     say?
Ans:­ It is incorrect.”

      Even the alleged circumstance that the railway receipt was in
      the appellant's name has not been put to him in his statement
      under
Section 313
of CrPC.
9)     The learned counsel appearing for the respondent relied
      upon question no. 7, which reads thus:
“Q.7 That station Supervisor produced RR
                       receipt No.732118 to the police, the same
Criminal Appeal No. 2333 of 2010                                     Page 6 of 10
was taken into possession vide recovery
                       memo Ex.PB. You were arrested by the
                       police, what have you to say?
Ans:­It is incorrect, However, police
                       arrested us and planted a false case upon
                       us.”

      Even in question no. 7, it is not put to the accused that the
      railway receipt of the parcel was in his name or that the
      consignment of parcels containing contraband was booked in
      his name. Even this material circumstance is not put to the
      accused.
10)    Thus, both the circumstances on which the prosecution
      relied upon against the appellant were not put to him in his
      examination under
Section 313
of CrPC. Even the question
      no.15 does not incorporate any specific circumstance against
      the accused.
11)    Regarding the importance of the examination of the
      accused under
Section 313
of CrPC, we may refer to a
      judgment of this Court in the case of
Raj Kumar v. State
      (NCT of Delhi
)1. In paragraph 17, this Court has summarised
      the law on the aspect which reads thus:
“17.The law consistently
laid down by
this Court
                can be summarised as under:
(i)   It is the duty of the Trial Court to put each
                  material circumstance appearing in the
                  evidence against the accused specifically,
                  distinctively and separately. The material
                  circumstance means the circumstance or the
                  material on the basis of which the prosecution
                  is seeking his conviction;
1 2023 SCC online SC 609
Criminal Appeal No. 2333 of 2010                                   Page 7 of 10
(ii) The object of examination of the accused
                 under Section 313 is to enable the accused to
                 explain any circumstance appearing against
                 him in the evidence;
(iii) The Court must ordinarily eschew material
                  circumstances not put to the accused from
                  consideration while dealing with the case of
                  the particular accused;
(iv) The failure to put material circumstances to
                 the accused amounts to a serious irregularity.
                 It will vitiate the trial if it is shown to have
                 prejudiced the accused;
(v)   If any irregularity in putting the material
                  circumstance to the accused does not result in
                  failure of justice, it becomes a curable defect.
                  However, while deciding whether the defect
                  can be cured, one of the considerations will be
                  the passage of time from the date of the
                  incident;
(vi) In case such irregularity is curable, even the
                 appellate court can question the accused on
                 the material circumstance which is not put to
                 him; and
(vii) In a given case, the case can be remanded to
                  the Trial Court from the stage of recording the
                  supplementary statement of the concerned
                  accused under
Section 313
of CrPC.
(viii) While deciding the question whether prejudice
                   has been caused to the accused because of the
                   omission, the delay in raising the contention is
                   only one of the several factors to be
                   considered.”
12)    Thus,     the   two   circumstances   alleged   against   the
      appellant will have to be kept out of consideration. There is no
      other material on record to connect the appellant with the
Criminal Appeal No. 2333 of 2010                                         Page 8 of 10
offence. The incident is of May 2001, and therefore, it will be
      unjust to subject the appellant to further examination under
Section 313
of CrPC at this stage, nearly twenty­two and half
      years from the date of the alleged recovery of the contraband.
      As    the    only    material   circumstances   pleaded   by   the
      prosecution against the appellant were not put to him, a
      serious prejudice has been caused to the appellant's defence.
      Indeed, the appellant may not have earlier raised the issue
      regarding the inadequacy of examination under
Section 313
of
      CrPC. However, in this case, the omission goes to the root of
      the matter as far as the appellant is concerned. According to
      us, it is a serious and material illegality committed by the
      Court as the examination of the appellant was not made
      under
Section 313
of CrPC on the aforesaid circumstances.
13)    The appellant has undergone incarceration of five and a
      half years. If, after the lapse of more than twenty­two years,
      he is again subjected to examination under
Section 313
of
      CrPC, it will cause prejudice to him. Therefore, the failure to
      put two relevant circumstances to the appellant in his
      examination under
Section 313
CrPC will be fatal to the
      prosecution case. Hence, on this ground, we hold that the
      appellant’s conviction cannot be sustained.
14) Therefore, the appeal must succeed, and the impugned
      judgments of the Trial Court and High Court are set aside
      only in so far as the present appellant is concerned. We are
      not disturbing the conviction of the other two accused. The
Criminal Appeal No. 2333 of 2010                                       Page 9 of 10
appellant is acquitted of the offence alleged against him. His
      bail bonds stand cancelled.
15)    The appeal is allowed on the above terms.
……………………..J.
                                                 (Abhay S. Oka)



                                                 ……………………..J.
                                                 (Pankaj Mithal)

      New Delhi;
November 24, 2023.
Criminal Appeal No. 2333 of 2010                                  Page 10 of 10