[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Mohar Singh (Dead) Through Lrs. vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh Collector on 7 November, 2023
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
,
Surya Kant
REPORTABLE
                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
2023 INSC 1019
                         CIVIL APPEAL NOS.7504-7505 OF 2023
                       [Arising out of SLP(C) No.16572/2016]

         MOHAR SINGH (DEAD) THROUGH LRS. & ORS.                       APPELLANT(S)


                                             VERSUS



         STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH COLLECTOR & ORS.                      RESPONDENT(S)

                                     J U D G M E N T
1.      Leave granted.
2.      The   land   of    the     appellants,    situated    in   village

         Khora, Pargana Loni, Tehsil Dadri, District Ghaziabad,

         was part and parcel of the total land measuring 902.2046

         acres which was proposed to be acquired by a notification

         dated 17.03.1988 published on 19.03.1988 under
Section

         4(1)
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (in short, “the

         Act”). It appears that finally, land measuring 337.892

         acres    only,    including         that   of    the     appellants,   was

         acquired and the award was passed by the Special Land

         Acquisition Officer on 01.02.1991, granting compensation

         at the rate of Rs.70 per sq. yard.
3.      Most of the land owners, including the appellants,

         filed reference under
Section 18
of the Act. The Learned

         Xth Additional District Judge, Ghaziabad vide an award

         dated   06.04.1998        partly    accepted     those    references   and

         enhanced the compensation at the rate of Rs.106 per sq.

         yard.
1
4.      Various land owners then approached the High Court

by    way    of    First       Appeals,         for       further     enhancement      of

compensation.            These     appeals               included      First       Appeal

No.491/1998        (
Veer        Singh    &      others       vs.    State     of    Uttar

Pradesh and others
), First Appeal No.493/1998 (
Megh Singh

and others vs. State of Uttar Pradesh
) and First Appeal

No.477/1998 (
Amar Singh vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and

others
) etc.
5.      The appellants, however, did not file any appeal

before      the    High    Court        within        a    reasonable       time.   They

eventually preferred the first appeals in the year 2011.

Their    appeals         were    barred         by       limitation;       hence,    they

applied for condonation of delay of 12 years and 353

days. The grounds taken by the appellants for condonation

of delay were that due to illiteracy and poverty, they

could       not   arrange       the     Court         Fee    and    that     they    were

advised to file the appeal(s) in September, 2011. They

also put forward the plea that the first appeals against

the     same      reference       award         were        pending    consideration

before the High Court.
6.      The       High    Court       has       vide        impugned       order    dated

09.03.2016          declined          to        condone         the        delay      and

consequently,            the    first        appeal(s)         preferred       by     the

appellants have been dismissed.
7.      Meanwhile, the batch of first appeals preferred by

other    land      owners,       came      to       be    decided     on    04.07.2016,

wherein the High Court enhanced the compensation at the
2
rate of Rs.130 per sq. yard. The operative part of the

judgment dated 04.07.2016 reads as follows:
“19. In view of the above discussion, all the
     appeals   filed  by   the   Claimants-appellants
     deserve to be allowed to the extent that the
     appellants   shall  be    entitled  to   receive
     compensation @ 130/- per Sq. yard along with
     all statutory benefits and interest after
     adjustment of the amount already received by
     them. The deficiency in Court fees shall be
     recovered from the Claimants-appellants at the
     time of preparation of final decree.”
8.   It is also a matter of record that some of the land

owners,   being   still   dissatisfied    with    the    rate   of

compensation   determined   by   the   High   Court,    approached

this Court in C.A. No.12631/2017 (
Jitendra and others vs.

State of Uttar Pradesh and another
) & connected matters.

A coordinate Bench vide order dated 12.12.2017 allowed

those appeals in part, in terms of the following order:
“Delay condoned.
Leave granted.
The notification under
Section 4
of the Land
     Acquisition Act, 1894 was issued on 17th March,
     1988. The Land Acquisition Officer granted
     compensation at the rate of Rs.70/- per square
     yard and the Reference Court enhanced it to
     Rs.106/- per square yard. The value determined
     by the High Court was Rs.130/- per square yard
     after making a deduction of 35% towards
     development cost.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, in
     our opinion, the only modification required in
     the impugned orders is with respect to the
     aspect that 25% deduction deserves to be made
     instead of 35% made by the High Court. We make
     deduction of 25% in the facts and circumstances
     of the case instead of 35%. Thus, the amount of
     compensation comes to Rs.150/- per square yard
     instead of Rs.130/- per square yard. The
     compensation amount is enhanced to Rs.150/- per
3
square yard along with statutory benefits.
The appeals filed by the land                              owners    are
        allowed to the aforesaid extent.”
9.      Learned Senior Counsel for the appellants firstly

seek parity with their co-land owners to whom the High

Court granted compensation at the rate of Rs.130 per sq.

yard, followed by further enhancement by this Court to

Rs.150 per sq. yard. It is urged that the High Court

ought    to     have       condoned       the        delay    and     treated      the

appellants at par with their co-villagers, whose appeals

were at that time pending consideration before the High

Court.    On     the       same        analogy,       he     seeks     the       higher

compensation as assessed by this Court in
Jitendra and

others
(Supra),          without        prejudice          to     the        second

contention raised hereinafter.
10.     It is then canvassed that the Reference Court while

assessing the market value of Rs.106 per sq. yard had

relied   upon        the   rate    of     compensation         awarded       for   the

adjoining land of village Makanpur and since, the High

Court subsequently enhanced the compensation for the land

of    village    Makanpur         to    Rs.297       per     sq.    yard    in    First

Appeal No.522/2009 (
Pradeep Kumar and another vs. State

of Uttar Pradesh and others
) decided on 21.04.2016, such

revised rate deserves to be adopted to restore                                   parity

between the land of village Khora with that of village

Makanpur.       On    this    premise,          it    is     asserted       that   the

appellants too are entitled to be compensated with the
4
higher rate of Rs.297 per sq. yard.
11.     Contrarily, learned Senior Counsel for the NOIDA

vehemently      contends    that   there   was    an   inordinate   and

unexplained delay of almost 13 years in filing the first

appeal(s). The appellants who slept over the matter being

satisfied with the rate of compensation as determined by

the Reference Court, have rightly been non-suited by the

High    Court     on   account     of    their     gross   negligence.
Consequently, the appellants forfeited their so called

right    to     seek   parity      which    was     nothing   but   an

afterthought claim made out of greed. He points out that

the    first    appeal(s)   were   filed    with    certain   defects,

including deficient Court Fees and they never cured such

defects. According to learned Senior Counsel, the plea of

illiteracy or poverty was a lame excuse. Not only that

the appellants are residents of an area which falls in

NCR, they had also gotten a handsome compensation amount

from the Reference Court, which fact alone belies their

plea of poverty and ignorance.
12.     Having heard learned Senior Counsel for the parties

and on perusal of the material placed on record, we are

satisfied that the appellants are entitled to seek parity

with their co-villagers in the grant of compensation for

their acquired land. This Court has consistently held in

a catena of decisions that the inordinate delay in filing

appeal in compensatory matters, per se, may not be fatal

as the rights and equities between the parties can be
5
well balanced by denying the statutory benefits, such as

interest       for   the       delayed      period.       We   are      thus     of    the

considered opinion that the delay in filing the first

appeal(s) could be condoned subject to the condition that

the   appellants          would       not    be    entitled        to   enure      undue

benefit for the delayed period. We grant such indulgence

in the appellant’s favour also for the reason that a

batch of first appeals at the instance of other land

owners was still pending consideration before the High

Court. All that the High Court ought to have emphatically

denied to the late-comers was the benefit of interest

including on the solatium, under
Section 34
of the Act

for the period from the date of passing of the award by

the Reference Court till the filing of the first appeals.
13.     Adverting         to    the    appellants’           claim      for     enhanced

compensation         at   the     rate      fixed       by   the     High     Court     in

respect    of    the       land    of       village      Makanpur,         it    may   be

noticed that such a plea was expressly raised by the land

owners before the High Court when their first appeals

were decided on 04.07.2016. The High Court unequivocally

rejected the said claim while fixing the compensation at

a lower rate of Rs.130 per sq. yard for the land of

village    Khora.         This     Court          in    further      appeal       partly

accepted the claim of the land owners of village Khora

and enhanced the compensation to Rs.150 per sq. yard. In

other words, the claim of parity between the acquired

lands     of    village         Khora       and        Makanpur      was      impliedly
6
rejected      by   this   Court.    We       see   no   reason   to   take   a

different view. Consequently, we do not find any merit in

the plea that the appellants are entitled to compensation

at par with the land owners of village Makanpur.
14.     There is one more plausible reason for us to turn

down the appellant’s claim for the higher rate of Rs.297

per sq. yard. We have condoned the delay of nearly 13

years in filing of their first appeals, only to accord

parity between the similarly placed land-owners on the

anvil    of
Article     14
of    the       Constitution.      If   the

appellants are granted compensation higher than their co-

landowners, despite the fact that such counterparts were

vigilant in pursuing their remedy promptly, it will lead

to hostile discrimination viz those landowners whose fate

already stands sealed upto this Court. This will also

amount to granting premium on, what can be aptly termed

as stale, belated and chance claim of the appellants.
15.     Having held so, the appeals are allowed in part;

the appellants are held entitled to compensation at the

rate of Rs.150 per sq. yard for their respective acquired

land. However, the compensation amount shall not include

statutory interest, including on solatium, as per the

rate prescribed under
Section 34
of the Act, for the

period from the date of passing of the award by the

Reference Court under
Section 18
of the Act till the

filing of the respective first appeals before the High

Court. The appellants shall be required to make good the
7
deficiency in Court Fees before the High Court within

four   weeks,   whereupon   only       the   arrears   of   enhanced

compensation shall be paid to them within eight weeks

thereafter.
16.    Ordered accordingly.
...................J.
                                             (SURYA KANT)


                                             ...................J.
                                             (DIPANKAR DATTA)
New Delhi;
November 07, 2023
8