[Cites
70
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Public Interest Committee For ... vs Union Of India Ministry Of Home Affairs ... on 23 November, 2023
Author:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Bench:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
1


2023 INSC 1086                                                              Reportable




                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION



                                Writ Petition (Civil) No 443 of 2017




        Public Interest Committee for Scheduling Specific Areas
        and Anr                                                        ... Petitioners




                                           Versus

        Union of India & Ors                                           ... Respondents


                                                WITH


                                Writ Petition (Civil) No 187 of 2019




   Signature Not Verified

   Digitally signed by
   NEETA SAPRA
   Date: 2024.01.02
   14:45:49 IST
   Reason:
                                                                     2


                                                         JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI


Contents

Constitutional Framework .................................................................................................. 3
Representation of Peoples Act, 1950
............................................................................... 8
Delimitation Act, 2002
...................................................................................................... 11

Factual Context................................................................................................................ 14

Submissions on behalf of the Petitioners ........................................................................ 22

Submissions on behalf of the Respondents ................................................................... 24

Delimitation Notification of 2006 and the Delimitation Order of 2008 ........................ 26

Issues .................................................................................................................................. 29

Analysis: ............................................................................................................................. 30

   Whether Delimitation Commission can amend the 2006 Notification under the
Delimitation Act
............................................................................................................ 30
   Whether the Election Commission can Amend the 2008 Order to incorporate
   those changes .............................................................................................................. 33
      The Scope of powers of the Election Commission under
Article 324
, Constitution
      of India: ...................................................................................................................... 33
      Scope of Powers of the Election Commission under RP Act. ............................... 34
      Section 9, RP Act and
Section 11
, Delimitation Act............................................... 38
   Proportional Representation ........................................................................................ 41

Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 52
3
1. The jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 32
of the Constitution has been invoked in

        two petitions. The first of those petitions seeks a direction for the grant of proportional

        representation for the Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People and in the

        Legislative Assemblies of West Bengal and Sikkim in terms of the mandate of
Articles

        330
and
332
of the Constitution.
2. The second petition seeks more specifically, a direction for upholding the

        constitutional rights of the Limboo-Tamang Scheduled Tribe to reservation of seats in

        the Sikkim Legislative Assembly. It seeks directions to amend/strike down the

        Notification of the Delimitation Commission dated 4 September 2006 and the

        Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order 2008 1 to the extent

        that they do not provide for reservations for members of the Limboo-Tamang

        Scheduled Tribe. It additionally seeks directions to the effect that
Section 7(1A)
of

        the Representation of People’s Act 2 is ultra vires the Constitution for the same

        reason. The petitioner seeks directions to the Delimitation Commission as well as the

        Election Commission to effectuate the mandate of
Article 332
of the Constitution, in

        respect of Limboo Tamang Scheduled Tribe, by undertaking necessary changes to

        the 2006 Notification and the 2008 Order.
Constitutional Framework
3.
Article 342
of the Constitution empowers the President to specify the tribal

        communities of the country which will be designated as Scheduled Tribes.



1 “2006 Notification” and “2008 Order”
2 “RP Act”
4
Communities so designated by the President in the Scheduled Tribes Order or later

       added by amendment are treated as Scheduled Tribes for the purpose of the

       Constitution, according to
Article 366 (25).
4.
Article 330
of the Constitution provides for reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes

       and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People. Clause (2) of
Article 330
states

       that the number of seats reserved in a State or Union Territory for the Scheduled

       Castes or Scheduled Tribes under clause (1) “shall bear, as nearly as may be, the

       same proportion to the total number of seats allotted to that State or Union Territory

       in the House of People as the population of Scheduled Castes or Schedule Tribes in

       that State or Union Territory bears to the total population of the State or Union

       Territory”.
5. Similar provisions are contained in clause (3) of
Article 332 3
which mandates the

       reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative

       Assemblies of the States. Clause (3) stipulates that the number of seats so reserved

       for the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes shall be in proportion to the

       population of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes in the State to the total

       population of the State.
3   332. Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the
    States.—(1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, 8 [except the
    Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam], in the Legislative Assembly of every State.
…
    (3) The number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative
    Assembly of any State under clause (1) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total
    number of seats in the Assembly as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the
    Scheduled Tribes in the State or part of the State, as the case may be, in respect of which seats are so
    reserved, bears to the total population of the State.
5
6. Three facets of
Article 330
and
Article 332
need to be noticed at the forefront. First,
Articles 330(1)
and
332(1)
contain a mandate which is evident from the use of the

        expression “seats shall be reserved” for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes

        in the House of the People and in the Legislative Assembly of every State. Second,

        the number of seats required to be reserved is stipulated in clause (2) of
Article 330
and clause (3) of
Article 332.
The same principle is adopted by both these provisions,

        requiring that the number of seats so reserved shall “as nearly as may be” bear the

        same proportion to the total number of seats allotted to the State in the House of

        the People and in the Legislative Assembly, as the case may be, as the proportion of

        the population of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in respect of which

        seats are so reserved to the total population of the State. The implementation of the

        constitutional mandate for reserving seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled

        Tribes in the House of the People and in the State Legislative Assemblies is governed

        by a statutory regime which, it will be necessary to advert to in due course. Third,
Articles 330
and
332
, do not provide for reservations for any particular Scheduled

        Caste or Scheduled Tribe.
7.
Article 81 4
of the Constitution provides for the composition of the House of the



4   81. Composition of the House of the People.—(1) Subject to the provisions of
article 331
, the House of the
    People shall consist of—
(a)   not more than five hundred and thirty members chosen by direct election from territorial
          constituencies in the States, and
(b)   not more than twenty members to represent the Union territories, chosen in such manner as
          Parliament may by law provide.
(2) For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),—
6
People. Under
Article 81(2)(a)
, there shall be allotted to each State a number of

        seats in the House of the People in such a manner that the ratio between that

        number and the population of the State is, so far as practicable, the same for all

        States.
Article 82 5
provides for the readjustment of the seats after each census. It
(a)   there shall be allotted to each State a number of seats in the House of the People in such
           manner that the ratio between that number and the population of the State is, so far as practicable,
           the same for all States; and
(b)   each State shall be divided into territorial constituencies in such manner that the ratio between
           the population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it is, so far as practicable,
           the same throughout the State:
Provided that the provisions of sub-clause (a)of this clause shall not be applicable for the purpose of
       allotment of seats in the House of the People to any State so long as the population of that State does
       not exceed six millions.
(3) In this article, the expression ―population‖ means the population as ascertained at the last preceding
    census of which the relevant figures have been published:
Provided that the reference in this clause to the last preceding census of which the relevant figures
    have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2026 have been
    published, be construed,—
(i) for the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (2) and the proviso to that clause, as a reference to the
       1971 census; and
(ii) for the purposes of sub-clause (b)of clause (2) as a reference to the 2001 census.
5    82. Readjustment after each census.—Upon the completion of each census, the allocation of seats in the
    House of the People to the States and the division of each State into territorial constituencies shall be
    readjusted by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine:
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the House of the People until the
    dissolution of the then existing House:
Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from such date as the President may, by order,
    specify and until such readjustment takes effect, any election to the House may be held on the basis of the
    territorial constituencies existing before such readjustment:

    Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2026 have been
    published, it shall not be necessary to readjust—
(i) the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States as readjusted on the basis of the 1971
       census; and
(ii) the division of each State into territorial constituencies as may be readjusted on the basis of the
       2001]census,
7
provides that upon the completion of each census, the allocation of seats in the

   House of the People to the States and the division of each State into territorial

   constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and in such manner as

   Parliament may by law determine. For the purposes of
Article 81
, clause (3) provides

   that the expression “population” means the population as ascertained at the last

   preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published. However, until

   the relevant figures for the first census taken after 2026 have been published, this

   shall be construed, for the purpose of sub-clause (a) of clause (2), and its proviso, as

   a reference to the 1971 census. Regarding the division of each State into territorial

   constituencies, it has been provided that the reference would be to the 2001

   census. Analogous provisions are contained in the proviso to
Article 82.
Article 170
contains provisions for the composition of the Legislative Assemblies.
8.
Article 327
entrusts Parliament with the power to make provisions with respect to

   elections to either House of Parliament or to the Legislature of a State.
Article 329
provides for a bar to the interference by courts in electoral matters including the

   validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of

   seats to constituencies made under
Articles 327
or 328.
9. Entry 72 of the Union List to the Seventh Schedule deals with elections to Parliament

   and to the legislatures of States among other Subjects. The legislative domain

   consequently lies exclusively with Parliament in terms of
Articles 245
and
246
read

   with Entry 72 of List I.



 under this article.
8
10. For the State of Sikkim, in addition to the constitutional provisions already noted, a

      special provision is contained in
Article 371F(f)
in terms of which, notwithstanding

      anything in the Constitution:
“(f) Parliament may, for the purpose of protecting the
                  rights and interests of the different sections of the
                  population of Sikkim make provision for the number of
                  seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim
                  which may be filled by candidates belonging to such
                  sections and for the delimitation of the Assembly
                  constituencies from which candidates belonging to
                  such sections alone may stand for election to the
                  Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim;”
Representation of Peoples Act
, 1950
11.
Section 3
of the Representation of the People Act 1950 provides for the allocation of

      seats to the States in the House of the People and the number of seats which are

      reserved for the Scheduled Castes and for the Scheduled Tribes as indicated in the

      First Schedule.
Section 7(1)
, inter alia, provides that the total number of seats in the

      Legislative Assembly of each State specified in the Second Schedule by direct

      election from Assembly constituencies and the number of seats reserved for the

      Scheduled Castes and for the Scheduled Tribes of the State, shall be as indicated in

      that Schedule. As regards the State of Sikkim, specific provisions are contained in

      sub-section (1A) of
Section 7
which reads as follows:
“7. Total number of seats in Legislative Assemblies and
                   assembly constituencies. —


                                   …                …              ...
9
(1A)     Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
                section (1), the total number of seats in the Legislative
                Assembly of the State of Sikkim, to be constituted at
                any time after the commencement of the
Representation of the People (Amendment) Act,
                1980
(8 of 1980), to be filled by persons chosen by
                direct election from assembly constituencies shall
                be thirty-two, of which –
(a)     twelve seats shall be reserved for Sikkimese of
                        Bhutia-Lepcha origin;
(b)     two seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled
                        Castes of that State; and


                (c)     one seat shall be reserved for the Sanghas
                        referred to in
section 25A
.


                Explanation—In this sub-section “Bhutia” includes
                Chumbipa, Dopthapa, Dukpa, Kagatey, Sherpa,
                Tibetan, Tromopa and Yolmo.”
12. Sub-section (1A) indicates that the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly

   of Sikkim shall be thirty-two. Of these, twelve seats are reserved for Sikkimese of

   Bhutia-Lepcha origin; two seats for the Scheduled Castes; and one seat for the

   Sanghas as referred to in
Section 25A
. Likewise, a specific provision in relation to

   Sikkim is contained in
Section 7A
in the following terms:
“7A. Total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly
               of Sikkim and assembly constituencies.– (1)
               Notwithstanding anything contained in
section 7
, in the
               Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim [deemed
               under the
Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act,
               1975
to be the Legislative Assembly of that State duly
               constituted], the total number of seats to be filled by
               persons chosen by direct election from assembly
               constituencies shall be 32.
(2) Every Assembly constituency referred to in sub-
section (1) shall be a single-member constituency.
10
(3) In the Legislative Assembly so deemed to be duly
               constituted, the extent of each constituency and the
               reservation of seats shall be as provided for
               immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975
.”
13. The First Schedule to the RP Act provides for the allocation of seats in the House of

   the People. The allocation of seats is indicated in two segments of the First Schedule:
(i)    The number of seats in the House as constituted in 2004 on the basis of the

          Delimitation Order of 1976; and
(ii)   The number of seats in the House as subsequently constituted on the basis of

          the Delimitation Order 2008.
14. The total number of seats in the House of the People allocated to West Bengal is 42,

   of which 10 are reserved for the Scheduled Castes and 2 for the Scheduled Tribes.

   Sikkim has a lone seat in the House of the People which is unreserved. The Second

   Schedule of the RP Act prescribes the total number of seats in the Legislative

   Assemblies, again bifurcating the determination on the basis of the Delimitation

   Order of 1976 and the Delimitation Order of 2008. For the State of West Bengal, the

   Legislative Assembly consists of 294 seats of which 68 are reserved for the Scheduled

   Castes and 16 for the Scheduled Tribes under the Delimitation Order of 2008. For the

   State of Sikkim, the Legislative Assembly consists of 32 seats of which two are

   reserved for the Scheduled Castes and 13 for the Scheduled Tribes. In terms of the

   provisions of
Section 7(1)(a)
, the Second Schedule indicates that 13 seats reserved

   for the Scheduled Tribes will comprise one seat for Sanghas and 12 seats for the

   Sikkimese of Bhutia Lepcha origin.
11
Delimitation Act
, 2002
15. Parliament enacted the
Delimitation Act
2002 (Act 33 of 2002) which, came into

      force on 3 June 2002.
The Act
provides for the constitution of the Delimitation

      Commission. The Delimitation Commission is required to readjust the division of each

      state into territorial constituencies for the purpose of elections to the House of the

      People and to the State Legislative Assemblies.
16.
Section 8
provides for readjustment of the number of seats in the following terms:
“8. Readjustment of number of seals.—The
                  Commission shall, having regard to the
                  provisions of
articles 81
, 170
, 330
and
332
, …,
                  determine,—
(a) on the basis of the census figures as
                  ascertained at the census held in the year 1971
                  and subject to the provisions of
section 4
, the
                  number of seats in the House of the People to
                  be allocated to each State and determine on
                  the basis of the census figures as ascertained at
                  the census held in the year 2001 the number of
                  seats, if any, to be reserved for the Scheduled
                  Castes and for the Scheduled Tribes of the
                  State; and
(b) on the basis of the census figures as
                  ascertained at the census held in the year 1971
                  and subject to the provisions of
section 4
, the
                  total number of seats to be assigned to the
                  Legislative Assembly of each State and
                  determine on the basis of the census figures as
                  ascertained at the census held in the year 2001
                  the number of seats, if any, to be reserved for
                  the Scheduled Castes and for the Scheduled
                  Tribes of the State:
…”
12
17. In terms of
Section 8
, the Delimitation Commission is empowered to determine the

   seats to be allocated to each State in the House of the People and in the Legislative

   Assemblies of every State on the basis of the census figures of 1971. The Delimitation

   Commission is also empowered to determine the number of seats reserved for the

   Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes on the basis of the census of 2001.
Section 9
of the Delimitation Act provides for distribution of these seats allocated to

   each state in the House of the People.
Section 10
of the Act pertains to the

   publication of orders by the Delimitation Commission in accordance with the

   exercise of its powers under
Sections 8
and
9
.
Section 10(4)
specifically states that

   the orders so published under
Section 10
shall apply to every election to the House

   of the People and to the Assembly if such election is held after the publication of

   such orders. The orders apply in supersession of all other provisions pertaining to

   representation and delimitation contained in any other law, order or notification.
Section 10(4)
provides as follows:
“(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), the
                readjustment of representation of the several territorial
                constituencies in the House of the People or in the
                Legislative Assembly of a State and the delimitation of
                those constituencies provided for in any such order
                shall apply in relation to every election to the House or
                to the Assembly, as the case may be, held after the
                publication in the Gazette of India of that order and
                shall so apply in supersession of the provisions relating
                to such representation and delimitation contained in
                any other law for the time being in force or any order
                or notification issued under such law in so far as such
                representation and delimitation are inconsistent with
                the provisions of this Act :…”
                                                       (emphasis added)
13
18.
Section 11
empowers the Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders up-to-

   date. It provides as follows :
“11. Power to maintain delimitation orders up-to-
                 date.—(1) The Election Commission may, from time to
                 time, by notification in the Gazette of lndia and in the
                 Official Gazette of the State concerned,—
(a)    correct any printing mistake in any of the
                        orders made by the Commission under
Section 9
or any error arising therein from an
                        inadvertent slip or omission; and
(b)    where the boundaries or name of any district
                        or any territorial division mentioned in any of
                        the said orders are or is altered, make such
                        amendments as appear to it to be necessary
                        or expedient for bringing the orders up-to-
date, so, however, that the boundaries or
                        areas or extent of any constituency shall not
                        be changed by any such notification.
(2) Every notification under this section shall be laid,
                 as soon as may be after it is issued, before the House
                 of the People and the Legislative Assembly of the
                 State concerned.”
19. The position of the law relating to delimitation can be summarized as follows:
1. The Delimitation Commission is required to allocate seats to every State in the

      House of the People and the Legislative Assembly on the basis of the Census of

      1971. The Commission has to determine the seats reserved for Scheduled Castes

      and Scheduled Tribes based on the 2001 census. This exercise is required to be

      undertaken with due regard to the provisions of
Articles 81
, 170
, 330
and
332
of

      the Constitution of India; and
2. This provision is in line with the Explanation to
Article 330
of the Constitution. The

      Explanation stipulates that the reference to ‘population’ in
Article 330
and
Article

      332
is to be construed as the population ascertained at the last preceding
14
census of which the relevant figures have been published. However, the proviso

           states that the reference to the 'last preceding census’ in the Explanation to
Article 330
would be construed as a reference to the 2001 census until relevant

           figures for the first census taken after 2026 have been published.
Factual Context
20. The 2001 census figures indicate that the Scheduled Tribes constitute 5.50% and

       20.60% of the total population of the States of West Bengal and Sikkim respectively.

       The figures are stated below:
States          Total Population        Population of the   Scheduled Tribes as a
                                                    Scheduled Tribes      percentage of the
                                                                           total population
       West Bengal        8,01,76,197           44,06,794               5.50%
       Sikkim             5,40,851              1,11,405                20.60%
21. The Union Government constituted the Delimitation Commission under the
Delimitation Act
2002. The Commission was undertaking the exercise of delimiting

       Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies when Parliament enacted the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act
2002 6.
The Act
came into effect on 7 January 2003.
Section 4
of the amending Act read with the

       Second Schedule appended to it, amended, inter alia, the Constitution (Scheduled

       Tribes) Order 1950 and the Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1978. The

       effect of the
Amending Act
of 2002 was that Limboo and Tamang communities



6
Amending Act
of 2002.
15
stood included in the list of Scheduled Tribes for the States of West Bengal and Sikkim

        with effect from 7 January 2003.
22. Upon the completion of the delimitation exercise, on 26 November 2008, the

        Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order 2008 was issued by

        the Election Commission. The Delimitation Order stipulated the seats reserved for

        Scheduled Tribes in the state legislative assemblies as well as the seats reserved in

        the House of the People, out of the total seats allocated to states. For the States of

        West Bengal and Sikkim, this is indicated in the following tabulation :
State                      Seats reserved for                 Seats reserved for
                                             Scheduled Tribes in the             Scheduled Tribes in the
                                           House of the People, out of         State Legislative Assembly
                                           the total seats reserved for        out of the total seats in the
                                                     the State.                         Assembly.
       West Bengal                         2 out of 42                            16 out of 294
       Sikkim                              0 out of 1                             13 out of 32 7
23. Though a demand was made by certain castes and tribes designated as Scheduled

        Castes and Scheduled Tribes for reservation in the House of the People and State

        Legislative Assemblies by taking into account the additional population as a result of

        the
Amending Act
of 2002, the exercise was never actually carried out.
24. In carrying out the delimitation exercise under
Section 9
of the Delimitation Act,
Section 9(2)
provides that the Commission shall publish the delimitation proposals,

        specify the date after which the proposals shall be considered by it and consider

        the objections received before finally determining the delimitation of constituencies.



7 Out of the 13 seats, 12 were reserved for Sikkimese of Bhutia-Lepcha Origin and 1 for the Sanghas.
16
Accordingly, in 2005, the Delimitation proposal for Assembly constituencies for the

   State of Sikkim was published. The number of seats to be reserved for Scheduled

   Tribes was to be determined on the basis of the 2001 census and the proposal did

   not contain seats reserved for the Scheduled Tribes of Sikkim. It was stated that

   unlike clauses 3A and 3B of
Article 332
, which enables the Delimitation Commission

   to deviate from the “generalized procedure as contained in the
Delimitation Act,

   2002
read with
Delimitation (Amendment) Act
2003” for certain states, there is no

   provision which allows a similar deviation from the generic provisions of the
Delimitation Act
in order to accommodate the newly inducted Scheduled Tribes.

   Various representations were made to the Delimitation Commission on the ground

   that the 2001 census alone did not account for the then newly designated Limboo-

   Tamang Scheduled Tribes for reservations in the constituencies.
25. However, despite the objections, the 2006 Delimitation Notification was published

   without accounting for the Scheduled Tribes designated as such under the
Amending Act
of 2002. The 2006 Notification formed the basis of the 2008 Order

   issued by the Election Commission under RP Act 1950.
26. It is the case of the petitioners that the 2006 Delimitation Notification was, to the

   extent that it did not accommodate the newly inducted Limboo Tamang Tribes, not

   corrected by the Election Commission, in the exercise of its powers under
Section 11
of the Delimitation Act. Thus, according to the petitioners, the 2008 Order published

   by the Election Commission under the
Representation of People Act
1950, which

   was a consolidation of the Orders issued by the Delimitation Commission, was

   defective to the extent that it did not account for the
Amending Act
of 2002. Its
17
defects, the petitioners claim, were not duly cured by the Election Commission

        under
Section 9(1)(aa)
of the 1950 Act.
27. The petitioners rely on the directions of this Court in the decision in
Virendra Pratap

        and Another vs Union of India and Others
. A writ petition was instituted seeking

        directions against the Election Commission to take steps for proper representation

        by identifying constituencies for reservations of the Scheduled Tribes in the Uttar

        Pradesh Assembly Elections, in accordance with proportional representation in terms

        of
Article 330
of the Constitution. 8 While agreeing that the Scheduled Tribes had the

        right to proportional representation under
Articles 330
and
332
of the Constitution,

        this Court directed the Election Commission to consider the case of the Scheduled

        Tribes and take appropriate steps to ensure their representation in the House of the

        People and the Legislative Assembly “in the State”. The Court clarified that while the

        Election Commission was not being directed to complete the exercise before the

        upcoming assembly elections, it was at liberty to complete the exercise, without

        disturbing the election schedule:
“8. Accordingly, we dispose of the writ petition by
                       directing the Election Commission of India, to
                       consider the case of the Scheduled Tribes, as
                       indicated in the writ petition and to take appropriate
                       steps for their representation in the Lower Houses,
                       both in the Parliament, as well as in the State
                       Assemblies in accordance with the provisions of the
                       Constitution. The petitioners will be at liberty to supply
                       necessary details of the figures indicated to the
                       Election Commission of India and the Election
                       Commission may itself also obtain figures from the
                       Registrar General, as suggested by the learned



8 (2012) 11 SCC 764.
18
Attorney General and, thereafter, proceed to take
                 steps in accordance with the provisions of the
                 Constitution for due representation of the Scheduled
                 Tribes population.”
                                                   (emphasis added).
28. The 2008 Delimitation Order came up for the consideration of this Court in 2012 in its

   decision in the case of
Virendra Pratap
(supra) where the Election Commission as

   well as the then Attorney General had taken the position that they would carry out

   the relevant exercise by considering the figures de hors the 2001 census. The

   Commission was then directed to undertake the relevant steps to ensure

   proportional representation of the tribes, in accordance with the Constitution.
29. The Central Government appears to have taken the position (as the Election

   Commission informs the Court on affidavit) that the benefit of reservation should be

   extended to all those castes and tribes which were designated by the
Amending

   Act
of 2002 and thereafter until 31 May 2012. A succession of three Ordinances

   came to be promulgated by the President under
Article 123
of the Constitution. The

   first of them called the Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled Castes and

   Scheduled Tribes in Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Ordinance 2013 was

   promulgated on 30 January 2013, inter alia, empowering the Election Commission to

   readjust the representation of SCs/STs in Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies

   in all States and Union Territories on the basis of the revised population of 2001

   estimated by the Registrar General by taking into account the relevant Acts which

   were enacted by Parliament between 2002 and 31 May 2012. Though the

   Ordinance was sought to be replaced by an Act of Parliament, the Bill was referred
19
to the Parliamentary Standing Committee which, in its Report dated 5 May 2013,

          recommended the passage of the Bill. The Bill was, however, not converted into law.
30. A second Ordinance was issued on 5 June 2013. The Ordinance lapsed. A third

          Ordinance was promulgated on 27 September 2013.
31. In pursuance of the third Ordinance, the Registrar General of India completed the

          exercise of estimating the revised population figures of Scheduled Castes and

          Scheduled Tribes by taking into account changes that were made under
Article 342
of the Constitution by the inclusion of additional castes and tribes up to 31 May

          2012. The Election Commission made necessary adjustments only in respect of the

          State of Uttar Pradesh, while the provisions of the third Ordinance were in force.

          However, the Election Commission has stated in its counter that in terms of the

          revised Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes’ population figures which were

          ascertained by the Registrar General of India in 2013, an increase of one seat each

          for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes was found in respect of West

          Bengal while no increase was found for seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled

          Tribes in Sikkim. This, the Court is informed, was as a result of the provisions of Section

          7A of the RP Act.
32. The third Ordinance which was promulgated by the President in 2013 lapsed. No law

          has been enacted by Parliament either in terms of the provisions of the Ordinance

          or bearing on the subject matter of the dispute in the present case. However, in

          2018, the Union Ministry of Home Affairs 9 initiated an exercise to increase the seats in




9 “MHA”
20
the Legislative Assembly from 32 to 40 so as to provide for the reservation of seats for

   the Limboo and Tamang Tribes. On 30 July 2005, a communication was addressed

   by MHA to the Chief Secretary of the State of Sikkim, proposing that the State could

   choose one of three options for implementing it:
“(i) The reservation for Limboos and Tamang may be
                considered out of the 17 un-reserved Assembly seats
                at present on the basis of proportion of their
                population to the total population, without increasing
                the size of the State Legislature;
(ii) The strength of State Legislature may be increased
                to 40 and reservation for Limboos and Tamangs may
                be considered out of 25 seats (17 un-reserved at
                present + 8 additional seats) subject to the condition
                that in the event of any new communities being
                declared as ST in future they may also be
                accommodated within the over all size of 40 without
                having to request further increase in the number of
                seats;
(iii) The strength ·of the State Legislature may be
                increased to 60 to bring at par with other States and
                in conformity with
Article 171(1)
and reservation for
                Limboos and Tamangs may be considered in
                proportion to their population out of the 45 seats (17
                un-reserved seats + 28 additional seats) subject to the
                condition that in the event of any new communities
                being declared as ST in future they will also be
                accommodated within the over all strength of 60
                without having to ask for any further increase in the
                strength of the Assembly.”
33. The Chief Secretary of the State of Sikkim responded to the communication stating

   that the second option was acceptable in terms of which the seats in the Sikkim

   State Legislative Assembly would be increased from 32 to 40 so as to allow

   reservation for Limboo and Tamang Scheduled Tribes. On 4 April 2018, MHA again,

   initiated the exercise to increase the seats in the Legislative Assembly of Sikkim from

   32 to 40 and to provide reservation for Limboo and Tamang Tribes while seeking the
21
views of the Election Commission. The Election Commission responded on 4 April

   2018.     Thereafter, MHA addressed a communication to the Secretary of the

   Legislative Department in the Ministry of Law and Justice intimating that a “revised

   draft cabinet note and draft RPA (Amendment) Bill 2018 had been seen and

   approved by the Honourable Home Minister of India”. No further steps seem to

   have taken place thereafter after the exchange of these communications.
34. Counter affidavits have been filed in these proceedings by the Election Commission

   of India, the State of West Bengal and the State of Sikkim. The Election Commission

   has stated that presently, it has no power to make any changes in the delimitation

   orders passed by the Delimitation Commission in the States of West Bengal and

   Sikkim.   According to the Election Commission, readjustment of seats requires an

   enabling provision in the law empowering it to undertake such an exercise. No

   action has been taken in the matter by MHA or by the Union and hence according

   to the Election Commission, it is unable to proceed further. The Election Commission

   also states that readjustment of seats would involve necessary amendments to the

   RP Act, among other legislation.
35. The State of West Bengal, has stated that in terms of the census of 2011, 52,96,953

   persons belong to the Scheduled Tribes representing 5.8% of the total population

   and consequently, 6% of the seats in the Legislative Assembly are reserved for the

   Scheduled Tribes. Sixteen seats are stated to have been reserved in the Legislative

   Assembly and two seats in the Lok Sabha for the Scheduled Tribes. On 15 February

   2006, a notification was published by the Delimitation Commission allotting 42 seats
22
in the House of People and 294 in the Legislative Assembly to the State of West

      Bengal. The State of West Bengal has also stated that the delimitation notification

      was based on the census of 2001 and any exercise of delimitation would have to

      take place within the ambit and purview of
Delimitation Act
2002.
36. The State of Sikkim has stated that the Government of Sikkim has been repeatedly

      requesting the Government of India to take immediate steps to provide reservation

      to the Limboo and Tamang Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State. The

      correspondence between the State and Union Governments, as detailed in the

      preceding paragraphs, has however, not led to the implementation of the proposal

      to increase the seats in the legislative assembly of the State.


Submissions on behalf of the Petitioners
37. We have heard Mr Prashant Bhushan and Ms Pritika Kumar, counsel appearing on

      behalf of the petitioners.
38. The petitioners are aggrieved by the non-representation of the Limboo and Tamang

      Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People and the State Legislative Assemblies, in

      accordance with
Articles 330
and
332
of the Constitution. The provisions stipulate

      that the Scheduled Tribes will be given reservations in the House of the People as

      well as the Legislative Assemblies, and that this reservation shall, as nearly as may

      be, proportionate to their population to the total population of the state. They

      challenge the 2006 Notification and 2008 Order on the ground that the Delimitation

      Commission and the Election Commission have overlooked the
Amending Act
of
23
2002 which included, inter alia, these two tribes to the Scheduled Tribes’ List.

   Accordingly, it has been submitted that the two orders, are defective and an

   election notification based on these orders, would also be in violation of
Articles 330
and
332.
39. The primary submission urged on their behalf is that unlike
Article 15
of the

   Constitution, which contains enabling provisions for reservation,
Articles 330
and
332
contain a mandate for reservation.       Moreover, it has been submitted that the

   mandate is that proportional reservation has to be provided for the Scheduled

   Castes and Scheduled Tribes based on the ratio which their population bears to the

   total population of the State. Hence, it has been urged:
•   First, that there is a constitutional mandate and the entitlement of the Limboo

          and Tamang communities as Schedules Tribes which stems from the
Amending Act
of 2002, whereby they were designated as Scheduled Tribes.
Accordingly, it is the plain duty of the Union Government and the Election

          Commission to act in pursuance of their statutory and constitutional powers.
To the extent that the 2006 Notification and the 2008 Order and Section 7(1A)

          of the RP Act do not account for the Limboo and Tamang Scheduled Tribes,

          they violate this mandate;
•   Second, the Election Commission is empowered, under
Article 324
of the

          Constitution, to issue directions for the readjustment of seats to reserved

          constituencies;
•   Third, the provisions of
Section 11
of the Delimitation Act and
Section 9(1)(aa)
of the Representation of People Act 1950 sufficiently empower the Election
24
Commission to correct any omission. Such an omission, it has been urged,

             took place when the Delimitation Commission did not include any seats in

             the reservation list for Limboo and Tamang communities; and

         •   Fourth, the judgment of this Court in Virendra Pratap’s case (supra), which

             was rendered on 10 January 2012, was not confined only to the Respondents
in that case
, namely, the State of Uttar Pradesh. Just as in the manner that

             the Election Commission implemented the judgment for the State of Uttar

             Pradesh, it ought to have done the same thing for other communities

             designated as Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes since 2002.
Submissions on behalf of the Respondents
40. On the other hand, it has been urged by both Mr KM Natraj, Additional Solicitor

      General appearing on behalf of the Union of India and Mr Amit Sharma, counsel

      appearing on behalf of the Election Commission that:
•   First, the exercise of delimitation has to be carried out within the framework of

             the
Delimitation Act
2002.
•   Second, the legislative framework for reservation of seats requires an

             amendment to the RP Act in order to provide for such reservations. Such an

             amendment is exclusively the mandate of Parliament, and not the Election

             Commission. In the absence of an enabling legislation, the powers under
Article 324
alone, would not warrant such an exercise at the instance of the

             Election Commission. In fact, in order to create such an enabling provision,

             three Ordinances were promulgated in 2013, which eventually lapsed and
25
the power could not be granted to the Election Commission.
•   Third, the power under
Section 11
of the Delimitation Act 2002 cannot be

          extended to mean the power to carry out readjustment of seats or to provide

          for reservations for additional castes and tribes in the manner which the

          petitioners suggest.
41. Mr Rakesh Dwivedi and Mr Ashok Panda, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the

   State of West Bengal have broadly adopted the submissions of the Election

   Commission regarding the need for an enabling statutory amendment. Mr Rakesh

   Dwivedi has highlighted that the provisions of the Constitution do not earmark

   reservations for each SC/ST separately but provide for reservations for the SC/STs as

   a whole in relation to each state in the House of People and legislative assemblies.
42. Against this backdrop, the petitioners seek directions to give effect to the

   constitutional right of the Limboo-Tamang Scheduled Tribes. They seek directions to

   the Delimitation Commission to amend its 2006 Notification to that extent; and

   directions to the Election Commission, to incorporate the amendments to its 2008

   Order; and to make corrections to the Delimitation Commission’s 2006 Notification

   and the 2008 Order. As they stand, the 2006 Notification and 2008 Order, are based

   on the 2001 census and do not incorporate the subsequent additions/adjustments

   made to the Scheduled Tribes Orders whereby, inter alia, the Limboo Tamang Tribes

   were designated as Scheduled Tribes.
26
Delimitation Notification of 2006 and the Delimitation Order of 2008
43. Entry 72 of the Union List of the Seventh Schedule deals with elections to Parliament

      and the State Legislatures.
Article 327
of the Constitution empowers Parliament to

      make provisions by law with respect to all matters relating to or in connection with

      elections to either House of Parliament or to the legislatures of the States including:
(i)     Preparation of electoral rolls;


      (ii)    Delimitation of constituencies; and
(iii)   All matters necessary for securing the due constitution of the House.
44.
The Delimitation Act
2002 is an outcome of the exercise of the power to legislate on

      the subject of delimitation. The provisions of the Act which have been noted earlier,

      indicate that the statutory function of the Delimitation Commission includes

      specifying reserved seats in the Legislative Assemblies for the Scheduled Castes and

      Scheduled Tribes.
45. The Election Commission has a broad mandate in terms of
Article 324
in regard to

      the superintendence, direction and control of elections.
Article 324(1)
provides for

      the superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of the electoral rolls

      and stipulates that the conduct of all elections to Parliament and to the State

      Legislature shall be vested in the Election Commission. The Constitution has drawn a

      careful balance between the broader powers of the Election Commission over the

      superintendence, direction and control of electoral rolls and the conduct of
27
elections on the one hand, and the legislative power of Parliament under
Article 245
and
Article 246
on the other hand read with Entry 72 of the Union List in the Seventh

   Schedule. The power of Parliament in its legislative domain is coupled with its

   constitutional function under
Article 327.
The Election Commission has categorically

   stated before this Court that the powers which it exercises for the purposes of

   delimitation are governed by the statute which has been framed by Parliament

   under
Article 327
, namely, the
Delimitation Act
2002.
46. Following upon the judgment in
Virendra Pratap
(supra), three Ordinances were

   promulgated in order to create enabling provisions for the Election Commission to

   undertake an exercise of updating the Delimitation Orders in accordance with the

   additions/changes made to the Scheduled Tribes Order subsequent to the 2001

   census.
47. The statutory framework for the enactment of the 2006 Notification and the 2008

   Order is as follows:
1. Under
Section 4(2)
, the Delimitation Commission is required to readjust the

      division of each state in territorial constituencies for elections on the basis of the

      statutorily prescribed census;
2. Under
Section 8
, the Delimitation Commission has to determine, having regard to

      the provisions of
Articles 81
, 170
, 330
and
332
, the total number of seats to be

      assigned to the legislative assembly of each state and determine on the basis of

      the prescribed census figures, the number of seats to be reserved for SCs and STs

      of the States;
28
3. Under
Section 9
, the Delimitation Commission has to distribute the seats in the

   House of the People allocated to each state and seats assigned to the Legislative

   Assemblies of the States based on the 1971 census figures and delimit them in

   accordance with,
Articles 81
, 170
, 330
and
332
of the Constitution, as referred to

   in
Section 8
;
For this, the Delimitation Commission is required to publish its delimitation

   proposals in the Gazette of India and of the States, specifying the date for its

   further consideration. It is then required to consider objections and suggestions by

   way of public sittings in the States as it thinks fit and then finally determine the

   delimitation of parliamentary constituencies and assembly constituencies of each

   state.
4. This Order would then be published in the Gazettes and upon publication, in

   accordance with
Section 10(2)
of the Act, “have the force of law and shall not

   be called in question in any court”. The readjustment and delimitation provided

   for in such an order shall, in accordance with
Section 10(4)
of the Act, “apply in

   relation to every election to the House or to the Assembly, as the case may be,

   held after the publication in the Gazette of India of that order and shall so apply

   in supersession of the provisions relating to such representation and delimitation

   contained in any other law for the time being in force or any order or notification

   issued under such law in so far as such representation and delimitation are

   inconsistent with the provisions of this Act”; and
5. Section 4 (5) of the RP Act states that the extent of Parliamentary constituencies
29
shall be as provided by the Delimitation Orders under the Act of 2002. However,

            there is an exception in favour of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,

            Jharkhand, Manipur and Nagaland. So, except the states mentioned in
Sections

            10A
, and
10B
, the other states’ parliamentary constituencies and the extents

            thereof will be determined by Orders passed under the 2002 Act. The 2006

            Delimitation Notification impugned herein is one such Order in relation to the

            State of Sikkim.
48. The 2006 Delimitation Notification was made in pursuance of the powers under
Sections 10
,
9(2)
and
4(2)
of the Delimitation Act 2002. It delimited constituencies for

         Parliamentary and Assembly elections in the State of Sikkim. The total number of

         seats allocated in the House of the People to the State was one and the total

         number of the seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly was thirty two, out of which

         two were reserved for SCs, twelve for Sikkimese of Bhutia Lepcha Origin and one for

         Sanghas. The 2006 Notification additionally specified the Constituencies and their

         extent for the Legislative Assembly as well as for the Parliament.


Issues


   •     The Petitioners have suggested first, that the Delimitation Commission must amend

         the 2006 Notification to reserve seats for Limboo and Tamangs under
Article 332
and

         second, the Election Commission must use the power under
Section 9(1)(aa)
to

         amend the 2008 Order in accordance with the amendments made to the 2006

         Order by the Delimitation Commission;
30
•   Alternatively, the petitioners have suggested that the Election Commission use its

       powers under
Section 11
and Section 9 of the Delimitation Act and the RP Act

       respectively to correct both the 2006 Order and the 2008 Order by reserving seats

       for the Limboo Tamang STs in accordance with the formula stated in
Articles 330
and
332.
49. Accordingly, the issues that arise before us pertain to the scope of the powers of the

       two bodies – the Delimitation Commission and the Election Commission to make the

       above changes and the scope of this Court’s power to make the above directions.


Analysis:
Whether Delimitation Commission can amend the 2006 Notification under the Delimitation

Act
50.
Article 82
of the Constitution provides that “upon the completion of each census,

       the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States and the division of

       each State into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and in

       such manner as Parliament may by law determine”
51.
Article 327
provides that “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament

       may from time to time by law make provision with respect to all matters relating to,

       or in connection with, elections to either House of Parliament or to the House or

       either House of the Legislature of the State including the preparation of rolls, the

       delimitation of constituencies and all other matters necessary for securing the due

       constitution of such Houses”.
31
52. The Delimitation Commission is a statutory body under the
Delimitation Act
. The 2006

        Delimitation Notification is duly published in the Gazette of India and of the States in

        the manner prescribed under
Sections 4
,
8
and
10
of the Delimitation Act. In

        accordance with
Section 10(2)
, the Order has the force of law, and cannot be

        called into question before any court of law.
53.
In
Meghraj Kothari v. Delimitation Commission
, rejecting the argument that the
Delimitation Act
was passed under
Article 82
and not
Article 327
and that the Act

        was thus exempt from the bar under
Article 329
, this Court has held that the Act was

        made under
Article 327.
Thus, even though the notification issued under
Section 10
is

        not a statute, it has been held to have the effect of a law relating to the delimitation

        of constituencies or allotment of seats under not only
Section 10
, but also under
Article 327
of the Constitution. 10
54. The delimitation of constituencies can only be objected to, and the objections

        entertained by the Commission when they are made before the Commission prior to

        the date specified by the Commission. Once the Orders made under
Sections 8
and
9
are published under
Section 10
, they cannot be objected to. This Court has

        observed:
“20. In our view, therefore, the objection to the
                      delimitation of constituencies could only be
                      entertained by the Commission before the date
                      specified. Once the orders made by the Commission
                      under
Sections 8
and
9
were published in the Gazette
                      of India and in the Official Gazettes of the States
                      concerned, these matters could no longer be
10
Meghraj Kothari vs Delimitation Commission and Ors
, 1966 SCC OnLine SC 12 paras 10, 11.
32
reagitated in a court of law. There seems to be very
               good reason behind such a provision. If the orders
               made under
Sections 8
and
9
were not to be treated
               as final, the effect would be that any voter, if he so
               wished, could hold up an election indefinitely by
               questioning the delimitation of the constituencies from
               court to court.
Section 10(2)
of the Act clearly
               demonstrates the intention of the Legislature that the
               orders under
Sections 8
and
9
published under
Section
               10(1)
were to be treated as law which was not to be
               questioned in any court.
21. It is true that an order under
Section 8
or 9 published
               under
Section 10(1)
is not part of an Act of Parliament,
               but its effect is to be the same.
…
33. In the instant case the provision of
Section 10(4)
of
               the Act puts orders under
Sections 8
and
9
as published
               under
Section 10(1)
in the same street as a law made
               by Parliament itself which, as we have already said,
               could only be done under
Article 327
, and
               consequently the objection that the notification was
               not to be treated as law cannot be given effect to.”
55. The 2006 Notification, having the force of law under
Article 327
, is protected also by

   virtue of
Article 329
of the Constitution, which reads as follows:
“Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution (a) the
               validity of any law relating to the delimitation of
               constituencies or the allotment of seats to such
               constituencies, made or purporting to be made under
Article 327
or
Article 328
, shall not be called in question
               in any court;”
56. Thus, in view of
Article 329
of the Constitution, the Delimitation Notification of 2006

   cannot be called into question. Any changes to the 2006 Notification, could only

   have been made in accordance with the
Delimitation Act
.
The Act
envisages
33
changes/suggestions only until the publication of the final notification, consequent

        to which, the notification assumes the force of law in supersession of any other law

        for the time being in force. In view of
Article 329
, it is beyond the realm of judicial

        review.
57.
The Delimitation Act
only provides for changes prior to the final notification. Once

        published, the Notification cannot be amended even by the Delimitation

        Commission under the 2002 Act.
The question is thus answered in the negative.
Whether the Election Commission can Amend the 2008 Order to incorporate those changes


        The Scope of powers of the Election Commission under
Article 324
of the Constitution

        of India
58.
Article 324
vests wide-ranging powers in the Election Commission. The expressions

        “Superintendence, direction and control” as well as “elections” have been

        interpreted widely to mean the entire process of elections which comprises several

        stages. 11 The power under this Article, though plenary, is not untrammeled, but is

        conditioned by the provisions of the statutes governing the field. 12




11 Shambhu Prasad Sharma vs Charandar Mahant, 2023 11 SCC 390.
12
SS Dhanoa vs Union of India
, AIR 1991 SC 1745
34
59.
In
Mohinder Singh Gill v. The Chief Election Commissioner
, 13 a Constitution Bench of

         this Court in the context of the Election Commission’s power to order a re-poll and

         cancel a poll, clarified that that while the Commission has plenary powers under
Article 324
, this power is subject to competent legislation enacted by Parliament

         under
Article 327
of the Constitution. The Election Commission cannot, the court

         held, act in a manner that is contrary to the letter of the law and it is subject to

         scrutiny for its actions, notwithstanding the scope of its powers under
Article 324.
This

         Court held as follows:
“Two limitations at least are laid on its plenary
                      character in the exercise thereof. Firstly, when
                      Parliament or any State Legislature has made valid law
                      relating to or in connection with elections, the
                      Commission, shall act in conformity with, not in violation
                      of, such provisions but where such law is silent
Article
                      324
is a reservoir of power to act for the avowed
                      purpose of, not divorced from, pushing forward a free
                      and fair election with expedition 14”
60. The power of the Election Commission under
Article 324
is meant to supplement and

         not supplant the law made by the Parliament and must be read in harmony with the

         provisions of the statutes governing the field - which include the
Delimitation Act
of

         2002 and the RP Act 1950.
Scope of Powers of the Election Commission under RP Act.
61. Under Section 8 of the RP Act, the Election Commission is to consolidate Orders

         made by the Delimitation Commission under
Section 10
and under
Sections 10-A
13 AIR 1978 SC 851.
14 ibid para 92.
35
and 10-B of the Delimitation Act. The consolidation has been carried out by the

   Election Commission and the 2008 Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly

   Constituencies Order is an outcome of this consolidation.
62. Section 8(1), RP Act uses the words “having regard to all the orders referred to in

   sub-section (5) of
Section 4
and sub-section (3) of
Section 7
relating to delimitation

   of parliamentary and assembly constituencies in all States and Union Territories”.

   These provisions in turn, refer to the extent of the constituencies as determined by

   the Delimitation Commission under the
Delimitation Act
2002. Once the extent is

   determined, the Election Commission’s role under
Section 8
, is (i) to update the

   “description” of the extent of the constituencies, without altering the extent and (ii)

   to consolidate the orders into one order, under clauses (a) and (b) respectively.

   Neither of these clauses pertains to incorporating provisions relating to the

   reservations for newly designated Scheduled Tribes.
63. There is a duty to consolidate the Orders, as signified by the use of “shall” in
Section

   8
, but that duty specifically pertains to consolidation of Orders made by the

   Delimitation Commission. Once consolidated in this manner, which is what the

   Order of 2008 does, Section 9, RP Act comes into operation.
64. The marginal note to
Section 9
is titled “Power of Election Commission to maintain

   Delimitation Order up-to-date”. Unlike
Section 8
,
Section 9
uses phrase “may”.

   Further,
Section 9(1)(aa)
, which the petitioners have relied on, encompasses the

   power to :
36
“(aa) make such amendments in the Delimitation of
                        Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order,
                        2008 as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
                        consolidating with that Order any notification or order
                        relating to delimitation of Parliamentary or assembly
                        constituencies (including reservation of seats for the
                        Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in such
                        constituencies) issued under Section 8-A of this Act or
                        any other Central Act”.
65. The provision uses the phrase “as appears to it to be necessary or expedient”. The

        exercise of discretion arises when the authority in question is satisfied of the necessity

        or expediency of its exercise. Justice GP Singh in his book Interpretation of Statutes

        writes:
“Ordinarily, the words “May” and “it shall be lawful” are
                        not words of compulsion. They are enabling words and
                        they only confer capacity, power or authority and
                        imply discretion. “They are both used in a statute to
                        indicate that something may be done which prior to it
                        could not be done” 15
66. This Court has held that it is possible that a statute confers powers on authorities,

        which are to be exercised at their discretion, and is couched in permissive terms

        such as “it may be lawful” or “it may be permissible”. However, in certain cases, the

        power, even though discretionary, is coupled with a duty to act.
67. The present provision implies that if the Election Commission considers it necessary

        and expedient, it may consolidate with the 2008 Order “any notification or order

        relating to delimitation” of constituencies. The Election Commission has the



15 Justice GP Singh, Interpretation of Statutes, 15th Edition pg 365 para 5.6.11.
37
discretion to consolidate with the 2008 Order any notification or order that relates to

        delimitation, and not all orders and notifications whatsoever. It is so to speak, not a

        general exercise of updating the 2008 Order with any notification or order that

        follows the 2008 Order. The consolidation has to be done only with first, such a

        notification or order that relates to delimitation of constituencies and second, issued

        under Section 8A of this Act or under any other Central Act.
68.
Amending Act
of 2002 which designates Limboo and Tamang Scheduled Tribes is

        enacted under
Articles 341 (2) 16
and
342 (2) 17
of the Constitution. It does not relate

        to delimitation, but to designation of certain Castes and Tribes as Scheduled Castes

        and Tribes for the purpose of the
Article 366
of the Constitution.
69. Even if the discretion, as apparently vested in the Election Commission to act is

        taken to be coupled with a duty to act, the duty arises only when the conditions for

        its exercise are fulfilled 18. For the Election Commission to act, there must be an order

        that relates to delimitation and such an order must have been issued under Section

        8-A of this Act or under a Central Act. Neither of these conditions is present as far as

        the
Amending Act
of 2002 is concerned, to warrant the exercise of power under

        Section 9(1)(aa) of the RP Act.
70. Thus, the RP Act does not envisage a duty vested in the Election Commission to

        amend the 2008 Order to include the 2002
Amending Act
.
16 (2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Castes specified in a notification

issued under clause of any caste, race or tribe or part of or group within_ any caste, race or tribe, but save as
aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.
17 (2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification

issued under clause ( 1 ) any tribe or tribal community or part of or group within any tribe or tribal community...”
18
Official Liquidator vs Dharti Dhan
, AIR 1977 SC 740.
38
Section 9, RP Act and
Section 11
, Delimitation Act
71. The petitioners have adverted to these provisions, as an alternative route to

   incorporate the mandate of
Articles 332
into the 2006 Notification and 2008 Order.

   They seek a mandamus against the Election Commission generally in accordance

   with
Article 332
for the Sikkim State Legislative Assembly, on the strength of Section

   9of the RP Act and
Section 11of
the Delimitation Act.
72.
Section 11
deals with the power of the Election Commission to maintain delimitation

   orders up to date while
Section 9
deals with the same power specifically in respect

   of the Delimitation Order 2008. The salient aspects of these provisions are:
•   Both the Sections use the word “may” in delineating the power of the Election

         Commission;
•   Clause (a) of sub-section (1) of each of the provisions pertains to correction of

         printing mistakes in the orders generally and in the 2008 Order respectively, or

         any “error arising therein from inadvertent slip or omission”; and


     •   Clause (b) of sub-section (1) deals with necessary amendments on account of

         alteration in the boundaries or names.
73. We have already addressed
Section 9(1)(aa)
. The only other relevant clause for our

   purpose is clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
Section 11of
the Delimitation Act and

   Section 9 of the RP Act. Clause (a) deals with – first, correction of printing mistakes in

   orders or the 2008 order respectively and second, correction of “any error arising
39
therein from an inadvertent slip or omission”.
74. The invocation of this clause can take place only if we were to find the non-inclusion

   of the Limboo Tamang Scheduled Tribes in the 2006 Notification and 2008 Order as

   an “error” arising out of an inadvertent slip or omission. However, the non-inclusion of

   these Scheduled Tribes in the two Orders is attributable to the fact that the

   Constitution itself mandates the delimitation exercise to be carried out in

   accordance with the figures of the 2001 census alone and that the subsequent

   changes to the ST Order have not been accordingly assimilated with the 2001

   figures. Consequently, the delimitation exercise undertaken in 2006 could not

   account for the
Amending Act
of 2002. This was the specific issue that the Court

   addressed in
Virendra Pratap
(supra) by stating that the Election Commission may

   obtain the relevant figures that were de hors the 2001 census.
75. Thus, the non-inclusion of the Limboo Tamang STs is not attributable to a mere error

   arising out of an inadvertent slip or omission- which are the only grounds under

   which the Orders can be altered by the Delimitation Commission or the Election

   Commission.
76. The Explanation to
Article 170
of the Constitution, which deals with the composition

   of legislative assemblies prescribes that the “population” means population as

   determined at the last preceding census of which figures have been published. The

   proviso appended to it further states that the last preceding census would mean the

   2001 census, until the first post-2026 census is carried out.
Section 8
of the

   Delimitation Act, states that the power to readjust the number of seats will be
40
exercised having due regard inter alia to
Article 170.
Further clauses (a) and (b)

        state that the Commission shall determine the number of seats to be reserved in the

        House of People as well as the Legislative Assemblies, in accordance with the

        census figures of the 2001 census.
77. The Delimitation Commission, under
Section 8
, is supposed to act according to the

        2001 census in determining the number of seats to be reserved. Their non-inclusion

        cannot be termed as an “error arising out of an inadvertent slip” within the meaning

        of Section 9(1)(a) of the RP Act.
78. The non-inclusion cannot also be termed as an “omission” either. The principle of

        statutory interpretation, noscitur a sociis, states that the meaning of a word is judged

        by the company it keeps 19. The general term “omission” in the above clauses

        derives its flavour from the more specific preceding phrase “inadvertent slip” and

        also, “printing mistakes” as specified in the same clause. The term “omission” does

        not cover the situation of the Scheduled Tribes designated as such after the 2001

        census, and thereby excluded from consideration in a subsequent delimitation

        exercise.
79. Therefore, this non-inclusion arises due to a lack of an enabling statutory provision

        which would accommodate post-census changes to the delimitation exercise. The

        omission envisaged by Section 9 of the RP Act and
Section 11of
the Delimitation Act

        refers to      errors or omissions of a ministerial nature. The entirety of the ambit of

        clause (a) is to allow the Election Commission to correct printing mistakes and



19
GP Singh
(supra) pg 391 para 5.8.2.
41
inadvertent slips or omissions that result in error. This, evidently, would not extend to

        making substantial modifications in the delimitation which has been made by the

        Delimitation Commission in the exercise of its statutory power.


    Proportional Representation
80. As regards the State of Sikkim, Section 7(1A) of the RP Act was inserted by Act 8 of

        1980 with effect from 1 September 1979.
Section 7(1A)
provides that out of a total of

        thirty two seats in the Legislative Assembly, twelve seats are reserved for persons of a

        Sikkimese Bhutia-Lepcha origin and one seat for the Sanghas referred to in Section

        25A (apart from two seats for the Scheduled Castes).
81. The provisions of sub-section (1A) of
Section 7
need to be contrasted with those of

        sub-sections (1B) 20 and (1C) which provide for reservation for the “Scheduled Tribes”

        in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura.

        The purpose of emphasizing this distinction is that the reservation which is

        contemplated by clause (a) of sub-section (1A) of
Section 7
is in the character of

        the Bhutia-Lepcha as a section. This is distinct from reservations for tribes.
82.
Article 371F
of the Constitution contains special provisions for the State of Sikkim and

        begins with a non-obstante clause.                 Clause (f) empowers Parliament to make

        provision for the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly which may be filled by


20 (1-B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in the Legislative Assemblies of the States of

Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland, to be constituted at any time after the
commencement of the
Representation of the People (Third Amendment) Act, 1987
(40 of 1987),— (a) [fifty-nine
seats] shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pradesh;
[(1-C) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), twenty seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled
Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tripura to be constituted at any time after the commencement
of the
Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1992
42
candidates “belonging to such sections” and for the delimitation of constituencies.

   Parliament is entrusted with this enabling power “for the purpose of protecting the

   rights and interest of different sections of the population of Sikkim”.
83.
Article 371F
creates special provisions for setting apart seats in the Legislative

   Assembly for such sections as Parliament may seek to legislate upon.           It was in

   exercise of the power under
Article 371F(f)
that Parliament enacted the provision

   enabling the reservation of twelve seats for Sikkimese of Bhutia-Lepcha origin under

   Section 7(1A) of the RP Act.
84. The validity of
Section 7(1A)
was challenged before this Court in RC Poudyal (supra).

   Justice MN Venkatachaliah (as the learned Chief Justice then was) delivered the

   judgment of the majority, in the Constitution Bench and observed that the principle

   of proportionality specified in
Article 332(3)
is a broad and general principle which is

   not intended to be arithmetically precise.
Article 332(3)(a)
was, hence, together

   with
Article 333
, regarded as illustrative of the broad principle of proportionality. The

   learned Judge observed:
“126. An examination of the constitutional scheme
               would indicate that the concept of ‘one person one
               vote’ is in its very nature considerably tolerant of
               imbalances and departures from a very strict
               application and enforcement. The provision in the
               Constitution indicating proportionality of representation
               is necessarily a broad, general and logical principle but
               not intended to be expressed with arithmetical
               precision.
Articles 332(3-A)
and
333
are illustrative
               instances.      The    principle   of      mathematical
               proportionality of representation is not a declared
               basic requirement in each and every part of the
               territory of India. Accommodations and adjustments,
               having regard to the political maturity, awareness and
43
degree of political development in different parts of
               India, might supply the justification for even non-
               elected Assemblies wholly or in part, in certain parts of
               the country. The differing degrees of political
               development and maturity of various parts of the
               country, may not justify standards based on
               mathematical accuracy.
Articles 371-A
a special
               provision in respect of State of Nagaland, 239-A and
               240 illustrate the permissible areas and degrees of
               departure. The systemic deficiencies in the plenitude of
               the doctrine of full and effective representation has not
               been understood in the constitutional philosophy as
               derogating from the democratic principle. Indeed, the
               argument in the case, in the perspective, is really one
               of violation of the equality principle rather than of the
               democratic principle. The inequalities in representation
               in the present case are an inheritance and compulsion
               from the past. Historical considerations have justified a
               differential treatment.”
85. The Court held that the special provision under Section 371F(f) is based on historical

   considerations and compulsions peculiar to the State of Sikkim and based on the

   conditions that led to the admission of the State into the Union of India. The Court

   noted:
“128. From 1975 and onwards, when the impugned
               provisions came to be enacted, Sikkim has been
               emerging from a political society and monarchical
               system into the mainstream of a democratic way of life
               and an industrial civilisation. The process and pace of
               this political transformation is necessarily reliant on its
               institutions of the past. Mere existence of a Constitution,
               by itself, does not ensure constitutionalism or a
               constitutional culture. It is the political maturity and
               traditions of a people that import meaning to a
               Constitution which otherwise merely embodies political
               hopes and ideals. The provisions of clause (f) of
Article
               371-F
and the consequent changes in the electoral
               laws were intended to recognise and accommodate
               the pace of the growth of the political institutions of
               Sikkim and to make the transition gradual and
               peaceful and to prevent dominance of one section of
               the population over another on the basis of ethnic
44
loyalties and identities. These adjustments and
               accommodations reflect political expediencies for the
               maintenance of social equilibrium. The political and
               social maturity and economic development might in
               course of time enable the people of Sikkim to
               transcend and submerge the ethnic apprehensions
               and imbalances and might in future — one hopes
               sooner — usher in a more egalitarian dispensation.
               Indeed, the impugned provisions, in their very nature,
               contemplate and provide for a transitional phase in
               the political evolution of Sikkim and are thereby
               essentially transitional in character.”
86. The Court upheld the provision on the ground that Parliament had considered it

   necessary “in the admission of a strategic border State into the Union”.
87. It was specifically argued in RC Poudyal that (i)
Article 371F(f)
would require parity

   between all sections of the State’s population and not only Bhutias and Lepchas

   and (ii) since the Bhutias and Lepchas, in addition to being sections covered under
Article 371F(f)
, are also Scheduled Tribes and are governed by the formula

   stipulated under
Article 332(3).
Hence, it was urged that they had to be treated at

   par with the other Scheduled Tribes in the state and given only proportionate

   representation in accordance with the formula prescribed under
Article 332(3).
To

   the extent that
Section 7(1A)
gave them greater representation than their

   proportion in the total population of the state, it was argued, that it violated
Article

   14
and
Articles 332
of the Constitution.
88. Rejecting the submission, the Court observed:
•   First,
Article 371F(f)
is a “merely enabling” provision.       Consequently, as the

         Court noted, “if reservation is made by Parliament for only one section, it must,
45
by implication, be construed to have exercised the power respecting the other

           sections in a negational sense”. Hence, in the view of the Court, the provision

           “enables the reservation confined only to a particular section”. The Court held

           thereby that Parliament could not be directed to treat all sections of the state

           with parity; and

      •    Second, on whether
Section 7(1A)
violated the mandate of
Article 332 (3)
it

           was held that, the operational effect of the non-obstante clause of
Article

           371F(f)
was that it allowed a departure from
Articles 330
and
332.
This

           departure, it was held, was permissible in view of the special considerations

           operating in the state of Sikkim.
89. Thus, the following position emerges in view of the judgment in RC Poudyal (supra)
(i)
Article 371F
which make special provisions with respect to the State of Sikkim

            is   a measure which was adopted bearing in mind the historical

            circumstances pertaining to the admission of the State as an integral part of

            the Union of India;
(ii)     The antecedent historical circumstances leading to
Article 371F
could

            legitimately be borne in mind by Parliament in designing a special measure

            for a certain section of the population of Sikkim and while doing so,

            Parliament was not bound to treat all the sections of the population alike;
(iii)
Article 371F
makes a departure from the principle embodied in
Article 332(3)
which is evident from the non-obstante clause in the former; and
46
(iv)   The principle of proportionality itself is a broad and general guiding principle

          that is adopted in
Articles 330
and
Article 332
but as a concept, it is not

          capable of application with arithmetic precision or exactitude.
90. The petitioners argue that RC Poudyal (supra) upheld
Article 371F
and thereby

   permitted a departure from the principle of proportionality under
Article 332(3)
but

   not a departure from the principle of reservations per se, under that provision. They

   argue that the principle of reservations under
Article 332(3)
continues to apply and

   to the extent it is not applied to Limboo Tamang Scheduled Tribes under
Section

   7(1A)
, the Section is ultra vires
Article 332.
91. The judgment in RC Poudyal (supra) contains the following observations:
“133. Sri Jain contended that Bhutias and Lepchas had
                been declared as Scheduled Tribes under the
                Constitution [Sikkim Scheduled Tribes] Order, 1978 and
                that the extent of the reservation in their favour would
                necessarily be governed by the provisions of
Article
                332(3)
of the Constitution which requires that the
                number of seats to be reserved shall bear, as nearly as
                may be, the same proportion to the total number of
                seats in the Assembly as the population of the
                Schedule Tribes in the State bears to the total
                population of the State. But, in our opinion, clause (f)
                of
Article 371F
is intended to enable, a departure
                from
Art. 332(3).
This is the clear operational effect of
                the non obstante clause with which
Article 371F
opens
                …
181. This provision empowers Parliament to make
                provision prescribing the number of seats in the
                Legislative Assembly in the State of Sikkim which may
                be filled in by candidates belonging to the different
                sections of the population of Sikkim with a view to
                protect the rights and interests of those sections. The
                non-obstante      clause    in
Article    371-F
enables
47
Parliament to make a departure from the ratio
               contemplated by
Article 332 (3)
within the limitation
               which is inherent in the power conferred by
Article 371-
F, i.e., not to alter any of the basic features of the
               Constitution. It is, therefore, necessary to examine
               whether in providing for reservation of twelve seats out
               of thirty-two seats for Bhutias and Lepchas Parliament
               has acted in disregard of the said limitation.”
92. The above paragraphs form parts of the separately authored opinions of Justice

   Venkatachaliah and Justice Agarwal respectively. While para 133 states that
Article

   371F
permits a departure from
Article 332 (2)
, as a whole, para 181 implies that the

   departure is permissible only from the ratio contemplated in
Article 332(3)
, as

   opposed to the Article as a whole.
93. We believe that since
Article 371F
uses the non-obstante clause in respect of

   “anything in the Constitution”, it would be anomalous to say that the non-obstante

   clause in
Article 371F
only applies to a part of
Article 332(3)
which deals with

   proportionality and not to the whole provision, including the very principle of

   reservations. However, we are not inclined to finally decide on the specific

   contention of the petitioners, which requires a detailed analysis of the interface

   between
Article 371F
on the one side and
Articles 332
on the other.
94. In any case, the ruling in RC Poudyal is unambiguous on the aspect that

   proportionality is not capable of being applied with mathematical precision. The

   principle of proportionality is to be borne in mind by the Delimitation Commission

   and the Election Commission while acting in discharge of their powers under the

   two legislations.
48
95. For instance, if the percentage of ST population is 3% of the total state population

        and the state has 70 Assembly Seats, 3% of 70 seats would be 2.1 or 2 seats (rounded

        off to the closest whole number). Now if three seats are allocated for the STs instead

        of two, this would be considered violative of the mandate of
Article 332(3)
since the

        reservation allowed to the STs is greater than their percentage of total population in

        the state. These were the facts of
Anand Singh Kunwar v. Election Commission of

        India
where though the Election Commission later rectified this error, a two-judge

        bench of this Court held that reserving 3 seats instead of 2 in the Uttarakhand

        Legislative Assembly would have been contrary to the paramount consideration of

        proportionality under
Article 332(3).
21 Notably, provisions analogous to
Article 371F
that permit a departure from
Article 332(3)
do not exist for the State of Uttarakhand.
96.
Section 8
of the Delimitation Commission Act, as we have observed above,

        mandates that the exercise of the Delimitation Commission’s powers in determining

        reserved seats be in accordance with the 2001 census. In this the Commission must

        have due regard to the provisions of
Articles 81
, 170
, 330
and
332
of the Constitution.
97.
The Delimitation Act
or the RP Act do not require consideration of subsequent

        changes to the composition of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes Orders in

        determining the reserved seats for Scheduled Tribes. This is precisely why the

        Ordinances promulgated after this Court’s directions in
Virendra Pratap
(supra)

        created certain provisions expressly enabling readjustment of seats by factoring in




21 (2007) 7 SCC 234.
49
inclusions/exclusions to the Scheduled Tribe lists. 22 Such an enabling direction was

       made in the specific factual context of that case in
Virendra Pratap
(supra), as we

       have noted above.
98. However, legislative efforts in the form of the Ordinances and Bills, did not eventually

       result in the creation of a legislative framework creating a power to enable the

       Delimitation Commission and/or the Election Commission to incorporate changes

       dehors the 2001 census to the Delimitation Orders.
The Delimitation Act and the

       Representation of the People Act
, as they exist presently, do not create such a

       legislative framework. Absent a statutory duty, this Court is unable to issue a writ of

       mandamus against the respondents.
99. This court has held in respect of the relief of mandamus, that:
“11. The writ of Mandamus is only granted to compel
                      performance of a public duty or to enforce private
                      rights when duties of a public nature, affect public
                      rights or when private rights are breached by or in
                      collusion with public officers.
12. The legal duty that may be enjoined by Mandamus
                      can be one imposed by the Constitution, a statute,
                      any law or by rules or orders having the force of law,
                      which are capable of being judicially enforced.
13. The writ of Mandamus is liable to be refused when
                      there is no legal or constitutional obligation of the



22 Preamble to the Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Parliamentary

and Assembly Constituencies (Second) Ordinance 2013 –

       “AN ORDINANCE to provide for the readjustment of seats in the House of the People and in the
       Legislative Assemblies of the States and for the readjustment of territorial . constituencies therefore,
       insofar as such readjustment is necessitated by inclusion in or exclusion from the lists of the Scheduled
       Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.”
50
authority concerned, which is capable of being
                       enforced by Mandamus. 23
100.        For the Court to direct that in addition to the reservation which has been

        made in
Section 7(1A)
, Parliament must necessarily legislate in a particular manner

        to provide proportional representation to all the other communities forming a part of

        the Scheduled Tribes, would be to trench into the legislative domain. The Court

        unquestionably has the power to determine in the exercise of judicial review as to

        whether a provision made by Parliament is contrary to constitutional principle. But

        equally, this Court would be going beyond the line that separates the legislative

        from judicial domains by directing that reservation for the Scheduled Tribes over and

        above what has been prescribed in
Section 7(1A)
should be made by Parliament in

        a particular manner. This Court has held-
“Having       due     regard   to      the     provisions
                       of
Articles 245
and
246
of    the Constitution,        no
                       such mandamus can be issued by this Court. Nor can a
direction be issued by this Court to the legislature of a
                       State to enact a law.” 24
101.        No mandamus can be issued to Parliament as a legislating body to enact a

        legislation or to legislate in a particular manner. These are matters which have to be

        factored in by Parliament, at its discretion. The judgment of the Constitution Bench in

        RC Poudyal clearly lays down the road map for the manner in which the Court must



23
Vivek Krishna vs Union of India
, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1040.
24
John Paily vs State of Kerala
2021 SCC OnLine SC 3405.
51
approach such a vexed issue.
102.      Mr K M Nataraj, Additional Solicitor General has sought to rely on the

   provisions of
Article 170
to contend that the Article would stand in the way of any

   fresh exercise of delimitation being carried out.
103.      The provisions of
Article 170
indicate that until the census takes place after

   2026, the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly would be governed by

   the readjustment made on the basis of the 1971 census and the division of territorial

   constituencies would be governed by the readjustment on the basis of the 2001

   census. This has no bearing on the exercise which is required to be conducted on

   the issue which is raised in the present proceedings which essentially relates to the

   implementation of the principle of representation for the Scheduled Tribes on the

   basis of the population as indicated in the 2001 census.
104.      The Additional Solicitor General sought to argue that the 2001 census may

   not give accurate figures since many of the communities that were subsequently

   designated as Scheduled Tribes were part of the general communities prior to the

   census. This is a matter for the Delimitation Commission to determine. How the figures

   of population for a particular Scheduled Tribes should be ascertained within the

   purview of the 2001 census is a matter for determination which the statutory body

   would be empowered to carry out at the appropriate stage.
52
Conclusion
105.      The delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order 2008

      forms the basis of the First and Second Schedules to the RP Act. The Delimitation

      Commission completed its exercise almost fifteen years ago. Mr K M Nataraj,

      Additional Solicitor General submitted that nearly fifty-one communities were added

      after 2001 to the list of Scheduled Tribes until the last census took place in 2011. This is

      a matter which must engage the attention of the Union Government. The manner in

      which this exercise would have to be determined within the purview of the
Delimitation Act
2002. But as we have already noted earlier, the exercise would

      require legislative amendments, particularly having regard to the provisions of the

      First and Second Schedules to the RP Act. Directing a legislative amendment is

      beyond the domain of judicial review.
106.      In regard to the State of West Bengal, it has been submitted, by the counsel

      appearing on behalf of the Election Commission that broadly an additional seat

      would have to be made available in the State of West Bengal for the Scheduled

      Tribes in order to accommodate the principle of proportional representation. The

      above submission makes it abundantly clear that it is for the Union Government to

      take recourse to the powers under the
Delimitation Act
2002 for the purpose of

      ensuring that the provisions of
Articles 330
and
332
are duly implemented. The

      Central Government should take a decision with all reasonable dispatch, in

      accordance with law.
53
107.     We, however, clarify that this judgment shall not be construed as interfering

     with the election schedule that the Election Commission may prescribe for the

     conduct of elections either to Parliament or to the State Legislative Assemblies.
108.     The Writ Petitions are disposed of in view of the above discussion.
109.     Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
..…..…....…........……………….…........CJI.
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                    …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                    [J B Pardiwala]



                                                    …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                    [Manoj Misra]

New Delhi;
November 23, 2023