[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shambhubhai Kalabhai Raval vs The State Of Gujarat on 2 November, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S. Oka
1


2023 INSC 977

                                                                                                   NON-REPORTABLE


                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 06 OF 2011



        SHAMBHUBHAI KALABHAI RAVAL                                                             …...APPELLANT(S)


                                                               VERSUS


        STATE OF GUJARAT                                                                       …...RESPONDENT(S)

                                                             JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.                  The    appellant     is    the   husband         of     the       deceased,   who     was

        convicted for the offences punishable under
Sections 306
and
498A
of the Indian Penal Code (for short ‘
IPC
’). The marriage between

        the                 appellant      and   the    deceased       was        ten     years    old,   when    on

        31.07.1994, the deceased poured kerosene on her own body and set

        herself ablaze. The burn injuries suffered by her was the cause of

        death, which happened on 04.08.1994. The prosecution mainly relied

        upon                 the   dying    declaration      of       the    deceased          recorded   by     PW3-

        Kachrabhai. The dying declaration was recorded between 09:45 P.M.
Signature Not Verified
to 10:00 P.M. on 31.07.1994. Apart from relying upon the dying
Digitally signed by
Neetu Khajuria
Date: 2023.11.06
16:48:41 IST
Reason:
declaration,                  the    prosecution      relied         upon       the    evidence   of     PW1-
2
Dolabhai, the father of the deceased and PW4- Pravin Kumar, the

brother of the deceased. Unfortunately, both the father and the

brother did not support the prosecution and they were declared

hostile. Admittedly, nothing could be brought on record in their

cross-examination      conducted     by        the   public    prosecutor     for   the

benefit of the prosecution.
2.   With the assistance of the learned counsel appearing for the

appellant, we have perused the evidence of prosecution-witnesses,

relevant documents and the dying declaration. The main submission

of the learned counsel for the appellant is that there is a serious

doubt   about   the    correctness    of       the    dying    declaration.    Another

submission is that Bhavna, the sister of the deceased was a very

important witness, who has been withheld by the prosecution. The

submissions     made    by   the   learned           counsel    appearing     for   the

respondent is that PW-3, who recorded the dying declaration was an

Executive Magistrate who had no enmity with the present appellant

and, therefore, there is no reason to disbelieve his testimony. Her

submission is that though the dying declaration may not bear an

endorsement of the doctor recording the fitness of the deceased to

make a statement, on the Yadi forwarded by the police, the doctor

had certified her fitness.
3.   As stated earlier, the evidences of PW-1 and PW-4, the father

and brother of the deceased do not help the prosecution as they did

not support the prosecution. Now, what remains is that the dying

declaration. If the conviction is to be based only on the dying

declaration, necessarily, it must be of an unimpeachable quality.
3
Before we go into the issue of the doubts expressed by the learned

counsel appearing for the appellant about the dying declaration, it

is necessary to make a reference to what the deceased purportedly

stated in her dying declaration. Answers to question Nos. 6 and 7

are most material which read thus: -
“6. What is done to you?
Answer : Today at 7.00 p.m. I was prepared dinner. When

       my sister came at my house at that time, my mother-in-

       law was quarrelling with me. My husband had given 2-3

       sticks blows to me and due to unbearable pain; I poured

       kerosene on my body and put fire myself. My sister

       Bhavna was came to meet me.
7. How this incident happened?
Answer : That quarrel took place alternatively with my

       mother-in-law and due to this incident took place.”
4.   On a conjoint reading of answers given to question Nos. 6

and 7, assuming that what is stated therein is correct, we find

that according to the deceased, it was the conduct of the mother-

in-law, which prompted her to take the extreme step. It is pointed

out that initially the mother-in-law was made an accused but she

died. Taking the allegation made by way of answer to question No. 6

against the appellant-husband as correct, it is not sufficient to

come to the conclusion that the act done by the husband was the

cause for immediate instigation to the deceased to take the extreme

step of burning herself.
4
5.    What is most important is that Bhavna, the sister of the

deceased     was        present       when    the      alleged      act   of   mother-in-law

quarreling with the deceased and her husband giving two or three

stick blows to the deceased took place. The prosecution has not

explained why the evidence of this material witness was withheld

from the Court. This is one reason for drawing an adverse inference

against the prosecution.
6.    There are other factors on the basis which we can say that the

dying   declaration         is    not       free   from   a   serious     doubt.       The   said

reasons are as under:-
(i)   The dying declaration itself does not bear the endorsement of

the    doctor   regarding             the    fitness    of    the    deceased     to     make    a

statement;
(ii) A panchnama (Exhibit ‘29’) was recorded around 10:10 P.M. on

31.07.1994, which records that the deceased was barely able to tell

her name and she stated that she could not speak. The alleged dying

declaration was recorded between 09:45 P.M. to 10:00 P.M.;
(iii) Even the police personnel, who recorded the panchnama has

stated that the deceased was not in a position to speak; and
(iv) PW5 -      Dr. Rajendra, who examined the deceased stated in the

cross-examination that when he asked the deceased about the cause

of    burn   injuries,          she    disclosed       that   she     poured     kerosene       on

herself. But she gave no reason why she did the act.
7.    These factors taken together create a serious doubt about the

correctness        of     the     dying       declaration.          Therefore,     the       dying

declaration will have to be kept out of consideration. In any case,
5
the dying declaration is not of that sterling quality on which the

conviction   can    be    based   in    absence    of   any    other   evidence.

Therefore, the prosecution has failed to prove the guilt of the

appellant beyond a reasonable doubt. The appeal succeeds and the

impugned   orders   are    quashed     and   set   aside.     The   appellant   is

acquitted.
8.    As the appellant is on bail, his bail bond stands cancelled.
9.    The appeal is, accordingly, allowed on above terms.
10.   Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
…………………………...J.
                                                                [ABHAY S. OKA]



                                                                …………………………...J.
                                                                [PANKAJ MITHAL]

NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 02, 2023.