[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Suresh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 24 November, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023 INSC 1021


                                                                            NON­REPORTABLE

                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 3512 OF 2023


                            Suresh & Ors.                                          … Appellants


                                                            versus


                            State of Madhya Pradesh                            … Respondent


                                                         JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECT
1)     The appellants invoked the jurisdiction of the High
                            Court under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
                            1973 (for short, ‘
CrPC
’) for quashing First Information Report
                            (for   short,   ‘FIR’)   registered   against   them    for   offences
                            punishable under
Sections 420
and
120
­B of the
Indian Penal
                            Code
, 1860 (for short, ‘the
IPC
’) and
Sections 3
and
7
of the
                            Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (for short, ‘the
EC Act
’). By
                            the impugned judgment, the High Court has dismissed the
Signature Not Verified   petition seeking quashing of the FIR.
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.11.24
17:55:34 IST
Reason:
Criminal Appeal No. 3512 of 2023                                               Page 1 of 7
2)     On 7th October 2021, invoices were issued by Bharat
     Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (‘BPCL’) in the name of MP
     Bombay Auto Service Petrol Diesel Pump owned by the third
     appellant for the sale and transportation of 9 Kilolitres each of
     petrol and diesel through a particular tanker. It is alleged that
     the subject fuel was shifted to another tanker due to the valve
     failure in the original tanker. The first appellant was the
     driver of the tanker, which carried the subject fuel. On 11 th
     October 2021, the SHO of Police Station Kishanpura District,
     Indore, intercepted the truck while unloading the subject fuel
     at the third appellant's petrol pump. The SHO recorded the
     disclosure statements of the first and the second appellants.
     The second appellant was the manager of Shivam Industries.
     The truck was seized with the liquid inside.           The police
     collected samples from the four compartments of the tanker.
     The appellants were given arrest memos on 13 th October
     2021. On the same day, the samples collected by the SHO
     were sent to State Forensic Laboratory. The Collector (Food)
     instructed on the same day to send the samples collected
     from    the   subject   tanker   to   BPCL   Quality   Assurance
     Laboratory, Indore. On 14th October 2021, the aforesaid
     impugned FIR was registered. The Forensic State Laboratory
     at Indore recommended sending the samples to the Indian
     Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun. According to the appellants'
     case, BPCL Quality Assurance Laboratory submitted a test
     report on 19th October 2021, recording that the samples
     conformed with the required specifications. In the meanwhile,
Criminal Appeal No. 3512 of 2023                                   Page 2 of 7
there was a show cause notice issued to the third appellant
     under
Section 6(b)
of the EC Act, which culminated in an
     order imposing a fine on the ground that the third appellant
     could not produce an invoice authorising transportation
     through the tanker in question and he did not seek
     permission for opening the seal and lock of the tanker. The
     charge sheet was filed on 11th February 2022.
SUBMISSIONS
3)   The learned counsel appearing for the appellants has
     invited our attention to the material forming part of the
     charge sheet. He pointed out that in the chargesheet, the
     allegation is that fuel oil mixed with Hexin, C­09, Pentane and
     rover process oil were procured from Mumbai and Hazira
     through Shivam Industries. The allegation is that if these
     hydrocarbons are mixed in different proportions in a mixing
     machine, the mixture looks exactly like petrol and diesel and
     has the same smell. The allegation is that on 11 th October
     2021, the hydrocarbon mixture was loaded in the intercepted
     tanker. The learned counsel submitted that, admittedly, there
     is no report obtained by the prosecution of any expert agency
     about the nature of the liquid found in the intercepted truck.
     Learned counsel invited our attention to the finding recorded
     in the impugned order, which records that, though samples
     were sent to the laboratory in charge of BPCL, a report from
     the laboratory has not been received. He submitted that
     taking the charge sheet and material therein as correct, there
     is no material to show the nature of the liquid found in the
Criminal Appeal No. 3512 of 2023                                 Page 3 of 7
tanker at the time of its interception. Hence, no offence was
     made out.
4)   The learned counsel appearing for the State relied upon
     the statement under
Section 27
of the Indian Evidence Act,
     1872 of the first appellant stating that he used to pick up
     ‘concocted fuel’ from Shivam Industries for distribution to the
     fuel stations. He submitted that the issues raised by the
     appellants can be decided only after the evidence is adduced.
     He submitted that there is a violation of the Motor Spirit and
     High­Speed Diesel Oil (Regulation of Supply and Distribution
     and Prevention of Malpractices) Order 2005 (for short, ‘the
     Motor Spirit Order’). He would, therefore, submit that no case
     was made out for quashing the FIR, as all the issues raised
     can be decided only at the time of trial.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
5)   We     have   carefully   perused   the   chargesheet.   The
     allegation in the chargesheet is that hydrocarbons mixed in
     different proportions by using mixing machines create a
     mixture that looks exactly like petrol and diesel. It is alleged
     that such a mixture smells like petrol and diesel. It is alleged
     that Shivam Industries supplied the mixture and sold it to the
     petrol pumps instead of petrol or diesel. It is alleged that by
     cheating ordinary customers, the appellants are causing
     illegal losses to the customers. Even the Government is
     deprived of the tax which can be levied on petroleum and
     diesel. It is alleged that after a search of Shivam Industries'
Criminal Appeal No. 3512 of 2023                                    Page 4 of 7
factories, it was found that there were several tanks of
     thousands of litres capacity, out of which five were found to
     be filled with different hydrocarbons. As per the chargesheet,
     on 11th October 2021, the hydrocarbon mixture was loaded in
     the tanker in question.
6)   Thus, the prosecution's case is that a hydrocarbon
     mixture was found in the seized tanker, which was being sold
     by the appellants, representing it to be petrol or diesel. Along
     with a letter dated 13th October 2021, the police forwarded
     four samples of the liquid seized from the tanker to the
     Forensic State Laboratory at Sagar in Madhya Pradesh,
     requesting the laboratory to submit an opinion on whether
     petrol in the samples at Exhibit A and B is of human grade
     used as a normal fuel in vehicles. The second question posed
     to the laboratory was whether there is any standard level
     petrol or diesel used as a normal fuel in samples C and D or if
     the liquid has been adulterated. Similarly, the Collector (Food)
     sent another set of samples to the State Level Coordinator,
     IOCL, Bhopal, for testing. The impugned judgment notes that
     along with the letter dated 3 rd November 2021, samples were
     also sent to the Laboratory Incharge, BPCL, Indore.           It
     appears that the laboratory in charge of the BPCL laboratory
     has not submitted the result of the analysis.      That is the
     specific observation in the impugned judgment. By the order
     dated 27th March 2023, the learned counsel appearing for the
     respondent was granted time to ascertain whether a report
     was received from the laboratory of BPCL. The learned
Criminal Appeal No. 3512 of 2023                                  Page 5 of 7
counsel for the respondent stated on instructions that till
     date, the report of analysis has not been received.
7)   The appellants rely on the test report dated 19 th October
     2021 submitted by Quality Assurance Laboratory, Mangliya
     Depot, Indore of BPCL. The report confirms that the samples
     conform to the HSD (BSVI) specifications. The submission of
     the learned counsel appearing for the respondent is that the
     said report is not a part of the charge sheet.
8)   Though FIR was registered on 14th October 2021 and
     the charge sheet was filed on 11th February 2022, even as of
     today, the expert’s report on the nature of the liquid found in
     the seized tanker has not been produced. The entire
     foundation   of   the   charge   sheet   is   that   there   was    a
     hydrocarbon mixture in the seized tanker, which looks
     precisely like petrol and diesel and smells like petrol and
     diesel. Along with the charge sheet, the respondent did not
     produce an expert's report regarding the precise nature of the
     liquid in the tanker. An expert’s opinion showing that the
     liquid was neither petrol nor diesel, but the hydrocarbon
     mixture has not been placed on record. As stated earlier,
     samples were sent more than two years back for testing, and
     a report has not yet been received. In the absence of the
     report, taking the charge sheet as it is, no material is placed
     on record to show that the liquid in the tanker was neither
     diesel nor petrol but a mixture of hydrocarbons. The
     allegation of cheating is also made on the footing that
Criminal Appeal No. 3512 of 2023                                        Page 6 of 7
thousands of customers were supplied with the said mixture
     instead of petrol or diesel. Unless there was a material
     forming part of the charge­sheet to show the nature of the
     liquid, no offence is made out. Now, it is too late for the State
     to file a report after a gap of more than two years.         The
     respondent was put to notice by this Court by the order dated
     27th March 2023 about the failure to produce the report.
     However, the respondent has not attempted to get the report
     during the last seven months. Even an adverse inference can
     be drawn against the respondent. Hence, the continuation of
     the prosecution will be an abuse of the process of law.
9)    The appeal succeeds, and the same is allowed. We set
     aside the impugned judgment of the High Court. The FIR No.
     727 dated 14th October 2021, registered with Kishanpura
     District, Indore, and the consequent charge sheet filed
     thereon are quashed and set aside.
10)   The appeal is accordingly allowed on the above terms.
……………………..J.
                                                 (Abhay S. Oka)



                                                  ……………………..J.
                                                 (Pankaj Mithal)


     New Delhi;
November 24, 2023.
Criminal Appeal No. 3512 of 2023                                   Page 7 of 7