[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ved Pal vs The State Of Haryana on 29 November, 2023
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
B.R. Gavai
1


2023 INSC 1039
                                                             NON-REPORTABLE
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1205 OF 2021


                   VED PAL & ANR.                                      APPELLANT(S)

                                                   VERSUS

                   STATE OF HARYANA                                    RESPONDENT(S)


                                             J U D G M E N T
B.R. GAVAI,J.
1.       The appeal challenges the judgment and order

                   dated 15th July, 2019 by which the Division Bench of

                   the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, Chandigarh

                   has affirmed the orders of conviction dated 28th

                   January,      2004/29th    January,    2004    as    recorded   by

                   learned Additional District Judge (Adhoc) thereby

                   convicting        the     appellants     for     the     offences

                   punishable under Section 376(2) (g), 342 read with
Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code (for short,

                   “
IPC
”)      and   sentencing    them   to     undergo    rigorous

                   imprisonment for a period of 10 years along with
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Nisha Khulbey
Date: 2023.12.01
17:56:55 IST
Reason:
fine of Rs.2,000/- each and in default of payment
2
of fine, to further undergo rigorous imprisonment

for a period of six months each. The appellants

were also sentenced to suffer imprisonment for a

period of 06 months for the commission of offence

punishable under
Section 342
of the IPC.
2.   The   prosecution    case    in     brief,       as    could    be

gathered   from   the    material       placed       on    record   is

thus:
(i) On    the   date   of   the      incident       i.e.    on    6 th

       August, 2022, there was a programme in the

       village    with   regard     to    taking      of     ‘Kavar’.
Prosecutrix-P.W.1, who at the relevant time

       was studying in 9th Class, was sleeping in her

       house with her parents and her grandmother

       namely,     Chameli.       The         brothers       of     the

       prosecutrix-P.W.1 namely Jogender and Hemant

       had gone to attend the said programme in the

       village. The prosecutrix was sleeping along

       with her grandmother Chameli on the roof of

       the ground floor of the house whereas her

       parents    were   sleeping        on    the    roof    of    the

       first floor.
3
(ii)        At around 01:00 a.m., the prosecutrix heard

       a noise of knocking at the door. Thinking

       that     her   brothers        had     returned        from     the

       village programme, she opened the door. When

       the prosecutrix opened the door, she saw both

       the     accused,     namely,         Suresh      and    Ved     Pal

       standing at the door. Ved Pal caught hold of

       the     hand   of    the       prosecutrix        and    accused

       Suresh placed his hand on her mouth. After

       that, both the accused took the prosecutrix

       to their ‘baithak’. Accused Suresh forcibly

       laid    her    on   the    cot      and    accused      Ved     Pal

       placed     his      hand       on    the      mouth      of     the

       prosecutrix. Following which, accused Suresh

       opened     the      string      of     her       ‘salwar’       and

       committed rape on the prosecutrix. After the

       accused released her, the prosecutrix raised

       an    alarm    which   alerted        the     mother     of     the

       prosecutrix and Simran, who is the cousin of

       the prosecutrix. On seeing them coming, both

       the     accused      ran       away       from     the        door.
4
Thereafter,         the        mother        of      the    prosecutrix

         (P.W.2) came there and took the prosecutrix

         with    her.       The    prosecutrix              told      her    mother

         about the occurrence of the incident and on

         the    same    day,           at       around     08:00       a.m.,      the

         prosecutrix          accompanied                by      her      parents,

         Simran and others went to the Police Post,

         where the statement of the prosecutrix came

         to be recorded. The prosecutrix was medically

         examined and her statement under
Section 164
of    the    Criminal           Procedure            Code,       1973    (in

         short “
Cr.P.C
.”) was also recorded.
3.   After      the     completion               of     the      investigation,

charge-sheet         came    to        be       filed      in    the      Court    of

competent       Judicial      Magistrate              First         Class.     Since

the case was essentially triable by the Sessions

Judge,    it    came    to        be    committed           to      the   Sessions

Court.    At the conclusion of the trial, the learned

Trial    Judge       recorded          the      order      of    conviction        as

aforesaid.       In     an    appeal,             the       High       Court      has

confirmed the same and hence the present appeal.
5
4.   Mr. Nikhil Tyagi, learned counsel appearing on

behalf of the appellants submitted that both the

Trial Court as well as the High Court have grossly

erred   in    recording   the    order     of     conviction.   He

submitted that, there are material contradictions

between the evidence of the prosecutrix-P.W.1 and

P.W.2 (Rajwati). He further submits that, even the

evidence of the medical expert as well as the FSL

report does not support the prosecution case. He

further      submitted    that       the   case     is   full   of

coincidences. It is submitted that, according to

the prosecution, P.W.2 (Rajwati) went to fill up

water and at the same time, she heard the cries of

the prosecutrix. He further submitted that, another

coincidence is that Simran, who is the son of the

uncle of the prosecutrix also comes at the same

time from the function and accompanies P.W.2. It is

submitted that in any case, Simran has not been

examined. He therefore submits that the order of

conviction     and   sentence,        as   recorded,      is    not

sustainable in law and the appellants are entitled
6
to be acquitted.
5.    Ms. Ruchi Kohli, learned counsel appearing for

the    State   vehemently           opposed      the    appeal.     She

submitted that the learned Trial Court as well as

the learned High Court concurrently, and on correct

appreciation      of   the    evidence,         have   recorded     the

order of conviction which warrants no interference.

She further submits that the conviction can also be

recorded on the sole testimony of the prosecutrix.

It    is   submitted         that       the   testimony      of    the

prosecutrix       (P.W.1)      is        cogent,       reliable     and

trustworthy.      In   any    event,      the    testimony    of   the

prosecutrix (P.W.1) is supported by the version of

P.W.2 (Rajwati). She also submits that the minor

contradictions between the evidence of (P.W.1) and

P.W.2 (Rajwati) should not be given much weightage

inasmuch as both are rustic villagers. She further

submits    that    the       prosecutrix        is     70   per    cent

physically handicapped and as such, was not in a

position to resist the force used by the accused.

It is therefore submitted that, much would not turn
7
on the absence of injuries on the person of the

prosecutrix.
6.    Ms. Ruchi Kohli, learned counsel appearing for

the State further submitted that the entire defence

of    the      appellants      has           been    that    of    consent.

However,        taking       into        consideration            that     the

prosecutrix at the relevant time was aged about 13

years, consent would be immaterial.
7.    With the assistance of the learned counsel for

the appellants as well as learned counsel for the

State, we have scrutinized the evidence.
8.    No doubt that the conviction of the appellants

under
Section 376
of the IPC could be recorded on

the     sole    testimony         of     the        prosecutrix     if     the

evidence       is    found   to     be       trustworthy,        cogent   and

reliable.       As    rightly       pointed          out    by    Ms.    Ruchi

Kohli, learned counsel appearing for the State, the

minor       contradictions          in        the     evidence      of     the

prosecution witnesses would not substantially deter

the prosecution case.
8
9.     However,      in     the    present             case,   upon      the

consideration of the entire evidence together, we

find that the prosecution has failed to prove the

case     against      the     appellants          beyond       reasonable

doubt.
10.    In the evidence of prosecutrix as well as in

the evidence of P.W.2, it has come on record that

there are three houses in between the house of the

prosecutrix and house of the accused Suresh, where

the incident is alleged to have taken place.
11.    As such, it is clear that even according to the

prosecution, the prosecutrix was dragged from her

house     to   the    house       of       accused       Suresh.    It    is

difficult      to    believe       that,         at     that   time,     the

prosecutrix did not make any cries/hues.
12.    It is further to be noted that in the medical

evidence, the Doctor has specifically stated that

no     injuries     were    found          on    the     person    of    the

prosecutrix.         Though       he       has        opined   that      the

possibility of the sexual intercourse could not be

ruled out, he has also stated that the possibility
9
of intercourse earlier to the MLR cannot be ruled

out. It is further to be noted that the FSL report

further    finds    that    no    semen    was      found    on    the

clothes of the prosecutrix or on the vaginal swab.

The semen was found on the underwear of accused

Suresh.
13.   It is to be noted that the accused have taken a

specific   defence       that    there   was    a   civil   dispute

between grand-father of the appellant(s) and the

grand-father of the prosecutrix.                No doubt that the

said suggestion is once denied by the prosecutrix

and on other occasion she has stated that she is

not aware about the same. Though the prosecutrix

admits    the    letter    addressed       by    her   to   accused

Suresh, in the next blush, she states that she has

neither visited the house of the Suresh nor Suresh

has    visited      to     her        house.        Taking        into

consideration       the     fact        that     the    both       the

prosecutrix and the appellant(s) reside within the

vicinity    of    three    houses,       the    said   version     is

difficult to believe.
10
14.   In the totality of the circumstances, we find

that the prosecution has failed to prove the case

beyond reasonable doubt. The accused are entitled

to benefit of doubt.
15.   The impugned judgment and order dated 15th July,

2019 passed by the High Court as well as the orders

dated 28th January, 2004/29th January, 2004 passed by

learned     Additional   District         Judge       (Adhoc)     are

quashed and set aside and the appeal is allowed.
16.   The   appellants   are     directed        to    be   set    at

liberty     forthwith    if     their      detention        is    not

required in any other case.
17.   Pending   applications,        if   any,   stand      disposed

of.
….........................J
                                       (B.R. GAVAI)



                                ….........................J
                              (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)


New Delhi
November 29, 2023