[Cites
27
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Pawan Kumar vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 21 November, 2023
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
1


2023 INSC 1012                                                         REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 3548 OF 2023
                              (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL) No. 7957 OF 2021)



            PAWAN KUMAR                                              …APPELLANT
                                                  Versus


            STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ORS.                          …RESPONDENTS


                                             JUDGMENT
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.
Leave granted.
2.              The appellant before this Court has been convicted by the

            Additional Sessions Judge, Barabanki in Sessions Trial No.85 of

            1996 for offences under Sections 302 and 307 read with
Section

            34
of Indian Penal Code, 1860 and has been sentenced to life

            imprisonment under
Section 302
/
34
and rigorous imprisonment

            for 7 years under
Section 307
/
34
with default stipulations. The
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHA SUNDRIYAL
Date: 2023.11.21
14:49:43 IST
Reason:
2
conviction and sentence of the appellant was upheld in appeal by

the High Court, in its order dated 07.05.2019.
3.   There were four accused in the case, which were Gaya

Prasad Mishra, Gulab Chandra, Pawan Kumar and Babadeen.

The accused Babadeen passed away during the trial and his case

stood abated and the remaining three were convicted for the

offences as stated above. The said conviction has been upheld by

the High Court of Judicature of Allahabad (Lucknow Bench).

Meanwhile, as far as Gaya Prasad Mishra and Gulab Chandra

are concerned, who are the father and brother of the present

appellant respectively, they were released prematurely after

remaining in jail for more than 19 years, under the remission

policy of the State. Consequently, they have not filed any petition

before this Court.
4.   The appellant before this Court apart from challenging the

impugned order on merits has also raised a claim of being a

juvenile at the time of the alleged commission of the crime (dated

01.12.1995), a plea which has been dismissed by the Trial Court

and the High Court.
3
5.    Before us, the learned counsel for the appellant, Ms.

Vanshaja Shukla has submitted that the plea of juvenility may be

considered first as the claim of the appellant indeed was that at

the time of the incident, he was a juvenile and his plea of

juvenility had not been considered in the true letter and spirit of

the applicable law. Consequently, before going through the case

on its merits, we have heard the counsel for the appellant at

length on the plea of juvenility.
6.    We must state at the very outset that the appellant has

been raising the claim of juvenility right since the time of his

trial, although belatedly. The trial court as well as the appellate

court after an enquiry have found that the appellant was not

juvenile at the time of the incident. Since this plea was raised

before this Court as well, this court had asked for a report from

the   concerned   Additional   Sessions   Judge,   Barabanki   and

consequently a report was filed on an earlier occasion before this

Court, to which we shall refer in a while. However, the last report

(dated 28.09.2022) filed by the Additional Sessions Judge,

Barabanki differs from the earlier findings, and the claim of the
4
appellant being a juvenile at the time of the commission of crime

has been accepted. We shall be referring to this report later.
7.   The facts of this case must also be stated here. On

01.12.1995, while the father and brother of the Complainant­

Guru Prasad Mishra were irrigating their land, water flushed

towards the adjacent field belonging to one Gaya Prasad Mishra.

The present appellant, who is the son of Gaya Prasad Mishra

reported this to his father and shortly thereafter Gaya Prasad

Mishra along with his two sons, Gulab Chandra and Pawan

Kumar (the present appellant), and one ‘Babadeen’ came to the

spot armed with “lathis” and started assaulting the father and

brother of the complainant. After hearing the ‘hue and cry’, the

complainant along with some village persons reached the spot

and he was also assaulted by the accused persons. This incident

resulted in grievous injuries on all and ultimately in the death of

one Ganga Prasad, brother of the complainant. An FIR as Crime

No.86 of 1995 was then filed in Subeha Police Station in

Barabanki District, under
Sections 307
,
504
and
323
IPC against

the four named accused as mentioned above. As the brother of
5
the complainant (Ganga Prasad) died the same day,
Section 302
was added in the FIR.
8.   Undoubtedly, the appellant belongs to the aggressor group

and had attacked the deceased and caused injuries and

ultimately the death of one of the injured persons. It is also true

that some of the assailants, including the present appellant, were

armed with “lathis”.    We have placed these facts on record to

show the nature of the incident. The accused have committed a

heinous crime. Yet they are not hardened criminals. It is also

not a premeditated cold­blooded murder.
9.   While having his statement recorded under
Section 313
of

CrPC the age of the appellant was recorded as 18 years and upon

further inquiry the appellant claimed that he was less than 16

years of age at the time of the commission of the offence, i.e., on

01.12.1995. At the relevant time,
Juvenile Justice Act, 1986
was

in force where a juvenile in case of a boy, was one who had not

completed sixteen years of age. This age however, was increased

to eighteen years by the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of

Children) Act, 2000
as we shall see later. A formal plea of

juvenility was raised at the stage of trial. In support of his plea,
6
the appellant produced the Scholar Register of the National Inter

College, Barabanki which recorded his D.O.B. as 05.07.1980

which meant that on the date when the offence was committed,

the appellant would be 15 years, 6 months, and 26 days old.

However, during cross­examination the clerk of National Inter

College who had produced the Scholar Register, admitted that

the entry was made on the basis of a transfer certificate issued by

Purva Madhyamik Vidhyalaya (hereafter referred to as High

School, Kamela), which was not placed on record. Further, the

Gram Panchayat Officer was examined who produced the Family

Register of the appellant where D.O.B. of the appellant was

recorded as 1975. The day and month of his birth were not

mentioned in this Family Register. In any case, as per the Family

Register of the Gram Panchayat, the appellant would be around

20 years of age at the time of the commission of the offence.
In view of this contradiction, a bone ossification test was

conducted under the supervision of the Chief Medical Officer of

District Hospital, Barabanki where the age of the appellant was

recorded as approximately 19 years. Thus, by order dated

21.08.1999 it was concluded by the Trial Court that the benefit of
7
juvenility cannot be extended to the appellant and he was

directed to face the trial.
10.   The appellant filed a Criminal Revision before the High

Court against the said order dated 21.08.1999 passed by the

Additional Sessions Judge, Barabanki. The High Court dismissed

his criminal revision on 16.09.1999.      At the stage of filing the

criminal revision the trial was almost complete and the High

Court did not consider it appropriate to interfere with the trial at

such a belated stage.
11.   The Additional Sessions Judge, Barabanki continued with

the trial, where all the accused persons (except Babadeen),

including the appellant were convicted for offences under
sections 302
/
34
and
307
/
34
of the IPC for which they were

sentenced    to   life   imprisonment   and   7   years   of   rigorous

imprisonment, respectively. One of the co­accused, Babadeen

died on 12.12.1998 during the trial and proceedings against him

stood abated by order dated 04.01.1999 passed by the Trial

Court.
12.   Against the order of conviction dated 11.02.2000 passed by

the Trial Court all the accused filed their appeal before the High
8
Court of Judicature at Allahabad (Lucknow Bench). During the

pendency    of    the   appeal,   the   appellant   filed   a   Criminal

Miscellaneous Application under
Section 391
of the CrPC for

placing additional evidence on record regarding his juvenility.

Accordingly, the appellant produced Transfer Certificate dated

05.07.1995 issued by High School, Kamela based on which the

Scholar Register of National Inter College, Barabanki which had

recorded the age of the appellant as 05.07.1980. Nevertheless,

the High Court vide its order dated 07.05.2019, dismissed the

Criminal Appeal of all the three accused, including the plea of

juvenility raised by the appellant. The High Court also noted that

the State Government had meanwhile remitted the sentence of

the other two co­accused as both had undergone more than 19

years of imprisonment. However, the appellant was directed to

surrender and to carry out his sentence. While rejecting the plea

of juvenility, the reasons given by the High Court are as follows:
“20...It is undisputed that juvenility can
                 be examined at any stage, if raised by
                 the accused person. In the present case,
                 appellant no. 3 has raised the point of his
                 juvenility before the trial court, which
                 was dealt with after examining the court
                 witnesses and evidences placed by
                 means of parivar register, radiological
9
report, C.M.O. report and the scholar
               register of Rashtriya Inter College and
               rejected by the court below vide order
               dated 21.08.1999. As no good ground
               has been taken in the present appeal of
               juvenility of appellant no. 3. It is also
               relevant to mention here that aforesaid
               order dated 21st August, 1999 was
               challenged by the appellant no. 3 in
               Criminal Revision No. 271 of 1999, which
               was also dismissed by this Court vide
               order dated 16.09.1999”.
The appellant had mostly remained on bail during the

period of trial and appeal, but consequent to the decision of the

High Court, he surrendered on 29.07.2019 and since then he has

been in jail. By now he has served a sentence of about 4 ½ years.
13.   The specific grievance of the appellant in the present case is

that the Trial Court had not accepted the veracity of the Scholar

Register of National Inter College, Barabanki because it was

based on a Transfer Certificate issued by High School, Kamela

which was not on record. However, when the appellant had

placed the same on record, in his application under
Section 391
of CrPC, the same ought to have been considered.
14.   This Court passed order dated 08.10.2021 and directed the

Trial Court to submit a fresh report on the plea of juvenility

raised by the appellant, after appreciating the additional
10
evidence. The order dated 08.10.2021 of this Court reads as

under: ­

           “…Learned counsel for the petitioner submits
           by reference to additional documents that
           CM No.96164/2012 was filed under
Section
           391
of the Cr.P.C for taking on record
           additional documents in the form of transfer
           certificate showing the date of birth of the
           applicant as 05.07.1980. She has also filed a
           document      regarding   listing    of   the
           applications as on 29.01.2020 before the
           High Court of Judicature at Allahabad,
           Lucknow Bench to show such application as
           pending as on 01.11.2012 for disposal. It is
           thus, her submission that the application
           seeking to bring on record additional
           documents in support of the plea of juvenility
           was never dealt with.
Our attention has been invited at para 20
           of the impugned order which recognizes that
           plea of juvenility was raised before the trial
           Court and was rejected by the order dated
           21.08.1999. It has been observed that no
           ground has been taken in the appeal of
           juvenility of appellant No.3 possibly because
           a Criminal Revision was filed against the
           order dated 21.08.1999 being Criminal
           Revision No.271/1999 which was also
           dismissed by the High Court on 16.09.1999.
It is correct that in the grounds of appeal
           before the High Court no plea of juvenility
           was raised. The plea of the petitioner is
           predicated only on CM No.96164/2012 filed
           seeking to raise the plea of juvenility based
           on the additional grounds.
In view of the aforesaid facts and
           circumstances, we are of the view that the
11
additional documents brought on record
            ought to have been examined and they
            require examination as to whether the
            petitioner can raise the plea of juvenility.
               We thus, refer the matter to the trial Court
            for recording evidence on the basis of the
            certificates sought to be produced by the
            petitioner as a transfer certificate and submit
            a report to this Court….”
15.   Accordingly, the First Additional Sessions Judge, Barabanki

in compliance of the order of this Court had submitted a Report

dated 28.02.2022. According to this report, the D.O.B of the

appellant should be taken as recorded in the Family Register,

which is 1975 and therefore at the time of the commission of the

offence he was not a juvenile. The Trial Court had examined the

entry of the Scholar Register of the National Inter College,

Barabanki where the D.O.B of the appellant was 05.07.1980. The

D.O.B entered in the Scholar Register was based on a Transfer

Certificate dated 05.07.1995 issued by High School, Kamela

which had also been placed on record by the appellant, however,

the original records of High School, Kamela were not produced

and the evidence of the Family Register and bone ossification test

was also against the appellant. By comparing these evidences,

the Trial Court declared the D.O.B of the appellant to be 1975
12
and consequently, the report of the Additional Sessions Judge

dated 28.02.2022 declared that the appellant was not a juvenile

on the date of the commission of the alleged offence.
16.   The report dated 28.02.2022 was examined by this Court

and it was felt that the Trial Court did not examine the Transfer

Certificate of the appellant, which was placed before it. Hence,

the issue was again remitted back to the Additional Sessions

Judge, Barabanki on 15.07.2022 by this Court for fresh

consideration on the aspect of juvenility and another report was

directed to be filed. The Order of this Court dated 15.07.2022 is

as follows:
“We have perused the report of the First
              Additional Sessions Judge, Barabanki
              dated 28.02.2022 but that report does
              not analyze the transfer certificate
              which is the document sought to be
              relied upon by the petitioner as an
              additional document before the High
              Court for which an application had
              been filed before it. That is what is
              required to be considered.
Undisputedly, the other documents do
              not go in favour of the petitioner and
              show the age as more than 16 years.
It appears that the District Judge has
              not analysed the document or its
13
veracity which is what is required to be
              considered.
We have thus, no option but to remit the
              matter back to the District Judge,
              Barabanki to appreciate the purport of
              our order and carry out the enquiry in
              that behalf and then submit a report to
              us.
Learned counsel for the petitioner
              states that the original document is in
              the possession of the petitioner and will
              be filed with an affidavit before the
              District Judge.
The enquiry report to be submitted
              within a period of three months from
              the date of the receipt of this order.
List on the     enquiry   report   being
              received.”
17.   In compliance of the said order the Additional Sessions

Judge, Barabanki filed a fresh report dated 28.09.2022. In this

report the D.O.B has been determined as 05.07.1980.       If this

report is accepted then the appellant was 15 years, 4 months,

and 26 days old at the time of commission of the crime which

occurred on 01.12.1995. The relevant observation of the report

is given as under:
“18. In the end, it is humbly submitted
              that the date of birth of Pawan Kumar,
              right from the first school where he was
14
admitted, up to the last school where
               he has studied, as per the relevant
               documents     of    each school     has
               remained the same i.e., 05.07.1980
               (Annexure­1) which has been issued by
               the Principal of Pre­secondary School
               Kamela, mentioning his date of birth as
               05.07.1980, matches with the date of
               birth of Pawan Kumar as has been
               mentioned        in     the    relevant
               registers/documents of each and every
               school, where the petitioner has
               studied at different stages of his
               education”.
18.   On behalf of the appellant, we have heard ld. counsel Ms.

Vanshaja Shukla and learned senior counsel Mr. Ardhendumauli

Kumar Prasad, Additional Advocate General (AAG) for the State of

Uttar Pradesh. Before we deal with the submissions made by

both sides, it would be prudent to examine some of the relevant

statutory provisions.
19.   The age of a juvenile has to be determined on the basis of

the date of the alleged commission of the crime.     The present

incident which involved the appellant in a crime inter alia under
Section 302
IPC was allegedly committed on 01.12.1995. At the

relevant point of time, the Act which was in force for juvenile

offenders was known as
Juvenile Justice Act, 1986
. In the said

Act,
Section 2(h)
defined juvenile as follows:
15
“(h) “juvenile” means a boy who has
                not attained the age of sixteen years
                or a girl who has not attained the age
                of eighteen years”
In the case of the present appellant, the relevant age apparently

was 16 years.      In order to be a juvenile, he should not have

attained the age of 16 years.         Till the time the sessions court

finally convicted the appellant, inter alia, under
Section 302
of

the IPC, the above provision of law was in force. The Trial court’s

decision is of 11.02.2000.
20.   Meanwhile, during the pendency of the appeal before the
High Court, the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of

Children) Act, 2000
came into force on 01.04.2000, inter alia,

repealing the 1986 Act. There were some major changes in the

2000 Act. The first and foremost was the definition of juvenile

itself.
Section 2(k)
defined the “juvenile” as follows:
“(k) “juvenile” or “child” means a
                person who has not completed
                eighteenth year of age”
The definition of “juvenile in conflict with law” under
Section 2(l)
,

which stood amended1 in 2006 is as follows:
1 Prior to the 2006 amendment, it reads as follows:
(l) “juvenile in conflict with law” means a juvenile who is alleged to
have committed an offence. (w.e.f. 22.08.2006)
16
“(l) “juvenile in conflict with law” means
               a juvenile who is alleged to have
               committed an offence and has not
               completed eighteenth year of age as on
               the date of commission of such offence”
The 1986 Act made a distinction between a boy and a girl as to

their claim of juvenility. In the case of boys, it was 16 years,

whereas for girls it was 18 years.        The 2000 Act, not only

removed this distinction but also raised the age of juvenility from

16 years to 18 years.
21.   The majority opinion of 4:1 in a Constitution Bench decision

of this Court in the case of
Pratap Singh v. State of

Jharkhand and Another
(2005) 3 SCC 551, held as follows:
“(a) The reckoning date for the
               determination of the age of the juvenile is
               the date of the offence and not the date
               when he is produced before the authority
               or in the court.
(b) The 2000 Act would be applicable in a
               pending       proceeding      in     any
               court/authority initiated under the 1986
               Act and is pending when the 2000 Act
               came into force and the person had not
               completed 18 years of age as on
               01.04.2001.”
17
Subsequent to the decision in
Pratap Singh
(supra) certain

amendments were made in the 2000 Act.             Section 7A was

introduced which reads as follows:
“[7­A. Procedure to be followed when
              claim of juvenility is raised before any
              court.—(1) Whenever a claim of juvenility
              is raised before any court or a court is of
              the opinion that an accused person was a
              juvenile on the date of commission of the
              offence, the court shall make an enquiry,
              take such evidence as may be necessary
              (but not an affidavit) so as to determine
              the age of such person, and shall record a
              finding whether the person is a juvenile
              or a child or not, stating his age as nearly
              as may be:
Provided that a claim of juvenility may be
              raised before any court and it shall be
              recognised at any stage, even after final
              disposal of the case, and such claim shall
              be determined in terms of the provisions
              contained in this Act and the rules made
              thereunder, even if the juvenile has
              ceased to be so on or before the date of
              commencement of this Act.
(2) If the court finds a person to be a
              juvenile on the date of commission of the
              offence under sub­section (1), it shall
              forward the juvenile to the Board for
              passing appropriate order, and the
              sentence if any, passed by a court shall
              be deemed to have no effect.]”

The definition of “juvenile in conflict with law” was also amended

which we have already
referred above
.
18
22.     In addition, comprehensive Rules known as Juvenile Justice

(Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2007, were also made,

inter    alia,   laying   down   a   detailed   procedure   as   to   the

determination of the age of a juvenile. Rule 12 of the said Rules is

as follows:
“12. Procedure to be followed in
                  determination of Age.—(1) In every case
                  concerning a child or a juvenile in conflict
                  with law, the court or the Board or as the
                  case may be the Committee referred to in
                  Rule 19 of these rules shall determine the
                  age of such juvenile or child or a juvenile
                  in conflict with law within a period of
                  thirty days from the date of making of the
                  application for that purpose.
(2) The court or the Board or as the case
                  may be the Committee shall decide the
                  juvenility or otherwise of the juvenile or
                  the child or as the case may be the
                  juvenile in conflict with law, prima facie
                  on the basis of physical appearance or
                  documents, if available, and send him to
                  the observation home or in jail.
(3) In every case concerning a child or
                  juvenile in conflict with law, the age
                  determination inquiry shall be conducted
                  by the court or the Board or, as the case
                  may be, the Committee by seeking
                  evidence by obtaining—
(a)(i) the matriculation or equivalent
                  certificates, if available; and in the
                  absence whereof;
19
(ii) the date of birth certificate from the
school (other than a play school) first
attended; and in the absence whereof;
(iii) the birth certificate given by a
corporation or a municipal authority or a
panchayat;
(b) and only in the absence of either (i), (ii)
or (iii) of clause (a) above, the medical
opinion will be sought from a duly
constituted Medical Board, which will
declare the age of the juvenile or child. In
case exact assessment of the age cannot
be done, the Court or the Board or, as the
case may be, the Committee, for the
reasons to be recorded by them, may, if
considered necessary, give benefit to the
child or juvenile by considering his/her
age on lower side within the margin of
one year.
and, while passing orders in such case
shall, after taking into consideration such
evidence as may be available, or the
medical opinion, as the case may be,
record a finding in respect of his age and
either of the evidence specified in any of
the clauses (a)(i), (ii), (iii) or in the absence
whereof, clause (b) shall be the conclusive
proof of the age as regards such child or
the juvenile in conflict with law.
(4) If the age of a juvenile or child or the
juvenile in conflict with law is found to be
below 18 years on the date of offence, on
the basis of any of the conclusive proof
specified in sub­rule (3), the court or the
Board or as the case may be the
Committee shall in writing pass an order
stating the age and declaring the status
of juvenility or otherwise, for the purpose
20
of the Act and these rules and a copy of
              the order shall be given to such juvenile
              or the person concerned.
(5) Save and except where, further inquiry
              or otherwise is required, inter alia, in
              terms of
Section 7
­A,
Section 64
of the Act
              and these rules, no further inquiry shall
              be conducted by the court or the Board
              after examining and obtaining the
              certificate or any other documentary proof
              referred to in sub­rule (3) of this rule.
(6) The provisions contained in this rule
              shall also apply to those disposed of
              cases, where the status of juvenility has
              not been determined in accordance with
              the provisions contained in sub­rule (3)
              and the Act, requiring dispensation of the
              sentence under the Act for passing
              appropriate order in the interest of the
              juvenile in conflict with law.”
                                    (emphasis supplied)
23.   Although, during the pendency of the appeal before the

Allahabad High Court (Lucknow Bench), the
Juvenile Justice

(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015
had come into force

repealing the 2000 Act and subsequent to the 2015 Act,

comprehensive and detailed Model Rules relating to “juvenile in

conflict with law” known as Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection

of Children) Model Rules (hereinafter referred to as ‘JJ Rules,

2016’) were laid down.    Rule 94 of the JJ Rules, 2016 also

repeals the 2007 Rules.
21
“94. Repeal.—The Juvenile Justice
              (Care and Protection of Children)
              Rules, 2007 notified vide G.S.R.
              679(E) dated 26th October, 2007 and
              as amended vide GSR 903(E) dated
              26th December 2011, are hereby
              repealed:
Provided that any action taken or
              order issued under the provisions of
              the Rules of 2007 prior to the
              notification of these rules shall, in so
              far it is not inconsistent with the
              provisions of these rules, be deemed to
              have been taken or issued under the
              provisions of these rules.”

  Nevertheless, the 2015 Act contains an important Section,

which is
Section 25
, which reads as follows:
“25. Special provision in respect of
              pending      cases.—Notwithstanding
              anything contained in this Act, all
              proceedings in respect of a child
              alleged or found to be in conflict with
              law pending before any Board or
              court on the date of commencement of
              this Act, shall be continued in that
              Board or court as if this Act had not
              been enacted.”
24.
In Satya Deo alias
Bhoorey v. State of Uttar Pradesh
(2020) 10 SCC 555, the impact of
Section 25
of the 2015 Act has

been explained in detail. The expression “all proceedings” would

not only mean the trial but will also include revision or appeal.
22
Consequently, since at the commencement of 2015 Act the

proceedings of the present appellant were pending before the

High Court (the appeal was decided on 07.05.2019),
Section 25
of

the 2015 Act would be attracted. It would mean that what would

be applicable in the present case would be the 2007 Rules,

including Rule 12 which we have
referred above
.
This aspect has

also been examined in great detail in
Hariram v. State of

Rajasthan and Another
(2009) 13 SCC 211.
25.   In other words, what would be applicable in the present

case regarding the determination of the age of the appellant

would be the 2000 Act and the Rules framed therein i.e., 2007

rules.   Rule 12 has an important bearing in the present case,

which we have already
referred above
. The first document under

the 2007 Rules which has to be considered for determination of

the age of a person who is claiming juvenility is the matriculation

certificate and the settled position here is that the appellant had

not done his matriculation and there is no question of the

appellant having such a certificate. The other document which

then becomes relevant is the school leaving certificate of Primary

School, Bhatgawan, which is also his certificate of age.
23
26.   One important aspect which was missed by the High Court

as well as the Additional Sessions Judge in his report dated

28.02.2022, was the provisions of Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules

which are applicable for determination of age in the present case

and, in particular, the provision under sub­rule (3)(b) of Rule 12

which states that “in the case exact assessment of the age cannot

be done, the Court or the Board or, as the case may be, the

committee for the reasons to be recorded by them, may, if

considered necessary give benefit to the child or juvenile by

considering his/her age on lower side within the margin of one

year”. We are of the considered view that in the present case,

even assuming for the sake of argument that there were some

conflicting aspects as to the age of the appellant but since the

margin of age was so thin, the aforesaid benefit ought to have

been given to the appellant.
27.   From perusal of the report dated 28.09.2022 the following

facts emerge. The appellant had attended three schools during

his life time. The first was the Primary School at Bhatgawan in

Barabanki. The second was High School, Kamela, Barabanki and

the third was National Inter College, Ranapur, Barabanki (in
24
chronological order). The admitted position is that the appellant

had not completed his matriculation at the time of the incident in

the year 1995 and therefore the only evidence he could place

before the authorities was the copy of the admission register of

National Inter College and the transfer certificate of the college,

which had recorded his date of birth to be 05.07.1980. The

appellant took admission in National Inter College, Barabanki on

25.07.1995 and thereafter since he could not pay his tuition fee,

his name was removed as a student from the college register on

30.12.1995. The date of birth which was registered in the said

school was 05.07.1980.      The date of birth, however, was not

taken to be the correct date of birth in the earlier findings, since

the appellant had not produced any certificate before the inquiry

officer on the basis of which the date of birth i.e., 05.07.1980 was

registered in the school register of National Inter College. In the

subsequent enquiry though he submitted the transfer certificate

from the earlier school register but the same could not be verified

to the satisfaction of the inquiry officer and consequently the date

of birth as claimed by the appellant (05.07.1980) was not

accepted. In the latest enquiry, which has been conducted by the

Additional Sessions Judge, Barabanki dated 28.09.2022, the
25
appellant had produced relevant certificates of all three schools

he had attended.
28.   First is the certificate from Primary School Bhatgawan,

Barabanki, which was the first school attended by the appellant

and where his date of birth recorded was 05.07.1980. The

Sessions Judge himself has seen the school register of the school

and had taken the statement of the principal of the school to

consider the veracity of the school register. The other documents

examined were the transfer certificates of High School, Kamela

and National Inter College and the relevant registers of the said

schools. The Additional Sessions Judge, who did not doubt the

veracity of any of these documents which were placed before him,

has given a categorical finding that what has been consistent is

that, in all the schools that he has attended, his date of birth

remains the same i.e., 05.07.1980.
29.   However, there are two certificates which have not been

considered by the Additional Sessions Judge in his latest report.

The first is the Family Register in which the year in which

appellant was born is recorded as 1975. As deposed by the

concerned Gram Panchayat Officer, there is no precise date of
26
birth recorded in the Family Register and what has been

recorded, is that the appellant was born in the year 1975. All the

same this certificate will not have the same evidentiary value as

the school certificates in the present case. Moreover, the entry is

also not a precise entry. Under the 2007 Rules (i.e., Rule 12), the

school certificates are given more importance than a Panchayat

Register.        The school leaving certificate of the first school

attended by the appellant which is Primary School, Bhatgawan

will be a certificate that is liable to be considered and the

certificate is a valid proof of evidence for determination of the age

of the appellant. [
Shah Nawaz v. State of Uttar Pradesh and

Another
(2011) 13 SCC 7512]. The second certificate is the

medical report of the appellant i.e., Bone Ossification Test

conducted on 05.02.1996 which is about two months after the

alleged incident where the certificate of the test show that he was

about 19 years of age.           The Radiologist (CW­3) who had

conducted the test was examined in the trial, on being

questioned about the veracity of the report by the defence, he

said that although he had examined the appellant and conducted

the Bone Ossification Test but, he did not give the precise years

2 Paragraph 24
27
i.e., 19 years to be the age of the appellant. According to him

this has been done by the Chief Medical Officer (CMO). The

C.M.O was never examined in the trial.       In any case, a bone

ossification test, which is primarily done to determine the age,

does not give the precise age but is at best an approximation.
30.   Further, it must also be kept in mind that the medical

opinion based on Bone Ossification Test, is not entirely accurate.

This Court in the case of
Vinod Katara v. State of U.P.
2022

SCC OnLine SC 1204 has held the following:
60. The bone ossification test is not an
              exact science that can provide us with
              the exact age of the person. As
              discussed     above,    the    individual
              characteristics such as the growth rate
              of bones and skeletal structures can
              affect the accuracy of this method. This
              Court has observed in
Ram Suresh
              Singh v. Prabhat Singh
, (2009) 6 SCC
              681 : (2010) 2 SCC (Cri) 1194,
              and Jyoti Prakash Rai v. State of
              Bihar, (2008) 15 SCC 223 : (2009) 3
              SCC (Cri) 796, that the ossification test
              is not conclusive for age determination
              because it does not reveal the exact age
              of the person, but the radiological
              examination leaves a margin of two
              years on either side of the age range as
              prescribed by the test irrespective of
              whether the ossification test of multiple
              joints is conducted. The courts in India
28
have accepted the fact that after the
              age of thirty years the ossification test
              cannot be relied upon for age
              determination. It is trite that the
              standard of proof for the determination
              of age is the degree of probability and
              not proof beyond reasonable doubt.
31.   In a case of juvenility where two views are possible, this

Court has held that a liberal approach should be undertaken.

This position was laid down by this Court in the case of
Arnit

Das v. State of Bihar
(2000) 5 SCC 488 where it was held that:
“19……….
(ii) a hypertechnical approach should
              not be adopted while appreciating the
              evidence adduced on behalf of the
              accused in support of the plea that he
              was a juvenile and if two views may
              be possible on the same evidence, the
              court should lean in favour of holding
              the accused to be a juvenile in
              borderline cases; and”

This proposition of taking a liberal view and about extending the

benefit of juvenility where two views are available has been

reiterated by this Court in numerous subsequent decisions such

as
Mukarrab and Others v. State of Uttar Pradesh
(2017) 2

SCC 210, Ashwani Kumar Saxena v. State of Madhya

Pradesh (2012) 9 SCC 7503 as well as
Rishipal Singh Solanki
3 Para 13
29
v. State of Uttar Pradesh
(2022) 8 SCC 602 which concluded

as follows in para 33.8:
33.8. If two views are possible on the
              same evidence, the court should lean
              in favour of holding the accused to be
              a juvenile in borderline cases. This is
              in order to ensure that the benefit of
              the
JJ Act, 2015
is made applicable
              to the juvenile in conflict with law. At
              the same time, the court should
              ensure that the
JJ Act, 2015
is not
              misused by persons to escape
              punishment after having committed
              serious offences.
32.   Even if the medical report which shows the age of the

appellant as 19 years is taken to be correct even then in a case

where an exact assessment of age was not possible, considering

the conflicting reports and documents in our considered opinion,

the provision given in sub­rule 3(b) of Rule 12 would come into

play and the Court ought to have given the appellant a benefit of

one year in the present case.
Consequently, we accept the report of the Additional

Sessions Judge, Barabanki dated 28.09.2022 and declare that

the appellant was a juvenile on the date of the commission of

crime i.e., on 01.12.1995.
30
33.   The other two co­accused i.e., Gaya Prasad Mishra and

Gulab Chandra have been convicted and sentenced inter alia to

life imprisonment. Although both of them have been prematurely

released by the State Government under its remission policy, yet

the fact remains that they were convicted (along with the

appellant), for the offences under Sections 302/
34
and 307/
34
by

the Trial Court in trial as well as by the High Court in appeal after

examining the entire evidence in detail. The role assigned to the

present appellant is no different than the role assigned to the

other two accused who were convicted under Sections 302 and

307 read with
Section 34
IPC.      It is exactly the same role and

clearly
section 34
of the Indian Penal Code is also attracted. We

have already declared the appellant as a juvenile, but there is

also an order of conviction against the appellant, which is based

on the evidence placed by the prosecution against the other two

accused and the present appellant, which is common. It is not

possible therefore to take a different view for the present

appellant than what has been taken by the Trial Court and the

Appellate court against the other two accused regarding their

conviction. Therefore, we sustain the conviction of the appellant

under
Sections 302
and
307
IPC read with
Section 34
IPC, but all
31
the sentences which have been awarded to him are hereby

quashed as such sentences cannot be given to a juvenile, in view

of
Section 16
of the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000.
34.   The appeal is partly allowed on the question of juvenility as

indicated hereinabove, and the order of the High Court will stand

modified to this extent. The appellant is presently in jail. He

should be around 43 years of age as of now. Considering all the

relevant aspects including the fact that the appellant has already

been declared a Juvenile by this Court and in view of
Sections 15
and
16
of Juvenile Justice Act, 2000, since the maximum period

for which a juvenile can be detained is three years and the

appellant has already undergone imprisonment for 4 ½ years, we

hereby order that the appellant be released forthwith, unless he is

required in some other crime.
..……….………………….J.
                                         [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]


                                         ...………………………….J.
                                         [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]
New Delhi
November 21, 2023.
32
ITEM NO.1501                 COURT NO.2                   SECTION II
(FOR JUDGMENT)
                 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F      I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Petition(s)      for   Special   Leave     to   Appeal    (Crl.)   No(s).
7957/2021
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 07-05-
2019 in CRLA No.106/2000 passed by the High Court Of
Judicature At Allahabad, Lucknow Bench)

PAWAN KUMAR                                              Appellant(s)

                                  VERSUS

THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ORS.            Respondent(s)
([ HEARD BY : HON'BLE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL and HON'BLE SUDHANSHU
DHULIA, JJ. ]........... )

Date : 21-11-2023 This petition was called on for pronouncement of
judgment today.
For Appellant(s) Ms. Vanshaja Shukla, AOR
                      Mr. Rishad Murtaza, Adv.
Ms. Ankeeta Appanna, Adv.
For Respondent(s)       Mr. Rohit K. Singh, AOR
                        Ms. Tania Sharma, Adv.
The Court pronounced the following
                             J U D G M E N T

                Hon’ble    Mr.    Justice  Sudhanshu    Dhulia
pronounced the judgment for the Bench comprising
          Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul and His
          Lordship.
Leave granted.
The   appeal   is   partly allowed   and   the
          appellant be released forthwith in terms of the
          signed reportable judgment.
Pending application, if any, stands disposed
          of.
(ASHA SUNDRIYAL)                                    (POONAM VAID)
ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                            COURT MASTER (NSH)
[Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file]