[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Director Genl. Of Police, Mayilapur vs J. Raghunees on 20 October, 2023
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S. Oka
CA NO. 1183 OF 2012


2023 INSC 944                                                        NON-REPORTABLE


                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1183 OF 2012



             THE DIRECTOR GENERAL OF POLICE
             TAMILNADU, MYLAPORE                                         … APPELLANT


                                                     Versus


             J. RAGHUNEES                                                … RESPONDENT


                                              J U D G M E N T
PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.     The Director General of Police, Tamil Nadu, Chennai has

                                preferred this appeal against the final judgment and order

                                dated 24.04.2009 passed by the Division Bench of the

                                High Court allowing writ appeal no. 1487 of 2008 filed by

                                the respondent, J. Raghunees, after setting aside the

                                judgment and order of the Single Judge dismissing the writ
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.10.20
petition.
16:45:53 IST
   Reason:
Page 1 of 9
CA NO. 1183 OF 2012
2.   In short, the judgment and order of the Division Bench is

     of reversal. The order dismissing the writ petition of the

     respondent was set aside in the writ appeal by the Division

     Bench and the writ petition was ultimately allowed.
3.   The respondent was selected for the post of Grade-II

     Constable after he qualified the written test. Upon his

     selection, his antecedents were inquired into and in that

     connection an exercise for verification of his character and

     other antecedents was undertaken. In the discreet inquiry

     conducted for the purpose of the aforesaid verification, it

     was revealed that the respondent was involved in a

     criminal case registered as case crime no. 392 of 1997 for

     offences under
Sections 341
,
323
,
324
and
506(II)
of

     Indian Penal Code. The respondent was the third accused

     in the said case. He was acquitted in the said case by the

     Trial Court vide judgment and order dated 19.02.2001 but

     these facts were not disclosed by him.
4.   Though there is some controversy as to the nature of the

     aforesaid acquittal i.e., whether it was an honorable

     acquittal or an acquittal by giving benefit of doubt but the

     same is not very material for us in the present appeal.
Page 2 of 9
CA NO. 1183 OF 2012


     Nonetheless, it may be pertinent to note that the writ court

     recorded a finding upon consideration of the judgment and

     order of acquittal dated 19.02.2001 that the charges were

     not proved against the respondent beyond reasonable

     doubt and the acquittal of the respondent was not strictly

     on the basis of doubt but because of want of evidence and

     as such it was an honorable acquittal. Notwithstanding as

     to whether the respondent was acquitted by giving benefit

     of doubt or was acquitted honorably, the issue before us is

     quite different and does not depend upon the nature of the

     acquittal.
5.   The issue which has given rise to this appeal is that

     whether the respondent is guilty of suppression of material

     fact with regard to his involvement in the above criminal

     case so as to disentitle him to employment.
6.   The authorities vide order dated 09.11.2004 held that the

     respondent was not entitled to appointment as he was

     guilty of suppressing material fact by not stating about his

     involvement in the criminal case while filling up column 15

     of the attestation form.
Page 3 of 9
CA NO. 1183 OF 2012
7.   The above order was challenged by the respondent by

     means of a writ petition before the High Court, which was

     dismissed but in writ appeal the judgment and order of the

     Learned Single Judge was set aside and the writ appeal

     was allowed on the reasoning that the respondent was

     acquitted from the criminal case much before the

     verification and therefore, the respondent rightly thinking

     that his involvement in the criminal case is of no relevance

     bona fidely failed to mention about the same and as such

     suppression of this information cannot be considered to be

     willful or intentional so as to deprive him of service

     pursuant to his selection.
8.   The Tamil Nadu Special Police Subordinate Service Rules,

     1978 provides for the eligibility criteria for the recruitment

     and appointment in the State Police Service. It, inter alia,

     provides that no person shall be           eligible for the

     appointment to the service by direct recruitment unless

     his character and antecedents are such as to qualify him

     for such service. For the sake of convenience, the relevant

     Rule 14(b) is reproduced below:
Page 4 of 9
CA NO. 1183 OF 2012


       “Extract of Rule 14(b) of Tamil Nadu Special
       Police Subordinate Service Rules 1978
       14(b) No person shall be eligible for
             appointment to the service by direct
             recruitment unless he satisfies the
             appointing authority.
i)   that he is of sound health, active habits
              and free from any bodily defect or infirmity
              unfitting him for such service and
ii) that the character and antecedents are
              such as to qualify him for such service.
iii) that such a person does not have more
              than one wife living.”
9.   The aforesaid rule only provides for the eligibility criteria

     and that, apart from other things, the character and

     antecedents of the candidate are relevant and material

     factor for giving him entry in the service. Additionally, the

     respondent was required to disclose certain information

     about himself by filling the verification roll. The said

     verification roll is very relevant and important for the

     purposes of the present case, especially its column 15 and

     in particular the language of the said column which reads

     as under: -
“15 - Have you ever been concerned in any
            criminal case as defendant?”
Page 5 of 9
CA NO. 1183 OF 2012
10. The aforesaid column in unequivocal terms inquires from

     the candidate about his involvement in any criminal case

     whether in past or present and unaffected by its status or

     result.
11. The respondent in filling up the said verification roll in

     reply to the query made in the aforesaid column stated ‘NO’

     meaning thereby he clearly stated that he had not been

     involved in any criminal case.
12. Apparently in the admitted facts, the respondent was

     involved in a criminal case but had been acquitted

     therefrom. Thus, it cannot be said that the respondent was

     not concerned with any criminal case. Therefore, he ought

     to have disclosed the correct position that he was involved

     in a criminal case but had been acquitted. The respondent

     instead of giving the full and complete information as

     above simply stated ‘NO’ as if he was never involved in any

     criminal case. The answer of the respondent to the

     question posed in column 15 of the verification roll

     undoubtedly conveys the wrong information and amounts

     to the suppression of the correct information.
Page 6 of 9
CA NO. 1183 OF 2012
13. The issue in the matter is not of eligibility of the respondent

                to the post in the light of Rule 14(b) of the Tamil Nadu

                Special Police Subordinate Service Rules,1978 rather that

                of suppression of material information which was required

                to be disclosed in column 15 of the verification roll. The

                respondent has certainly not disclosed the correct

                information. His honorable acquittal or acquittal by giving

                benefit of doubt is not material and relevant but what is

                relevant is the full and complete disclosure of the

                information regarding his involvement in a criminal case

                which has been suppressed by him.
14. In Avtar Singh1 case, a three-Judge Bench of this Court

                while dealing with a similar kind of situation summarised

                the legal position by stating that (i) Information given by

                the candidate to the employer as to his conviction,

                acquittal, arrest or pendency of a criminal case, whether

                before or after entering into service must be true and there

                should be no suppression or false mention of required

                information.
(ii) In cases where conviction or acquittal had

                already              taken             place   before   filling         the
1
Avtar Singh vs Union of India Ors.
, (2016) 8 SCC 471
Page 7 of 9
CA NO. 1183 OF 2012


     application/verification form, the employer may consider

     all relevant facts available as to antecedents and may take

     appropriate decision as to the continuance of the

     employee. (iii) and even if the employee had made truthful

     declaration of a concluded criminal case, the employer still

     has   the    right   to    consider   antecedents       of    the

     candidate/employee and cannot be compelled to appoint

     him/her.
15. In other words, the candidate in the first instance is

     obliged to give correct information as to his conviction,

     acquittal or arrest or pendency of the criminal case and

     there should be no suppression or false mention of

     required    information.    Secondly,   even       if   truthful

     declaration is made by him, he would not be entitled to

     appointment as a matter of right and that the employer

     still has the right to consider his antecedents.
16. In the case at hand, though the respondent may be eligible

     for appointment but since he has not disclosed the

     complete information with regard to his involvement in a

     criminal case, wherein he might have been acquitted

     earlier even before verification, he cannot escape the guilt
Page 8 of 9
CA NO. 1183 OF 2012


      of suppressing the material information as required by

      column 15 of the verification roll. Keeping in mind that

      the respondent was a candidate for recruitment to a

      disciplined force, the non-disclosure of the information of

      his involvement in the criminal case and subsequent

      acquittal therefrom cast a serious doubt upon his

      character and the antecedents which is sufficient enough

      to disentitle him from employment.
17. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the

      judgment and order of the Division Bench passed in writ

      appeal cannot be sustained in law and is hereby set aside

      restoring that of the writ court.
18. The appeal is allowed and the writ petition stands

      dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.
…………………… J.
(ABHAY S. OKA)




                                              …………………… J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)
New Delhi;
October 20, 2023.
Page 9 of 9