[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Rajasthan vs Gautam Harijan on 11 October, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S. Oka
2023 INSC 903


                                                                          Non­Reportable

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.3168 OF 2023
                            (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.11331 of 2019)


                            State of Rajasthan                                … Appellant

                                                       versus

                            Gautam s/o Mohanlal                            … Respondent


                                                  JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.   Leave granted.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
2.   This is a case which shocks the conscience of the Court.
                            The only issue in this case is regarding the enhancement of
                            the sentence imposed on the respondent–accused.
3.   As the issue is confined to the quantum of sentence, it
                            is not necessary for us to go into the correctness of the
                            finding of guilt recorded by the Trial Court and the High Court
                            of Judicature for Rajasthan. As far as the factual details are
Signature Not Verified   concerned, we are reproducing the facts set out in the
Digitally signed by
impugned judgment, which read thus:
Anita Malhotra
   Date: 2023.10.11
   17:12:03 IST
   Reason:
SLP (Crl.) No.11331 of 2019                                                   Page 1 of 11
“.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
The material facts briefly leading to filing of
                     the appeal are required to be noted.
                     Complainant Rakesh (PW­3) submitted a
                     written report (Ex.P­4) before SHO, Police
                     Station Udyog Nagar, Kota on 8.5.2014
                     stating therein that he and his wife
                     Smt.Kajod were residing at Suryanagar in the
                     house of Chittar Lal as tenant. Gautam
                     Harizan was also residing in the same house
                     as tenant. They both used to attend to their
                     respective jobs. They were having a daughter
                     and a son. The elder was daughter aged 5
                     years and younger was son aged about two
                     and half years. He further stated that on
                     8.5.2014, as usual, he left the house for his
                     job at 6.00 A.M. and his wife left the house at
                     about 9­10 A.M. after leaving children with
                     their aunt Lad Bai, who was living in
                     neighbourhood. While returning at 3.00 PM,
                     wife of complainant found her daughter in a
                     pool of blood. Blood was oozing from her
                     private parts. On asking, she told to her
                     mother that during day hours, Gautam
                     Harijan uncle brought her from her Mausi's
                     (sister of mother) house to his room. There he
                     removed her clothes and undergarments. He
                     did something to her private parts due to
                     which there was bleeding. Accused had
                     caused bite also. She was suffering from
                     pain. His wife called him and they noticed
                     that Gautam Harijan committed rape with
                     their daughter on account of which, there
                     was bleeding from her private parts and her
                     garments were also stained with blood.
.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..”
SLP (Crl.) No.11331 of 2019                                                                  Page 2 of 11
4.      The Trial Court convicted the respondent–accused for
         the offences punishable under Sections 363, 342, clauses (i)
         and (m) of sub­section (2) of
Section 376
of the Indian Penal
         Code, 1860 (for short, ‘
IPC
’) read with
Sections 3
and
4
of the
         Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (for
         short, ‘POCSO’). The respondent–accused was also convicted
         for the offences punishable under
Section 8
(punishment for
         sexual assault) and
Section 10
(punishment for aggravated
         sexual assault) of POCSO. For the offences punishable under
         clauses (i) and (m) of sub­section (2) of
Section 376
of IPC, the
         Trial Court sentenced the respondent–accused to undergo
         imprisonment for life (for the remainder of natural life). For
         the offence punishable under
Section 377
of IPC, the Trial
         Court      awarded     the   sentence   of    ten   years   of   simple
         imprisonment with a fine of Rs.10,000/­.             For the offence
         punishable under
Section 8
of POCSO, the Trial Court
         convicted        the   respondent–accused      to   undergo      simple
         imprisonment for three years and to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/­.
         For the offence punishable under
Section 10
of POCSO, the
         respondent–accused           was   directed    to   undergo      simple
         imprisonment for five years with a fine of Rs.5,000/­. For the
         offence punishable under
Section 342
of IPC, he was
         sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for six months.
         For the offence punishable under
Section 363
of IPC, he was
         penalised to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years
         with a fine of Rs.10,000/­.
SLP (Crl.) No.11331 of 2019                                                   Page 3 of 11
5.      In the appeal preferred by the respondent–accused,
         while confirming the conviction, the High Court showed
         leniency by reducing the sentence for the offence under
         clauses (i) and (m) of sub­section (2) of
Section 376
of IPC to
         rigorous imprisonment for twelve years.
SUBMISSIONS
6.      The submission of the learned counsel appearing for the
         appellant–State of Rajasthan is that the High Court has
         shown undue and undeserving leniency to the respondent.
         The submission of the learned counsel is that the High Court
         has completely lost sight of the fact that the age of the victim­
         girl was only five to six years. He submitted that the High
         Court also ignored the evidence of Dr Vinod Garg (PW­6), who
         and a gynaecologist had examined the victim. His submission
         is that showing leniency only based on the young age of the
         accused will send wrong signals.
7.      We have also heard Ms Shweta Garg, the learned
         counsel appointed as amicus curiae, to espouse the cause of
         the respondent–accused.     She submitted that the minimum
         punishment for the offences punishable under clauses (i) and
(m) of sub­section (2) of
Section 376
of IPC is ten years.
         Therefore, the sentence imposed by the High Court is more
         than what is prescribed as the minimum.        She pointed out
         that the incident occurred on 8th May 2014, and the
         respondent has been incarcerated since then. She submitted
         that the factors of young age and caste of the respondent–
SLP (Crl.) No.11331 of 2019                                             Page 4 of 11
accused, considered by the High Court, are certainly relevant.
She pointed out that the respondent must have undergone
         the sentence by this time, including remissions. She would,
         therefore, submit that no interference was called for.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
8.      The offence under clause (i) of sub­section (2) of
Section
         376
of IPC (as it stood before 21 st April 2018) was of rape of a
         girl who is under sixteen years of age. The victim was only 5
         to 6 years old at the relevant time.    The offence under clause
(m) of sub­section (2) of 376 of
IPC
is attracted when the
         offender, while committing rape, causes grievous bodily harm
         to the victim, causes her disfigurement, or endangers her life.
         In the present case, the medical evidence in the form of the
         medical report and evidence of Dr Vinod Garg (PW­6)
         indicates why the Trial Court invoked clause (m).
9.      The offence is so gruesome and heinous that it will
         impact the victim for her entire life.     The childhood of the
         victim has been destroyed. The victim's life has been ruined
         due to the trauma and everlasting impact on her mind. It
         must have converted the victim into a psychological wreck.
10.     The reasons given by the High Court for showing
         leniency are:
a. The age of the respondent–accused was twenty­
                        two years;
b. The respondent–accused     belonged   to   a   poor
                        scheduled caste family;
SLP (Crl.) No.11331 of 2019                                              Page 5 of 11
c. The respondent–accused is not a habitual offender
                        and

                     d. The respondent–accused has been            suffering
                        incarceration since 8th May 2014.
11.     As far as the serious offences under Section 376 of IPC
         and the POCSO Act are concerned, the fact that the
         respondent–accused is not a habitual offender is entirely
         irrelevant.          The intention of the legislature is clear from
Section 376E
of IPC, introduced with effect from 3 rd February
         2013.        It provides that whosoever has been previously
         convicted for the offence punishable under
Section 376
of IPC
         and is subsequently convicted for the same crime shall be
         punished with imprisonment for life, which shall mean
         imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life
         or death. Therefore, the law takes care of habitual offenders
         by imposing stringent punishment under
Section 376
of IPC.
         As law prescribes a minimum sentence, the fact that the
         respondent–accused was suffering incarceration from 8 th May
         2014 is not material. The caste of the accused is, per se, not
         a consideration for showing leniency in the cases of such
         offences. Here, we are dealing with a case where the victim
         was five to six years old. In a given case, the financial
         condition of an accused can be one of the considerations for
         not exceeding the minimum sentence. Still, again, when it
         comes to such a serious offence against a girl aged five to six,
         the financial condition of the accused should not normally
SLP (Crl.) No.11331 of 2019                                               Page 6 of 11
weigh in the mind of the Court. In this case, the victim's
         family is from the same economic strata as the respondent.
12.     While dealing with the issue of sentence, in such a case,
         the mitigating circumstances which weigh in favour of the
         accused must be balanced with the impact of the offence on
         the victim, her family and society in general. The rights of the
         accused must be balanced with the effect of the crime on the
         victim and her family. This is a case which impacts the
         society. If undue leniency is shown to the respondent in the
         facts of the case, it will undermine the common man's
         confidence in the justice delivery system.     The punishment
         must be commensurate with the gravity of the offence. When
         it comes to sentencing, the Court is not only concerned with
         the accused but the crime as well.
13.     Only two factors prevent us from restoring the life
         sentence. First is the young age of the accused. His age was
         22 years, as noted by the High Court. The second is that he
         has undergone the sentence imposed by the High Court.
         Therefore, we are of the view that in this case, the sentence of
         rigorous imprisonment of fourteen years will be appropriate.
         However, while he undergoes the remaining sentence, the
         respondent shall not be entitled to remission. Under sub­
         section (2) of
Section 376
of IPC, the offence is also
         punishable with a fine. The Trial Court had imposed a fine of
         Rs.25,000/­. It is not clear whether the said amount of fine
         has been paid.       We maintain the sentence in default of
SLP (Crl.) No.11331 of 2019                                             Page 7 of 11
payment        of    the   fine   amount,     which   is   six     months
         imprisonment.          We retain the punishment for the other
         offences and the sentence in default of fine. We also propose
         that after retaining a sum of Rs.5,000/­ for the State, the rest
         of the fine amount shall be paid over to the victim as
         compensation.
14.     We also propose to direct the Secretary of the Rajasthan
         State      Legal     Services     Authority   to   ensure        that   the
         compensation is paid to the victim under the victim
         compensation scheme of the State.
15.     Before we part with the judgment, we find from the
         cause title of the judgments of the Trial Court and the High
         Court that the respondent’s caste has been mentioned. The
         same defect has been carried forward in the Special Leave
         Petition as the description of the respondent–accused must
         have been copied from the cause title of the judgments of the
         Courts. An accused has no caste or religion when the Court
         deals with his case. We fail to understand why the caste of
         the accused has been mentioned in the cause title of the
         judgments of the High Court and the Trial Court. The caste or
         religion of a litigant should never be mentioned in the cause
         title of the judgment. We have already observed in our order
         dated 14th March 2023 that such practice should never be
         followed. The cause title in this judgment has been amended
         accordingly.         Formal amendment be carried out after
         pronouncement of this judgment.
SLP (Crl.) No.11331 of 2019                                                       Page 8 of 11
16.     We have a suggestion to make before we part with
         judgment. Whenever a child is subjected to sexual assault,
         the State or the Legal Services Authorities should ensure that
         the child is provided with a facility of counselling by a trained
         child counsellor or child psychologist. It will help the victim
         children to come out of the trauma, which will enable them to
         lead a better life in future. The State needs to ensure that the
         children who are the victims of the offence continue with their
         education. The social environment around the victim child
         may not always be conducive to the victim's rehabilitation.
         Only the monetary compensation is not enough. Only the
         payment of compensation will not amount to rehabilitation in
         a true sense. Perhaps the rehabilitation of the girl victims in
         life should be part of the “Beti Bachao Beti Padhao” campaign
         of the Central Government. As a welfare State, it will be the
         duty of the Government to do so. We are directing that the
         copies of this judgment should be sent to the Secretaries of
         the concerned departments of the State.
17.     We may also appreciate the assistance rendered by Ms
         Shweta Garg, who was appointed amicus curiae to espouse
         the cause of the respondent­accused.
18. We partly allow the appeal by passing the following
         order:
a. The respondent–accused is sentenced to suffer
                         rigorous imprisonment for fourteen years for the
SLP (Crl.) No.11331 of 2019                                             Page 9 of 11
offences punishable under clauses (i) and (m) of
                         sub­section (2) of
Section 376
of IPC;
b. The respondent­accused shall not be entitled to
                         remission    while      undergoing        the     enhanced
                         sentence.   The    remission       granted      earlier   will
                         remain unaffected;
c. The substantive sentence for the rest of the
                         offences is maintained;
d. The direction of the Trial Court, as regards the
                         sentence to be undergone in default of payment of
                         fine, is maintained;
e. If the respondent–accused has already paid the
                         fine amount payable under the judgment of the
                         Trial Court while retaining the sum of Rs.5,000/­
                         for the State, the rest of the amount shall be paid
                         over to the victim as compensation;
f. We direct the Secretary of the Rajasthan State
                         Legal   Services       Authority     to      ensure       that
                         compensation       under     the      relevant        victim
                         compensation scheme is immediately paid to the
                         victim as per her entitlement, if not already paid;
g. If the respondent has already been released after
                         undergoing the punishment in terms of the verdict
                         of the High Court, he shall be forthwith arrested
SLP (Crl.) No.11331 of 2019                                                         Page 10 of 11
and sent to prison for undergoing the remaining
                         sentence in terms of this judgment; and

                     h. The Registry is directed to forward a copy of this
                         judgment to the Secretary of the Ministry of
                         Women and Child Development of the Central
                         Government to enable the Government to take
                         appropriate action in terms of paragraph 16 above.
….…………………….J.
                                                     (Abhay S. Oka)


                                                      …..…………………...J.
                                                      (Pankaj Mithal)
         New Delhi;
October 11, 2023.
SLP (Crl.) No.11331 of 2019                                             Page 11 of 11