[Cites
17
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sheo Raj Singh(D) Tr.Lrs.. vs Union Of India on 9 October, 2023
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
,
Bela M. Trivedi
2023INSC885                                                                         REPORTABLE


                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5867 OF 2015


             SHEO RAJ SINGH (DECEASED)
             THROUGH LRS. & ORS.                                             …APPELLANT(S)


                                                        VERSUS


             UNION OF INDIA & ANR.                                           …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                    JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
THE CHALLENGE
1.             This appeal, at the instance of certain affected landowners, challenges

             an order dated 21st December 2011 passed by a learned Single Judge of

             the High Court of Delhi (“High Court”, hereafter). By the order under

             challenge, the High Court allowed an application filed by the Union of India

             (“first respondent”, hereafter) under
section 5
of the Limitation Act, 1963

             (“
Limitation Act
”, hereafter) and thereby condoned the delay of around 479

             days in presentation of an appeal from the decision of the Reference Court
Signature Not Verified
under
section 18
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2023.10.09
17:37:31 IST
Reason:
1
THE ISSUE
2.   The limited issue that we are tasked to decide is, whether the High

Court was justified in condoning the delay in presentation of the appeal. In

the process, we need to necessarily consider whether the first respondent

had shown sufficient cause for which the appeal could not be presented

within the prescribed period of limitation.
RELEVANT FACTS GIVING RISE TO THE APPEAL
3.   The appeal has its genesis in a proceeding for acquisition of land. It

is noticed from the materials on record that the Reference Court in LAC No.

198/08, vide its order dated 31st October 2008, enhanced compensation

payable to the landowners. Such order was sought to be challenged by the

first respondent in an appeal before the High Court on 2nd June 2010,

numbered as LA. App. No. 655/2010. Since the appeal was time barred

(delayed by 479 days), the first respondent applied for condonation of

delay.
4.   After considering the pleadings as well as the other materials on

record, the High Court was satisfied that the first respondent, as the

appellant, had shown sufficient cause for which it could not present the

appeal within time; hence, vide the impugned order, it proceeded to allow

C.M. No. 11018/2010. The delay of 479 days in presentation of the appeal

was condoned but not without the High Court imposing costs of Rs.

10,000/- on the first respondent.
2
5.   The explanation put forth by the first respondent, which ultimately

found favour with the High Court, reveals the lamentable institutional

inefficiency and the deplorable bureaucratic inertia.
6.   The following events in the aftermath of the order of the Reference

Court need to be briefly mentioned. Counsel who represented the first

respondent before the Reference Court applied for the certified copy of the

Reference Court’s order on 22nd April 2009, despite the same being passed

on 31st October 2008. Thereafter, certified copy was received on 30 th July

2009. On 10th August 2009, the Deputy Legal Advisor (Land and Building)

advised the first respondent to file an appeal before the High Court. The

Principal Secretary (Land and Building) then approved the proposal for filing

the appeal on 11th August 2009 (erroneously mentioned as 2010 in the

application for condonation delay before the High Court). The Deputy Legal

Advisor (Land and Building) thereafter sent the certified copy and the

approval of the Principal Secretary to the Deputy Commissioner (East) on

26th August 2009, which was received on 28th August 2009, whereupon the

case file reached the Land Acquisition Collector on 31st August 2009. The

case file was next forwarded to the counsel for the first respondent for

preparation of the appeal on 17th September 2009, and the same was sent

back to the first respondent on 7th October 2009. The file for payment of

the requisite court fee of Rs. 51,36,592/- was put up before the relevant

Deputy Commissioner on 12th October 2009. Subsequently, the budget for

the same was sanctioned on 15th December 2009. The certified copy of the

order   of the   Reference   Court, in   the   meanwhile,   was   misplaced
3
necessitating another application for the same which was made on 24th

October 2009. Pursuant thereto, certified copy was received on 3rd

November 2009; thereafter the Accounts Department, on 12th January

2010, sent the case file to the Finance Department for the requisite funds.

The Finance Department’s letter dated 15th March 2010 approving the funds

was received by the Accounts Department on 25th March 2010. The cheque

towards court fees was received sometime in April 2010, after which the

same was deposited with the Treasury on 7th May 2010. The Treasury

having deposited the court fees on 11th May 2010, finally the appeal came

to be presented on 2nd June 2010.
APPELLANT’S CONTENTIONS
7.   Mr. Chinmoy Pradip Sharma, learned senior counsel, contended that

the High Court plainly erred in condoning the delay without sufficient cause

being shown therefor. He pointed out that the reasons cited were not

reasonable by any measure, and that the same were habitual unacceptable

explanations meted out in such land acquisition matters to seek

condonation of delay. Adverting to the order granting the prayer for

condonation of delay, it was next submitted that the High Court, and this

Court, on numerous occasions had refused to condone delays of lesser

periods. An attempt was made to impress upon us that it was not even the

case of the first respondent that the explanation proffered by it in the

present matter was more cogent than the ones in the other cases before

several fora which were not accepted. He urged that the High Court caused
4
a     failure   of   justice   in   not   appreciating   that   inter-departmental

correspondence, bereft of an attempt to explain the delay, did not amount

to showing sufficient cause warranting condonation of the same. The

approach of the High Court was criticised as mechanical and perverse.
8.     Mr. Sharma submitted that the application for condonation of delay

before the High Court simply provided a narration of the ‘chain of matters’

post the order of the Reference Court. In the present case, not only was

there a delay of almost 6 months in applying for a certified copy of the

order of the Reference Court, but also a delay of 10 months thence in filing

the appeal after receipt of approval from the Principal Secretary (Land and

Building) on 11th August 2009. Such an explanation, Mr. Sharma urged,

ought not to be construed as a satisfactorily explained delay as per
Balwant Singh (Dead) v. Jagdish Singh & Ors.1
.
9.     Relying on several other decisions of this Court, more particularly the

decision in
University of Delhi v. Union of India & Ors2, Mr. Sharma
prayed that the appeal be allowed by setting aside the impugned order and

dismissing the appeal of the first respondent before the High Court as time

barred.
RESPONDENTS’ CONTENTIONS
10. Per contra, Mr. Sanjiv Sen, learned senior counsel, urged this Court

not to disturb the findings in the impugned order since the High Court had,
1
(2010) 8 SCC 685.
2
(2020) 13 SCC 745.
5
in judicious exercise of discretion, condoned the delay after satisfying itself

as to the sufficiency of the reasons for the delay in presentation of the

appeal.
11. Mr. Sen was heard informing us of the negligent conduct of counsel for

the first respondent before the Reference Court costing him his

empanelment. The delay in applying for the certified copy of the order of

the Reference Court, according to him, was mainly due to unprofessional

conduct of the concerned counsel and so implored Mr. Sen that such

conduct should not have any bearing in the mind of the Court to nip a

meritorious claim of the first respondent in the bud, particularly when

stakes are high and the public exchequer is likely to be unnecessarily

drained if the impugned order were interdicted.
12. Insofar as the subsequent delay is concerned, Mr. Sen sought to

remind us of the impersonal machinery and bureaucratic methodology of

government departments contributing to such delays. He submitted that it

is unfortunate that such delays often act as impediments in the way of the

State’s collective cause for the community, where the ultimate prey

happens to be public interest.
13. Mr. Sen put forth the contention that the High Court, in due exercise

of its discretion, had chosen the pragmatic path while noting that the

negligence in pursuing the appeal did not amount to callousness; it was in

this light that the High Court had condoned the delay after imposing heavy

costs on the first respondent.
6
14. In the light of the foregoing submissions, Mr. Sen prayed that the High

Court ought to be given the opportunity to decide LA. App. No. 655/2010

on its own merits where the appellant would have the opportunity to

persuade the High Court to dismiss the appeal, if at all. He, thus, prayed

that the present appeal be dismissed.
THE PRECEDENTS
15. Learned senior counsel for both the parties invited our attention to

various decisions of this Court, which we propose to consider hereafter.
16.
In
Collector, Land Acquisition, Anantnag & Anr. v. Mst
. Katiji &

Ors.3 the relevant high court did not condone the delay of 4 (four) days in

presentation of an appeal by the Collector in a land acquisition matter for

which the order rejecting the application under
section 5
of the Limitation

Act was carried in appeal. This Court opined that legislature had conferred

power under
section 5
in order to enable the courts to do substantial justice

to the parties by disposing of matters on “merits”. It was further held that

the expression “sufficient cause” employed by the legislature is adequately

elastic to enable the courts to apply the law in a meaningful manner which

sub-serves the ends of justice — that being the life-purpose for the

existence of the institution of courts. Despite the liberal approach being

adopted in such matters, which was termed justifiable, this Court lamented

that the message had not percolated down to all the other courts in the

hierarchy and, accordingly, emphasis was laid on the Courts adopting a
3
(1987) 2 SCC 107.
7
liberal and justice-oriented approach. The following passage from the

decision is reflective of this Court’s realization that:
“3. […] And such a liberal approach is adopted on principle as
       it is realized that:
***
4. When substantial justice and technical considerations are
       pitted against each other, cause of substantial justice deserves
       to be preferred for the other side cannot claim to have vested
       right in injustice being done because of a non-deliberate delay.
       ***
6. It must be grasped that judiciary is respected not on account
       of its power to legalise injustice on technical grounds but
       because it is capable of removing injustice and is expected to
       do so.”
                                                           (bold in original)
17.
State of Nagaland v. Lipok AO & Ors.4
arose out of an appeal where

this Court condoned the State’s delay of 57 days in applying for grant of

leave to appeal before the high court against acquittal of certain accused

persons. This Court observed that in cases where substantial justice and a

technical approach were pitted against each other, a pragmatic approach

should be taken with the former being preferred. Further, this Court noted

that what counted was indeed the sufficiency of the cause of delay, and not

the length, where the shortness of delay would be considered when using

extraordinary discretion to condone the same. This Court also went on to

record that courts should attempt to decide a case on its merits, unless the

same is hopelessly without merit. It was also observed therein that it would
4
(2005) 3 SCC 752.
8
be improper to put the State on the same footing as an individual since it

was an impersonal machinery operating through its officers.
18.
In
Balwant Singh
(supra), this Court refused to condone the delay of

778 days in bringing on record the legal heirs of the petitioner therein

through an application filed under
Order XXII Rule 9 of the Code of Civil

Procedure
, 1908. It was observed that though sufficient cause should be

construed in a liberal manner, the same could not be equated with doing

injustice to the other party. For sufficient cause to receive liberal treatment,

the same must fall within reasonable time and through proper conduct of

the concerned party. The Court emphasised that for such an application for

condonation to be seen in a positive light, the same should be bona fide,

based on true and plausible explanations, and should reflect the normal

conduct of a common prudent person. Further, the explained delay should

be clearly understood in contradistinction to inordinate unexplained delay

to warrant a condonation.
19.
Lanka Venkateswarlu (Dead) v. State of Andhra Pradesh &

Ors.5
happened to be a case where this Court set aside the impugned

judgment condoning both a delay of 883 days in filing the petition to set

aside the dismissal order by the relevant high court, along with a delay of

3703 days caused by the respondents in bringing on record the legal

representative of the appellant. This Court observed that whilst the high

court admonished the concerned government pleaders for their negligence
5
(2011) 4 SCC 363.
9
in prosecuting the appeal before it and not providing a sufficient cause for

delay, it nonetheless proceeded to condone the delay despite holding the

same to be unjustifiable.
20. In Postmaster General & Ors. v. Living Media India Limited &

Anr.6, this Court noted that in cases when there was no gross negligence,

deliberate inaction, or lack of bona fides, a liberal concession ought to be

adopted to render substantial justice but on the facts before the Court, the

appellant could not take advantage of the earlier decisions of this Court.

Further, merely because the State was involved, no different metric for

condonation of delay could be applied to it. Importantly, it noted that the

appellant department had offered no proper and cogent explanation before

this Court for condonation of a huge delay of 427 days apart from simply

mentioning various dates. The claim on account of impersonal machinery

and inherited bureaucratic methodology of making file notes, it was held,

not acceptable in view of the modern technologies being used and available.

Also, holding that the law of limitation undoubtedly binds everybody,

including the Government, this Court went on to reject the prayer for

condonation.
21. This Court in
Esha Bhattacharjee v. Managing Committee of

Raghunathpur Nafar Academy & Ors.7
, whilst referring to various

precedents rejected the pleas of lack of knowledge and miscarriage of

justice raised by the respondent/managing committee in challenging an
6
(2012) 3 SCC 563.
7
(2013) 12 SCC 649.
10
interim order of a Single Judge of the high court. It then proceeded to set

aside the impugned judgment condoning a delay of 2449 days in

challenging the said interim order based on lack of bona fides. Paragraph

21 of the decision contains the principles culled out by this Court from the

several precedents that it had considered in the process.
22. A Bench of three Hon’ble Judges of this Court in
State of Manipur &

Ors. v. Koting Lamkang8
was faced with a delay of 312 days by the State

in preferring its first appeal before the high court. This Court, on grounds

of public interest, the impersonal nature of governments, and the

ramifications of individual errors on State interest, condoned the delay in

filing the first appeal on payment of costs of Rs. 50,000/-.
23.
In
Delhi University
(supra), another Bench of three Hon’ble Judges

of this Court declined to condone the delay of 916 days by the appellant in

challenging an order of a Single Judge of the high court. This Court, whilst

distinguishing Mst.
Katiji (supra) on facts, observed that the consideration

to condone could only be made on presentation of a reasonable

explanation, and the same could not be done simply because the appellant

therein was a public body. It then went on to note the conduct of the

appellant in demonstrating delay and laches not only in filing the appeal,

but also the original writ petition before the high court at the first instance.

While refusing to condone the appellant’s delay, it was specifically noted

that condonation of delay at that stage would be prejudicial to public
8
(2019) 10 SCC 408.
11
interest as one of the respondents therein (Delhi Metro Rail Corporation)

had received large amounts of money years ago to carry out development

on the subject land in question.
24. We may profitably refer hereunder to some other decisions of this

Court for the purpose of the present adjudication.
25.
G.      Ramegowda    v.   Spl.   Land   Acquisition    Officer9
,   while

summarising the position of law on ‘sufficient cause’, had the occasion to

observe that the contours of the area of discretion of the courts in the

matter of condonation of delays in filing appeals have been set out in a

number of pronouncements of this Court. It was observed to be true that

there is no general principle saving the party from all mistakes of its

counsel. Noting that there is no reason why the opposite side should be

exposed to a time-barred appeal if there was negligence, deliberate or

gross inaction or lack of bona fides on the part of the party or its counsel,

it was further observed that each case will have to be considered on the

particularities of its own special facts. However, this Court reiterated that

the expression ‘sufficient cause’ in
section 5
must receive a liberal

construction so as to advance substantial justice and generally delays in

preferring appeals are required to be condoned in the interest of justice

where no gross negligence or deliberate inaction or lack of bona fides is

imputable to the party seeking condonation of the delay. This was followed

by these words:
9
(1988) 2 SCC 142.
12
“15. In litigations to which Government is a party there is yet another
       aspect which, perhaps, cannot be ignored. If appeals brought by
       Government are lost for such defaults, no person is individually
       affected; but what, in the ultimate analysis, suffers is public interest.
       The decisions of Government are collective and institutional decisions
       and do not share the characteristics of decisions of private individuals.
       ***
17. Therefore, in assessing what, in a particular case, constitutes
       ‘sufficient cause’ for purposes of
Section 5
, it might, perhaps, be
       somewhat unrealistic to exclude from the considerations that go into
       the judicial verdict, these factors which are peculiar to and
       characteristic of the functioning of the government. Governmental
       decisions are proverbially slow encumbered, as they are, by a
       considerable degree of procedural red tape in the process of their
       making. A certain amount of latitude is, therefore, not impermissible.
       It is rightly said that those who bear responsibility of Government must
       have ‘a little play at the joints’. Due recognition of these limitations on
       governmental functioning — of course, within reasonable limits — is
       necessary if the judicial approach is not to be rendered unrealistic. It
       would, perhaps, be unfair and unrealistic to put government and
       private parties on the same footing in all respects in such matters.
       Implicit in the very nature of governmental functioning is procedural
       delay incidental to the decision-making process.” […]
26. Mst. Katiji (supra) was also noticed by a Bench of three Hon’ble

Judges of this Court in
State of Haryana v. Chandra Mani10
where we

find the following discussion:
“11. *** When the State is an applicant, praying for condonation of
       delay, it is common knowledge that on account of impersonal
       machinery and the inherited bureaucratic methodology imbued with
       the note-making, file-pushing, and passing-on-the-buck ethos, delay
       on the part of the State is less difficult to understand though more
       difficult to approve, but the State represents collective cause of the
       community. It is axiomatic that decisions are taken by
       officers/agencies proverbially at slow pace and encumbered process of
       pushing the files from table to table and keeping it on table for
       considerable time causing delay — intentional or otherwise — is a
       routine. Considerable delay of procedural red-tape in the process of
       their making decision is a common feature. Therefore, certain amount
       of latitude is not impermissible. If the appeals brought by the State
10
(1996) 3 SCC 132.
13
are lost for such default no person is individually affected but what in
       the ultimate analysis suffers, is public interest. The expression
       ‘sufficient cause’ should, therefore, be considered with pragmatism in
       justice-oriented approach rather than the technical detection of
       sufficient cause for explaining every day’s delay. The factors which are
       peculiar to and characteristic of the functioning of the governmental
       conditions would be cognizant to and requires adoption of pragmatic
       approach in justice-oriented process.” ***
27. This Court, in
Special Tehsildar, Land Acquisition v. K.V.

Ayisumma11
, had the occasion to observe that it would not be necessary

for the State to provide a day-to-day explanation of delay while seeking

condonation of the same. The relevant observations therein read as follows:
“It is now settled law that when the delay was occasioned at the behest
       of the Government, it would be very difficult to explain the day-to-day
       delay. The transaction of the business of the Government was being
       done leisurely by officers who had no or evince no personal interest at
       different levels. No one takes personal responsibility in processing the
       matters expeditiously. As a fact at several stages, they take their own
       time to reach a decision. Even in spite of pointing at the delay, they do
       not take expeditious action for ultimate decision in filing the appeal.
       This case is one of such instances. It is true that
Section 5
of the
       Limitation Act envisages explanation of the delay to the satisfaction of
       the court and in matters of
Limitation Act
made no distinction between
       the State and the citizen.
Nonetheless adoption of strict standard of
       proof leads to grave miscarriage of public justice. It would result in
       public mischief by skilful management of delay in the process of filing
       the appeal. The approach of the Court should be pragmatic but not
       pedantic. Under those circumstances, the Subordinate Judge has
       rightly adopted correct approach and had condoned the delay without
       insisting upon explaining every day's delay in filing the review
       application in the light of the law
laid down by
this Court. The High
       Court was not right in setting aside the order. Delay was rightly
       condoned.”
11
(1996) 10 SCC 634.
14
ANALYSIS
28. We have heard Mr. Sharma and Mr. Sen, appearing on behalf of the

appellants and the respondents respectively, and perused the order under

challenge.
29. Considering the aforementioned decisions, there cannot be any quarrel

that this Court has stepped in to ensure that substantive rights of private

parties and the State are not defeated at the threshold simply due to

technical    considerations   of    delay.    However,        these    decisions

notwithstanding,   we   reiterate   that   condonation   of    delay   being   a

discretionary power available to courts, exercise of discretion must

necessarily depend upon the sufficiency of the cause shown and the degree

of acceptability of the explanation, the length of delay being immaterial.

Sometimes, due to want of sufficient cause being shown or an acceptable

explanation being proffered, delay of the shortest range may not be

condoned whereas, in certain other cases, delay of long periods can be

condoned if the explanation is satisfactory and acceptable. Of course, the

courts must distinguish between an ‘explanation’ and an ‘excuse’. An

‘explanation’ is designed to give someone all of the facts and lay out the

cause for something. It helps clarify the circumstances of a particular event

and allows the person to point out that something that has happened is not

his fault, if it is really not his fault. Care must however be taken to

distinguish an ‘explanation’ from an ‘excuse’. Although people tend to see

‘explanation’ and ‘excuse’ as the same thing and struggle to find out the
15
difference between the two, there is a distinction which, though fine, is real.

An ‘excuse’ is often offered by a person to deny responsibility and

consequences when under attack. It is sort of a defensive action. Calling

something as just an ‘excuse’ would imply that the explanation proffered is

believed not to be true. Thus said, there is no formula that caters to all

situations and, therefore, each case for condonation of delay based on

existence or absence of sufficient cause has to be decided on its own facts.

At this stage, we cannot but lament that it is only excuses, and not

explanations, that are more often accepted for condonation of long delays

to safeguard public interest from those hidden forces whose sole agenda is

to ensure that a meritorious claim does not reach the higher courts for

adjudication.
30. Be that as it may, it is important to bear in mind that we are not

hearing an application for condonation of delay but sitting in appeal over a

discretionary order of the High Court granting the prayer for condonation

of delay. In the case of the former, whether to condone or not would be the

only question whereas in the latter, whether there has been proper exercise

of discretion in favour of grant of the prayer for condonation would be the

question. Law is fairly well-settled that “a court of appeal should not

ordinarily interfere with the discretion exercised by the courts below”. If

any authority is required, we can profitably refer to the decision in
Manjunath Anandappa v. Tammanasa12
, which in turn relied on the
12
(2003) 10 SCC 390.
16
decision in
Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd. v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor

Sabha13
where it has been held that “an appellate power interferes not

when the order appealed is not right but only when it is clearly wrong”.
31. The order under challenge in this appeal is dated 21st December 2011.

It was rendered at a point of time when the decisions in Mst. Katiji (supra),
Ramegowda
(supra),
Chandra Mani
(supra),
K.V. Ayisumma
(supra)

and
Lipok AO
(supra) were holding the field. It is not that the said decisions

do not hold the field now, having been overruled by any subsequent

decision.
Although there have been some decisions in the recent past

[
State of M.P. v. Bherulal14
is one such decision apart from
University

of Delhi
(supra)] which have not accepted governmental lethargy,

tardiness and indolence in presenting appeals within time as sufficient

cause for condonation of delay, yet, the exercise of discretion by the High

Court has to be tested on the anvil of the liberal and justice oriented

approach expounded in the aforesaid decisions which have been
referred

to above
. We find that the High Court in the present case assigned the

following reasons in support of its order:
a.    The law of limitation was founded on public policy, and that some

             lapse on the part of a litigant, by itself, would not be sufficient to

             deny condonation of delay as the same could cause miscarriage

             of justice.
13
(1980) 2 SCC 593.
14
(2020) 10 SCC 654.
17
b.   The expression sufficient cause is elastic enough for courts to do

          substantial justice. Further, when substantial justice and technical

          considerations are pitted against one another, the former would

          prevail.
c.   It is upon the courts to consider the sufficiency of cause shown

          for the delay, and the length of delay is not always decisive while

          exercising discretion in such matters if the delay is properly

          explained. Further, the merits of a claim were also to be

          considered when deciding such applications for condonation of

          delay.
d.   Further, a distinction should be drawn between inordinate

          unexplained delay and explained delay, where in the present case,

          the first respondent had sufficiently explained the delay on

          account of negligence on part of the government functionaries and

          the government counsel on record before the Reference Court.

     e.   The officer responsible for the negligence would be liable to suffer

          and not public interest through the State. The High Court felt

          inclined to take a pragmatic view since the negligence therein did

          not border on callousness.
32. Given these reasons, we do not consider discretion to have been

exercised by the High Court in an arbitrary manner. The order under

challenge had to be a clearly wrong order so as to be liable for interference,

which it is not.
18
33. It is now time to distinguish the two decisions on which Mr. Sharma

heavily relied on.
34.
Balwant Singh
(supra) arose out of a landlord-tenant dispute. Our

thought process need not be guided by the law laid down on what would

constitute ‘sufficient cause’ in a dispute between private parties to a case

where the Central Government is a party.
35.
According to Mr. Sharma, University of Delhi
(supra) is a decision by

a larger Bench and, therefore, binding on us. This Court, while deciding
University of Delhi
(supra), was seized of a situation where even if the

delay were to be condoned, it would cause grave prejudice to the

respondent Delhi Metro Rail Corporation at the instance of the casual

approach of the appellant University. This Court, on the argument of non-

availability of the Vice Chancellor for granting approval to file the appeal,

and other reasons put forth in the matter, could not conclude that there

was fulfilment of sufficient cause for condonation of delay; hence, the

refusal to condone the delay. The decision really turns on the facts before

this Court because of the prejudice factor involved.
36. We can also profitably refer to
Koting Lamkang
(supra), cited by Mr.

Sen, where the same Bench of three Hon’ble Judges of this Court which

decided
University of Delhi
(supra) was of the view that the impersonal

nature of the State’s functioning should be given due regard, while ensuring

that individual defaults are not nit-picked at the cost of collective interest.

The relevant paragraphs read as follows:
19
“7. But while concluding as above, it was necessary for the Court to
    also be conscious of the bureaucratic delay and the slow pace in
    reaching a government decision and the routine way of deciding
    whether the State should prefer an appeal against a judgment adverse
    to it. Even while observing that the law of limitation would harshly
    affect the party, the Court felt that the delay in the appeal filed by the
    State, should not be condoned.
8. Regard should be had in similar such circumstances to the
    impersonal nature of the Government's functioning where individual
    officers may fail to act responsibly. This in turn, would result in
    injustice to the institutional interest of the State. If the appeal filed by
    the State are lost for individual default, those who are at fault, will not
    usually be individually affected.”
                                            (underlining ours, for emphasis)
37. Having bestowed serious consideration to the rival contentions, we feel

that the High Court’s decision to condone the delay on account of the first

respondent’s inability to present the appeal within time, for the reasons

assigned therein, does not suffer from any error warranting interference.

As the aforementioned judgments have shown, such an exercise of

discretion does, at times, call for a liberal and justice-oriented approach by

the Courts, where certain leeway could be provided to the State. The hidden

forces that are at work in preventing an appeal by the State being

presented within the prescribed period of limitation so as not to allow a

higher court to pronounce upon the legality and validity of an order of a

lower court and thereby secure unholy gains, can hardly be ignored.

Impediments in the working of the grand scheme of governmental functions

have to be removed by taking a pragmatic view on balancing of the

competing interests.
20
CONCLUSION
38. For the foregoing reasons and the special circumstances obtaining here

that the impugned order reasonably condones the delay caused in

presenting the appeal by the first respondent before the High Court, the

present appeal is, accordingly, dismissed. Pending applications, if any, also

stand disposed of.
39. Parties shall bear their own costs.
...................................J.
                                                 [BELA M. TRIVEDI]




                                                 …................................J.
                                                 [DIPANKAR DATTA]

NEW DELHI;
9TH OCTOBER, 2023.
21