[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Mukesh Kumar vs S.Kuldeep Singh on 5 October, 2023
Bench:
Sanjay Kumar
,
Aniruddha Bose
NON-REPORTABLE

2023INSC873                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8641 OF 2009

             MUKESH KUMAR                                                     … APPELLANT(S)

                                                       VERSUS



             S. KULDEEP SINGH                                          … RESPONDENT (S)


                                                  JUDGMENT
S.V.N. BHATTI, J.
1.             The appellant-Mukesh Kumar is the tenant of Shop No. 5 at Guru Amardas

             Chowk, Model Town, Jalandhar. In the instant Civil Appeal, he challenges the

             Order of Eviction from Shop No.5 under Section 13-B of the Act1.
2.             S. Kuldeep Singh, son of S. Harbhajan Singh-owner, filed Eviction

             Application No.6 of 2003 against the appellant-tenant for the subject premises

             before the Rent Controller, Jalandhar. Parties are referred to as Mukesh Kumar

             and S. Kuldeep Singh for the appellant and the respondent, respectively. The

             eviction case is that S. Kuldeep Singh’s father, late S. Harbhajan Singh, owned

             the tenanted premises. S. Kuldeep Singh inherited the ownership of the tenanted
Signature Not Verified
premises along with other legal heirs of S. Harbhajan Singh. The monthly rent is
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
Date: 2023.10.05
17:41:34 IST
Reason:
1
East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949
.
1
Rs. 225/-. Mukesh Kumar continued to be the tenant of S. Kuldeep Singh even

after the demise of S. Harbhajan Singh. The averments in the Application under
Section 13-B
of the Act are that S. Kuldeep Singh, born in India, was raised and

educated in England. He was working for gains in England and was rendered

without work due to recession. Therefore, he had come to India to make a living.

It is averred that Shop No. 3 in the same complex, belongs to S. Kuldeep Singh.

An application filed for eviction of Shop No. 3 ended in dismissal. Now, he seeks

eviction of tenanted premises in Shop No. 5 for doing business. The categorical

averment is that the owner, his brothers and his mother intend to do business in

the complex’s shops by converting the shop into a proper showroom. The

Eviction Application has an averment that S. Kuldeep Singh has no other

premises in his possession or occupation. Hence, the Petition for Eviction under
Section 13-B
of the Act.
3.     The case set out by Mukesh Kumar for leave to defend Eviction

Application is stated as follows:
3.1.   The tenanted premises are part of a big building, and Shop No.3 is in

possession of M/s Arcade, represented by Kishan Lal Chaudhari. Nasib Kaur,

mother of S. Kuldeep Singh, filed a Petition for Ejectment of Shop No. 3. The

petition was dismissed. S. Kuldeep Singh is neither the owner nor the landlord of

the tenanted premises, and the Eviction Petition at the instance of S. Kuldeep

Singh is, therefore, not maintainable.
2
3.2.
Section 2(dd)
of the Act defines a non-resident Indian, and S. Kuldeep

Singh is not a Non-Resident Indian. S. Kuldeep Singh cannot seek eviction of the

subject premises under
Section 13-B
of the Act. Malafides vitiated the eviction

proceeding, for S. Kuldeep Singh need not come to do business in India.
Section

13-B
, eviction at the instance of S. Kuldeep Singh, is not maintainable for this

reason as well. Curiously, Mukesh Kumar states that S. Kuldeep Singh offered to

sell the tenanted premises. Still, the transaction could not go forward, for S.

Kuldeep Singh demanded twenty lakh rupees as sale consideration for the

tenanted premises. This averment is inconsistent with the other averment viz., that

S. Kuldeep Singh is not the owner of the tenanted premises. For brevity, we refer

to the limited grounds raised by the tenant for leave to defend the petition.
4.     The Rent Controller, by Order dated 14.05.2004, rejected the Leave

Petition and ordered the eviction of Mukesh Kumar. Tenant filed Civil Revision

No. 3101 of 2004 before the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh.
The High Court dismissed the Revision on 05.05.2008. Hence, the Civil Appeal.
5.     Learned Counsel Kavita Wadia, appearing for Mukesh Kumar, contends

that the Order of Eviction, through the summary procedure under
Section 13-B
of the Act, is wholly illegal and unsustainable. The tenanted premises are part of

a big building—the family members of S. Kuldeep Singh own shops. The Rent

Controller ordered the eviction of one of the shop rooms in favour of a family

member of S. Kuldeep Singh. The consequence of such an Eviction Order in

favour of a family member is that S. Kuldeep Singh cannot claim possession of
3
yet another shop room through summary procedure. By a plain reading of
Sections 2(a)
and
13-B
of the Act, the eviction in the stated circumstances,

through summary procedure, is not maintainable. The right under
Section 13-B
is not absolute, and the statutory bar, viz., apply for eviction under
Section 13-B
,

is available: (a) after five years from the date of becoming owner and (b) only

once during the lifetime of such owner is applied mandatory before ordering

eviction through summary procedure.
5.1.     The Rent Controller and the High Court did not examine and apply the in-

built safeguards in the scheme of summary eviction. The flow of title to the shops

owned by the owner’s family members would clinchingly establish that each shop

is a building by itself. Once the possession of a shop is secured by a family

member, leave to defend ought to have been granted to Mukesh Kumar. The

learned Counsel invited our attention to
Baldev Singh Bajwa v. Monish Saini2
and
Ram Krishan Grover and others v. Union of India
and others3 for the

proposition that the conditions of
Section 13-B
are mandatory and carefully

followed by the primary and Revisionary Court. Hence, eviction of a tenant under
Section 13-B
is not a matter of course.
6.       Learned Counsel for S. Kuldeep Singh contends that the summary eviction

of the tenant was fully compliant with the requirements of
Section 13-B
of the

Act. The findings of fact recorded in the impugned judgments do take away any
2
(2005) 12 SCC 778
3
(2020) 12 SCC 506
4
view by this Court as beyond the scope of Appeal under
Article 136
of the

Constitution of India. Further,
Section 18-A
obligates the tenant, to avoid eviction

to apply with grounds for leave to defend the summary eviction petition. A

reading of Sub-Sections (4) and (5) of
Section 18-A
discloses that the Rent

Controller examines the grounds raised against summary eviction and the

affidavit filed by the tenant, which would reveal such facts as disentitling the

landlord from obtaining an Order for Recovery of Possession through summary

proceeding. In other words, it is argued that the Rent Controller examines the

grounds in
Section 13-B
of the Act in the background of objections/grounds

raised by the tenant and decides a case for leave to defend is made out by the

tenant. The Counsel invited our attention to the Leave Application and argued

that the legal contention now introduced by referring to
Section 2(a)
“building”,

read with
Section 13-B
first proviso, was not an issue before the Rent Controller

and the High Court. He further contends that a new ground introduced before the

High Court was examined and rejected, and the Supreme Court ought not to

entertain a new or recent plea altogether. The plea now raised is not entirely a

plea in law. By commending to us the concurrent findings of facts recorded by

the High Court and the Rent Controller, he prays for dismissing the Appeal.
7.    We have taken note of the contentions of both the Counsel appearing for

the parties and perused the record.
8.    Let us preface
Section 13-B
and Sub-Sections (4) and (5) of
Section 18-A
of the Act:
5
“13B. Right to recover immediate possession of residential
building or scheduled building and/or non-residential
building to accruing to Non-resident Indian. - (1) Where an
owner is a Non-Resident Indian and returns to India and the
residential building or scheduled building and/or non-
residential building, as the case may be, let out by him or her,
is required for his or her use, or for the use of any one
ordinarily living with and dependent on him or her, he or she,
may apply to the Controller for immediate possession of
such building or buildings, as the case may be:
Provided that a right to apply in respect of such a
building under this Section, shall be available only after a
period of five years from the date of becoming the owner of
such a building and shall be available only once during the
life time of such an owner.
(2) Where the owner referred to in sub-section (1), has let
out more than one residential building or scheduled building
and/or non-residential building, it shall be open to him or her
to make an application under that sub-section in respect of
only one residential building or one scheduled building
and/or one non-residential building, each chosen by him or
her.
(3) Where an owner recovers possession of a building under
this Section, he or she shall not transfer it through sale or any
other means or let it out before the expiry of a period of five
years from the date of taking possession of the said building,
failing which, the evicted tenant may apply to the Controller
for an order directing that he shall be restored the possession
of the said building and the Controller shall make an order
accordingly.
18A. Special procedure for disposal of applications under
Section 13-A
or
Section 13-B
.-
(1) xxx     xxx    xxx
(2) xxx     xxx    xxx
(3) xxx     xxx    xxx
(4) The tenant on whom the service of summons has been
declared to have been validly made under sub-section (3),
shall have no right to contest the prayer for eviction from the
[residential building or scheduled building and/or non
residential building], as the case may be, unless he files an
affidavit stating the grounds on which he seeks to contest the
application for eviction and obtains leave from the
Controller as hereinafter provided, and in default of his
6
appearance in pursuance of the summons or his obtaining
               such leave, the statement made by the specified landlord or,
               as the case may be, the widow, widower, child, grandchild
               or the widowed daughter-in-law of such specified landlord
               [or the owner, who is non resident Indian] in the application
               for eviction shall be deemed to be admitted by the tenant and
               the applicant shall be entitled to an order for eviction of the
               tenant.
(5) The Controller may give to the tenant leave to contest
               the application if the affidavit filed by the tenant discloses
               such facts as would desentitle the specified landlord or, as
               the case may be, the widow, widower, child, grand- child or
               widowed daughter-in-law [or the owner, who is non resident
               Indian] of such specified landlord from obtaining an order
               for the recovery of possession of the [residential building or
               scheduled building and/or non residential building], as the
               case may be, under [
section 13-A
or
section 13-B
].”
9.
In
Baldev Singh Bajwa
(supra), the scope of
Section 13-B
is laid down as

a ratio decidendi, and the true ratio of Baldev Singh Bajwa is considered and

explained in
Ram Krishan Grover
(supra). The excerpt from Ram Krishan

Grover’s case explains the dicta of both the citations.
10.
In
Ram Krishan Grover
(supra), this Court examined the constitutional

validity of
Section 13-B
of the Act and extension of
Section 13-B
vide

Notification dated 09.10.2009 to the Union Territory of Chandigarh. The Court

framed the following questions:
“A. Whether Notification dated 9-10-2009 issued under
Section 87
of the Reorganisation Act extending
Section 13-
               B
of the Rent Act to Chandigarh by executive action is
               invalid?
B. Whether amendments made vide the Amendment Act
               with regard to the rights of Non-Resident Indians by the
               State Legislature of Punjab were beyond its competence?
7
C. Whether
Section 13-B
of the Rent Act is arbitrary and
              unreasonable inasmuch as it does not afford any legal
              remedy to the tenants?”
11.   The answer to Question No. ‘C’ is relevant for our purpose and excerpted

herein:
“37. In terms of
Section 13-B
of the Rent Act, the landlord
              should have been the owner of the premises for five years
              before the eviction petition is filed. Such landlord/owner is
              permitted to file an eviction petition only once during the
              lifetime and in respect of one building. Sub-section (3) to
Section 13-B
of the Rent Act imposes a restriction on sale or
              lease of the premises for a period of five years from the date
              of taking possession from the tenant. On breach of the
              conditions/restrictions mentioned in sub-section (3) to
              Section 13-B, the tenant has a right to seek restoration of
              possession. Sub-section (2-B) to
Section 19
imposes a
              maximum punishment of six months' imprisonment or a fine
              of one thousand rupees or both in case the landlord does not
              occupy the premises for a continuous period of three months
              after getting an eviction order or lets out the whole or any
              part of the premises to a third person other than the tenant in
              contravention of the provisions of sub-section (3) to Section
              13-B. The reasoning in
Baldev Singh Bajwa [Baldev Singh
              Bajwa v. Monish Saini
, (2005) 12 SCC 778] exposits that
              these restrictions and conditions are strong in-built checks to
              ensure that the need of the landlord should be genuine and
              bona fide and the tenant should not be subjected to frivolous
              and dubious eviction order by relying on false assertions.
38. The presumption raised with regard to the genuine need
              of the landlord as pleaded in the petition should not be read
              as an axiom or self-evident truth, which entitles the landlord
              and mandates the court to pass a decree of eviction. This is
              clear from subsequent elucidation by this Court in paras 20
              and 21 in Baldev Singh Bajwa [Baldev Singh Bajwa v.
Monish Saini, (2005) 12 SCC 778]. The true ratio, in our
              opinion, is reflected in para 25, which reads as under:
(
Baldev Singh Bajwa [Baldev Singh Bajwa v. Monish Saini
,
              (2005) 12 SCC 778], SCC p. 796)

              “25. On the interpretation given by us and on a plain reading
              of the provisions, once in a lifetime possession is given to an
              NRI to get one building vacated in a summary manner. A
8
Non-Resident Indian landlord is required to prove that: (i) he
                  is an NRI; (ii) that he has returned to India permanently or
                  for a temporary period; (iii) requirement of the
                  accommodation by him or his dependant is genuine; and (iv)
                  he is the owner of the property for the last five years before
                  the institution of the proceedings for ejectment before the
                  Controller. The tenant's affidavit asking for leave to contest
                  the NRI landlord's application should confine itself to the
                  grounds which NRI landlord is required to prove, to get
                  ejectment under
Section 13-B
of the Act. The Controller's
                  power to give leave to contest the application filed under
                  Section 13-B is circumscribed to the grounds and inquiry on
                  the aspects specified in Section 13-B. The tenant would be
                  entitled for leave to contest only if he makes a strong case to
                  challenge those grounds. Inquiry would be confined to
                  Section 13-B and no other aspect shall be considered by the
                  Controller.”
39. The requirement of a “strong case” for obtaining leave to
                  defend means a good case that brings to fore reasonable and
                  well-grounded basis on which the tenant seeks leave to
                  contest the eviction proceedings. It does not mean setting up
                  and establishing at that stage a case beyond any scintilla of
                  doubt and debate. The grounds and pleas raised should
                  reflect clear and strong defence and relate to the grounds
                  mentioned in para 25 in
Baldev Singh Bajwa [Baldev Singh
                  Bajwa v. Monish Saini
, (2005) 12 SCC 778] .
The standard
                  applied is similar to parameters elucidated in
Inderjeet Kaur
                  v. Nirpal Singh [Inderjeet Kaur
v. Nirpal Singh, (2001) 1
                  SCC 706] , in which this Court had held that the leave to
                  defend should not be granted on mere asking but when the
                  pleas and contentions raise triable issues and the dispute on
                  facts demands that the matter be properly adjudicated after
                  ascertaining the truth of affidavits filed by the witnesses in
                  their cross-examination. Each case has to be decided on its
                  merits and not on the basis of any preconceived suppositions
                  and presumptions. By providing for a simplified procedure
                  of eviction by the Non-Resident Indians, Section 13-B does
                  not dilute the rights of tenants. It gives a chance to the tenants
                  on merits to establish their case and when justified and
                  necessary to take the matter to trial. By no means, therefore,
                  Section 13-B can be held to be arbitrary and unreasonable.”
12.     We will revert to the applicability of the above excerpt to the case on hand,

a little later.
9
13.   We perused the Orders impugned, and we notice that after examining each

one of the grounds raised by the tenant, the Rent Controller recorded that the

ground raised by Mukesh Kumar that S. Kuldeep Singh is not the owner, is

unsustainable and rejected the said ground. It is recorded that Mukesh Kumar,

having referred to an offer of S. Kuldeep Singh to sell the property, cannot dispute

the status of S. Kuldeep Singh as the owner of the tenanted premises. The finding

of fact on maintainability of eviction at the instance of S. Kuldeep Singh is

correctly recorded by the Rent Controller, and we agree with the said finding as

available in the present background.
14.   It is argued that S. Kuldeep Singh does not fit into the NRI status or satisfy

the conditions precedent for availing the summary procedure for eviction. The

Rent Controller held that the owner was born in India and presently has a passport

issued by the United Kingdom of Britain and Northern Ireland and, therefore,

satisfies the requirements of
Section 2(dd)
of the Act. No exception to this finding

is pointed out in the Civil Appeal. The other ground is meeting the requirements

of
Section 13-B
of the Act. In Paragraph-11 of the Order dated 14.05.2004, the

Rent Controller had elaborately considered this objection of Mukesh Kumar and

rejected the objection. It is held that the contention that S. Kuldeep Singh is not

the owner is also contrary to the very case pleaded by Mukesh Kumar. To wit,

Mukesh Kumar need not negotiate with S. Kuldeep Singh as owner if the tenant

disputes the ownership of the property. On the grounds urged by the tenant, the
10
Rent Controller observed that a case to contest the summary eviction proceeding

is not made out and leave need not be granted.
14.1. Before the Revisional Court, it was argued that S. Kuldeep Singh was not

the owner for five years to avail remedy under
Section 13-B
of the Act. The High

Court answered that this differs from the case pleaded before the Rent Controller

and a new case cannot be entertained. What is applicable before the High Court

on a new plea being raised is applied with the same reasoning while examining

the new pleas raised by Mukesh Kumar in the instant Civil Appeal.


14.2. A plain reading of
Section 18(4)
and
Section 18(5)
makes it clear that the

tenant files an affidavit stating the grounds on which the tenant desires to contest

the Application for Eviction and obtains leave of the court. Sub-Section (5)

conditions the discretion of the Rent Controller to examine the affidavit filed by

the tenant, and the grounds in the affidavit would disentitle the landlord from

obtaining possession through summary procedure. In other words, the initial case,

i.e., the summary procedure set in motion by the landlord, is tested on the grounds

raised by the tenant in the affidavit against the case averred by the landlord and a

finding is returned whether leave to defend is granted or not. As evident from the

record, the arguments before this Court are made in new terms. The

maintainability of an Eviction Application under Section 13-B is not a stand-

alone circumstance that this Court can consider and accept. At any rate, the

disqualification for summary eviction proceeding is traced to the alleged serving

of vacant possession of a shop in the same building. This argument cannot be
11
appreciated for more than one reason, viz., (i) there is no evidence on the alleged

possession secured by S. Kuldeep Singh, (ii) the family members can settle

among themselves with an understanding and allow one of the members in need

to secure possession under
Section 13-B
of the Act and (iii) eviction order in

favour of Nasib Kaur cannot be put against S. Kuldeep Singh. These grounds

should have been stated with certainty while serving leave to defend the Eviction

Petition. The consideration of these objections raised without basis or pleas is

impermissible. These arguments, viz., possessing other shops, etc., are merely

noted and need to be rejected.
15.   We have, in the preceding paragraph, with sufficient detail, narrated the

grounds urged by Mukesh Kumar for leave of the Court to contest the Eviction

Application. Now, the argument of the Counsel for the appellant is not that the

pleas raised by the tenant, a finding unavailable is recorded, and leave under

Section 18-A ought to have been granted. The inquiry under
Section 18-A
of the

Act limits the discretion of the Court, namely, to verify that the affidavit filed by

the tenant shows the grounds to contest the Application for Eviction. The Rent

Controller can grant the leave to defend if the affidavit filed by the tenant

discloses such facts as would disentitle the landlord from obtaining an Order for

the Recovery of Possession under
Section 13-B
of the Act. The orders of eviction

are in line with the precedents referred in Para 11 (supra).
16.   From the scheme of things under Section 13-B read with Section 18-A, we

are of the view that the owner invoking Section 13-B satisfies the ingredients of
12
the said Section and the onus is on Mukesh Kumar to disclose such facts as would

disentitle summary eviction under Section 13-B, which, in our considered view,

Mukesh Kumar failed to do.
17.   We have considered the grounds raised before us and believe that the tenant

is introducing a new case, which this Court is not persuaded to entertain new

pleas, particularly in the facts and circumstances of the present Civil Appeal.
18.   In our considered view, the Courts below on being satisfied that the

requirements of Section 13-B are complied with, rightly rejected the leave to

defend as Mukesh Kumar failed to make out a case under Sub-Sections (4) and

(5) of
Section 18-A
of the Act.
19.   For the above reasons, the Appeal fails and is dismissed accordingly. No

order as to costs.
…..………...................J.
                                                         [ANIRUDDHA BOSE]



                                                         …...………................J.
                                                         [SANJAY KUMAR]



                                                         …....……….................J.
                                                         [S.V.N. BHATTI]

NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 05, 2023.
13