[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
State Bank Of India vs P. Zadenga on 3 October, 2023
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Hrishikesh Roy
2023INSC868                                                             REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.2518 OF 2012


             STATE BANK OF INDIA & ORS.                             … APPELLANTS


                                                   VERSUS


             P. ZADENGA                                             … RESPONDENT



                                              JUDGMENT
SANJAY KAROL, J.
1.             The instant lis presents two questions for consideration by

             this Court. They are-
a) Does clause 4 of the Memorandum of Settlement

                                 dated 10th April 2002 create a bar on departmental

                                 proceedings continuing when the person subjected

                                 thereto is being tried before a criminal court for
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
offences of the same origin?
NITIN TALREJA
   Date: 2023.10.03
   18:03:08 IST
   Reason:
Page 1 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
b) Does acquittal in some of the connected proceedings

              entail a benefit in the surviving proceedings? Further,

              inuring a right upon the delinquent employee of

              automatic discharge in disciplinary proceedings?
2.     This appeal, by way of special leave, is directed against the

final judgement and order dated 7th January 2009 passed in Writ

Appeal No.03/2006 by which the order passed in Writ Petition

(Civil) No.12 of 2005 dated 25th July 2005 allowing the appeal of

the Respondent herein against the order of dismissal from bank

services dated 28th March 2003 and the rejection of the

departmental appeal vide order 16 th August 2004, was allowed

and the order of the Learned Single Judge confirmed.


Background
3.     The facts of the instant dispute as they emanate from the

record are:-
3.1 The respondent namely P. Zadenga 1 was employed in the

     State Bank of India2 as Assistant (CAT) at the Dawrpui

     Branch,        Aizawl.      Three      government   retailers   lodged     a

     complaint with the Aizawl Police Station that their challan-
1 Hereinafter referred to as “the delinquent employee”
2 Hereinafter, the “Appellant Bank”
Page 2 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
deposits with the said Branch had not been entered into the

cash receipt scroll. The District Civil Supply Officer, Aizawl

West, also lodged a complaint that a certain retailer had

taken the delivery of particular food stuff using a fake

challan.
3.2 Pursuant thereto, disciplinary proceedings were initiated

against the respondent with the issuance of a Memorandum

dated 8th December 1999, wherein it was alleged that he had

received Rs.61,908 for a deposit on 19 th April,1996 in respect

of which a challan was issued, but the amount never

deposited in the respective account. Two other similar

occurrences dated 21st February 1995 regarding Rs.24,640

and Rs.27,412 were also alleged.
3.3 Three different FIRs stood registered against him, under

which he was arrested but later released on bail. In his

written show cause to this Memorandum, the Delinquent

employee contended that the disciplinary proceedings should

be either dropped or closed since criminal cases were

pending him, arising from the same set of transactions.
Page 3 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
3.4 The appellant-bank proceeded to appoint an inquiry

     officer who, in his report, submitted that three out of four

     charges stood established. The Delinquent Employee, again

     denying the charges, filed a response to that but was

     eventually dismissed from the services at the bank, vide the

     order of dismissal dated 28th March 2003. The departmental

     appeal filed by him, after due opportunity of hearing, was

     dismissed on 16th August 2004.
4.     Aggrieved by the dismissal of the departmental appeal, the

delinquent employee filed Writ Petition (Civil) No.12 of 2005

before the Gauhati High Court. The question before the said

Court was: whether, in view of the Memorandum of Settlement

dated 10th April 20023, the disciplinary proceedings against the

delinquent employee (respondent) herein ought to have been

stayed or not.
5.     Having recorded that post signing of the said MoS, the

Shastri Award as confirmed by the Desai Award “ceased to exist

for all intents and purposes” the Court observed that clause 4 of

3 Hereinafter referred to as “MoS": between the Management of 52 ‘A’ Class Banks as
represented by the Indian Banks’ Association and their workmen as represented by the All
India Bank Employees’ Association, National Confederation of Bank Employees, Indian
National Bank Employees’ Federation.
Page 4 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
the said document was clear and unambiguous and, therefore, it

was not correct for the bank to have subjected him to disciplinary

proceeding during the pendency of criminal proceedings.
6.   However, it would be open for the disciplinary authority to

act under the clauses of the MoS after the criminal cases against

the delinquent employee having reached a conclusion, one way or

the other.
7.   Dissatisfied by the order of the learned Single Judge, a Writ

Appeal was filed bearing No.03 of 2006. Having discussed the

background of the case, the Division Bench discussed the

contention on behalf of the bank regarding the applicability of the

Shastri Award and observed that the continuation of the

disciplinary proceedings during the pendency of criminal cases

would be an infraction, given para 521(3) thereof.
8.   In conclusion, the Division Bench upheld the order of the

learned Single Judge and confirmed the setting aside of the

disciplinary proceedings.
Page 5 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
The Present Appeal
9.    We have heard Mr. Vikas Singh, learned senior counsel for

the appellant bank and Mr. Jitendra Bharti for the delinquent

employee.
10.   Inviting attention to several decisions rendered by this

Court, it is argued on behalf of the appellant-bank that (i)

initiation of departmental proceedings binding criminal trial

would not amount to an automatic stay unless, of course, a

complicated question of law is involved in the matter; (ii) acquittal

in a criminal trial in relation to the very same impugned action

would not preclude the employer to initiate departmental

proceedings; and (iii) mere non-compliance of the provisions of

bipartite agreement, in attending facts, would not result in the

disciplinary action to be void ab initio.
11.   On the other hand, it is argued on behalf of the delinquent

employee that the disciplinary proceedings, the subject matter of

the instant lis, were in gross violation of the bipartite agreement,

which has been held to have the force of law. In any case,

Respondent stand acquitted in two out of three criminal trials.
Page 6 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
Also, the action initiated by the employer was belated and an

afterthought only to harass the delinquent employee.
12.   Before proceeding to the merits of the issue at hand, it

would be appropriate to reproduce clause 4 of the MoS dated 10 th

April 2002, which is the bone of contention in this dispute, for

the delinquent employee contends an apparent embargo on

proceedings with disciplinary enquiry when criminal cases

arising from the same transactions are pending, and the

appellant-bank submitting to the contrary of there being no such

restriction. Clause 4 reads as under: -
“If after steps have been taken to prosecute an
          employee or get him prosecuted, for an offence, he is
          not put on trial within a year of the commission of the
          office, the management may then deal with him as if
          he had committed an act of “gross misconduct” or of
          “minor misconduct”, as defined below; provided that if
          the authority which was to start prosecution
          proceedings refuses to do so or comes to the
          conclusion that there is no case for prosecution it shall
          be open to the management to proceed against the
          employee under the provisions set out below in Clauses
          11 and 12 infra relating to discharge, but he shall out
          below in Clauses 11 and 12 infra relating to discharge,
          but he shall be deemed to have been on duty during
          the period of suspension, if any, and shall be entitled
          to the full wages and allowances and to all other
          privileges for such period. In the event of the
          management deciding, after enquiry, not to continue
          him in service, he shall be liable only for termination
          with three months’ pay and allowances in lieu of notice
Page 7 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
as provided in Clause 3 above. If within the pendency
             of the proceedings thus instituted is put on trial, such
             proceedings shall be stayed pending the completion of
             the trial, after which the provisions mentioned in
             Clause 3 above shall apply.”
                                               (Emphasis Supplied)
13.
In respect of the interpretation of clause 4, we find this

Court to have observed in
State Bank of India & Ors. v. Neelam

Nag4
as follows:-
“21. In the plain language of Clause 4, in our opinion,
             it is not a stipulation to prohibit the institution and
             continuation of disciplinary proceedings, much less
             indefinitely, merely because of the pendency of a
             criminal case against the delinquent employee. On the
             other hand, it is an enabling provision permitting the
             institution or continuation of disciplinary proceedings,
             if the employee is not put on trial by the prosecution
             within one year from the commission of the offence or
             the prosecution fails to proceed against him for want of
             any material.
22. As can be culled out from the last sentence of
             Clause 4, which applies to a case where the criminal
             case has in fact proceeded, as in this case, for trial.
The term “completion of the trial” thereat, must be
             construed as completion of the trial within a
             reasonable time-frame. This clause cannot come to the
             aid of the delinquent employee—who has been named
             as an accused in a criminal case and more so is party
             to prolongation of the trial.”
14.   Against this backdrop, it is also imperative that we look into

the position of law regarding two proceedings of similar origin

continuing simultaneously.
4 (2016) 9 SCC 491
Page 8 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
14.1 This Court in
State of Rajasthan v. B.K. Meena and

     Ors.5
referred to some decisions on the aspect of stay on

     disciplinary proceedings and observed :-
“14. It would be evident from the above decisions that
             each of them starts with the indisputable proposition
             that there is no legal bar for both proceedings to go on
             simultaneously and then say that in certain situations,
             it may not be ‘desirable’, ‘advisable’ or ‘appropriate’ to
             proceed with the disciplinary enquiry when a criminal
             case is pending on identical charges. The staying of
             disciplinary proceedings, it is emphasised, is a matter
             to be determined having regard to the facts and
             circumstances of a given case and that no hard and
             fast rules can be enunciated in that behalf…The
             interest of the delinquent officer also lies in a prompt
             conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings. If he is not
             guilty of the charges, his honour should be vindicated
             at the earliest possible moment and if he is guilty, he
             should be dealt with promptly according to law. It is
             not also in the interest of administration that persons
             accused of serious misdemeanour should be continued
             in office indefinitely, i.e., for long periods awaiting the
             result of criminal proceedings. It is not in the interest
             of administration.
It only serves the interest of the
             guilty and dishonest. While it is not possible to
             enumerate the various factors, for and against the stay
             of disciplinary proceedings, we found it necessary to
             emphasise some of the important considerations in
             view of the fact that very often the disciplinary
             proceedings are being stayed for long periods pending
             criminal proceedings. Stay of disciplinary proceedings
             cannot be, and should not be, a matter of course. …”

                                                    (Emphasis supplied)

     14.2 Further, this Court in
M Paul Anthony v. Bharat

     Gold Mines Ltd.6
elucidated the following principles in



5 (1996) 6 SCC 417
6 (1999) 3 SCC 679
Page 9 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
dealing with departmental and criminal proceedings

simultaneously:-
a.   No   bar   exits    on      both   proceedings    continuing

simultaneously, though in an appropriate, separate

forum.
b. If said proceedings are on identical/similar facts and if

the charges levied against the delinquent employee are of

a serious nature, then it would be desirable if the

departmental proceedings are stayed till the conclusion of

the other.
c. The nature of the charge or the involvement of complex

questions of law and fact depends on the facts and

circumstances of each case, i.e., the offence, nature of the

case launched, evidence and material collected.

d.   Sole consideration of the above-mentioned factors

cannot    be    the     reason    to    stay   the   departmental

proceedings.
e. It must be remembered that departmental proceedings

cannot be unduly and unjustly delayed.
Page 10 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
f.   If the criminal proceedings are delayed, the other,

      having been stayed on account thereof, may be resumed

      to conclude the same at the earliest. This may result in

      two possibilities: either the vindication of the position of

      the delinquent employee or he being found guilty,

      enabling the department concern to show him out the

      door.
14.3 The view taken in
M. Paul Anthony
(supra) was

      referred to by this Court in
Karnataka Power Transmission

      Corpn. Ltd. v. C. Nagaraju7
.
15. As is evident from the judicial pronouncements
referred to

above
, it may be desirable or, in certain circumstances, advisable

for   disciplinary      proceedings     to   be     stayed   when   criminal

proceedings are ongoing; however, stay is not "a matter of course"
and is only to be given after consideration of all factors, for and

against.
16. Keeping           in view
Neelam       Nag
(supra), the following

essentialities may be culled out for the operation of clause 4 –




7 (2019) 10 SCC 367
Page 11 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
a.      At least one year ought to have passed since

     attempts to get the delinquent employee prosecuted;

     b.      If, after the passage of such time, no prosecution is

     initiated, then the department may proceed in accordance

     with its procedure for disciplinary action;

     c.      If the prosecution commences later in point of time

     to the disciplinary proceedings, the latter shall be stayed,

     but not indefinitely. Such proceedings are to be stayed

     only for a reasonable period of time, which is a matter of

     determination per the circumstances of each case.
17. The next aspect we must consider is whether an acquittal in

one of the proceedings entails an acquittal in the other.
17.1 In
Nelson Motis v. Union of India
8 it was observed

     that the question whether departmental proceedings could

     have    continued   in   the   face    of   acquittal   in   criminal

     proceedings had no force as “the nature and scope of a

     criminal case are very different from those of a departmental

     disciplinary proceeding and an order of acquittal, therefore,

     cannot conclude the departmental proceeding .”


8 (1992) 4 SCC 711
Page 12 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
17.2 In
C. Nagaraju
(supra) it was observed:
“9. Acquittal by a criminal court would not debar an
             employer from exercising the power to conduct
             departmental proceedings in accordance with the rules
             and regulations. The two proceedings, criminal and
             departmental, are entirely different. They operate in
             different fields and have different objectives. [
Ajit
             Kumar Nag v. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd.
, (2005) 7 SCC 764 ]
             In the disciplinary proceedings, the question is
             whether the respondent is guilty of such conduct as
             would merit his removal from service or a lesser
             punishment, as the case may be, whereas in the
             criminal proceedings, the question is whether the
             offences registered against him under the
PC Act
are
             established, and if established, what sentence should
             be imposed upon him. The standard of proof, the mode
             of inquiry and the rules governing inquiry and trial in
             both the cases are significantly distinct and different.
[
State of Rajasthan v. B.K. Meena
, (1996) 6 SCC 417]

                                                   (Emphasis supplied)


     17.3 This observation was quoted with profit in the
State

     of Karnataka v. Umesh.9
18. It is a matter of record that concerning the incident(s) in

question, the FIR was registered sometime in 1996, and

disciplinary proceedings were initiated on 8 th December 1999.
With the completion thereof in the year 2002 and pursuant to

further completion of formalities mandatorily required to be

complied with, including the principles of natural justice, the



9 (2022) 6 SCC 563
Page 13 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
delinquent employee was dismissed from service with the passing

of the order dated 28th March 2003.
19.   An appeal preferred by the delinquent employee was also

dismissed in 2004. It is only after the completion of the entire

process of disciplinary proceedings that the delinquent employee,

in February 2005, seeking reliance upon clause 4 of the MoS,

filed a writ petition challenging the action, which, to our mind,

was a belated attempt, only to forestall its implementation.
20.   Repetitive as it may sound, we reiterate the principle of law

enunciated in
Neelam Nag
(supra) that the completion of trial

must be construed as completion “within the reasonable time

frame” and that the clause cannot come to the aid of the

employee “more so”, for “prolongation on the trial”. In the instant

case, the completion of the trial concerning the crime registered

in the year 1996 is nowhere nearing completion.
21.   As a principle of law, we have already observed that a

departmental proceeding pending criminal trial would not

warrant an automatic stay unless, of course, a complicated

question of law is involved. Also, acquittal in a criminal case ipso
Page 14 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
facto would not be tantamount to closure or culmination of

proceedings in favour of a delinquent employee.
22.   Having perused the delinquent employee’s response to the

initiation of inquiry proceedings, most significantly, we notice

that no plea of MoS was ever taken. No specific plea of

postponement of disciplinary proceedings awaiting conclusion of

a criminal trial was made.
23.   It is seen that the officer neither pleaded nor indicated the

prejudice caused to him as a consequence of the initiation of

criminal proceedings or simultaneous continuation of both

proceedings.
24.   Applying all of the above-noted principles to the facts of the

case, we find that neither was it the case of the delinquent

employee that the trial to which he was subjected to begin within

one year of the commission of the offence nor does the record

speak to this effect. It is in the inquiry report 10, dated 3rd

December        2001,      that    an     objection   to   the   disciplinary

proceedings being conducted while a criminal case was being

tried is registered, but even there, no date stands specified.

10 Annexure P-4 Pg.109 of the Paperbook
Page 15 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
25.   Further, it is not the case of the delinquent employee that

the principles of natural justice were not complied with in the

disciplinary proceedings of the bank.
26.   Both these aspects, taken along with the fact that it is not

mandatory to stay the disciplinary proceedings, particularly

when they have been initiated after the prescribed period of one

year, we cannot bring ourselves to agree with the courts below.

The restriction within clause 4 is not complete and is to be

applied on facts.
In such a situation, the Division Bench’s

reliance on
United Commercial Bank & Ors. v. P.C. Kakkar,11
is entirely misconceived.
Contrary to the conclusion arrived at by

the High Court in
Writ Appeal, Kakkar
(supra) furthers the

position of the appellant-bank as it states, “acquittal in the

criminal case is not determinative of the commission of

misconduct or otherwise, and it is open to authorities to proceed

with the disciplinary proceedings, notwithstanding acquittal in

the criminal case.”
27.   Surprisingly, having referred to
Kakkar
(supra), which

takes the above-mentioned position, the High Court, in the very

11 (2003) 4 SCC 364
Page 16 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
next paragraph, takes a diametrically opposite view without any

reasoning to that.
We may, in fact, refer to
Kakkar
(supra) to

reiterate what is expected of persons employed in a bank while

also observing that the conduct of the delinquent employee

herein flies in the face of these principles. This Court noted : -
“14. A bank officer is required to exercise higher
           standards of honesty and integrity. He deals with the
           money of the depositors and the customers. Every
           officer/employee of the bank is required to take all
           possible steps to protect the interests of the bank and
           to discharge his duties with utmost integrity, honesty,
           devotion and diligence and to do nothing which is
           unbecoming of a bank officer. Good conduct and
           discipline are inseparable from the functioning of every
           officer/employee of the bank… The very discipline of an
           organization more particularly a bank is dependent
           upon each of its officers and officers acting and
           operating within their allotted sphere. Acting beyond
           one's authority is by itself a breach of discipline and is
           a misconduct.”

                                                  (Emphasis Supplied)
28.   Given the foregoing discussion and in the light of judicial

pronouncements discussed supra, the appeal succeeds. We set

aside the judgment and order dated 7th January 2009 passed in

Writ Appeal No.03/2006, and consequentially, the order passed

in Writ Petition (Civil) No.12 of 2005 dated 25 th July 2005.
29.   The questions presented in this appeal are answered as

under :
Page 17 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
29.1 Clause 4 of the MoS dated 10 th April 2002 does not

      envisage a complete standstill of departmental proceedings

      as a result of the pendency of criminal proceedings. The

      position of law is that the stay of the latter is desirable, but

      the same is to be affected only for a reasonable period of

      time.
29.2 The nature of proceedings being wholly separate and

      distinct, acquittal in criminal proceedings does not entitle

      the delinquent employee for any benefit in the latter or

      automatic discharge in departmental proceedings.
30.    Consequently, Mr. P. Zadenga’s dismissal from service as

per the Memorandum dated 28th March 2003 (D.P.S.No.2003/02)

is restored.
31.    Interlocutory Applications, if any, stand disposed of.
32.    Parties to bear their own costs.
…………….…………J.
                                                 (HRISHIKESH ROY)


                                                 ………...….…………J.
                                                  (SANJAY KAROL)
Date : 03 October, 2023;
Page 18 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012
Place : New Delhi.
Page 19 of 19
CA No. 2518/2012