[Cites
73
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Assessing Officer Circle ... vs M/S Nestle Sa on 19 October, 2023
Author:
S. Ravindra Bhat
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
1


2023 INSC 928                                                             REPORTABLE
                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 1420 OF 2023



             ASSESSING OFFICER CIRCLE (INTERNATIONAL
             TAXATION) 2(2)(2) NEW DELHI             …APPELLANT(S)

                                                                VERSUS

             M/S NESTLE SA                                                                  …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                                  WITH


                            Civil Appeal No. 1423/2023, Civil Appeal No. 1421-1422/2023,
                              Civil Appeal No. 1424/2023, Civil Appeal No. 1425/2018,
                              Civil Appeal No. 1426/2023, Civil Appeal No. 1427/2023,
                              Civil Appeal No. 1428/2023, Civil Appeal No. 1429/2023,
                              Civil Appeal No. 1430/2023, Civil Appeal No. 1431/2023,
                                             Civil Appeal No. 1432/2023

                                                           JUDGMENT
S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.
Table of Contents
             I.          Facts..................................................................................2
             II. Arguments of parties...........................................................6
                   A.        Revenue’s contentions...............................................................6
                   B.        Contentions of the assessees/Respondents...............................12
Signature Not Verified
III. Relevant statutory provisions.............................................20
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2023.10.19
IV. Analysis............................................................................21
   13:47:24 IST
   Reason:
A.        General...................................................................................21
2
B.   The interpretation of the term “is”...........................................30
     C. Treaty practice of India, in relation to DTAAs and their Protocol,
     and practices of Netherlands, France and Switzerland.....................32
     D. International perspectives and practices...................................47
     E.   Vienna Convention on Law of Treaties.......................................49
V. Conclusions.......................................................................57
1.        The present batch of appeals arise from decisions of the Delhi High Court
involving interpretation of the Most Favoured Nation (MFN) clause contained
in various Indian treaties with countries that are members of the Organisation
for Economic Cooperation and Development (hereafter ‘OECD’). This clause
provides for lowering of rate of taxation at source on dividends, interest,
royalties or fees for technical services (hereafter ‘FTS’) as the case may be, or
restriction of scope of royalty/FTS in the treaty, similar to concession given to
another OECD country subsequently. The bilateral treaties in question are
between India and Netherlands, France, and Switzerland, respectively. Broadly,
the issues arising are whether there is any right to invoke the MFN clause when
the third country with which India has entered into a Double Tax Avoidance
Agreement (hereafter ‘DTAA’) was not an OECD member yet (at the time of
entering into such DTAA); and secondly whether the MFN clause is to be given
effect to automatically or if it is to only come into effect after a notification is
issued.
I. Facts
2.        One of the first judgments1 challenged, in this batch of appeals by special
leave, relates to Steria India. Before the Authority for Advance Ruling (“AAR”),
Steria contended that having regard to Clause 7 of the Protocol to the India-
France DTAA the more restrictive definition of the expression 'fees for technical
services' appearing in the India-UK DTAA, must be read as forming part of the
India-France DTAA as well. The AAR, by the impugned order, disagreed with
1 By judgment dated 28.07.2016 passed by the Delhi High Court in W.P.(C) 4793/2014.
3
Steria. It ruled that the Protocol could not be treated as forming part of the
DTAA itself. It further held that restrictions imposed by the Protocol were only
to limit the taxation at source for the specific items mentioned therein; the
restriction was only on the rates. Further, the 'make available' clause found in
the India-UK DTAA could not be read into the expression 'fee for technical
services' occurring in the India-France DTAA unless there was a notification
under
Section 90
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 issued by the Union Government
to incorporate the more restrictive provisions of the India-UK DTAA into the
India-France DTAA. In other words, Steria’s plea that Clause 7 of the Protocol
did not require any separate notification and could straightway be
operationalised, was not accepted by the AAR. Upon challenge in a writ petition
before the High Court, this was reversed; the court accepted Steria’s contention,
and held that a Protocol is considered as part of the treaty itself and does not
have to be separately notified for the purposes of application of the MFN clause.
Therefore, in Steria, the question for the interpretation of the MFN clause in the
Protocol to the India-France DTAA, was whether a separate notification by the
Union was required for application of the MFN clause. The AAR had concluded
that even though the conditions set out in the MFN clause were satisfied, the
benefit could not be availed unless there was a specific notification by the
Government of India effectuating the benefit under the MFN clause, which the
High Court reversed.
3.    The next set of facts, relate to the India-Netherlands DTAA which was
entered into on 21.01.1989, and notified on 27.03.1989. This DTAA was
amended by a subsequent notification dated 30.08.1999. The respondent
assessees (writ petitioners before the High Court2) were Concentrix Services
Netherlands BV, and Optum Global Solutions International BV, and their Indian
counterparts (in which the former held 99.99% share respectively) which
2
4
remitted dividends. In 2020, Concentrix India and Optum India each applied
under
Section 197
of the Act in the prescribed form, seeking a certificate that
authorized them to deduct withholding tax at a lower rate of 5% in consonance
with the subject DTAA read with the Protocol. In both cases, certificates were
issued on 16.09.2020 and 04.01.2021 respectively by which the stipulated
withholding tax rate was shown as 10%. In both cases, the certificates were
valid till 30.03.2021. The validity period of the certificates came to an end on
31.03.2021 in both cases. By communication dated 17.09.2020, Concentrix,
through its accountants, sought permission of respondents to inspect the files as
well as copies of order sheet(s) which concerned processing of its application
preferred under
Section 197
of the Act. It also sought reasons why the certificate
did not grant the withholding rate at 5%. The respondent sought to justify its
certificate on 01.10.2020, and applied seeking reasons from the appellant
(hereafter “the revenue”). A similar request was made by Optum Netherlands;
the revenue furnished reasons to justify the withholding tax rate which was
pegged at 10% by its communication dated 22.01.2021. Feeling aggrieved, both
Concentrix Ne and Optum Ne approached the Delhi High Court, in proceedings
under
Article 226
of the Constitution.
4.    In both cases, the assessees contended that regard being had to the
phraseology of the DTAA and the subsequent Protocol, the relevant event relied
upon – the provisions of the DTAA and the Protocol, obliged the revenue to
extend the lower rate of 5%. It was urged that since India had entered into
DTAAs with other countries which were members of OECD, the lower rate or
the restricted scope in the DTAA executed between India and such a country
automatically applied to the India-Netherlands DTAA. This was based on the
provision made in the preface of the Protocol which inter alia stated that the
Protocol "shall form part an integral part of the Convention" i.e., the subject
DTAA. It was argued that application of provisions of the DTAA (which
5
followed subsequent to the India-Netherlands DTAA), contrary to the revenue’s
stand, no fresh notification was required.
In support, reliance was placed upon
the rulings in Court in
Steria (India) Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-Tax3
, the
judgment of the Karnataka High Court in
Apollo Tyres Ltd. v. Commissioner of
Income Tax, International Taxation,4 and of another
judgment of the Delhi High
Court in
EPCOS Electronic Components S.A. v. Union of India5
.
5.     By the impugned judgment, the Delhi High Court, allowed the writ
petitions, inter alia, reasoning that:
“15. A bare perusal of Clause IV (2) shows that it incorporates the principle of
       parity between the subject DTAA and the Conventions/DTAAs executed
       thereafter qua the rate of withholding tax or the scope of the Conventions in
       respect of items of income concerning dividends, interest, royalties, fees for
       technical services, or payments for use of equipment [in short "subject
       remittances"].
16. However, the principle of parity kicks-in, only if the following conditions are
       fulfilled:
i. First, the third State with whom India enters into a Convention/DTAA should
       be a member of the OECD.
ii. Second, India should have, in its Convention/DTAA, executed with the third
       State, limited its rate of withholding tax, on subject remittances, at a rate lower
       or a scope more restricted, than the rate or scope provided in the subject
       Convention/DTAA.
17. Once the aforementioned conditions are fulfilled, then, from the date on
       which the Convention/DTAA between India and a third State comes into force,
       the same rate of withholding tax or scope as provided in the Convention/DTAA
       executed between India and the third State would necessarily have to apply to
       the subject DTAA.
17.1. Therefore, the argument advanced on behalf of the revenue, that the
       beneficial provisions contained in the Conventions/DTAAs, executed both prior
       to or after the coming into force of the subject DTAA, i.e., 21.01.1989, could not
       be made applicable to the recipients of remittances covered under the subject
       DTAA even though the concerned third State was a member of the OECD is, to
       our minds, completely misconceived and contrary to the plain terms of Clause
       IV (2) of the protocol appended to the subject DTAA.
17.2. Although it must be said in favour of the revenue, the construct of Clause
       IV (2) is such that in certain cases there could be a hiatus between the dates on
       which the Convention/DTAA is executed between India and the third State and
       the date when such third State becomes a member of OECD. The limit on the
       lower rate of tax or the scope more restricted contained in the

3 [2016] 386 ITR 390 (Delhi): Judgment dated 22.04.2021 passed by the Delhi High Court in WP (C) No.
9051/2020 and connected matters.
4 [2018] 92 Taxmann.com 166 (Karnataka)
5 2019 SCC OnLine Del 9113
6
Convention/DTAA executed between India and the third State can only apply
        when the third State fulfils the attribute of being a member of the OECD.
        17.3. We must point out that a lot of emphases is laid on behalf of the revenue
        on the word "is" mentioned in the following part of Clause IV (2) in the context
        of the aforementioned third States with which India has entered into
        Conventions/DTAAs after the execution of the subject DTAA "... which is a
        member of the OECD...".
17.4. In our view, the word "is" describes a state of affairs that should exist not
        necessarily at the time when the subject DTAA was executed but when a request
        is made by the taxpayer or deductee for issuance of a lower rate withholding
        tax certificate under
Section 197
of the Act. The word 'is'- is both autological
        and heterological. An autological word is one that expresses the property that it
        possesses. Opposite of that is a heterological2 word, i.e., it does not describe
        itself. The examples of autological words are expressions such as "English",
        "Noun", or "Word". Heterological words as indicated above are those which do
        not describe themselves or have the potential of developing into several forms
        or supporting multiple interpretations. An example of a heterological word is
        the word "long". The word long does not describe itself because it is not a long
        word.
17.5. Therefore, bearing the aforesaid in mind, the best interpretative tool that
        can be employed to glean the intent of the Contracting States in framing Clause
        IV (2) of the protocol would be as to how the other contracting State [i.e., the
        Netherlands] has interpreted the provision.”

     The judgment then considered the executive decree issued by Netherlands,
pursuant to the Protocol, as a method of interpretation of how the event, i.e.
entry of another country into OECD, which had a previous DTAA with India (or
where a country which was in OECD and subsequently entered into DTAA with
India) had to be dealt with.
6.      The judgment in Concentrix was followed subsequently, in the case of
Nestle SA v. Assessing Officer Circle (International Taxation
) 6 which is also
under challenge. In the revenue’s appeals7 in Nestle what was considered by the
Delhi High Court, were provisions of the India-Switzerland DTAA and its three
protocols. The other judgments impugned before this court have similar facts,
and the decisions by the High Court have followed the position laid out in
Steria and Concentrix.
6 W.P. (C) No. 3243 of 2021 decided on 04.06.2021
7 Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (C) No. 5360/2022
7
II.        Arguments of parties

     A. Revenue’s contentions
7.      The revenue argues, through the Additional Solicitor General, Shri N.
Venkatraman (hereafter “ASG”) that the impugned judgments are unsustainable.
The revenue points out that under the Indian Constitution, especially by
operation of
Articles 253 (read with Entries 13
, 14
and
15 of List I of the
Seventh Schedule)
of the Constitution of India, Parliament has exclusive power
to legislate in respect of any treaty or convention, entered into by India, with
any other nation; such treaty can only be entered into in exercise of executive
power of the Union. It was urged that without Parliamentary legislation, such
treaties are unenforceable, having regard to the express terms of
Article 253 8
which clothe Parliament alone with the power to make laws “notwithstanding”
other provisions in that chapter- which delineates and distributes legislative
power between the Union and States. Counsel submitted that India follows the
“dualist” practise, which means that international treaties and conventions are
not, upon their ratification, automatically assimilated into municipal law (i.e. the
national legal system) but would require enabling legislation. This is in contrast
to those countries which are “monist”, wherein the treaty provisions are
enforceable like municipal law, and are to be given equal weight by courts.
8.      The ASG relied upon the decisions in
Gramaphone Co. of India Ltd v.
Birendra Bahadur Pandey & Ors.9
and
Union of India (UOI) & Ors. v. Azadi
Bachao Andolan & Ors.10
to urge that the position in India is entrenched that
without enabling legislation, any convention or event flowing from a
convention, as in creation of rights and liabilities of third parties to conventions


8
Article 253 "
Legislation for giving effect to international agreements Notwithstanding anything in the
foregoing provisions of this Chapter, Parliament has power to make any law for the whole or any part of the
territory of India for implementing any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or countries or
any decision made at any international conference, association or other body. "
9 1984 [2] SCR 664
10 2003 (Supp 4) SCR 222
8
or treaties, do not operate on their own, and needs an intervening action by the
Union, giving effect to such obligation.
9.    The ASG relied on
Section 90
which requires the issuance of a
notification, to give effect to any treaty or convention. It is argued that in the
absence of any law, mere entering into a treaty or convention or protocol cannot
give rise to any right under the taxation laws having regard to the structure of
Section 90
. Therefore, in the present case, the trigger to the MFN clause can
occur at a later point in time when India enters into a treaty or convention with
other nations which happens to be a member of the OECD at the time it enters
into treaty or convention with India and if the DTAA with such country provides
for taxation at rate lower than or benefit over and above conferred upon the
parties of the existing DTAA between India and the other nation. However, it
would still require issuance of a notification to give effect to such consequence.
The incident involved in the present case – i.e., the mere fact that India entered
into DTAAs with Slovenia, Lithuania, and Columbia at certain points in time
and that some of them gained membership of OECD, ipso facto could not lead
to claims by the respondents assessees that similar or identical treatment had to
be extended to them as tax residents of Netherlands, France, and Switzerland
respectively.
10.   The learned ASG pointed out to the treaty practice between India and
each of the three countries (France, Netherlands and Switzerland). He also
referred to the fact that after Slovenia had entered OECD (in 2010) a Protocol
has been signed between India and France. This Protocol was notified sometime
in 2012. This, it was argued, is a clear pointer to the fact that entering into
membership of OECD per se does not result in automatic grants of benefits to a
country which had entered into DTAA with India because the later Protocol
with France and the consequent notification omitted to extend any benefit on the
basis that Slovenia had entered OECD membership in 2010.
9
11.   The learned ASG likewise pointed out that the Protocol executed between
India and Netherlands was notified on 30.08.1999. The plain reading of that
notification shows that the Protocol itself was triggered by the benefit granted to
the United States - with which India entered into a DTAA in 1990; Germany
with which India entered into a DTAA in 1996; Sweden with which India
entered into a DTAA in 1997 and the U.K. with which India entered into a
DTAA in 1993. The notification issued on 30.08.1999 (notifying the Protocol
between India and Netherlands), conferred benefits based upon the concessions
given to different countries, with effect from different dates depending on the
nature of the benefits, rate of tax withholding, definition etc.; this too, it is
argued, showed that the triggering event itself (here, mere entering into DTAA
with a country which was or became a member of the OECD) did not result in
grant of any benefit or advantage to Netherlands. It was after bilateral
negotiations that the Protocol was entered into, and yet later a notification under
Section 90
was issued, bringing it into effect.
12.   These practices were in consonance with the mandate and requirements
of
Section 90
. The learned ASG also submitted that without the benefit of any
notification, any tax administrator, an Assessing Officer or revenue authority
would find it hard to verify the claim of any assessee. The learned ASG argued
that the impugned order is erroneous in as much as it relied upon executive
orders and decrees issued by the Swiss, Dutch and French authorities; such
executive decrees or orders could not possibly bind Indian Revenue Authorities
and had in fact been issued unilaterally. They were bound to be implemented by
the concerned revenue authorities in Netherlands, Switzerland and France,
which in fact was done. The judgment in Concentrix relied heavily upon such
orders or decrees, and to the extent is unsustainable.
13.   The learned ASG also highlighted that if the impugned judgment is left
undisturbed the interpretation by it as well as the judgments which followed it,
10
would preclude enquiry into whether any DTAA or international instrument was
in fact assimilated in municipal law under
Section 90
or any like provision.
14.     Learned counsel highlighted that in the case of Nestle in fact, a plain and
straightforward review of the first and second protocols (of the India-
Switzerland DTAA) demonstrates that without notification in accordance with
Indian law, they could not have applied which was in fact, the occasion for the
notifications     dated      07.02.2001   and   27.02.2001   respectively.    Counsel
particularly highlighted the concerned provision, i.e.
Section 90 (1)
of the Act.
15.     The learned ASG cited
Ram Jethmalani v. Union of India11
, referring to the
General Rule on Interpretation of Vienna Convention on Law of Treaties, 1961
(hereafter “VCLT”), stated that though India is not a party to the VCLT, the
convention contains many principles of customary international law and the principle
of interpretation in
Article 31
provides a broad guideline as to what should be an
appropriate manner of interpreting a treaty in the Indian context as well. This court
also observed that the broad principle of interpretation, with respect to treaties, and
provisions therein, would be that ordinary meaning of words be given effect to, unless
the context requires otherwise. That such treaties are drafted by diplomats, and not
lawyers, also implies that care has to be taken to not render any word, phrase, or
sentence redundant, especially where rendering of such word, phrase, or sentence
redundant would lead to a manifestly absurd situation, particularly from a
constitutional perspective.
This principle of interpretation was applied by the Andhra
Pradesh High Court in the case of
Sanofi Pasteur Holding SA v. Department of
Revenue12
.
16.     It was argued thus, that a treaty should be interpreted ordinarily, and the
ordinary meaning of the words be given effect to apart from ensuring that the
interpretation should not render any word, phrase, or sentence redundant. The
grammatical and literal meaning of the India-Netherlands MFN clause reveals that the

11 [2011] 339 ITR 107 (SC)
12 [2013] ITR 354 (AP HC)
11
benefit of reduced rate mentioned therein would be available only in case of such
subsequent Indian treaties wherein the other State is an OECD member as on the date
of the treaty entering into force. Any other interpretation would render the words
“then as from the date on which the relevant Indian Convention or Agreement enters
into force” redundant or otiose, which is not permissible as per the above cited
decisions of this court.
17.    Responding to the linguistic interpretation of “is” by the impugned judgments,
it is urged that the assessees had cited
Article 10
and other Articles of the DTAAs to
advance a view that “is” signifies the time when the provisions of treaty are to be
applied. They have also relied on dynamic interpretation of
Article 3(2)
which allows
taking into account the definition in domestic law when a particular term is not
defined in the DTAA. The ASG urges that such arguments ignore the discussion
which clearly states that the word “is” can have present, past, or future meaning
depending on the context in which it is used. In fact,
Article 3(2)
of the DTAAs
also gives prominence to the context, as it clearly talks about meaning of a
treaty term in accordance with domestic tax law at the time of applying the tax
treaty unless the context otherwise requires. Counsel contends that the MFN
clause clearly demonstrates that the other country is required to be an OECD
member as on the date of the signing of the treaty and not on any future date.
Thus, when Slovenia, Lithuania, or Columbia entered into respective DTAAs
with India, they had to have been members of OECD at that time, for
Netherlands, France, and Switzerland to claim parity of treatment.
18.    It was lastly argued that the notifications, which amended existing
DTAAs in respect of the three countries, reveal two aspects: one, that they were
issued because of benefits granted to countries, other than Netherlands, France
and Switzerland; two, that such subsequent notifications were triggered by the
lowering of rate, or treatment of certain kinds of income (dividends, interest and
royalties and fee for technical services) and their definitions. These notifications
12
were preceded by negotiations, communications and letters, exchanged between
India and the other country. In many cases, the amending notification granted
one benefit, while denying other benefits (granted to other, third countries,
whose DTAAs conferred such benefits after Netherlands or France or
Switzerland’s DTAAs were entered into). This clearly showed that such
notifications were necessary, and that there could not be any automatic
applicability of such benefits given to other OECD members.
B. Contentions of the assessees/Respondents
19.      Mr. Poros Kaka, Mr. P. Chidambaram, Mr. S. Ganesh and Mr. Percy
Pardiwala, learned senior counsel; Mr. Lovkesh Sawhney, and Mr. Mukesh
Bhutani, learned counsel, appeared for the respondent assessees. It was
submitted that when the DTAA and the Protocols – including the MFN clause
contained in the concerned Article of the Protocol was already notified under
section 90(1)
and it has come into force, there is further no legal requirement to
notify any subsequent amendment to the DTAA which becomes operative
automatically as a consequence of the trigger of the MFN clause to the DTAA.
Counsel urged that
Section 90
only requires notification of a treaty or protocol,
and does not mandate each clause of such agreement to be further notified
separately. A plain reading of
Section 90
of the Act demonstrates that it does not
require each article or paragraph thereof of an already notified agreement to be
further notified separately if the amendment is as a consequence of a self-
operative MFN clause. Undoubtedly if the amendment is as a consequence of a
bilateral negotiation, then, a separate notification is required. To ascertain if any
such requirement exists or otherwise, one will have to refer to the respective
clauses itself. It is urged that the subject MFN clause in the Protocol to India-
Netherlands DTAA has no such requirement.
20.      The contrast between India’s DTAAs with Netherlands and Switzerland,
is that the relevant MFN clause in the India-Switzerland DTAA originally
13
required initiation of negotiation, to apply the beneficial provision agreed with
other OECD member. This was repealed by notification No. SO 2903(E), dated
27-12-2011 and both India-Switzerland agreed on the present MFN clause
which does not require negotiation to give the benefit of reduced rate of tax, and
it was argued applies automatically just like the India-Netherlands MFN.
Counsel also highlighted that the MFN Clause in the Protocol to the India-
Finland DTAA also clearly requires India to immediately inform the Finland
authorities and notify such beneficial provision whenever the MFN clause gets
triggered. Counsel also referred the MFN clause in the Protocol to the India-
Philippines DTAA, to say that that too clearly requires the countries to inform
each other and review the provisions with a view to extend the beneficial
provisions.
21.   Learned counsel submitted that the difference in language, is
unimportant, because
Article 7(3)
of the India-Netherlands DTAA shows that
treaty partners are same; yet the instrument uses different language to denote the
same terms.
Article 7(3)
specifically notes that where the expense limit
is relaxed for computing the profits attributable to the permanent establishment
in any other convention, the competent authority of one state would notify such
competent authority of the other state, and at the request of that competent
authority which is notified, the terms of the treaty shall be amended by Protocol
to reflect such beneficial terms. Naturally, once that amendment is agreed
pursuant to bilateral negotiations, it has to be notified. This language, it is
pointed out, is absent in the MFN clause.
22.   There is no requirement in the subject MFN clause to issue any
notification to bring into force the beneficial provisions from subsequent
DTAAs or by way of a notified protocol or negotiation. The MFN clause simply
states that the reduced rate as extended to an OECD country "shall also apply"
under this current convention and, hence, such clause is automatic in operation.
14
The     use    of    different   language    in   the   DTAA      by    the    two
contracting states is indicative of their intent and cannot be disregarded whilst
interpreting their terms. Likewise, in the case of the India-Switzerland DTAA,
the nature of the existing MFN clause is such that no negotiation is needed but
for change in scope, for which requirement for negotiation has still been
retained by the treaty partners. Obviously, these differences in the language of
the clauses bear significance.
23.    This court was shown the observations of the Income Tax Appellate
Tribunal (ITAT) Mumbai in SCA Hygiene Products AB v. DCIT13, and the ITAT
Delhi decision in
Mitsubishi Electric India Pvt Ltd v Commissioner of Income
Tax
14 where the tribunal has noted the difference in triggers of the MFN clause
such as one which is (a) automatic (India-Sweden) (b) requiring notifying
authority of other state (India-Philippines) (c) requiring negotiation. It was
urged that the tribunal adopted the same interpretation as was done in the
judgment impugned.
It was submitted also, that the Karnataka High Court in
Apollo Tyres Ltd.
(supra) had similarly considered the same Protocol to the
India-Netherlands DTAA; which as the revenue did not challenge - had, attained
finality.
24.    The assessees refute the revenue’s argument that treaties with other
OECD countries did not have a triggering consequence of the MFN clauses with
the three countries in the present case. On the revenue’s reference to the
unilateral notification dated 30.08.1999, where the restricted scope of FTS is
only given by India w.e.f. 01.04.1997, whereas the limited scope of FTS was
agreed in the India-USA DTAA which came into force from 18.12.1990 - it is
urged that this notification is unilateral and not a bilateral amendment by both
states. The assessees highlight, in this regard that the notification nowhere
clarifies that both states had agreed to its contents. In contrast Notification No.
13 ITA No. 7315/Mum/2018
14 ITA No. 3336/Del/2018
15
GSR 382(E)/ Notification No.2/2013 dated 14.1.2013 which notified the
Protocol to India-Netherlands dated 10.5.2012 bilaterally amending the DTAA
and states
       "India and Netherlands... Desiring to conclude a Protocol (hereinafter referred
       to as "Amending Protocol") to amend the Convention....have agreed as follows"
25.    It is submitted that every bilateral amendment to treaty always has a date
of entry into force agreed by both states. But the said Notification dated
30.08.1999 does not have one. Contrast this with the 2012 bilateral amendment
made in the India-Netherlands DTAA by the Protocol which entered into force
on 02.11.2012 and was notified vide Notification No. 2/2013.
26.    The purpose of this unilateral notification by India is clear from the Dutch
communication dated 18.11.1999 which states that messages were exchanged
and there was a difference of understanding between Indian and Dutch
authorities on the limited aspect as to whether the MFN clause would be
applicable from the date of entry into force of the beneficial DTAA, or w.e.f. 1 st
April of the following fiscal year, since India follows the financial year (April-
March) pattern. This limited aspect was agreed by the Dutch authorities. It is
argued that no such reservation was noted by India for MFN in clause IV of
Protocol.
27.    Counsel submit that the absence of a unilateral notification which
may have in the past been issued as an administrative practice cannot override
the clear language of an MFN clause which provides for automatic application.
The assessees refer to
Union of India of India v. Agricas LLP15
,
which held that the State cannot breach a treaty to which it is a party by
referring to domestic law-be it legislative, executive, or judicial decision.
The
decision       in
Engineering      Analysis      Centre      of     Excellence       P.
Ltd. v. CIT16
applied the principle in
Director of Income Tax v New Skies
15 [2020] 14 SCR 372
16 (2021) 432 ITR 471(SC)
16
Satellite BV17 wherein the Delhi High Court held that mere executive position
cannot alter the law under the DTAA.
28.    Learned senior counsel submit that Netherlands’ position has been clear
as early as from 1998. The Dutch decree of 22.06.1998 issued by the Secretary
of         Finance      clarifies      that       the        MFN         clause
in Clause IV of Protocol is automatic; for every favourable provision as a
consequence of a DTAA with another OECD country, Netherlands was of the
view that the amendment would apply with effect from date of entry into force
of that relevant convention. Similarly, the decree by Netherlands on 28.02.2012
maintained that beneficial provision of the USA-DTAA on restricted scope of
FTS should apply with effect from 01-04-1991 (1st April of the fiscal year
following the date of entry into force of the India-USA DTAA).
29.    Counsel argue that the revenue’s arguments are unfounded because even
in Netherlands, a notification is required for MFN benefits to extend to the
India-Netherlands DTAA. These decrees of 1998, 1999 and 2012 have been
issued by executive-decree states in order to avoid ambiguity. Issuing such
decrees are not akin to notifications statutorily required to give effect to
automatic amendments but just represents the understanding of the Dutch
authorities. Under Netherlands law to give effect to a DTAA, parliamentary
approval under
Article 91
of the Netherlands Constitution is required. The
process is that it has to be signed by the government, after which it has to be
approved by both houses of Parliament and then, ratified. After such approval
and ratification, nothing remains, and consequently, formal decrees follow.
Similar arguments were advanced in respect of French orders and Swiss decrees
and orders, which gave effect to the DTAAs and Protocols. It is highlighted that
the entry of the three countries: Lithuania, Slovenia, and Colombia, into OECD
were duly noted in subsequent orders and given effect to, wherever necessary.
17 (2016) 382 ITR 114
17
30.   Next, the assessees dealt with the argument that Lithuania, Columbia, etc.
were not OECD members at the time of signing of the India-Netherlands
DTAA, or the India-Switzerland Protocols in question, or the India-France
DTAA and Protocol. The following chart is extracted, from the assessees’
submissions:
Country     DTAA          DTAA               Date Notified OECD         Dividend
Art. 10
signed        Entry into                       Members      Tax
                          force
Slovenia    13.01.2003    17.02.2005         31.05.2005    21.07.201    5%       Art 10(2)(a)
            (pg.512 of (pg.501 of            (pg.501    of 0                     has      10%
            revenue’s     revenue’s          revenue’s                           beneficial
            Compilation- compilation-        Compilation-                        ownership
            Vol. III, pdf Vol. III), pdf     Vol. III, pdf                       requirement
            pg.16)        pg.5)              pg.5)                               (pg.505 of
                                                                                 revenue’s
                                                                                 Compilation-
Vol. III, pdf
                                                                                 pg.9)
Lithuania   26.07.2011       10.07.2012      25.07.2012    05.07.201    5%       Art 10(2)(a)
            (pg.534 of       (pg.534 of      (pg.534    of 8                     has      10%
            revenue’s        revenue’s       revenue’s                           beneficial
            Compilation-     Compilation-    Compilation-                        ownership
            Vol. III), pdf   Vol. III, pdf   Vol. III, pdf                       requirement
            pg.38            pg.38)          pg.38)                              (pg.538 of
                                                                                 revenue’s
                                                                                 compilation-
                                                                                 Vol. III, pdf
                                                                                 pg.42)
Columbia    13.05.2011       07.07.2014      23.09.2014     28.04.202   5%       Art     10(2)
            (pg.90           (pg.90          (pg.90         0                    (pg.91
            Assessee’s       Assessee’s      Assessee’s                          Assessee’s
            Common           Common          Common                              Common
            Comp.-Vol.       Comp.-Vol.      Comp.-Vol.                          Comp.-Vol.
            VI,      pdf     VI,      pdf    VI,        pdf                      VI,        pdf
            pg.93)           pg.93)          pg.93)                              pg.94)
31.   Learned counsel argued that the assessees are entitled to the benefit of the
lower tax rate of 5% provided for in the DTAAs between India and Lithuania,
Slovenia, and Colombia respectively, by relying on the MFN clause in the
treaty/protocol to the India-Netherlands, India-Switzerland and India-France
DTAAs in terms of which after the signing of the DTAA with these countries
(and other protocols), if India entered into a DTAA with an OECD member
18
where India has agreed for a rate of tax on dividend lower than the rate provided
for in each of the DTAAs with Netherlands, Switzerland and France
respectively, such lower rate also applies to those DTAAs. It is urged that the
MFN clauses in the three DTAAs and their protocols clearly oblige Indian
revenue officers to grant the benefit that is given to countries which
subsequently entered into DTAAs with India, and were given favourable
benefits, upon their entry into OECD.
32.   On the OECD membership issue, it was argued that the revenue's only
reason in the order denying the applicability of the lower rate of withholding tax
at 5% - which was challenged by the assessee in the relevant impugned
decision, was that the benefit of the MFN clause cannot be given as Lithuania,
Columbia, etc, were not OECD members at the time of signing of the India-
Netherlands DTAA. OECD membership requirement for the third country at the
time of signing of its own DTAA was not the reason given for rejection in the
order impugned before the High Court.
33    Counsel submitted that the word "is" appearing in
Article 10(1)
of the
India-Netherlands DTAA is in fact a complete answer to the revenue's objection
that Slovenia/Lithuania/Columbia ought to be members of OECD both at the
time of signing of the India-Netherlands DTAA or at the time of execution of
their own DTAA, and also at the time claim for lowering withholding by the
assessee is made. Hence, the revenue is alluding that “is a member of OECD”
appearing in the MFN clause means membership of OECD is a continuous
requirement. Thus, if the argument, of the revenue that the phrase "is a member
of OECD" is literally interpreted, it would mean Slovenia, Lithuania, and
Columbia ought to be members of the OECD at the time of signing of India-
Netherlands DTAA, at the time of execution of their own DTAA, and also the
19
time when the assessee invokes the MFN clause is to be accepted; then, the
consequence would be that while interpreting
Article 10(1)
of India-Netherlands
DTAA which also uses the same word “is” (“is a resident”) the same meaning
ought to be given. However, it is undisputed that while claiming the benefit of
Article 10
, the assessee needs to be a resident of India/Netherlands only for the
year in which the benefit of
Article 10
is sought by an assessee. Therefore,
when for
Article 10
, "is" does not postulate continuous requirement of
residence,                  the                same                 word                  "is"               when
it appears in the MFN clause can only mean that Slovenia etc. need to be OECD
members only when the benefit of the MFN clause is invoked.
34.      Learned senior counsel appearing for Nestle argued in addition, that the
third Protocol, between India and the Swiss Confederation 18, by
Article 11(5)
required that if India entered into agreement with another OECD country,
providing for lower rate of taxation on dividends, interest and royalties at FTS,
the same lower rate of taxation was to be given to Swiss tax entities. 19 It relies
on the fact that India and Lithuania-DTAA was signed on 26.07.2011; the date
of its notification was 25.07.2012. Lithuania became an OECD member on
05.07.2018. Likewise, the India-Colombia DTAA was signed on 13.05.2011 and
notified on 23.09.2014; Colombia entered OECD on 28.04.2020. These two
DTAAs provided lower rates of taxation, as compared with the India-
Switzerland DTAA. It was argued that the purpose of amending the relevant
provisions of the DTAA, by the third Protocol was to automatically provide the
same treatment to Switzerland; counsel relies on the expression that the lower

18 Notified by the Indian government on 13.08.2011
19Article 5 of the third protocol which amended
Articles 10
, 11
, 12
and
22
inter alia, read as follows:
“in respect of
Articles 10 (Dividends)
, 11 (Interest)
and
12 (Royalties
and fees for technical services), if
under any Convention, Agreement or Protocol between India and a third State which is a member of the OECD
signed after the signature of this Amending Protocol, India limits its taxation at source on dividends, interest,
royalties or fees for technical services to a rate lower than the rate provided for in this Agreement on the said
items of income, the same rate as provided for in that Convention, Agreement or Protocol on the said items of
income shall also apply between both Contracting States under this Agreement as from the date on which such
Convention, Agreement or Protocol enters into force.”
20
rate given to the later OECD member by India “shall also apply between both
Contracting States under this Agreement as from the date on which such
Convention, Agreement or Protocol enters into force”. Counsel contrasts this
with similar provisions in the third Protocol. The latter require the contracting
states to enter into negotiations. Nestle underlines that the first and second
Protocol, were worded differently. Earlier, in respect of the same event, i.e.
India’s entering into an agreement with another contracting state, granting lower
rate of tax, parties had to enter into negotiations (“shall enter into negotiations
without undue delay”). It was emphasized that the object of changing the
terminology in the third Protocol, was to assure to Swiss entities, that the
treatment extended to entities of the other state, automatically afforded a lower
rate of taxation.
35.     Learned senior counsel also referred to the opinions of Professor Dr.
Robert J Dannon and Prof. Dr. Stef Van Weeghel on the history of treaty
provisions and the applicable rules of interpretation, to support the assessees’
arguments.
III.     Relevant statutory provisions
36.
Section 9020
of the Income Tax Act reads as follows:
“90. Agreement with foreign countries or specified territories. 1
        (1) The Central Government may enter into an agreement with the Government
        of any country outside India or specified territory outside India—
(a) for the granting of relief in respect of—
(i) income on which have been paid both income-tax under this Act and income-
        tax in that country or specified territory, as the case may be, or
(ii) income-tax chargeable under this Act and under the corresponding law in
        force in that country or specified territory, as the case may be, to promote
        mutual economic relations, trade and investment, or

20
Section 90 (1)
was substituted with effect from 010.10.2009. The earlier provision was amended three times.
Section 90 (2A)
was inserted with effect from 01-04.2013 and amended with effect from 01-04-2016. It was
later omitted by Act 17 of 2013.
Section 90 (4)
substituted, by Act 17 of 2013, the “a certificate, containing
such particulars as may be prescribed, of his being a resident” (w.e.f. 1-4-2013) to the present provision.
Section 90 (5)
was inserted by w.e.f. 1-4-2013.Explanation 3 was inserted by
Section 32
of Act 23 of 2012, s. 32
(w.e.f. 01-10-2009) and Explanation 4 was inserted by Act 7 of 2017,
Section 39
(w.e.f. 1-4-2018).
21
(b) for the avoidance of double taxation of income under this Act and under the
corresponding law in force in that country or specified territory, as the case
may be, or
(c) for exchange of information for the prevention of evasion or avoidance of
income-tax chargeable under this Act or under the corresponding law in force
in that country or specified territory, as the case may be, or investigation of
cases of such evasion or avoidance, or
(d) for recovery of income-tax under this Act and under the corresponding law
in force in that country or specified territory, as the case may be,
and may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make such provisions as may be
necessary for implementing the agreement.
(2) Where the Central Government has entered into an agreement with the
Government of any country outside India or specified territory outside India, as
the case may be, under sub-section (1) for granting relief of tax, or as the case
may be, avoidance of double taxation, then, in relation to the assessee to whom
such agreement applies, the provisions of this Act shall apply to the extent they
are more beneficial to that assessee.
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the provisions of
Chapter X A of the Act
shall apply to the assessee even if such provisions are
not beneficial to him.
(3) Any term used but not defined in this Act or in the agreement referred to in
sub-section (1) shall, unless the context otherwise requires, and is not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or the agreement, have the same
meaning as assigned to it in the notification issued by the Central Government
in the Official Gazette in this behalf.
(4) An assessee, not being a resident, to whom an agreement referred to in sub-
section (1) applies, shall not be entitled to claim any relief under such
agreement unless 4 a certificate of his being a resident in any country outside
India or specified territory outside India, as the case may be, is obtained by him
from the Government of that country or specified territory.
(5) The assessee referred to in sub-section (4) shall also provide such other
documents and information, as may be prescribed.
Explanation 1.- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the charge
of tax in respect of a foreign company at a rate higher than the rate at which a
domestic company is chargeable, shall not be regarded as less favourable
charge or levy of tax in respect of such foreign company.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this section, “specified territory” means
any area outside India which may be notified as such by the Central
Government.
Explanation 3.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where
any term is used in any agreement entered into under sub-section (1) and not
defined under the said agreement or the Act, but is assigned a meaning to it in
the notification issued under sub-section (3) and the notification issued
thereunder being in force, then, the meaning assigned to such term shall be
22
deemed to have effect from the date on which the said agreement came into
        force.
Explanation 4.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where
        any term used in an agreement entered into under sub-section (1) is defined
        under the said agreement, the said term shall have the same meaning as
        assigned to it in the agreement; and where the term is not defined in the said
        agreement, but defined in the Act, it shall have the same meaning as assigned to
        it in the Act and explanation, if any, given to it by the Central Government.”
37.     The relevant extracts of the DTAAs and the MFN clause contained within
them, are extracted in Part IV.C below.
IV.     Analysis

      A. General
38.     Treaty making power vests exclusively with the Union, per
Article 253
of
the Constitution, and the relative entries in the Union List (List I, VII th
Schedule). Entering into a treaty is an attribute of sovereignty, and the power to
do vests solely in the Union executive - as opposed to the states, or the shared
(concurrent) domain within the distribution of administrative powers under the
Constitution; thus, it can be traced to
Article 73
of the Constitution. The
structure and phraseology of
Article 253
leaves one in no doubt, that it is when
a treaty is enacted by law, or enabled through legislation, which assimilates it,
that such provisions are enforceable in India.
39.     Duncan B. Hollis21, in a paper describes that

        “The treaty lives a double life. By day, it is a creature of international law,
        which sets forth extensive substantive and procedural rules by which
        the treaty must operate [….] By night, however, the treaty leads a more
        domestic life. In its domestic incarnation, the treaty is a creature of national
        law, deriving its force from the constitutional order of the nation state that
        concluded it.”
40.
In
State of W.B. v. Jugal Kishore More22
, this court held that the executive
may make treaties with foreign States for the extradition of criminals, but those
21 Duncan Hollis: Executive Federalism : Forging New Federalist Constraints on the Treaty Power” Legal
Studies Research Paper Series available at
22 1969 (1) SCR 320
23
treaties can only be carried into effect by Act of Parliament, for the executive
has no power, without statutory authority, to seize an alien here and deliver him
to a foreign power.
Likewise, in
State of Gujarat v. Vora Fiddali Badruddin
Mithibarwala23
this court observed that in India, unlike some other countries the
stipulations of a treaty duly ratified do not by virtue of such event (i.e. signing
the treaty alone) have the force of law and
Article 253
of the Constitution of
India recognises this position. If a treaty either requires alteration of or addition
to existing law, or affects the rights of the subjects, or are treaties on the basis of
which obligations between the treaty-making state and its subjects have to be
made enforceable in municipal courts, or which, involves raising or expending
of money or conferring new powers on the government recognizable by the
municipal courts, a legislation will be necessary.
41.    In the judgment reported as V.O. Tractoroexport v. Tarapore & Co24 this
court underlined that
       “16. We may look at another well-recognised principle. In this country, as is the
       case in England, the treaty or International Protocol or convention does not
       become effective or operative of its own force as in some of the continental
       countries unless domestic legislation has been introduced to attain a specified
       result. Once, Parliament has legislated, the Court must first look at the
       legislation and construe the language employed in it. If the terms of the
       legislative enactment do not suffer from any ambiguity or lack of clarity they
       must be given effect to even if they do not carry out the treaty obligations. But
       the treaty or the Protocol or the convention becomes important if the meaning of
       the expressions used by the Parliament is not clear and can be construed in
       more than one way. The reason is that if one of the meanings which can be
       properly ascribed is in consonance with the treaty obligations and the other
       meaning is not so consonant, the meaning which is consonant is to be preferred.
       Even where an Act had been passed to give effect to the convention which was
       scheduled to it, the words employed in the Act had to be interpreted in the well-
       established sense which they had in municipal law. (See Barras v. Aberdeen
       Steam Trawling & Fishing Co. Ltd. [(1933) AC 402])”
42.    This court, in
Maganbhai Ishwarbhai Patel & Ors. v. Union of India &
Ors.25
followed the ruling of the Privy Council in Attorney-General for Canada
23 1964 (6) SCR 461
24 (1969) 3 SCC 562
25 1970 (3) SCR 53
24
v. Attorney-General for Ontario & Ors.26 (which had made some observations in
the context of a rule applicable within the British Empire).
This court’s ruling in
Maganbhai Ishwarbhai
(supra) is the most significant, on this aspect. The
relevant observations are as follows:
“It will be essential to keep in mind the distinction between (1) the formation,
        and (2) the performance, of the obligations constituted by a treaty, using that
        word as comprising any agreement between two or more sovereign States.
        Within the British Empire there is a well-established rule that the making of a
        treaty is an executive act, while the performance of its obligations, if they entail
        alteration of the existing domestic law, requires legislative action. Unlike some
        other countries, the stipulations of a treaty duly ratified do not within the
        Empire, by virtue of the treaty alone, have the force of law. If the national
        executive, the Government of the day, decide to incur the obligations of a treaty
        which involve alteration of law they have to run the risk of obtaining the assent
        of Parliament to the necessary statute or statutes.... .Parliament, no doubt, ...
        .has a Constitutional control over the executive : but it cannot be disputed that
        the creation of the obligations undertaken in treaties and the assent to their form
        and quality are the function of the executive alone. Once they are created, while
        they bind the State as against the other contracting parties, Parliament may
        refuse to perform them and so leave the State in default.”
        These observations are valid in the context of our Constitutional set up.”
43.     The issue was more pointedly dealt with by the concurring judgment of
J.C. Shah, J (who relied on Oppenheim's International Law, 8th Edition):
“...Such treaties as affect private rights and, generally, as required for their
        enforcement by English Courts a modification of common law or of a statute
        must receive parliamentary assent through an enabling Act of Parliament. To
        that extent binding treaties which are part of International Law do not form
        part of the law of the land unless expressly made so by the Legislature.
        *********************************
        The binding force of a treaty concerns in principle the contracting States only,
        and not their subjects. As International Law is primarily a law between States
        only and exclusively, treaties can normally have effect upon States only. This
        Rule can, as has been pointed out by the Permanent Court of International
        Justice, be altered by the express or implied terms of the treaty, in which case its
        provisions become self-executory. Otherwise, if treaties contain provisions with
        regard to rights and duties of the subjects of the contracting States, their
        Courts, officials, and the like, these States must take steps as are necessary
        according to their Municipal Law, to make these provisions binding upon their
        subjects, Courts, officials, and the like.”

        Shah, J also referred to
Articles 73
and
253
and further commented:
26 [1937] A.C. 326
25
“80...By
Article 73
, subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the executive
      power of the Union extends to the matters with respect to which the Parliament
      has power to make laws. Our Constitution makes no provision making
      legislation a condition of the entry into an international treaty in times either of
      war or peace. The executive power of the Union is vested in the President and is
      exercisable in accordance with the Constitution. The Executive is qua the State
      competent to represent the State in all matters international and may by
      agreement, convention or treaties incur obligations which in international law
      are binding upon the State. But the obligations arising under the agreement or
      treaties are not by their own force binding upon Indian nationals. The power to
      legislate in respect of treaties lies with the Parliament under Entries 10 and 14
      of List I of the Seventh Schedule. But making of law under that authority is
      necessary when the treaty or agreement operates to restrict the rights of citizens
      or others or modifies the laws of the State. If the rights of the citizens or others
      which are justiciable are not affected, no legislative measure is needed to give
      effect to the agreement or treaty.”

      In
Gramaphone Co. of India Ltd. v. Birendra Bahadur Pandey & Ors.
27 it
was observed as follows:
“The doctrine of incorporation also recognises the position that the Rules of
      international law are incorporated into national law and considered to be part
      of the national law, unless they are in conflict with Act of Parliament. Comity of
      Nations or no, Municipal Law must prevail in case of conflict. National Courts
      cannot say yes if Parliament has said no to a principle of international law.
      National Courts will endorse international law but not if it conflicts with
      national law. National courts being organs of the National State and not organs
      of international law must perforce apply national law if international law
      conflicts with it.”
44.   The holding in the decisions discussed above may thus be summarized:
(i)    The terms of a treaty ratified by the Union do not ipso facto acquire
             enforceability;
(ii)   The Union has exclusive executive power to enter into
             international treaties and conventions under
Article 73 [
read with
             corresponding Entries - Nos. 10, 13 and 14 of List I of the VII th
             Schedule to the Constitution of India] and Parliament, holds the
             exclusive power to legislate upon such conventions or treaties.
27
26
(iii)   Parliament can refuse to perform or give effect to such treaties. In
                such event, though such treaties bind the Union, vis a vis the other
                contracting state(s), leaving the Union in default.
(iv)    The application of such treaties is binding upon the Union. Yet,
                they "are not by their own force binding upon Indian nationals".
(v)     Law making by Parliament in respect of such treaties is required if
                the treaty or agreement restricts or affects the rights of citizens or
                others or modifies the law of India.
(vi)    If citizens’ rights or others’ rights are not unaffected, or the laws of
                India are not modified, no legislative measure is necessary to give
              effect to treaties.
(vii) In the event of any ambiguity in the provision or law, which brings
                into force the treaty or obligation, the court is entitled to look into
                the international instrument, to clear the ambiguity or seek clarity.
45.     The clearest enunciation of law, on
Section 90
can be found in
Union of
India (UOI) & Ors. v Azadi Bachao Andolan & Ors
28.
Apart from noticing the
decisions of various High Courts (i.e.
Commissioner of Income Tax v.
Visakhapatnam Port Trust29
,
Commissioner of Income Tax v. Davy Ashmore
India Ltd.30
,
Leonhardt Andra Und Partner, Gmbh v. Commissioner of Income
Tax31
, Commissioner of Income Tax v. R.M. Muthaiah32 and Arabian Express
Line Ltd. of United Kingdom & Ors. v. Union of India33) this court held as
follows:
“The provisions of
Sections 4
and
5
of the Act are expressly made "subject to
        the provisions of this Act", which would include
Section 90
of the Act. As to
        what would happen in the event of a conflict between the provision of the
Income Tax Act
and a notification issued Under
Section 90
, is no longer res
        integra.
**************                                           ****************
28 2003 (Supp4) SCR 222
29 [1983]144ITR146(AP)
30 [1991]190 ITR 626 (Cal)
31 [2001] 249 ITR 418 (Cal)
32 [1993]202 ITR 508 (KAR)
33 [1995] 212 ITR 31 (Guj)
27
26. A survey of the aforesaid cases makes it clear that the judicial consensus in
      India has been that
section 90
is specifically intended to enable and empower
      the Central Government to issue a notification for implementation of the terms
      of a double taxation avoidance agreement. When that happens, the provisions of
      such an agreement, with respect to cases to which where they apply, would
      operate even if inconsistent with the provisions of the
Income Tax Act
. We
      approve of the reasoning in the decisions which we have noticed. If it was not
      the intention of the legislature to make a departure from the general principle of
      chargeability to tax under
section 4
and the general principle of ascertainment
      of total income under
section 5
of the Act, then there was no purpose in making
      those sections "subject to the provisions" of the Act". The very object of grafting
      the said two sections with the said clause is to enable the Central Government
      to issue a notification under
section 90
towards implementation of the terms of
      the DTAs which would automatically override the provisions of the
Income Tax
      Act
in the matter of ascertainment of chargeability to income tax and
      ascertainment of total income, to the extent of inconsistency with the terms of
      the DTAC.
27. The contention of the respondents, which weighed with the High Court viz.
that the impugned circular No. 789 is inconsistent with the provisions of the Act,
      is a total non-sequitur. As we have pointed out, Circular No. 789 is a circular
      within the meaning of
section 90
; therefore, it must have the legal consequences
      contemplated by sub-section (2) of
section 90
. In other words, the circular shall
      prevail even if inconsistent with the provisions of
Income Tax Act, 1961
insofar
      as assessees covered by the provisions of the DTAC are concerned.
******************                                         ****************
29. In our view, the contention is wholly misconceived.
Section 90
, as we have
      already noticed (including its precursor under the 1922 Act), was brought on
      the statute book precisely to enable the executive to negotiate a DTAC and
      quickly implement it. Even accepting the contention of the respondents that the
      powers exercised by the Central Government under
section 90
are delegated
      powers of legislation, we are unable to see as to why a delegate of legislative
      power in all cases has no power to grant exemption. There are provisions
      galore in statutes made by Parliament and State legislatures wherein the power
      of conditional or unconditional exemption from the provisions of the statutes
      are expressly delegated to the executive. For example, even in fiscal legislation
      like the
Central Excise Act and Sales Tax Act
, there are provisions for
      exemption from the levy of tax. (See
Section 5A
of Central Excise Act, 1944 and
Section 8(5)
of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956). therefore we are unable to
      accept the contention that the delegate of a legislative power cannot exercise
      the power of exemption in a fiscal statute.”
46.   The legal position discernible from the previous discussion, therefore is
that upon India entering into a treaty or protocol does not result in its automatic
enforceability in courts and tribunals; the provisions of such treaties and
28
protocols do not therefore, confer rights upon parties, till such time, as
appropriate notifications are issued, in terms of
Section 90(1)
.
47.      The various DTAAs, their relative Protocols and the date(s) of their
notification under
Section 90
of the Income Tax Act, based on the submissions
of parties, and the materials placed on the record, are summarized in a tabular
chart:
29
SUMMARIES OF DTAAs, PROTOCOLS & NOTIFICATIONS
                             IN TABULAR FORMAT

                                                                            Effective
           signing of/ date of                                                                        Whether
Contractin                            Notification Date of signing relevant date of said Notification
           entry into entry into                                                                      member of
g State #2                            , if any     amending protocol        amendment/ if any
           treaty      force                                                                          OECD
                                                                            protocol
                                                                            01.04.1997 or
                                                                            01.04.1991 or
                                                                            01.04.1998 or
                                                                            01.04.1995
                                                   13.08.199934             (based on the 30.08.1999
Netherland Treaty &                                                         provision, in            Yes (13
s          Protocol -                                                       relation to the
                      21.01.1989      27.03.1989                                                     November
           13.07.198                                                        concerned                1961)
           8                                                                country)
                                                                                          14.01.2013 -
giving effect
                                                   10.05.2012               02.11.2012
                                                                                          from
                                                                                          02.11.2012
USA

[earlier
agreement
dated         Treaty &
                                                   No amendment. [Note –                                  Yes (12
15.06.1989;   Protocol:
18.12.1990    20.12.1990   USA does not have an     NA            NA              November
also see      12.09.198
                                                   MFN clause]                                            1961)
instruction   9
dated
28.04.2003
and
23.10.2007]
UK

[had an                                                                                   10.02.2014 -
earlier       Treaty &                                                                    to be given
agreement     Protocol:                                                                   retrospectiv Yes (2 May
dated                   26.10.1993    11.02.1994   30.10.2012               27.12.2013
              25.01.199                                                                   e effect     1961)
30.06.1956;   3                                                                           from
see also                                                                                  27.12.2013
instruction
dated
19.03.2004]
Belgium       26.04.199                                                                              Yes (13
                                                                            01.04.1998
              3          01.10.1997   31.10.1997                                          19.01.2001 September
                                                                            (for India)
              (protocol)                                                                             1961)
                                                                            01.04.1995 or
                                                                            01.04.1997
              Treaty &                                                                    10.07.2000
                                                                            (based on the            Yes (07
France        Protocol -
                         01.08.1994   07.09.1994                            provision)               August
              29.09.199
              2                                                                           12.08.2009 1961)
                                                                            12.08.2009

Switzerland Treaty and 19.10.1994/ 21.04.1995      Protocol amending 1994   In force from 07.02.2001 Yes (28
            Protocol - 29.12.1994                  Treaty (2000) -          20.12.2000               September
            02.11.199                              16.02.2000                                        1961)
            4                                                               1 January
                       01.01.1995                                           2001
                       (Switzerland                                         (Switzerland)
34 13/30.08.1999 (date of signing mentioned as 13.08.1999 in Protocol, but as 30.08.1988 in amending
notification dated 30.08.1999).
30
Effective
           signing of/ date of                                                                       Whether
Contractin                           Notification Date of signing relevant date of said Notification
           entry into entry into                                                                     member of
g State #2                           , if any     amending protocol        amendment/ if any
           treaty      force                                                                         OECD
                                                                           protocol
                                                                            ; 1 April 2001
                                                                            (India)
                                                                            In force from
                        ) and                                               10.10.2011
                        01.04.1995                 Protocol amending 1994
                        (India)                                             1 January
                                                   Treaty (2010) -                         27.12.2011
2012
30.08.2010
                                                                            (Switzerland)
                                                                            ; 1 April 2012
                                                                            (India)
Germany

[replaced
older         Treaty &
                                                   No amendment                                          Yes (27
agreements    Protocol:
26.10.1996   29.11.1996    [Note – Germany does    NA                NA          September
notified on   19.06.199
                                                   not have an MFN clause]                               1961)
13.09.1960,   5
27.04.1979
and
02.03.1990]
Philippines Treaty &
            Protocol:
21.03.199435 02.04.1996                                                02.02.2005 No
            12.02.199
6
14.08.2013 -
Sweden                                             Protocol amending the                     to be given Yes (28
              24.06.199
                        25.12.1997   17.12.1997    Convention and Protocol 16.08.2013        effect to    September
7
- signed on 17.02.2013                    from         1961)
                                                                                             16.08.2013
                                                                                             11.09.2018 -
                                     16.01.2000
                                                                                             to have
                                     (correction
                                                                                             effect from
           Treaty and                by
                                                                                             08.08.2018 Yes (4
Portuguese Protocol:                 notifications
                      30.04.2000                   24.06.2017               08.08.2018       (
Art. 26
August
Republic   11.09.199                 dated
                                                                                             says         1961)
           8                         25.08.2000
                                                                                             10.08.2018
                                     and
                                                                                             in the
                                     20.09.2005)
                                                                                             footnote)
                                                                                             Notification
                                                   Protocol amending the                     dated
              13.01.200                            Convention and Protocol date of entry     27.10.2017 - Yes (21 July
Slovenia                17.02.2005   31.05.2005    - signed on 17.05.2016  into force is
              3                                                                              to have      2010)
                                                                           21.12.2016
                                                                                             effect from
                                                                                             01.03.2017
              Treaty &               20.05.2010 -
                                                                                                         Yes (28
              Protocol:              with effect
Finland                 19.04.2010                -                         NA               NA          January
              15.01.201              from
                                                                                                         1969)
              0                      01.04.2011
              Treaty &               25.07.2012:
              Protocol:              to have                                                             Yes (05 July
Lithuania               10.07.2012                 -                        NA               NA
              26.07.201              effect from                                                         2018)
              1                      01.04.2013
              Treaty &
              Protocol:                                                                                  Yes (28 April
Colombia                07.07.2014   23.09.2014    -                        NA               NA
              13.05.201                                                                                  2020)
1
35 Unclear if there is perhaps a typographical error in the Notification produced before this court.
31
C. The interpretation of the term “is”
48.      The High Court had interpreted the term “is” occurring in the DTAAs
[see Clause IV(2)36 of the India-Netherlands DTAA – the other two clauses in
relation to France and Switzerland being similar], which according to it
“describes a state of affairs that should exist not necessarily at the time when
the subject DTAA was executed but when a request is made by the taxpayer or
deductee for issuance of a lower rate withholding tax certificate under
Section
197
of the Act. The word ‘is’- is both autological and heterological. An
autological word is one that expresses the property that it possesses. Opposite
of that is a heterological word, i.e., it does not describe itself”. According to
that interpretation of ‘is, when the request for parity is made by a party seeking
aid of the DTAA and the Protocol containing a “same treatment” or in other
words, a pull in clause, the court has to consider whether at that time the third
party state is enjoying better benefits. Integral to this interpretation is whether
the “is a member” means the present tense, which is that the third party state
should be a member of OECD when it enters into DTAA with India. This is
relevant, because the India-Lithuania DTAA was signed on 26.07.2011; and
notified on 25.07.201237. The date of membership of Lithuania into OECD was
05.07.2018. The India-Colombia DTAA was signed on 13.05.2011; its date of
Notification was 23.09.2014. Colombia was admitted to membership of OECD
on 28.04.2020. Slovenia signed a DTAA with India on 13.01.2003; this was
notified on 31.05.2005, and Slovenia became a member of OECD on
21.07.2010. An amending Protocol was entered into, between India and
Slovenia, on 16.05.2016, which was notified on 27.10.2017.
36 “If after the signature of this convention under any Convention or Agreement between India and a third
State which is a member of the OECD, India should limit its taxation at source on dividends, interests, royalties,
fees for technical services or payments for the use of equipment to a rate lower or a scope more restricted than
the rate or scope provided for in this Convention on the said items of income, then as from the date on which the
relevant Indian Convention or Agreement enters into force the same rate or scope as provided for in that
Convention or Agreement on the said items of income shall also apply under this Convention." [emphasis
supplied]
37 Notification No. 28/2012 [F. No. 503/02/1997-FTD-1]/S.O. 1693(E), dated 25-7-2012
32
49.     Thus, in all three cases, the three “third party” nations: Lithuania,
Colombia and Slovenia, were initially not members of OECD when they
entered into treaties and protocols with India; they became members later.
50.
In
Jagir Kaur v. Jaswant Singh38 Section
488 of the erstwhile
Criminal
Procedure Code
read as follows:
“Proceedings under this Section may be taken against any person in any
         district where he resides or is, or where he last resided with his wife, or, as the
         case may be, the mother of the illegitimate child.”

      This court considered the meaning of “is” in the above provision:
“The crucial words of the sub-Section are, “resides”, “is” and “where he last
        resided with his wife”. Under the Code of 1882 the Magistrate of the District
        where the husband or father, as the case may be, resided only had jurisdiction.”

      The court then emphasized that the term “is” was fact dependent, and had to
be read contextually:
“The purpose of the statute would be better served if the word “resides” was
         understood to include temporary residence. The juxtaposition of the words “is”
         and “last resided” in the sub-Section also throws light on the meaning of the
         word “resides”. The word “is”, as we shall explain later, confers jurisdiction
         on a Court on the basis of a casual visit and the expression “last resided”,
         about which also we have something to say, indicates that the Legislature could
         not have intended to use the word “resides” in the technical sense of domicile.
         The word “resides” cannot be given a meaning different from the word
         “resided” in the expression “last resided” and, therefore, the wider meaning
         fits in the setting in which the word “resides” appears.”

        In
P. Anand Gajapati Raju v. P.V.G Raju39
in the context of the
Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996
, this court explained that “is” normally has present
signification:
“the phrase which is the subject of an arbitration agreement does not, in the
            context, necessarily require that the agreement must be already in existence
            before the action is brought in the Court. The phrase also connotes an
            arbitration agreement being brought into existence while the action is
            pending. Blacks Law Dictionary has defined the word is as follows:
            “This word, although normally referring to the present, often has a future
            meaning, but is not synonymous with shall have been. It may have, however,
            a past signification, as in the sense of has been.”

38 (1964) 2 SCR 73
39 (2000) 4 SCC 539
33
Again, in
Vijay Kumar Prasad v. State of Bihar
40 this court reiterated the
same view, that “is” refers to the present:
“Although the expression normally refers to the present, often it has a future
            meaning. It may also have a past signification as in the sense of “has
            been”. (See F.S. Gandhi v. CWT [(1990) 3 SCC 624 : 1990 SCC (Tax) 364 :
AIR 1991 SC 1866] .) The true intention has to be contextually culled out.”
51.     From the above discussion, it is clear that the expression “is” has a
present signification and it derives meaning from the context. Given this
interpretation, the conclusion is that when a third-party country enters into
DTAA with India, it should be a member of OECD, for the earlier treaty
beneficiary to claim parity.
D. Treaty practice of India, in relation to DTAAs and their Protocol, and
  practices of Netherlands, France and Switzerland
52.     The DTAA which India entered into with the Kingdom of Netherlands,
was signed on 13.07.1988. Article IV of the Protocol (of the same date), to the
DTAA provided that
         “if after the signature of the aforesaid Convention under any Convention or
         Agreement between India and a third State which is a member of the
         Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, India, should limit
         its taxation at source on dividends, interest, royalties, fees for technical
         services or payments for the use of equipment to a rate lower or a scope more
         restricted than the rate or scope provided for in this Convention on the said
         items of income “then, as from the date on which the relevant Indian
         Convention or Agreement enters into force the same rate or scope as provided
         for in that Convention or Agreement on the said items of income shall also
         apply under this Convention”
53.     The DTAA between India and Germany entered into force on 26.10.1996;
the DTAA between India and Sweden entered into force on 25.12.1997, the
India-Swiss Confederation DTAA entered into force on 19.10.1994, and the
DTAA between India and the United States of America entered into force on
18.12.1990. These states were members of the OECD. The Union limited the
taxation at source on dividends, interest, royalties, fees for technical services
40 (2004) 5 SCC 196
34
and payments for the use of equipment to a rate lower or a scope more restricted
than that provided in the DTAA between India and the Netherlands on the said
items of income. Consequently, the notification dated 30.08.1999, provided the
following benefits expressly on different dates, having regard to the fact that
India entered into DTAAs with OECD members and gave them effect,
subsequently:
“Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by
section 90
of the
      Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), the Central Government hereby directs that
      the following modifications shall be made in the Convention notified by the said
      notification which are necessary for implementing the aforesaid Convention
      between India and the Netherlands, namely:
I. With effect from April 1, 1997, for the existing paragraph 2 of
article 10
relating to dividends the following paragraph shall be read :
      "2. However, such dividends may also be taxed in the Contracting State of which
      the company paying the dividends is a resident and according to the laws of that
      State, but if the recipient is the beneficial owner of the dividends, the tax so
      charged shall not exceed 10 per cent. of the gross amount of the dividends."
II. With effect from April 1, 1997, for the existing paragraph 2 of
article 11
relating to interest the following paragraph shall be read :
"2. However, such interest may also be taxed in the Contracting State in which it
      arises and according to the laws of that State, but if the recipient is the
      beneficial owner of the interest the tax so charged shall not exceed 10 per cent.
      of the gross amount of the interest."
III. With effect from the April 1, 1997, for the existing
article 12
relating to
      royalty, fees for technical services and payments for the use of equipment the
      following article shall be read :
"
Article 12
ROYALTIES AND FEES FOR TECHNICAL SERVICES
1. Royalties and fees for technical services arising in a Contracting State and
      paid to a resident of the other Contracting State may be taxed in that other
      State.
2. However, such royalties and fees for technical services may also be taxed in
      the Contracting State in which they arise and according to the laws of that
      State ; but if the beneficial owner of the royalties or fees for technical services is
      a resident of the other Contracting State, the tax so charged shall not exceed :
(a) in the case of royalties referred to in sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph 4 and
      fees for technical services as defined in this article (other than services
      described in sub-paragraph (b) of this paragraph):
(i) during the first five taxable years for which this Convention has effect,--
      (A) 15 per cent. of the gross amount of the royalties or fees for technical
      services as defined in this article, where the payer of the royalties or fees is the
      Government of that Contracting State, a political sub-division or a public sector
      company ; and
      (B) 20 per cent, of the gross amount of the royalties or fees for technical
      services in all other cases ; and
35
(ii) during the subsequent years, 15 per cent. of the gross amount of royalties or
fees for technical services ; and
(b) in the case of royalties referred to in sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 4 and
fees for technical services as defined in this article that are ancillary and
subsidiary to the enjoyment of the property for which payment is received under
paragraph 4(b) of this
article, 10
per cent. of the gross amount of the royalties
or fees for technical services.
3. The competent authorities of the States shall by mutual agreement settle the
mode of application of paragraph 2.
4. The term "royalties" as used in this article means:
(a) payments of any kind received as a consideration for the use of, or the right
to use, any copyright of literary, artistic or scientific work including motion
picture films and works on film or video-tape for use in connection with
television, any patent, trade mark, design or model, plan, secret formula or
process, or for information concerning industrial, commercial or scientific
experience ; and
(b) payments of any kind received as consideration for the use of, or the right to
use industrial, commercial or scientific equipment, other than payments derived
by an enterprise described in paragraph 1 of
articles 8
and 8A (shipping and air
transport) from activities described in paragraph 2(a) of
article 8
or paragraph
4(b) of article 8A.
5. For purposes of this article, "fees for technical services" means payments of
any kind to any person in consideration for the rendering of any technical or
consultancy services (including through the provision of services of technical or
other personnel) if such services :
(a) are ancillary and subsidiary to the application or enjoyment of the right,
property or information for which a payment described in paragraph 4 of this
article is received ; or
(b) make available technical knowledge, experience, skill, know-how or
processes or consist of the development and transfer of a technical plan or
technical design.
6. Notwithstanding paragraph 5, "fees for technical services" does not include
amounts paid:
(a) for services that are ancillary and subsidiary, as well as inextricably and
essentially linked, to the sale of property other than a sale described in
paragraph 4(a) ;
(b) for services that are ancillary and subsidiary to the rental of ships, aircraft,
containers or other equipment used in connection with the operation of ships or
aircraft in international traffic;
(c) for teaching in or by educational institutions;
(d) for services for the personal use of the individual or individuals making the
payment; or
(e) to an employee of the person making the payments or to any individual or
partnership for professional services as defined in
article 14 (independent
personal services)
of this Convention.
7. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply if the beneficial owner
of the royalties or fees for technical services, being a resident of one of the
States, carries on business in the other State, in which the royalties or fees for
technical services arise, through a permanent establishment situated therein, or
performs in that other State independent personal services from a fixed base
36
situated therein, and the royalties or fees for technical services are effectively
connected with such permanent establishment or fixed base. In such case, the
provisions of
article 7
or
article 14
, as the case may be, shall apply.
8. Royalties or fees for technical services shall be deemed to arise in one of the
States when the payer is that State itself, a political sub-division, a local
authority or a resident of that State. Where, however, the person paying the
royalties or fees for technical services, whether he is a resident of one of the
States or not, has in one of the States a permanent establishment or a fixed base
in connection with which the contract under which the royalties or fees for
technical services are paid was concluded, and such royalties or fees for
technical services are borne by such permanent establishment or fixed base,
then such royalties or fees for technical services shall be deemed to arise in the
State in which the permanent establishment or fixed base is situated.
9. Where, by reason of a special relationship between the payer and the
beneficial owner or between both of them and some other person, the amount of
royalties or fees for technical services, having regard to the royalties or fees for
technical services for which they are paid, exceeds the amount which would
have been agreed upon by the payer and the beneficial owner in the absence of
such relationship, the provisions of this article shall apply only to the last-
mentioned amount. In such case, the excess part of the payment shall remain
taxable according to the laws of each State, due regard being had to the other
provisions of this Convention."
IV. With effect from April 1, 1995, for paragraph 6 of
article 12
relating to
royalties and fees for technical services referred to in paragraph III above the
following paragraph shall be read:
"6. Notwithstanding paragraph 5, 'fees for technical services' does not include
amounts paid :
(a) for services that are ancillary and subsidiary, as well as inextricably and
essentially linked, to the sale of property ;
(b) for services that are ancillary and subsidiary to the rental of ships, aircraft,
containers or other equipment used in connection with the operation of ships or
aircraft in international traffic;
(c) for teaching in or by educational institutions;
(d) for services for the personal use of the individual or individuals, making the
payment; or
(e) to an employee of the person making the payments or to any individual or
partnership for professional services as defined in
article 14 (independent
personal services)
of this Convention."
V. With effect from April 1, 1997, for paragraph 2 of
article 12
, relating to
royalties and fees for technical services referred to in paragraph III above the
following paragraph shall be read :
"2. However, such royalties and fees for technical services may also be taxed in
the Contracting State in which they arise and according to the laws of that State,
but if the recipient is the beneficial owner of the royalties, or fees for technical
services, the tax so charged shall not exceed 10 per cent. of the gross amount of
the royalties or the fees for technical services."
VI. With effect from April 1, 1998, for paragraph 4 of
article 12
relating to
royalties and fees for technical services referred to in paragraph III above the
following paragraph shall be read :
37
"4. The term "royalties" as used in this article means payments of any kind
      received as a consideration for the use of, or the right to use, any copyright of
      literary, artistic or scientific work including cinematograph films, any patent,
      trade mark, design or model, plan, secret formula or process, for information
      concerning industrial, commercial or scientific experience."
VII. The memorandum of understanding and the confirmation of understanding,
      dated September 12, 1989, with reference to paragraph 4 of
article 12
of the
      Indo-USA Double Taxation Avoidance Convention (DTAC), will apply mutatis
      mutandis for the purpose of paragraphs III, IV, V and VI above.”
54.   It is therefore, clear that the date on which the relief of rate of taxation for
interest and dividends was specified to be 01.04.1997; different dates
(01.04.1995 and 01.04.1998) were applied as applicable to the definition of fees
and technical services and other details; the rates, too varied, depending on the
period(s). The second aspect, is that the notification under
Section 90
was
issued on 30.08.1999. The third, and most significant aspect is that the
favourable or beneficial treatment was given to other OECD nations on
26.10.1996 (India-Germany); the DTAA between India and Sweden entered into
force on 25.12.1997, the India-Swiss Confederation DTAA entered into force on
19.10.1994 itself. These earlier dates, did not result in India automatically
extending benefits of Article IV of the India-Netherlands DTAA Protocol to
Netherlands. The relevant phrase in that provision (Article IV) obliged India to
grant to the Netherlands, the same benefit to it, as was granted to the other
nation in that third party state’s DTAA or Protocol with India:
“as from the date on which the relevant Indian Convention or Agreement enters
       into force the same rate or scope as provided for in that Convention or
       Agreement on the said items of income shall also. apply under this
       Convention”
55.   Clearly, therefore, so far as India-Netherlands DTAA goes, there is
established and clear precedent, of behaviour, in relation to treaty practise and
interpretation. This was uncontested, and is a matter of record.
56.   In relation to France, the India-France DTAA and Protocol came into
force on 01.08.1994, after the notification by the contracting states to each other
of the completion of the procedures required under their laws to bring them into
38
force.
Article 7
of that DTAA (which dealt with principles of taxation of
Business profits), provided by
Article 7(3)(a)
that:
“Provided that where the law of the Contracting State in which the permanent
         establishment is situated imposes a restriction on the amount of the executive
         and general administrative expenses which may be allowed, and that
         restriction is relaxed or overridden by any Convention, Agreement or Protocol
         signed after 1-1-1990 between that Contracting State and a third State which is
         a member of the OECD, the competent authority of that Contracting State shall
         notify the competent authority of the other Contracting State of the terms of the
         corresponding paragraph in the Convention, Agreement or Protocol with that
         third State immediately after the entry into force of that Convention, Agreement
         or Protocol and, if the competent authority of the other Contracting State so
         requests, the provisions of that paragraph shall apply under this Convention
         from that entry into force.”
57.     The DTAA between India and USA had been entered into force, on
18.12.1990; the DTAA between India and Germany had been entered into on
26.10.1996. These DTAAs gave benefits or more favourable treatment to USA
and Germany, in respect of income on dividends, interest, royalties, definition of
royalties and fees for technical services. In the light of these, India notified
changes in the applicable provisions to the India-France DTAA and Protocols
through a notification in July, 2000 41. The recital to the said notification of 2000
reads as follows:
“And whereas in the Convention between India and Germany which entered
         into force on the 26th October, 1996, and the Convention between India and the
         United States of America which entered into force on the 18th December, 1990,
         which States are members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
         Development, the Government of India has limited the taxation at source on
         dividends, interest, royalties, fees for technical services and payments for the
         use of equipment to a rate lower or a scope more restricted than that provided
         in the Convention between India and France on the said items of income.”
58.     The amending notification again followed the same pattern, as in the case
of the India-Netherlands DTAA, of defining the rate and nature of relief on
interest, and dividends and the rates applicable, and different definition for
different dates for “fees on royalties and technical services”, i.e. 01.04.1995

41 Notification No. S.O. 650(E), dated 10-7-2000
39
and 01.04.1997 for
Articles 11
, 12
, and
13.
This notification again reinforced
India’s practise and conduct of giving effect of the subsequent event of a more
beneficial arrangement with a third country, to the country which had entered
into a DTAA previously, on the basis of a treaty provision, through an express
action i.e., a notification under
Section 90
. Another aspect is that the India-UK
DTAA and India-Portugal DTAA had a condition, i.e., that by
Article 4
,
technical services (for the purpose of levying tax on income from fees for
technical service) applied a condition that the taxpayer could
       “make available technical knowledge, experience, skill, know-how, or
       processes, or consist of the development and transfer of a technical plan or
       technical design”
59.   Steria’s argument in addition, was that the India-Portugal DTAA was
signed on 11.09.1998 (after 29.09.1992 when India-France DTAA was signed).
The Portuguese Republic is a member of OECD. Similarly, India - UK DTAA
was signed on 25.01.1993 (after 29.09.1992) and the UK is a member of OECD.
Hence, the scope of India-France DTAA is less restrictive than these two
DTAAs (India-Portugal and India-UK). The provisions of the latter two DTAAs
enabling such acts to get benefits, too should have applied. The revenue argues
that for the more restrictive definitions in the DTAAs in India-Portugal and
India-UK treaties, to be automatically imported into India-France DTAA there is
need for a notification, before its scope could be imported. It is pointed out that
the Protocol, of 10.07.2000 did not extend the expanded definition, and instead
confined the benefits to definition and treatment of income from dividends,
interest, and royalties. The “make available” condition, in other DTAAs was
consciously omitted from the notification.
60.   The omission of certain benefits (available to other member countries of
OECD who had entered into DTAAs with India) in the subsequent notification,
dated 10.07.2000, is another indication that a “trigger” event such as India
granting favourable relief to a country per se does not cover all the benefits
40
granted through the later instrument. Therefore, the benefit which India granted
France, was within the framework of its treaty originally negotiated. In the case
of the other country (granted benefits later, through a convention, by India), a
different trajectory of negotiations might have led to different kind of benefits to
the third country (UK and Portugal, in the case of France). In other words, the
structure of the main DTAA, and its phraseology, based on negotiations with the
countries concerned, i.e., Netherlands, France and Switzerland, also plays a role
in the kind of benefits that are assured through it. The structure and terms of
other DTAAs might be different; the coverage and definition of certain terms
(FTS, permanent establishment, etc.) might be dissimilar. The revenue’s
argument that grant of automatic benefits based on the other country’s entry into
OECD, as unfeasible, has merit.
61.   As far as Switzerland is concerned the earlier discussion has noticed the
three different dates when DTAA and the two later Protocols were entered into.
They were given effect to by three separate notifications (No. GSR 357(E),
dated 21.04.1995; as amended by Notification No. GSR 74(E), dated
07.02.2001 and Notification No. S.O. 2903(E), dated 27.12.2011). The second
Protocol contained a condition, which constituted the “trigger” event. That
provision is extracted below:
“D With reference to
Articles 10
, 11
and
12
If after the signature of the Protocol of 16th February, 2000 under any
       Convention, Agreement or Protocol between India and a third State which is a
       member of the OECD India should limit its taxation at source on dividends,
       interest, royalties or fees for technical services to a rate lower or a scope more
       restricted than the rate or scope provided for in this Agreement on the said
       items of income, then, Switzerland and India shall enter into negotiations
       without undue delay in order to provide the same treatment to Switzerland as
       that provided to the third State."
62.   Nestle had argued that this provision has been deleted, and instead,
another condition added, by the 2010 Protocol, which reads as follows:
"
ARTICLE 11
41
Paragraph 4 of the Protocol to the Agreement shall be deleted and replaced by
       the following paragraph:
With reference to
Articles 10
, 11
, 12
and
22
The provisions of
Articles 10
, 11
, 12
and
22
shall not apply in respect to any
       dividend, interest, royalty, fees for technical services or other income paid
       under, or as part of a conduit arrangement. The term “conduit arrangement”
       means a transaction or series of transactions which is structured in such a way
       that a resident of a Contracting State entitled to the benefits of the Agreement
       receives an item of income arising in the other Contracting State but that
       resident pays, directly or indirectly, all or substantially all of that income (at
       any time or in any form) to another person who is not a resident of either
       Contracting State and who, if it received that item of income directly from the
       other Contracting State, would not be entitled under a Convention or
       Agreement for the avoidance of double taxation between the State in which that
       other person is resident and the Contracting State in which the income arises,
       or otherwise, to benefits with respect to that item of income which are
       equivalent to, or more favorable than, those available under this Agreement to
       a resident of a Contracting State; and the main purpose of such structuring is
       obtaining benefits under this Agreement.
In respect of
Articles 10 (Dividends)
, 11 (Interest)
and
12 (Royalties
and fees
       for technical services), if under any Convention, Agreement or Protocol
       between India and a third State which is a member of the OECD signed after
       the signature of this Amending Protocol, India limits its taxation at source on
       dividends, interest, royalties or fees for technical services to a rate lower than
       the rate provided for in this Agreement on the said items of income, the same
       rate as provided for in that Convention, Agreement or Protocol on the said
       items of income shall also apply between both Contracting States under this
       Agreement as from the date on which such Convention, Agreement or Protocol
       enters into force.
If after the date of signature this Amending Protocol, India under any
       Convention, Agreement or Protocol with a third State which is a member of the
       OECD, restricts the scope in respect of royalties or fees for technical services
       than the scope for these items of income provided for in
Article 12
of this
       Agreement, then Switzerland and India shall enter into negotiations without
       undue delay in order to provide the same treatment to Switzerland as that
       provided to the third State."
It is urged that the change in terminology is significant. The earlier
Protocol had obliged parties to enter into negotiations to ensure that benefits
extended to state parties which later entered into OECD membership, were
given to Switzerland. However, the language of the third Protocol is more
emphatic, in that it, states, through the second paragraph of the amended
Protocol to
Article 11
, that in such event (of entry by third party state into
OECD):
42
“the same rate as provided for in that Convention, Agreement or Protocol on
          the said items of income shall also apply between both Contracting States
          under this Agreement as from the date on which such Convention, Agreement
          or Protocol enters into force.”
63.      At this stage, it would also be useful to note that the second Protocol, by
Article 16
, had provided that:
“ARTICLE 16
          The Governments of the Contracting States shall notify each other through
          diplomatic channels
1. that all legal requirements and procedures for giving effect to this Protocol
          have been satisfied. [..]”

      It could plausibly be argued that this condition is not substantive, but only
diplomatic. However, what it requires is that the concerned governments have to
notify how and when the Protocol is assimilated into the domestic legal system.
Quite correctly the provision does not assign any time frame within which the
Protocol has to be made effective. Therefore, inbuilt in the entire eco-system of
the DTAAs is the inarticulate premise that assimilation into the domestic legal
system is not always within the control of the executive wing which enters into
the convention, or signs the protocol and that compelling constitutional and
legal requirements have to be satisfied, before its benefits are integrated within
the national legal regimes. This consideration, or premise, would equally apply
in the case of the India-Switzerland DTAA and its amending Protocol; the
requirement of notification of the protocol and a separate amending Protocol,
(like in the case of France and Netherlands) is necessary, by reason of
Section
90
of the Act. Switzerland cannot claim an exception, based only on the
language of the third Protocol.
64.      It would be useful to end this discussion, with one more instance of
India’s treaty practice, in regard to fulfilling its obligations under DTAAs and
their Protocols. India had entered into a DTAA with Canada on 30.10.1985
which was notified on 25.09.1986 under
Section 90
. The DTAA contained
provisions relating to rate of taxation, and treatment of royalties. It also
43
contained a provision that in the event India entered into a subsequent DTAA
with a member of the OECD, and conferred better terms, as compared with
Canada, then the latter would be extended similar benefits. The India-Sweden
DTAA was signed on 12.12.1988, which extended more favourable benefits,
than what was given to Canada; Sweden was an OECD member when the
DTAA was signed with India. This constituted the “trigger” event, impelling
Canada to seek parity. The Protocol (of 1985) to the India-Canada DTAA
contained the following stipulation:
"With reference to paragraph 2 of
article 13
, in the event that pursuant to an
       Agreement or a Convention concluded with a State which is a member of the
       Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development after the date of
       signature of this Agreement, India would accept a rate lower than 30 per cent
       for the taxation of royalties or fees for technical services paid by a resident of
       India to a resident of that State, it is understood that such lower rate will
       automatically be applied for the taxation of royalties and fees for technical
       services paid by a resident of India to a resident of Canada where the royalties
       or fees for technical services are paid in respect of a right or property which is
       first granted, or under a contract which is signed, after the date of entry into
       force of the first-mentioned Agreement or convention."
65.   The amendment to the DTAA was on 24.06.1992, which was notified
under
Section 90
on 28.10.1992; it reads inter alia, as follows:
“Subsequent to the signing of the Agreement with Canada, India has entered
       into Agreements with other OECD countries, wherein the rate of taxation in
       respect of royalties and fees for technical services has been agreed at 20% of
       the gross amount. The revised Agreement with Sweden, which came into force
       on 12th December, 1988, is the first of such Agreements. Accordingly, after
       consultation with the Canadian Government,”a notification has been issued on
       24th June, 1992 notifying that the rate of tax of 20% will be applicable to
       royalties and fees for technical services paid by a resident of India to a resident
       of Canada. This reduced rate will be applicable to payments made in respect of
       the right or property which is first granted or under a contract which is signed,
       after the 12th day of December, 1988. A copy of the notification bearing GSR
       No. 635(E), dated 24th June, 1992, is enclosed.
3. The Canadian Government have also passed a Remission Order dated 3rd
       December, 1991, making the revised rate as above applicable to Indian
       residents as well in respect of royalties or fees for technical services paid by a
       Canadian resident.”
66.   It is quite clear that the Protocol, to the original DTAA was unambiguous
and emphatic; it required that the trigger event would lead to “such lower rate
44
will automatically be applied for the taxation of royalties and fees for technical
services paid by a resident of India to a resident of Canada where the royalties
or fees for technical services are paid in respect of a right or property”. In such
an instance, of language, in the protocol, being as emphatic as the third Protocol
to the India-Switzerland DTAA, the treaty practice of India was consistent; a
separate notification was later issued.
67.      The respondents had relied on decrees/decisions of each of the countries,
to underline that in terms of treaty practice of the three countries, the Union
government has to extend reciprocity, which means that similarly, automatic
benefits have to be given to taxpayers, claiming them under DTAAs and
Protocols, on the occurrence of a third-party state granted better benefits,
gaining admission/membership into OECD. The decree or decision of the
Directorate General of Fiscal Affairs, International Fiscal Affairs (relevant
authority in the Kingdom of Netherlands), relied upon by Concentrix and
Optum Global42 reads as follows:
“In the treaty India agreed with Slovenia which entered into force on 17
          February 2005 has entered a participation dividend rate of 5 percent. This is
          the case a participation dividend, if a company immediately provides at least
          10 percent of the capital hold the body that pays the dividends. Slovenia joined.
the OECD on 21 July 2010. Under the most-favored nation clause in the
          Protocol to the Convention, this event has the effect of retroactive effect to and
          As of July 21, 2010 a rate of 5 percent applies to participation dividends, which
          are paid by a body that a resident of the Netherlands to a body that is a resident
          of India. The text of the relevant Treaty provision from the India -Slovenia
          Treaty is contained in the attachment.
The most-favored-nation clause remains on portfolio dividends (if a body is
          less than 10 percent of the share capital of the company that pays the
          dividends) in the Netherlands-India relationship a rate of 10 percent applies.
          This rate is taken from the treaty between India and Germany of June 19, 1995
          and applies since April 1, 1997. Herein brings the treaty therefore no change
          between India and Slovenia.”

         The decree issued by the Swiss Federation43 provides as follows:
42 Decision of 28 February 2012, No. IFZ 2012/54M, Tax treaties: India, issued by the Director General,
Fiscal Affairs, Kingdom of Netherlands
43 The State Secretariat for International Financial Matters SIF Section Bilateral tax Issues and double taxation
treaties, Swiss Federation, dated 13.08.2021
45
“Application of the most favoured nation clause of the protocol amending the
agreement between the Swiss Confederation and the Republic of India for the
avoidance of double taxation with respect to taxes on income Switzerland and
India have concluded the agreement of 2 November 1994 for the avoidance of
double taxation with respect to taxes on income (DTC IN-CH)1.1t was revised
by the amending protocols dated 16 February 2000 and 30 August 2010.
Article 11
of the amending protocol dated 30 August 2010 contains a so-called
most favoured nation clause, which stipulates that if, after the signing of the
amending protocol dated 30 August 2010, India under any convention,
agreement or protocol with a third State which is a member of the OECD,
limits its taxation at source on dividends, interest, royalties or fees for technical
services to a rate lower than the rate provided for in OTC IN-CH on the said
items of income, the same rate as provided for in that convention, agreement or
protocol on the said items of income shall also apply between Switzerland and
India as from the date on which such Convention, Agreement or Protocol enters
into force.
Following the signing of the amending protocol dated 30 August 2010, India
concluded two new double taxation agreements with States which are now
OECD members, in which it granted lower rates with respect to dividends.
These are the agreement of 26 July 2011 between the government of the
Republic of India and the government of the Republic of Lithuania for the
avoidance of double taxation with respect to income tax (DTC IN-L T) and the
agreement of 13 May 2011 between the government of the Republic of India
and the Republic of Colombia for the avoidance of double taxation with respect
to income tax (DTC IN-CO).
Article 10
, paragraph 2, letter a DTC IN-LT provides for a residual tax rate in
the source State of 5% of the gross amount of dividends if the beneficial owner
is a company (other than a partnership) that directly owns at least 10% of the
capital of the company paying the dividends. Lithuania joined the OECD on 5
July 2018.
On the basis of the most favoured nation clause between Switzerland and India,
lithuania's accession to the OECO has the effect of retroactively (from 5 July
2018) reducing the residual lax rate in the source State for dividends from
qualified participations from 10% to 5% applicable to the relationship between
India and Switzerland.
Article 10
, paragraph 2 OTC IN-CO provides for a general residual tax rate of
5% in the source state. Colombia joined the OECD on 28 April 2020.
On the basis of the most favoured nation clause between Switzerland and India,
Colombia's accession to the OECD has the effect of retroactively (from 28 April
2020) reducing the residual tax rate in the source Start: for dividends from
10% to 5% (dividends arising from qualified interests and portfolio dividends)
applicable to the relationship between India and Switzerland.
Thus, under the provisions of DTC IN-CH, Indian tax residents receiving
dividends from Swiss source as of 5 July 2018, or 28 April 2020 can claim,
subject to the conditions laid down in DTC IN·CH, a refund of the (additional)
withholding tax in accordance with the established procedures. The legal time
limit set out in
Article 32
of the
Federal Act
on withholding tax applies..”
46
68.    The decree issued by the Republic of France, inter alia, after narrating
and reciting the India-France DTAA, the amending Protocols, the date on which
India-Germany DTAA was entered into, and the date on which the Protocol,
amending India-France DTAA on the basis of the Indo-German DTAA,
provided as follows:
“I. Withholding tax rate on dividends and interest under the most-favoured-
         nation clause
         A. Dividends referred to in
Article 11
The rate of 15 % provided for in paragraph 2 of
Article 11
of the Franco-
         Indian convention shall be replaced by that of 10% provided for in the tax
         treaty concluded by India with Germany.
This rate shall be replaced by the rate of 5 % of the gross amount of
         dividends provided for in the tax treaty concluded between India and
         Slovenia if the 'beneficial owner is a company which directly holds at least 10
         % of the capital of the company paying those dividends.
          B. Interest referred to in
Article 2
, Paragraph 12
(a) The rate of 10 per cent provided for in paragraph 2 {a) of
Article 12
of
         the Franco-Indian Convention applies to interest paid on loans granted by
         insurance companies as a result of India's tax treaty with the United States.
(b) The rate of 15 % provided for in paragraph 2 (b) of
Article 12
shall be
         replaced by that of 10 % following the tax treaty concluded by India with
         Germany.”
69.    The context of these executive orders or decrees is to be understood in
relation to each country’s manner of assimilation of treaties, in municipal or
national law. The Federal Council headed by the President and the Federal
Chancellor exercise the executive authority, in Switzerland. The Federal
Council has the authority to negotiate and sign treaties and conventions. The
treaty after its signature is ratified in four different ways:
(a) In certain cases, Parliament authorizes the Federal Council in
              advance to sign the treaty and bring it into force as well;
(b) Some treaties require prior approval of the Parliament to be
              enforceable;
(c) In some cases, the treaty is subjected to optional referendum
              provided under
Article 89 (3)
of the Constitution;
47
(d) In some cases, the international agreement needs sanction through
                  compulsory referendum in terms of
Article 89 (5)
of the
                  Constitution44.
Consequential process then follows having regard to the nature of the treaty.
70.      As far as France is concerned, the French Constitution of 1958, by
Article
52
empowers the President to negotiate and ratify treaties. Treaty ratification is
authorized by the National Assembly and Senate when that treaty would affect
the sovereignty of France or alter an existing statute, though such authorization
has no normative value. A treaty affecting the rights of the citizens has to be
published; after publication it prevails over French legislation.
Article 55
confers upon treaties a status superior to that of domestic legislation and
provides that concluded treaties do not require any implementing legislation to
be enforceable.45
71.      The Kingdom of Netherland is party to a number of treaties, international
Agreements and Conventions. Such treaties have to receive approval of the
Lower and Upper House of its Parliament (States General; ). If a provision in a
treaty is in conflict with the Constitution, a two-thirds majority of the houses is
mandatory (
Article 91
paragraph 3 Constitution46). The Netherlands government
and its courts are not bound by a treaty until the States General have ratified it.
72.      In the opinion of this court, the status of treaties and conventions and the
manner of their assimilation is radically different from what the Constitution of
India mandates. In each of the said three countries, every treaty entered into the
executive government needs ratification. Importantly, in Switzerland, some
treaties have to be ratified or approved through a referendum. These mean that
after intercession of the Parliamentary or legislative process/procedure, the
treaty is assimilated into the body of domestic law, enforceable in courts.
44
Article 89
of the Federal Constitution of the Swiss Federation, available at: (accessed on 11.10.2023).
45 Title VI and
Art. 56
of the French Constitution, 1958, available at: (accessed on 15.10.2023).
46
Article 91
of the Constitution of the Kingdom of Netherlands, 2018, available at: (accessed on 15.10.2023).
48
However, in India, either the treaty concerned has to be legislatively embodied
in law, through a separate statute, or get assimilated through a legislative device,
i.e. notification in the gazette, based upon some enacted law (some instances are
the
Extradition Act, 1962
and the
Income Tax Act, 1961
). Absent this step,
treaties and protocols are per se unenforceable.
E. International perspectives and practices
73.      Klaus Vogel47 (an acknowledged authority on double taxation), in the
Treatise Double Taxation Conventions, comments - pertinently states, on the
aspect of assimilation of international treaties into municipal (national) laws,
that:
“45.For purposes of international law, a tax treaty comes into existence upon
         the declaration of consent by both Contracting States (
Article 9(1)
VCLT).
         Ordinarily, the Head of State is authorized to make the declaration. In
         Germany, the declaration under
Article 59
Abs. 1 GG is made by the Federal
         President. In the US, under Article II,
section 2
, clause 2 of the Constitution,
         the President, as Head of State, declares the consent of the United States to be
         bound by the treaty under international law. This power is ordinarily delegated
         to the Secretary of State or a US Ambassador.
46. The method by which the Contracting States declare their consent is left to
         the Contracting Parties (
Article 11
et seq. VCLT). For important treaties,
         however, it is generally agreed that the conclusion of the treaty shall be given
         effect only through an exchange of instruments, or 'ratification' (
Article 14(1)
VCLT); for multilateral treaties, it is by deposit of instruments at a location
         agreed upon in the treaty through corresponding notification (
Articles 14(1)
, 16
VCLT). Ratification is to be distinguished from parliamentary consent (see
         above), which frequently, primarily in the language of the media, is incorrectly
         termed as 'ratification'.
Article 31
of the OECD MC,
Article 30
of the UN MC
         and
Article 29
of the US MC each provide for ratification of tax treaties and
         treaties normally follow the MC in this respect. In the document of ratification,
         the authorized agent - the President in the US, the Federal President in
         Germany, Austria and Switzerland – delivers the formal declaration that the
         constitutional requirements necessary for internal application of the treaty have
         been fulfilled (see infra
Article 31
at m.no. 11 et seq.).
***************                                                   *************
47. Upon declaration of intent to contract, whether through ratification or
         other means, the treaty becomes binding under international law (unless the
         treaty provides for a different date for entry into force). The binding force of the
         treaty under international law is to be distinguished from its internal
         applicability. Internal applicability is a consequence only of treaties which -
47 Klaus Vogel on Double Taxation Conventions
49
like tax treaties - are designed to be applied by domestic authorities in addition
          to obligating the States themselves (i.e., self-executing treaties).48
          ***************                                                   ***************
49. In the UK, where parliamentary consent is not necessary for conclusion
          of a treaty, the treaty becomes applicable internally only when a special law to
          this effect is passed by Parliament after the treaty enters into force under
          international law.49 In special, legally authorized cases, such as for DTCs
          under § 788 ICTA 1988, the Queen may enact an Order in Council in place of
          parliamentary legislation.50 A special law is also required in Canada51 and
          other members of the Commonwealth. Under Netherlands constitutional law,
          the treaty becomes applicable domestically at the time it enters into force, 52
          reflecting the 'monist' theory of international law. In general, the conflict
          between 'monistic' and 'dualist' theories has been overcome by a compromise
          view.53
50. The process pursuant to which a treaty acquires the force and effect of
          domestic law was for long referred to by German theorists as a
          ‘transformation' (i.e., as the promulgation of a domestic statute parallel to the
          treaty and incorporating the treaty text). A similar view can also be found,
          though often not very explicit, in other countries.54 This theory, however cannot
          explain why, among other things, the treaty, even after parliamentary consent,
          becomes applicable domestically only when it enters into force under
          international law or why it loses its binding force internally when it is
          rescinded or terminated at the international level. For these reasons, the
          German doctrine of international law abandoned the transformation theory.
          Parliamentary consent is now understood as a mandate through which the
          treaty itself - rather than a corresponding internal legislative provision -
          becomes applicable within the scope of domestic law.55
51.       The point in time at which a treaty enters into force internationally and
        the point at which it becomes applicable under domestic law must be
        distinguished from the point in time at which the material consequences of the
        treaty begin to take effect, or, in other words, the taxable period or the date from
        which taxation shall be limited by the treaty (the effective date). Usually this
        'initiation of treaty effects' is established by explicit treaty rules. Various aspects
        may be of importance here. Treaty rules in particular often distinguish between
        treaty effects on assessed taxes and those on withholding taxes. In general, the
        material effects of tax treaties apply retrospectively, viewed from the date of


48 GATT has been held by the German Bundesfinanzhof not to be ‘self-executing’: 25 February, 1959, BStBl.
III 166, 167 (1959); 15 October 1959, BStBl. III 486, 489 (1959). Direct internal applicability of GATT,
however, has been advocated by Jackson, 66 Mich. L. Rev. 250 (1967).
49 McNair, A.D., The Law of Treaties (1961) at 81; Oliver, J.D.B., 15 BTR 388 (1970).
50 See Baker, P., Double Taxation Conventions and International Tax Law (1994) at 46.
51 Ward, D.A., Ward’s Tax Treaties (1993/94), at 6.
52 Van Raad, K., 47 MBB 49 (1978).
53 See in general: Tunkin, G & Wolfrum, R. (eds.), International Law and Municipal Law (1988).
54 See, e.g., Canadian Supreme Court of 28 September 1982, The Queen v. Melford Development Inc., D.T.C.
6281 (1982), at 6285.
55 Regarding the domestic applicability of international agreements in Germany, see Partsch, J., Die
Anwendung des Volkerrechts im innerstaatlichen Recht. Uberprufung der Transformationslehre (6 Berichte der
Deutschen Gesellschaft fur Volkerrecht (1964)); Blechmann, A., Begriff und Kriterien der innerstaatlichen
Anwendbarkeit volkerrechtlicher Vertage (1970); id., Grundgesetz und Volkerrecht, 277 (1975); Langbein,
V.,Intertax 151 (1985), original German version: Langbein, V.,30 RIW 531 (1984).
50
entry into force under international law; detrimental retrospectivity, however,
         may be prohibited.
52.     Through the mandate of the legislature, treaties in most States obtain the
         same authority as internal law. In some States they are even considered to have
         priority over domestic law.56”

      F. Vienna Convention on Law of Treaties
74.
Article 31
of the VCLT57 reflects the general rules of treaty interpretation.
India is not a signatory to the convention. However, the convention has been
accepted by consensus as reflecting the customary international law on general
rules of treaty interpretation, and is thus still relevant in the Indian context.
Article 31(3)
of the VCLT provides that the following shall be taken into
account, while interpreting the provisions of a treaty:
(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the
             interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions;
(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which
             establishes the agreement of the parties regarding the interpretation of
             the treaty or the application of its provisions;
(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations
             between the parties.
56 For e.g.,
Art. 94
of the Dutch Constitution,
Art. 55
of the French Constitution and for Luxembourg see Cour
de Cassation of 14 July 1954, Pagani, 16 Pas. 150
57 “Article 31 General Rule of Interpretation
1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the
terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.
2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in addition to the text,
including its preamble and annexes:
(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all the parties in connection
          with the conclusion of the treaty;
(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties in connection with the conclusion
          of the treaty and accepted by the other parties as an instrument related to the treaty.”
3. There shall be taken into account, together with the context:
(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the
application of its provisions;
(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which establishes the agreement of the
parties regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions;
(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the parties.”
51
75.     In 2018, the International Law Commission (ILC) adopted its Draft
Conclusions on Subsequent Agreements and Subsequent Practice in relation to
the Interpretation of Treaties (“ILC Draft Conclusions”).58 The ILC Draft
Conclusions note that under the scheme of the VCLT, subsequent agreements
and subsequent practice, being objective evidence of the understanding of the
parties as to the meaning of the treaty, are authentic means of interpretation of
treaties.59
76.     The ILC Draft Conclusions define ‘subsequent agreement’ as an
agreement between parties, reached after the conclusion of a treaty, regarding
the interpretation of a treaty and its provisions. 60 A ‘subsequent practice’ is
defined as consisting of conduct in the application of a treaty, after its
conclusion, which establishes the agreement of the parties regarding the
interpretation of the treaty.61 Such subsequent practice under
Articles 31
and
32
may consist of any conduct of a party in the application of a treaty, whether in
the exercise of its executive, legislative, judicial or other functions, 62 and may
take several forms.63 ‘Practice’ includes any type of positive action, whether
physical or conduct —for instance, the reliance on the provisions of a treaty to
support a State’s chosen course of action, or the adoption of legislation, or
enforcement action based on a treaty, and abstention from action (omission) in
the application of a treaty. Put simply, practice covers ‘what states do in their
relations with one another’.64 In a more dynamic sense, it represents the process
of continuous interaction between States. It also covers subsequent treaties with
third States65, and patterns of treaties, for instance when considering whether the
58 ILC Draft Conclusions on Subsequent Agreements and Subsequent Practice in relation to the Interpretation
of Treaties, available at .
59 Conclusion 3, Id.
60 Conclusion 4(1), Id.
61 Conclusion 4(2), Id.
62 Conclusion 5(1), Id.
63 Conclusion 6(2), Id.
64 JL Brierly, The Law of Nations, 6th Ed. (Oxford University Press, 1963), 59.
65 Irina Buga, ‘Subsequent Practice as a Means of Treaty Interpretation’ in Modification of Treaties by
Subsequent Practice (Oxford University Press, 2018). See also Report of the International Law Commission
covering its 2nd session, UN Doc A/1316 (1950) II YBILC 364, 368; M. Akehurst, ʻCustom as a Source of
52
conclusion of a large number of Bilateral Investment Treaties (BITs) could
collectively amount to subsequent practice.66
77.     The International Court of Justice (ICJ) has accepted a wide variety of
activities as interpretive conduct by states. It has referred to domestic
legislation67, diplomatic correspondence68, and the silence or inactivity of one
state in the face of the conduct of another. For example, in the Rights of
Nationals Case, the ICJ took into account the practice of local customs
officials.69 In the Asylum Case70, Colombian failure to raise the Havana
Convention in diplomatic correspondence was used to show that Colombia did
not construe the convention as applicable. In the Corfu Channel Case71,
Albanian failure to challenge the court’s power to fix the amount of
compensation was used in interpreting the Special Agreement as not precluding
the court from fixing the quantum of damages.
78.     The ILC Draft Conclusions further provide that a common understanding
would be required, regarding the interpretation of a treaty which the parties are
aware of and accept. Such an agreement may, but need not, be legally binding
for it to be taken into account.72 Further, the number of parties that must actively
engage in subsequent practice in order to establish an agreement under
Article
31(3)(b)
, may vary. Silence on the part of one or more parties may constitute

International Lawʼ (1974-75) 47 BYBIL 1, 43; ME Villiger, Customary International Law and Treaties: A Study
of Their Interactions and Interrelations, with Special Consideration of the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law
of Treaties (Brill, 1985), para 19.
66 See eg., SM Schwebel, ʻThe Influence of Bilateral Investment Treaties on Customary International Law ʼ
(2004) 98 ASIL Proc 27; JE Alvarez, ʻA BIT on Customʼ (2009) 42 NYU J Intl L & Pol 17.
67 See
Anglo-Iranian Oil Co.
Case (U.K. v. Iran), 1952 I.C.J. 93, 106-07 (Iranian law used in interpreting the
Iranian declaration acceding to the jurisdiction of the court).
68 See South West Africa Cases (Ethiopia v. S. Afr.; Liberia v. S. Afr.), 1966 I.C.J. 6, 134; Legal Consequences
for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia, 1971 I.C.J. 16, 39, where, in both cases,
statements by South African diplomats were used in interpreting the League of Nations Mandates.
See also Case
Concerning Rights of Nationals of the United States of America in Morocco (
Fr. v. U.S.
), 1952 I.C.J. 176, 211,
where letters and minutes of meetings of customs officials were used in interpreting the treaty in question.
69 Case Concerning Rights of Nationals of the United States of America in Morocco (
Fr. v. U.S.
), 1952 I.C.J.
176, 211
70 Asylum Case (Colombia. v. Peru), 1950 I.C.J. 266, 286.
71 Corfu Channel (U.K. v. Alb.), 1949 I.C.J. 4, 25.
72 Conclusion 10(1), Id.
53
acceptance of the subsequent practice when the circumstances call for some
reaction.73 Agreement between the parties in respect of subsequent conduct or
practice may be established by acquiescence of parties not actively participating
in the practice, or the absence of objections (characterized as ‘passive
conduct’).74
79.     ILC commentaries, such as the ILC Draft Conclusions on subsequent
practice, are an influential subsidiary means for determining rules of law, within
the meaning of the term in
Article 38(1)(d)
of the ICJ Statute. This is because
these documents often record and assess state practice (as well as international
jurisprudence and doctrine), and often explain whether (and to what extent)
opinio juris exists.75 As of 2019, the ICJ had relied expressly on the ILC’s work
in 22 cases (19 decisions in contentious proceedings and 3 advisory opinions).76
80.     The provisions of the ILC Draft Conclusions on subsequent practice were
drafted and adopted by consolidating the writings of eminent publicists in
international law, pursuant to extensive research on evolving state practice. 77
The cumulative effect of these provisions is that state practice subsequent to the
adoption of a treaty confirms and solidifies the intent of the parties to the treaty.
The goal of treaty interpretation under the VCLT is to determine the meaning of
the treaty viewed from the perspective of the contemporary shared
understanding of the parties to the treaties. 78 As James Crawford has pointed
out, from the perspective of international law, ‘the parties…own the treaty’79.
73 Conclusion 10(2), Id.
74 ILC, Third Report on the Law of Treaties, UN Doc A/CN.4/167, 59 para 24; See also ME Villiger,
Commentary on the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (Brill, 2009), 431.
75 Danae Azaria, The International Law Commission’s Return to the Law of Sources of International Law, 13
FIU L. Rev. 989 (2019).
76 Id.
77 See for eg., ILC, Reports on Subsequent Agreements and Subsequent Practice in Relation to Treaty
Interpretation, by Georg Nolte, Special Rapporteur, UN Doc A/CN.4/660 (2013); UN Doc A/CN.4/671 (2014);
UN Doc A/CN.4/683 (2015), UN Doc A/CN.4/694 (2016), UN Doc A/CN.4/715 (2018).
78 Steven Ratner, ‘International Law Rules on Treaty Interpretation’ in The Law and Practice of the Northern
Ireland Protocol, edited by Christopher McCrudden, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (2022), pp. 80-91.
79 James Crawford, ‘A Consensualist Interpretation of Article31(3) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties’ in Georg Nolte et al (eds.), Treaties and Subsequent Practice (Oxford University Press, 2013), pp. 29,
31.
54
Bruno Simma further emphasizes the relevance of subsequent practice for the
understanding of a treaty, noting that subsequent practice denotes the decisive
consent of the parties, and acts as a cogent, peremptory means of treaty
interpretation.80
81.        It is widely accepted that however precise the treaty text appears to be,
the way in which it is actually applied by the parties is usually a good indication
of what they understand it to mean, provided the practice is consistent, and is
common to, or accepted by, all the parties.81 A relevant case in point is the
interpretation of
Article 5
of the Chicago Convention, which governs charter air
services. This provision does not require a charter airline to obtain permission to
land en route, provided it does not pick up or set down passengers or cargo.
However, the practice of the parties over many years has been to require charter
airlines to seek permission to land in all cases, and the article is now so
interpreted.82
82.        The work of Sir Gerald Fitzmaurice during the drafting process that
eventually led to the formulation of
Article 31
VCLT is also worthy of note.
Taking as a reference point the ICJ’s case law between 1951 and 1954,
Fitzmaurice formulated the major principles of treaty interpretation that formed
the basis for the ILC draft provisions on treaty interpretation. He outlined three
subsidiary principles of interpretation, ‘effectiveness’, ‘subsequent practice’,
and ‘contemporaneity’, which he saw as complementary to the three primary
ones: ‘actuality’, the ‘natural and ordinary meaning’, and ‘integration’. With
regard to the principle of subsequent practice, Fitzmaurice remarked, as early as
then, that: “Where the practice has brought about a change or development in
the meaning of the treaty through a revision of its terms by conduct, it is

80 Bruno Simma, ‘Miscellaneous thoughts on subsequent agreements and practice’ in: Georg Nolte (ed.)
Treaties
       and Subsequent Practice (Oxford University Press, 2013), pp 46–51.
81 Anthony Aust, Modern Treaty Law and Practice, (Cambridge University Press, 2013), at p. 194.
82 B. Cheng, 'Air Law', Max Planck Encyclopedia of Public International Law (1989), Vol. 11, pp. 8-9.
55
permissible to give effect to this change or development as an agreed
revision...”83
83.     The ICJ in its decision in Case Concerning the Land, Island and
Maritime Frontier Dispute (El Salvador v Hondurus)84 considered and
explained how practice of parties assumes significance in treaty interpretation:
“380. The Chamber considers that, while both customary law and the Vienna
          Convention on the Law of Treaties (
Art. 31
, para. 3(b)) contemplate that such
          practice may be taken into account for purposes of interpretation, none of
          these considerations raised by Honduras can prevail over the absence from the
          text of any specific reference to delimitation. In considering the ordinary
          meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty, it is appropriate to compare
          them with the terms generally or commonly used in order to convey the idea
          that a delimitation is intended. Whenever in the past a special agreement has
          entrusted the Court with a task related to delimitation, it has spelled out very
          clearly what was asked of the Court: the formulation of principles or rules
          enabling the parties to agree on delimitation, the precise application of these
          principles or rules (see North Sea Continental Shelf cases, Continental Shelf
          (Tunisia/Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) and Continental Shelf (Libyan Arab
          Jamahiriya/Malta) cases), or the actual task of drawing the delimitation line
          (Delimitation of the Maritime Boundary in the Gulf of Maine Area case).
          Likewise, in the Anglo-French Arbitration of 1977, the Tribunal was
          specifically entrusted by the terms of the Special Agreement with the drawing
          of the line.
***********************
389. On the underlying question of the status of the waters of the Gulf
          which was thus raised before the Central American Court, there were by then
          three matters which practice and the 1917 Judgement took account of: first,
          the practice of all three coastal States had established and mutually recognized
          a 1 marine league (3 nautical miles) littoral maritime belt off their respective
          mainland coasts and islands (see the passage of the 1917 Judgement quoted in
          paragraph 400 below), in which belt they each exercised an exclusive
          jurisdiction and sovereignty, though with rights of innocent passage conceded
          on a mutual basis; second, all three States recognized a further belt of 3
          marine leagues (9 nautical miles) for rights of “maritime inspection” for fiscal
          purposes and for national security; third, there was an Agreement of 1900
          between Honduras and Nicaragua by which a partial maritime boundary
          between the two States had been delimited, which, however, stopped well short
          of the waters of the main entrance to the bay.
*************************
410. If the Gulf is an historic bay, it is necessary to determine the closing
          line of the waters of the bay. The normal geographical closing line for the
          waters of the Gulf of Fonseca would be the line Punta Amapala to Punta
83 G. Fitzmaurice, ‘The Law and Procedure of the International Court of Justice: Treaty Interpretation and
Certain Other Treaty Points’ (1951) 29 British Yearbook of International Law 8.
84 ICJR (1992) 351 - Decision dated 12-09-1992, [General List No. 75]
56
Cosigüina. This seems to have been the closing line recognized by the three
          coastal States in practice. It is, moreover, the closing line referred to in the
          1917 Judgement (loc cit., p. 706). It had not been necessary to say more, had
          not El Salvador elaborated a thesis of an “inner Gulf” and an “outer Gulf”,
          based on the reference in the Judgement of 1917, to an inner closing line from
          Punta Chiquirin, through Meanguera and Meanguerita, to Punta Rosario. The
          purpose of El Salvador's reference to this inner line, in its argument before the
          Chamber, was apparently to suggest that the Honduran legal interest in the
          Gulf waters was limited to the area inside the inner line, the remainder being
          left to El Salvador and Nicaragua. But there is nothing in the Judgement of the
          Central American Court of Justice to support this. There is no suggestion in
          that Judgement that Honduras was excluded from the waters between that
          inner line and the outer closing line subject to the régime of condominium
          found by the Court.”
84.      In Case Concerning Kasikili/Sedudu Island- Botswana v Namibia85 too,
practice was given significance. The ICJ held, quoting from the commentary of
the ILC, that “(t)he importance of such subsequent practice in the application
of the treaty, as an element of interpretation, is obvious; for it constitutes
objective evidence of the understanding of the parties as to the meaning of the
treaty. Recourse to it as a means of interpretation is well-established in the
jurisprudence of international tribunals.” (Op cit., p. 241, para. 15.)”
85.      Donald Regan, in a paper “Understanding What the Vienna Convention
Says About Identifying and Using 'Sources for Treaty Interpretation' Identifying
and Using 'Sources for Treaty Interpretation'86 writes this, about treaty practice:
“Article 31 (3) (b) presents a different complication.
Article 31 (3) (b)
says that
         the interpreter shall take into account ‘any subsequent practice in the
         application of the treaty which establishes the agreement of the parties
         regarding its interpretation’. It is clear why practice is important. The point of
         the treaty is to direct behaviour. But the treaty is in words, and words are never
         perfectly clear. In contrast, behaviour is the very stuff the treaty is about. The
         ILC Commentary says the practice is ‘objective evidence’ of the understanding
         of the parties, and it quotes the Permanent Court of Arbitration, saying that
         practice is ‘le plus sûr commentaire du sens’ of the agreement.26 So, it is easy to
         see why concordant practice should be an authentic source if it is engaged in by
         all the parties. But
Article 31 (3) (b)
does not say the practice must be engaged
         in by all the parties; it says only that it must establish the agreement of all the
         parties. The ILC Commentary is very clear both that it must be the agreement of
85[1999] ICJ Rep 1045; (General List No. 98)
86Donald Regan: Understanding What the Vienna Convention Says About Identifying and Using 'Sources for
Treaty Interpretation' Identifying and Using 'Sources for Treaty Interpretation' University of Michigan (2017) < :
> (accessed on 14.10.2023).
57
all, and that it need not be the practice of all.27 Now, we will see below that
      even if 31 (3) (b) contemplated only the practice of all the parties, a practice
      that was engaged in by some parties, but not all, could still be introduced under
Article 32;
and the interpreter would then consider how strong the partial
      practice was as evidence of a common understanding.”
86.   The material cited in the preceding paragraphs, on the ILC Draft
Conclusions and ICJ decisions, though not binding per se on this court,
certainly offer valuable insight into treaty interpretation. In sum, whilst
considering treaty interpretation, it is vital to take into account practice of the
parties. There is no dispute that treaties constitute binding obligations upon their
signatories. Yet, like all compacts, how the parties to any specific instrument
view them, give effect to its provisions, and the manner of acceptance of such
conventions or compacts are in the domain of bilateral relations and diplomacy.
Much depends upon the relationship of the parties, the mutuality of their
interests, and the extent of co-operation or accommodation they extend to each
other. In this, a range of interests combine. The issue of treaty interpretation and
treaty integration into domestic law is driven by constitutional and political
factors subjective to each signatory. Therefore, domestic courts cannot adopt the
same approach to treaty interpretation in a black letter manner, as is required or
expected of them, while construing enacted binding law. The role of practice-
which is, as the previous discussion demonstrates, not bilateral or joint practice,
but practice by one, accepted generally by the international community as
operating in that particular sphere, which is relevant, and at times determinative.
87.   This court is of the opinion that the treaty practice of Switzerland,
Netherlands and France is dictated by conditions peculiar to their constitutional
and legal regimes. Could it conceivably be argued that in the event of failure of
the Swiss Confederation to secure the requisite majority in a referendum or
approval by the Swiss Parliament, or in the absence of approval by both houses
of the States General in Netherlands, a DTAA provision or trigger event could
nevertheless be assimilated into executive decrees? The answer is obviously in
58
the negative. Likewise, the treaty practice in India points to a consistent pattern
of behaviour when the signatory to an existing DTAA, points to the event of a
third state entering into OECD membership, and a resultant trigger event, the
beneficial effect given to the later third-party state has to be notified in the
earlier DTAA, as a consequential amendment, preceded by exchange of
communication (and perhaps, negotiation) and acceptance of that position by
India. The essential requirement of a notification under
Section 90
of the
consequences of the trigger (or causative) event cannot be undermined.
V.    Conclusions
88.    In the light of the above discussion, it is held and declared that:
(a) A notification under
Section 90(1)
is necessary and a mandatory
          condition for a court, authority, or tribunal to give effect to a DTAA,
          or any protocol changing its terms or conditions, which has the effect
          of altering the existing provisions of law.
(b)The fact that a stipulation in a DTAA or a Protocol with one nation,
          requires same treatment in respect to a matter covered by its terms,
          subsequent to its being entered into when another nation (which is
          member of a multilateral organization such as OECD), is given better
          treatment, does not automatically lead to integration of such term
          extending the same benefit in regard to a matter covered in the DTAA
          of the first nation, which entered into DTAA with India. In such event,
          the terms of the earlier DTAA require to be amended through a
           separate notification under
Section 90
.
(c) The interpretation of the expression “is” has present signification.
Therefore, for a party to claim benefit of a “same treatment” clause,
          based on entry of DTAA between India and another state which is
          member of OECD, the relevant date is entering into treaty with India,
59
and not a later date, when, after entering into DTAA with India, such
            country becomes an OECD member, in terms of India’s practice.
89.      In view of the foregoing analysis and conclusions, it is held that the
reasoning and findings in the impugned orders cannot survive; they are set
aside.
The revenue’s appeals, therefore, succeed and are allowed. There shall be no
order on costs. Pending applications, including those seeking intervention for
impleadment, are disposed of.
90.      As the facts in CA No. 1428/2023 relate to the interpretation of the India-
Spain DTAA, which has not been considered in the present judgment, this
matter is hereby de-tagged, to be listed before the appropriate bench.
...............................................J.
                                                    [S. RAVINDRA BHAT]




                                                     ..............................................J.
                                                     [DIPANKAR DATTA]


NEW DELHI,
OCTOBER 19, 2023.