[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Manak Chand @ Mani vs The State Of Haryana on 30 October, 2023
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
,
C.T. Ravikumar
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
1

                                                                REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 959


                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2276 OF 2014


           MANAK CHAND @ MANI                                  …APPELLANT

                                        VERSUS

           THE STATE OF HARYANA                               …RESPONDENT

                                      JUDGMENT
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.
1.        The appellant before this Court has been convicted under
Section 376
of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred

                to as ‘
IPC
’) and has been sentenced for seven years of R.I.

                and Rs.1000/- as fine, with default stipulations. The order

                of the Trial Court dated 03.09.2001 has been upheld by

                the High Court of Punjab and Haryana as per judgment

                dated 19.02.2014 in appeal.
2.        A First Information Report was lodged on 23.10.2000 by

                Gian Chand (complainant), who is the father-in-law of

                appellant’s   elder   brother   Pappu.   It   states   that   on

                02.09.2000, Pappu requested the complainant to send his
2
younger daughter (who is the present prosecutrix), to his

     house for taking care of her sister, who had just given birth

     to a girl child.   It is alleged that the prosecutrix at the

     relevant time was 15 years of age. The prosecutrix was sent

     by her father to live for some time at her sister’s

     matrimonial house.       More than a month later, the

     prosecutrix returned to her house, tells her mother that

     while she was in the house of her sister, the present

     appellant Manak Chand @ Mani who is the younger

     brother of Pappu, raped her and thereafter repeated the

     same offence two to three times. Initially, considering the

     relations between the families, the matter was being

     “settled”, and the two families had even agreed for the

     marriage of the prosecutrix with the appellant Manak

     Chand @ Mani.      But it is alleged that the family of the

     appellant later turned down the offer on 23.10.2000, which

     led to the lodging of an FIR at Police Station City Dabwali

     under
Sections 376
,
342
and
506
of IPC. This in short is

     the case of the prosecution.
3.    After investigation, charge sheet was filed on 02.11.2000

     and the matter was committed to sessions where charges

     were framed against the appellant/accused under
Sections
3
376
and
506
IPC. The prosecution examined 7 witnesses,

including PW-5, who was the prosecutrix.
The prosecution’s case is that the prosecutrix was a

minor on the date of the incident. In order to prove this the

prosecution relied upon the date of birth of the prosecutrix

recorded as 04.04.1987 in the school register. PW-5 i.e.,

the prosecutrix in her examination-in-chief before the Trial

Court on 17.04.2001 states that she had gone to live with

her sister, when a request was made by her “Jija” (Brother-

in-law) to send her to their house for help. On 12.09.2000,

when her sister was away from the house and the

prosecutrix was alone, the appellant came to her room and

closed the door from inside, showed a knife to her and

threatened to kill her if she did not succumb to his carnal

desires; and then raped her. She further states that after

that incident, the appellant committed the same act on the

prosecutrix on two or three different occasions. She then

returns to her maternal house and tells her mother Sita

Devi/Sito Bai about the incident, which is admittedly after

more than a month from the incident of rape. Her father

Gian Chand (PW-6), also supported her version. He states

that on receiving this information he visited the house of
4
his son-in-law Pappu and narrated the entire incident to

him, as narrated to him by his daughter. He then gave a

proposal before the parents of the appellant for marriage of

the prosecutrix with the appellant Manak Chand @ Mani,

but as no positive reply was given to him, he lodged the FIR

on 23.10.2000.
The prosecutrix was medically examined by PW-1 Dr.

Kulwinder Kaur on 28.10.2000 at 11.30 AM. PW-1 states

that the age of the prosecutrix, as told to her by the mother

of the prosecutrix, was 16 years and the details of the

medical examination of the prosecutrix were as follows:
“GENERAL       EXAMINATION:       Well-built
        adult female, fully conscious, moderately
        nourished. There was no external mark of
        injury over breast, neck, face, abdomen &
        thigh.
LOCAL EXAMINATION: She had well-
developed public hairs; external genitalia
        were fully developed & normal. There was
        no external mark of injury.
PER VAGINAL EXAMINATION: Labia
        minora was hypertrophied, hymen was
        ruptured admitted 2 fingers. There was no
        sign of acute inflammation in & around
        vulva. There was discharge. Uterus non
        gravid, firm and mobile and fornix fox free.
        Her Vaginal swab not taken because pt had
        menstruated 5 days back & the history of
        assault is 1 ½ two months before. Ex.PB in
5
the true copy of the MLR. Firstly, the age of
                   the prosecutrix was recorded as 15 on the
                   information of her mother which was later
                   on corrected to 16 years. That was also
                   done on the information of the mother of the
                   prosecutrix.
At the time of medical examination of the
                   patient, no force seems to have been used
                   against her. I cannot opine about the age of
                   the patient on the basis of development of
                   her public hairs and genitalia etc. The
                   patient was habitual to sexual intercourse
                   because      her    labia    minora     was
                   hypertrophied and hymen admitted two
                   fingers.”
4.      At this stage, we must mention that at the relevant time

        i.e., in the year 2000 when the alleged offence of rape is

        said to have been committed, the age of consent was

        sixteen years and above. It was only vide an amendment

        made in the year 20131 that this has been increased to

        eighteen years. The school register which was produced in

        the court shows the date of birth of PW-5 is 04.04.1987,

        which would make the age of the prosecutrix at the time of

        the incident to be only 13½ years. However, as per her

        medical examination and in the doctor’s report, the

        prosecutrix is sixteen years of age. Moreover, the version of




1
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act
No.13 of 2013 dated 03rd February, 2013.
6
the   mother    of   the   prosecutrix   herself   is   that   the

     prosecutrix was sixteen years of age.
5.   The evidence of a prosecutrix in a case of rape is of the

     same value as that of an injured witness. It is again true

     that conviction can be made on the basis of the sole

     testimony of the prosecutrix. All the same, when a

     conviction can be based on the sole testimony of the

     prosecutrix, the courts also have to be extremely careful

     while examining this sole testimony as cautioned in
State

     of Punjab v. Gurmit Singh
, (1996) 2 SCC 384:
“If evidence of the prosecutrix inspires
               confidence, it must be relied upon without
               seeking corroboration of her statement in
               material particulars. If for some reason the
               court finds it difficult to place implicit
               reliance on her testimony, it may look for
               evidence which may lend assurance to her
               testimony, short of corroboration required in
               the case of an accomplice. The testimony of
               the prosecutrix must be appreciated in the
               background of the entire case and the trial
               court must be alive to its responsibility and
               be sensitive while dealing with cases
               involving sexual molestations.”

     This was reiterated by this Court in
Sadashiv Ramrao

     Hadbe v. State of Maharashtra and Another
(2006) 10

     SCC 92:
7
“It is true that in a rape case the accused
        could be convicted on the sole testimony of
        the prosecutrix, if it is capable of inspiring
        confidence in the mind of the court. If the
        version given by the prosecutrix is
        unsupported by any medical evidence or the
        whole surrounding circumstances are highly
        improbable and belie the case set up by the
        prosecutrix, the court shall not act on the
        solitary evidence of the prosecutrix.”

    Both the prosecutrix as well as the accused have a

right for a fair trial, and therefore when the statement of

the prosecutrix does not inspire confidence and creates a

doubt, the court must look for corroborative evidence.
Relying upon the case of
Gurmit Singh
(supra) this court

in
Raju and others v. State of Madhya Pradesh
(2008)

15 SCC 133 held as under:
“10. The aforesaid judgments lay down the
        basic principle that ordinarily the evidence
        of a prosecutrix should not be suspected
        and should be believed, more so as her
        statement has to be evaluated on a par with
        that of an injured witness and if the
        evidence is reliable, no corroboration is
        necessary. Undoubtedly, the aforesaid
        observations must carry the greatest weight
        and we respectfully agree with them, but at
        the same time they cannot be universally
        and mechanically applied to the facts of
        every case of sexual assault which comes
        before the court.
11. It cannot be lost sight of that rape
        causes the greatest distress and humiliation
8
to the victim but at the same time a false
               allegation of rape can cause equal distress,
               humiliation and damage to the accused as
               well. The accused must also be protected
               against the possibility of false implication,
               particularly where a large number of
               accused are involved. It must, further, be
               borne in mind that the broad principle is
               that an injured witness was present at the
               time when the incident happened and that
               ordinarily such a witness would not tell a lie
               as to the actual assailants, but there is no
               presumption or any basis for assuming that
               the statement of such a witness is always
               correct or without any embellishment or
               exaggeration.”
6.   Does the testimony of the prosecutrix in the present case

     inspire confidence? We are afraid it does not.             Let us

     appreciate the facts once again.          Although, the first

     incident of rape is alleged to be of 12.09.2000, the

     prosecutrix does not disclose this to anyone immediately.

     She then alleges rape again on two or three different

     occasions later, though no date and time are disclosed.

     She only discloses it to her mother after one and half

     months.     It has then come in the evidence led by none

     other but the prosecution (in the school register submitted

     in the court by PW-2 i.e., Ram Sahay), that the prosecutrix

     had attended her classes in the school on 12.09.2000 at

     Dabwali, where she resides with her parents.          We must
9
note that she has alleged rape on the same day at village

     Sanwat Khera, where she was staying at the relevant time

     with her sister in her matrimonial house. This seems

     improbable, if not impossible. The other aspect is the

     admitted position of the prosecution itself that the FIR was

     ultimately filed as the initial proposal of marriage was then

     turned down. All these facts do cast a doubt on the story

     of the prosecution.
7.   The prosecution then has also relied upon the medical

     report of the prosecutrix given by Dr. Kulwinder Kaur as

     PW-1 which states that the hymen of the prosecutrix was

     ruptured, and therefore she was raped.      To the contrary

     when we examine the same medical report in detail an

     entirely different picture emerges. The Trial Court, however

     relied upon the evidence placed by the prosecution

     regarding the date of birth of the prosecutrix, which was

     recorded in the school register as 04.04.1987 and therefore

     at the time of the alleged offence she was only thirteen and

     half years of age and thus the finding of the Trial Court is

     that, even if it is assumed for the sake of argument that

     the prosecutrix was a consenting party to the sexual

     intercourse, her consent would be immaterial since she
10
was less than sixteen years of age and therefore the offence

     of rape stands proved. The High Court in the appeal,

     however, even discards the presumption of the prosecutrix

     being a consenting party and has completely relied upon

     the testimony of the prosecutrix regarding rape and has

     dismissed the appeal.
The evidence, as to the age or even rape has not been

     examined properly by the Trial Court as well as the High

     Court.   Courts must examine each evidence with open

     mind dispassionately as an accused is to be presumed

     innocent till proved guilty. In our adversarial system of

     criminal jurisprudence, the guiding principle shall always

     be the Blackstone ratio which holds that it is better that

     ten guilty persons escape than one innocent be punished.
8.   There are two aspects which ought to have been considered

     by the Trial Court and the High Court in greater detail

     than what has been done. The first is the age of the

     prosecutrix. The age of the prosecutrix has an extremely

     crucial bearing in the case. The only evidence relied by the

     court for holding the prosecutrix as a minor (less than

     sixteen years of age), is the school register of Government

     Girls High School, which was placed in the Court by the
11
clerk of the school, Ram Sahay (PW-2). Undoubtedly, the

date of birth in the school register is 04.04.1987 which

makes the prosecutrix less than sixteen years of age at the

time of the incident. But it has also come in the evidence

of Ram Sahay (PW-2) that this date of birth was recorded

not on the statement of the parents of the prosecutrix, but

by some other person and more importantly, it was based

on the transfer certificate of Government Primary School

where the date of birth was recorded as 04.04.1987. All the

same, this transfer certificate, on the basis of which the

date of birth was recorded, was never produced in the

Court. Yet, both the Trial Court and the High Court have

relied upon the veracity of the school register. It is the same

school register which marks the presence of the prosecutrix

on 12.09.2000 in the school. This is also the date when the

prosecutrix was allegedly raped for the first time, in the

house of the appellant in village Sanwat Khera, whereas

the school is at another place called Dabwali Mandi. The

Trial Court discards the evidence in the same school

register, as not being authentic, when the defence had

raised the apparent contradictions on the prosecutrix
12
being in school and at the Sanwat Khera village at the

     same time. This is not a fair appreciation of evidence, to

     say the least, as same school register is the only basis for

     the determination of the age of the prosecutrix!
9.   This Court in
Birad Mal Singhvi v. Anand Purohit
(1988) Supp SCC 604 had observed that the date of birth

     in the register of a school would not have any evidentiary

     value without the testimony of the person making the

     entry or the person who gave the date of birth.
“14. …The date of birth mentioned in the
              scholar’s register has no evidentiary value
              unless the person who made the entry or
              who gave the date of birth is examined.
The entry contained in the admission form
              or in the scholar’s register must be shown to
              be made on the basis of information given
              by the parents or a person having special
              knowledge about the date of birth of the
              person concerned. If the entry in the
              scholar’s register regarding date of birth is
              made on the basis of information given by
              parents, the entry would have evidentiary
              value but if it is given by a stranger or by
              someone else who had no special means of
              knowledge of the date of birth, such an
              entry will have no evidentiary value.”



          In our opinion, the proof submitted by the prosecution

     with regard to the age of the prosecutrix in the form of the

     school register was not sufficient to arrive at a finding that
13
the prosecutrix was less than sixteen years of age, especially

when there were contradictory evidences before the Trial

Court as to the age of the prosecutrix. It was neither safe

nor fair to convict the accused, particularly when the age of

the prosecutrix was such a crucial factor in the case.
Secondly, we cannot lose sight of the fact that since

age was such a crucial factor in the present case, the

prosecution should have done a bone ossification test for

determination of the age of the prosecutrix. This has not

been done in the present case. On the other hand, as per

the clinical examination of the prosecutrix which was done

by PW-1, Dr. Kulwinder Kaur on 28.10.2000 and which has

also been referred to in the preceding paragraph of the

present   judgment,    we   find   that   the   secondary   sex

characteristics of the prosecutrix were well developed. The

doctor in her report mentions that the prosecutrix is a “well

built adult female”.   At another place it mentions “well

developed pubic hair” and “external genitalia were fully

developed and normal”. It then records her age as sixteen

years as told to her by the mother of the prosecutrix. The

report records that there were no external marks of injury
14
over her breast, neck, face, abdomen and thigh. The report

      then concludes, inter alia, about her age as under:
“At the time of medical examination of the
            patient, no force seems to have been used
            against her. I cannot opine about the age of the
            patient on the basis of development of her pubic
            hairs and genitalia etc.      The patient was
            habitual to sexual intercourse because her labia
            minora was hypertrophied and hymen admitted
            two fingers.”

      The doctor has refrained from giving an opinion herself as to

      the age, but in the same report the age is recorded as

      sixteen years.     Under the facts and circumstances of the

      case, what was required to be done was a bone ossification

      test in order to come to some reliable conclusion as to the

      age of the prosecutrix. This has evidently not been done.
Moreover, it has also come in evidence that the mother of

      the prosecutrix too had said that her daughter was sixteen

      years of age.
10.    We   must       also   keep   another   relevant   factor   into

       consideration. This would be the relative age of the

       prosecutrix and the accused. The accused at the relevant

       time was less than 20 years of age, or about 20 years of

       age, as his age is mentioned as 20 years at the time of
15
recording of his statement under Section 313, which is

      months later to the alleged incident. The fact that the

      prosecution has a case that initially the proposal of the

      marriage of prosecutrix with the appellant was accepted by

      the family of the appellant and only when the appellant

      refused the offer of marriage that the FIR was finally

      lodged. All these factors point out towards the fact that

      what was alleged as rape was not rape but could be a

      consensual act. The only factor which could have made the

      consensual aspect immaterial and made it a case of ‘rape’

      was the age of the prosecutrix.       The medical evidence,

      however, points out that she is more than 16 years of age.

      The   only   evidence   placed   by   the   prosecution   for

      establishing the DOB as 04.04.1987 i.e., the school register

      has not been conclusively proved.
11.    Under these facts, and on the weight of the evidence

      placed before the Trial Court, we are of the considered

      opinion that as regarding the age of the prosecutrix, no

      definite conclusion could have been made. The prosecution

      has not successfully proved that the prosecutrix was less

      than sixteen years of age at the time of the alleged

      commission of the crime, and therefore the benefit ought to
16
have been given to the appellant. Secondly, as to the

      factum of rape itself, we are not convinced that an offence

      of rape is made out in this case as it does not meet the

      ingredients of Rape as defined under
Section 375
of the

      IPC, as we do not find any evidence which may suggest that

      the appellant, even though had sexual intercourse with the

      prosecutrix, it was against her will or without her consent.
12.   Consequently, we allow this appeal and set aside the order

      dated 19.02.2014 of the High Court and the order dated

      03.09.2001 of the Trial Court. Accordingly, the appellant is

      acquitted of the charges of
Section 376
IPC. The appellant,

      who is on bail, need not surrender. His bail bonds stand

      discharged.
……..............................J.
                                       [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]



                                       ……..............................J.
                                       [C.T. RAVIKUMAR]

                                                                         .
…….............................J.
                                        [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]


      New Delhi,
      October 30, 2023.