[Cites
19
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Vikrant Kapila vs Pankaja Panda on 10 October, 2023
Author:
Aniruddha Bose
Bench:
Aniruddha Bose
NON-REPORTABLE
2023INSC897
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5355 OF 2023
                                             (@ S.L.P.(C) NO. 6793 OF 2023)


             VIKRANT KAPILA AND ANOTHER                                       … APPELLANT(S)



                                                          VERSUS



             PANKAJA PANDA AND OTHERS                                       … RESPONDENT (S)

                                                     JUDGMENT
S.V.N. BHATTI, J.
1.             Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 in C.S. (O.S.) No. 701/2021 are the Appellants,

             and the Civil Appeal is directed against the Judgment and Decree dated

             11.10.2022 in RFA (O.S.) No. 15/2022, on the file of the High Court of Delhi.
2.             Respondent Nos. 1, 2, and 3, in the Appeal, filed the subject suit for

             partition, separate possession, and permanent injunction, concerning Property

             admeasuring about 471 square yards, together with the built-up area of a house

             described as D – 897, New Friends Colony, New Delhi-1100251.
3.
Signature Not Verified   For convenience, the parties are adverted to as arrayed in the Original Suit.
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
Date: 2023.10.10
18:01:00 IST
Reason:
1
Suit Property.
1
AVERMENTS IN THE PLAINT
4.    It is averred that Sheila Kapila was the sole and absolute owner of the Suit

Property. On 08.04.2003, Sheila Kapila died, and her husband, the late Sh. P.K.

Kapila pre-deceased her on 15.02.1994. Sheila Kapila was practising the Hindu

religion and died intestate. The parties claim to be governed by Hindu Law. To

appreciate   the   inter   se   relationship   between   the   parties   and   the

claims/counterclaims for partition of the Suit Property, the genealogy of the

parties is noted hereinunder:
2
5.    Therefore, the succession or inheritance to the Suit Property is governed

by the principles of intestate succession applicable to a Hindu woman. Plaintiff

Nos. 1 to 3 are the grandchildren of Sheila Kapila through Mrs. Sudha Panda,

who is the first daughter of Sheila Kapila. Mrs. Sudha Panda died on 10.11.2019.

The Plaintiffs claim one-fourth right in the Suit Property as co-owners and hence,

have filed the Suit for partition, separate possession, etc. Defendant Nos. 1 and 2

are the daughter and son of the Late Sheila Kapila, respectively. Defendant Nos.

4 and 5 are the daughters of late Dr. Rajendra Kapila, through his first wife, Mrs.

Bina Kapila, and are also the grandchildren of Sheila Kapila. On 21.15.2008, the

marriage between Dr. Rajendra Kapila and Mrs. Bina Kapila stood dissolved. On

14.02.2009, the marriage between Dr. Rajendra Kapila and Dr. Deepti Saxena/

Defendant No. 3 was solemnized. On 28.04.2021, Dr. Rajendra Kapila died.

Hence, the Plaintiffs in the array of parties included Defendant No. 3 and also

Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 as party Defendants to the Suit.
5.1   The Plaintiffs aver that the Suit Property is inherited by the four children

of Sheila Kapila and therefore, at the foremost, the Suit Property is partitioned

into four equal shares, allotted one such share individually to the Plaintiffs and

Defendant Nos. 1 and 2. The share of Dr. Rajendra Kapila is deposited in the

Court till a final decision on intestate disputes between Defendant No. 3 on one

hand, and Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 on the other hand, are adjudicated by a separate

legal proceeding.
3
5.2   The Plaintiffs claim a share in the Suit Property as co-sharers/joint owners

on the principle of devolution. The averments essential for disposing of the

Appeal are adverted to. Defendant Nos. 4 and 5, through their mother, Mrs. Bina

Kapila, have sent threatening and intimidating communication to Plaintiff No. 1,

claiming an undetermined share in the Suit Property through e-mail. Defendant

No. 4 alleged that the Late Sheila Kapila left behind a Will providing for

succession to the Suit Property. In other words, Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 claim

that the Suit Property is divided and enjoyed as per the last Will of Late Sheila

Kapila. The Plaintiffs deny the existence of the Will said to have been executed

by their grandmother. The Plaintiffs, Defendant Nos. 1, 2, and 3 are together in

their pleas on the presence of the Will alleged to have been executed by Sheila

Kapila. Therefore, the Plaintiffs, Defendant Nos. 1, 2, and 3, claim intestate

succession to the Suit Property.
5.3   The Plaintiffs deny the copy/photograph of the Will of Late Sheila Kapila,

communicated by the Advocate of Defendant No. 4. The alleged original Will of

Sheila Kapila is not furnished to the Plaintiffs. In this background, while the

Plaintiffs deny the existence of the Will, they raise an alternative plea that the

purported Will relied upon by Defendant No. 4, even if construed as valid, would

provide an absolute legacy in favour of the four children of Late Sheila Kapila.

Therefore, the Plaintiffs contend that succession to the Suit Property as governed

by a Will, firstly, is untenable and illegal, and, secondly, the Will confers absolute

bequest in favour of her four children. Therefore, Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 did not
4
succeed to the estate of Late Sheila Kapila. Defendant Nos. 4 and 5, all these

years, maintained silence on the existence of the Will including during the

lifetime of their father, Dr. Rajendra Kapila. Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 propound

the said Will of Late Sheila Kapila, after 18 years of her demise. The Plaintiffs

resist the claim of Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 for a share in the Suit Property.

Alternatively, it is averred that the Suit Property can be sold, and the sale proceeds

be partitioned into four equal shares and are allotted to (i) Plaintiffs, (ii)

Defendant No. 1, and (iii) Defendant No. 2 and the fourth share of Dr. Rajendra

Kapila is divided among Defendant Nos. 3, 4 and 5 as finally adjudicated by a

legal proceeding. The parties agree that the Suit Property cannot be partitioned

by metes and bounds and enjoyed as a separate allotted partition.
6.         The Plaintiffs, pending Suit filed an I.A. No. 17202/2021 under Order

XXXIX, Rules 1 and 2
of Code of Civil Procedure
, 19082, pray for the following

reliefs: -
“
     (A) Directing sale of the Suit Property, and proceeds thereof being
         divided in the ratio of 25% each for the Plaintiffs, Defendant No.
         l and Defendant No.2, and the proceeds qua share of Dr. Rajendra
         Kapila being deposited before this Hon'ble Court until
         adjudication thereof; and

     (B) Restraining the Defendants No. 4 and 5 or their agents, assigns
         and representatives, from interfering with the peaceful possession
         of the Suit Property of the Plaintiffs till such time that the Suit
         Property is sold; and
2
CPC
.
5
(C) Directing the parties to maintain status quo qua title and
         possession of the Suit Property.”


6.1     The dates of posting of the I.A. and the original Suit are also examined

at an appropriate stage of our consideration.
WRITTEN STATEMENT OF DEFENDANT NO. 1
7.      Defendant No. 1, as noted in the genealogy, is the daughter of Sheila Kapila

and aged 84 years. Defendant No. 1 supports and admits the claim for partition

among the children of the Late Sheila Kapila as legal heirs. Defendant No. 1 joins

issue with Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 on the existence or genesis of the Will dated

18.11.1999, said to have been executed by Late Sheila Kapila. Defendant No. 1

stated a few circumstances shared by the Late Sheila Kapila with her, on how her

children should maintain a good relationship after Late Sheila Kapila’s demise

and how the Suit Property is inherited and enjoyed by her four children.
Defendant No. 1 avers that her mother died intestate. The long gap in surfacing

the Will definitely raises suspicion on the existence of the Will. Defendant Nos.

4 and 5 are advancing a claim not put forth or accepted by Dr. Rajendra Kapila.

Having seriously objected to the existence of the Will dated 18.11.1999 of Late

Sheila Kapila, it is also stated that sufficient circumstances are presented to raise

suspicion on the existence of the Will. In a nutshell, it can be narrated that

Defendant No.1 in all fours joined issues with Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 on the

mode and manner of administration of the Suit Property by the heirs of Late
6
Sheila Kapila. Defendant No. 1 supports the partition and mode of partition and,

hence, prayed for passing a decree in terms of the prayer made in the plaint. We

hasten to add that the frame of the Suit is for partition through intestate succession

and not by testamentary succession.
WRITTEN STATEMENT OF DEFENDANT NO. 2
8.    Defendant No. 2, in all material particulars, supports the case of the

Plaintiffs and Defendant No. 1. In other words, Defendant No. 2 is praying for

partition of the Suit Property by way of intestate succession and is contesting the

existence or otherwise of the Will dated 18.11.1999 of Late Sheila Kapila.

Defendant No. 2 prays for passing a decree for a partition of immovable Property

in terms of the prayer made in the plaint.
9.    We would have referred to the case of Defendant No. 3 at this juncture, but

for convenience and the continuity in understanding the real issue in the matter,

we would take up the case of Defendant No. 3 after adverting to the case of

Defendant Nos. 4 and 5.
WRITTEN STATEMENT OF DEFENDANT NO. 4
10.   Defendant No. 4 admits that the Suit Property was owned and held by

Sheila Kapila as an absolute owner. Defendant No. 4 categorically raises a plea

that Sheila Kapila did not die intestate, but she died leaving behind the Will dated

18.11.1999. Sheila Kapila, the testatrix, in her Will dated 18.11.1999, dealt with

the Suit Property. According to Defendant No. 4, a copy of the Will was provided
7
to Defendant No. 4’s father and mother. The original Will was with the testatrix

and her first daughter, Mrs. Sudha Panda, who was taking care of the testatrix

during the last days of her life. Defendant No. 4 asserts that the Suit Property

could be divided in terms of the Will dated 18.11.1999. Defendant No. 4 relies

on a few clauses in the Will, which read thus:
“i. The house shall belong to all four children with each having a
        25% share in the property.
ii. The beneficiaries will not have any power to dispose of their
        share of the property in any manner whatsoever. They Will have
        the right to enjoy their share of the property but will not have the
        right to make any will with respect to their share.

        iii. If any of the four beneficiaries die then his/her share of
        property shall devolve upon his/her children, who will have the
        full ownership of the property with the power of disposal.
        However, if the children of the deceased beneficiary intend to
        dispose of their share of the property, then they shall first offer it
        to the other beneficiaries or their children in case they are dead.”



10.1 In terms of the operative clause in the Will dated 18.11.1999, the four

children of Sheila Kapila have a beneficial life interest in the Suit Property.
The children can enjoy the Suit Property during their lifetime and do not have

a right to dispose of any share in it. Similarly, Defendant No. 3 does not have

any right in the Suit Property that can support the prayer for partition or claim

the share of Dr. Rajendar Kapila. Defendant No. 4 asserts that his father, Dr.

Rajendra Kapila, had a life interest, and he could not have executed a will in

favour of Defendant No. 3. Defendant No. 4 claims to have acquired the
8
share under the Will upon the demise of Dr. Rajendra Kapila along with

Defendant No. 5. The written statement emphasizes a dispute between

Defendant No. 4 and Defendant No. 5 on one hand, and Defendant No. 3 on

the other hand. In the said context, it is averred that Dr. Rajendra Kapila’s

Will dated 22.02.2020, for which a probate is obtained by Defendant No. 3,

does not refer to the Suit Property. In terms of testamentary succession dated

18.11.1999 desired by Sheila Kapila, Dr. Rajendra Kapila could not have

included the share in the Suit Property in the Will executed by him in favour

of Defendant No. 3. According to Defendant No. 4, Sheila Kapila died by

leaving behind her last Will dated 18.11.1999. The Plaintiffs have placed a

copy of the Will on record and Defendant No. 4 prays for division of the Suit

Property in terms of the Will dated 18.11.1999. Defendant No. 4 contests the

interpretation placed by the Plaintiffs and Defendant Nos. 1, 2 and 3 on the

operative portion of the Will dated 18.11.1999. Defendant No. 4 claims that

the right in the Suit Property is opened up with the demise of Dr. Rajendra

Kapila/Father on 28.04.2021. It is explicitly averred that the Plaintiffs have

placed a part of the correspondence exchanged between the parties and all

the e-mails are not placed on record. Defendant No. 4 prays for the division

of Suit Property, and the prayer reads thus;
“Pass a decree of partition of immovable Property described as
       'D-897 New Friends Colony New Delhi' admeasuring about 471
       Sq. Yards in terms of the Will dated 18 November 1999 of Late
9
Mrs. Sheila Kapila, who was the absolute owner; of the Suit
       Property at the time of her death.”
11.   Defendant No. 5, though filed a separate written statement, which is

verbatim in line with the narrative of Defendant No. 4. For brevity, we are not

adverting to the case of Defendant No. 5.
WRITTEN STATEMENT OF DEFENDANT NO. 3
12.   The marriage between Dr. Rajendra Kapila and his second wife, Mrs.

Deepti Saxena Kapila (Defendant No. 3), was solemnized on 14.02.2009. On

28.04.2021, Dr. Rajendra Kapila died. Late Dr. Rajendra Kapila upon the demise

of Sheila Kapila had become one of the four co-sharers in the Suit Property.

Defendant No. 3 states that a copy of the alleged Will was never made available

or handed over to Dr. Rajendra Kapila during his lifetime. According to

Defendant No. 3, Dr. Rajendra Kapila had no knowledge of any Will of Sheila

Kapila. Dr. Rajendra Kapila, being very close with his mother, was never sounded

on the execution of a Will by Sheila Kapila in favour of her children and

grandchildren. Sheila Kapila always intended that each of her children is entitled

to an equal share in the Suit Property. Dr. Rajendra Kapila treated his twenty-five

per cent share in the Suit Property as an owner and incorporated it in the terms of

his divorce from his first wife, Dr. Bina Kapila. Dr. Bina Kapila and her children,

in spite of the knowledge of the mode and manner in which the Suit Property is
10
to be partitioned, have moved the court with untenable pleas. Defendant No. 3

prays for a decree in terms of the prayer in the plaint.
13.   In essence, it is captured that the Plaintiffs and Defendant Nos. 1 to 3 claim

intestate succession to the Suit Property, and Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 press on the

existence of the Will dated 18.11.1999, and hence, claim testamentary succession

to the Suit Property. The parties, through an independent application, moved for

admission/ denial of documents on which the respective pleas are relied. We will

excerpt these exchanges between the parties at the appropriate stage of our

consideration.
14.   The following Orders of the Learned Single Judge of the High Court of

Delhi are referred to as a background to appreciate arguments on Impugned

Judgment advanced by the Counsel appearing for the parties:
“ORDER DATED 22ND MARCH, 2022

        C.S. (O.S.) NO. 701/2021 AND I.A. NO. 17202/2021 [U/O-XXXIX,
        RULES 1 AND 2 OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908
        (
CPC
)]:
“Pursuant to the order passed by this Court on 14th March, 2022,
        the counsel for the defendants No. 4 and 5 has taken instructions
        from his clients and submits that the defendants No. 4 and 5 are
        not inclined to purchase the respective shares of the remaining
        parties in the Suit Property at the circle rate.
        The written statements filed on behalf of the defendants No. 2, 4
        and 5 are lying under objections.
The counsels to take steps to remove the objections and have the
        same placed on record within two weeks from today.
11
In their reply to I.A. 17202/2021, the defendants No. 4 and 5 have
taken objection to the sale of the Suit Property being ordered
under the provisions of Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2
of the Code of
Civil Procedure
, 1908 (
Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (
CPC
).
In response, the counsel for the plaintiffs submits that the dehors
the aforesaid application, the plaintiffs are invoking powers of the
Court under
Section 2
of the Partition Act, 1893 to direct sale of
the Suit Property. She states that under
Section 2
of the Partition
Act, sale can be directed suo moto by the Court.
The parties shall address submissions on this aspect on the next
day of hearing.
List on 11th April, 2022.
The parties may file short written submissions, not exceeding three
pages, in support of their submissions within two weeks from
today, along with the judgments sought to be relied upon.
Interim orders to continue.”


               ORDER DATED 11TH APRIL, 2022

C.S. (O.S.) NO. 701 OF 2021 AND I.A. NO. 17202/2021 [U/O-
XXXIX RULES 1 AND 2 of CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908
(
CPC
)] :
“For the reasons stated in the application, the same is allowed.
 The written statements are stated to have been filed on behalf of
the defendants No. 4, 5 and the defendant no. 2, but are still not
on record.
The counsels to take steps to have the written statements placed on
record.
The written submissions have been filed on behalf of the plaintiffs
and the defendants no. 4 and 5.
The counsel for the defendants No. 1 and 2 states that written
submission have also been filed on behalf of the defendants no. 1
and 2, however, the same are not to record.
12
It is made clear that the matter Will be heard on the next date of
       hearing even if the written statements/submissions of the parties
       are not on record.
List on 10th May, 2022.
Interim orders to continue.”
15.   On 10.05.2022, a preliminary decree in O.S. No. 701 of 2021 was passed

and I.A. No. 17202/2021 was allowed. The preliminary decree declared the shares

of the parties. The operative portion of the composite decree is excerpted

hereunder:
“Accordingly, the plaintiffs no. 1, 2 and 3 together, defendant no.
       1, defendant no. 2, and the legal heirs of late Dr. Rajendra Kapila,
       would be entitled to 25% undivided share each in the suit
       Property.
In view of the above, a preliminary decree is passed in the above
       terms, declaring that the parties shall each have undivided shares
       in the suit Property in the manner indicated below:
S. Particulars Share of Share of            Share of  Share of
      No. of the Suit Plaintiff Defendant         Defendant the legal
          Property    Nos. 1 to Nos. 1            No. 2     heirs of
                      3                                     late Dr.
                                                            Rajendra
                                                            Kapila
      i.      D-897            25%      25%          25%        25%
              New
              Friends
              Colony
              New Delhi
Counsels for the parties agree that the suit Property cannot be
       divided by metes and bounds. In fact, in paragraph 14 of the plaint,
13
the plaintiffs have specifically averred that it is not possible to
       divide the suit Property by metes and bounds. There has been no
       denial by the defendants no.4 and 5 of the aforesaid averments in
       their written statements. Further, in reply to I.A. No.17202/2021,
       it has been stated by the defendants no.4 and 5 that they have only
       visited the suit Property from time to time but have never lived
       there. They are permanent residents of the United States of
       America. 41.
In view of the above and in terms of
Section 2
of the Partition Act,
       the only option available would be to sell the Property as a whole
       and divide the proceeds between the parties thereto.
       In light of the above, I am of the view that the aforesaid Property
       should be put to sale and the proceeds thereof be distributed
       equally amongst the parties in terms of their shares as determined
       above.
Since there is a dispute in respect of the 25% share of the legal
       heirs of late Dr. Rajendra Kapila, it is directed that the proceeds
       of sale received in respect of his share be deposited in the Court
       and the same shall be subject to the outcome of any legal
       proceedings between the defendant no.3 and the defendants no. 4
       and 5.”
16.   The Learned Single Judge in terms of discretionary Jurisdiction under

Order XII, Rule 6, read with
Order XV, Rule 1 of the CPC
, passed a decree

without conducting a trial. While passing the decree on the alleged admission, it

cannot be said that the objection of Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 was ignored. In the

Judgment dated 10.05.2022, it is recorded that Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 through

e-mail, conveyed to the Plaintiffs that the original Will of Sheila Kapila is with

the mother of Defendant Nos. 4 and 5. However, Mrs. Bina Kapila filed an

affidavit and vocally suggested that the original Will might, therefore, have been
14
handed over by Sheila Kapila to her first daughter, Mrs. Sudha Panda. Without

opportunity or trial of the issues, findings on the very existence of the Will are

recorded by the Single Judge and read thus;
“The reference to the alleged Will of late Mrs. Sheila Kapila was
        made by the mother of the defendants no.4 and 5 for the first time
        in her email dated 29th July, 2021 written to the plaintiffs, wherein
        she had claimed that “she has a valid Will duly signed by late Mrs.
        Sheila Kapila”. The subsequent e-mail dated 2 nd November 2021
        sent by the defendants no.4 and 257 5 along with their mother to
        the plaintiffs also suggests that the original Will of late Mrs. Sheila
        Kapila is with the mother of the defendants no.4 and 5. 12.
However, in the affidavit of Mrs. Bina Kapila, placed on record by
        the defendants, it has been vaguely stated that “the original will
        may therefore have been handed over by Mrs. Sheila Kapila to
        Mrs. Sudha Panda.” 13. The contradictory stance taken by the
        defendants no.4 and 5 in respect of the possession of the Will, as
        noted above, creates a serious doubt regard to the existence of the
        alleged Will. The fact of the matter is that the original Will has not
        been produced before the Court. The plaintiffs and the defendants
        no.1 and 2 completely deny the knowledge or existence of the
        aforesaid Will. 14. Even though I have expressed my reservations
        with regard to the existence of the Will, I have proceeded to
        consider the alleged Will”.
17.   We do not approve of the conclusion of the Learned Single Judge, to the

effect that the above stated contradictory statements of Defendant Nos. 4 and 5

on the possession of the Will create a doubt on the existence of the alleged Will.

It is further noted that the original Will has not been produced before the Court.

It is also noted that the Plaintiffs, and Defendant Nos. 1 and 2 deny the knowledge

or existence of the said Will. Notwithstanding the above, viz. that there is an issue

for consideration in the trial, the Judgment proceeds to consider the testamentary

succession contained in the Will dated 18.11.1999, and a Judgment on admission
15
is delivered. The Judgment refers to the paragraphs already excerpted and

interpreted the clauses in the Will allowing to the children of Sheila Kapila, an

absolute right. The Single Judgment placed reliance on the e-mail dated

29.07.2021 exchanged between the parties. A categorical finding in paragraph 29

of the Judgment is recorded which reads thus:
“In view of the aforesaid discussion, there is no doubt in my mind,
       whether on the principles of intestate succession or in terms of the
       Will dated 18th November, 1999 propounded by the defendants
       no.4 and 5 that the plaintiffs no.1 to 3 together, defendant no.1,
       defendant no.2, and the legal heirs of late Dr. Rajendra Kapila,
       have an absolute 25% undivided share each in the Suit Property.”


17.1 The objection to taking issues to trial has been brushed aside in Paragraphs
30 and 31 of the Judgment, by holding that the examination is confined to the

interpretation of the clauses in the Will propounded by Defendant Nos. 4 and 5,

where evidence is not required. Without further deliberation, we record that a

decree has been passed, and it does not appear merely as a preliminary decree,

but rather appears to be both, i.e., preliminary and final in more than one sense.

We notice that the inference drawn by the Single Judge where a case for a

Judgment and Decree on admission is made out, suffers from serious legal flaws.

The very basis for the Judgment and Decree is that Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 failed

to produce the original copy of the Will dated 18.11.1999. An adverse inference

on non-production can be drawn even if the matter has been posted, issues have

been framed, and the Suit has been posted for evidence of the parties. Even at the
16
stage of admission and denial, the parties, namely the Plaintiffs, Defendant Nos.

1 to 3 on one side, and Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 on the other side, are not admitting

the very existence of the Will dated 18.11.1999 and are not on the same page. In

our further consideration of the existence of admission, whether conditional or

categorical, we will refer to the relevant record of the Trial Court. The inference

drawn by the Learned Trial Judge is completely flawed.
18.    Defendant Nos. 3 and 5 filed RFA O.S. No. 15/2022 through Impugned

Judgment dated 11.10.2022, Division Bench of High Court of Delhi confirmed

the Judgment dated 10.05.2022. A close look at the Impugned Judgment discloses

that the Division Bench proceeded on the premise that the Will dated 18.11.1999

is not disputed, and an interpretation of clauses in the Will dated 18.11.1999 arises

for consideration. The operative portion of the Judgment reads thus:
“The sole issue for consideration before us hinges upon the
        interpretation of one sanguine document – Will dated 18.11.1999,
        which, being admitted by all parties, is not under challenge.
        Relevant clauses for purposes of adjudication of disputes inter-se
        parties, being clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of the said Will.”

Hence, the Civil Appeal.
19.    We have heard Learned Senior Counsel Mr. Dhruv Mehta, Mr. Shyam

Divan and Mr. Ritin Rai for Defendant Nos. 1, 4 and 5 and the Plaintiffs,

respectively and Ms. Manisha Sharma for Defendant No. 3.
19.1   Mr. Dhruv Mehta contends that the Courts below committed serious

illegality by pronouncing a judgment and passing a decree under Order XII, Rule
17
6, read with
Order XV of the CPC
; the main issue for consideration is whether

the Suit for partition of the Suit Property belonging to Late Sheila Kapila is by

devolution or through testamentary succession. There is no admission on this

crucial aspect in a suit for partition and further, when the suit is initiated by one

of the co-sharers, the Judgment is rendered on the ground that the children of Late

Sheila Kapila are entitled to one-fourth share each. The basis of this partition is

the core issue. By inviting our attention to the pleadings of the parties, he argued

that the admission through e-mail by Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 is not an admission

or unequivocal admission because the existence of the Will is seriously contested

by the Plaintiffs, Defendant Nos. 1, 2 and 3. Therefore, unless and until there is a

clear admission on the existence of the Will, which is proved by interpreting

clauses in the Will, a Judgment on admission is impermissible. There is no

categorical admission by the contesting parties on the existence of the Will. The

assumption on the existence of the Will by the Impugned Judgments is illegal and

to that extent, the findings are unsustainable and have been rendered contrary to

the judicial discretion available under Rule 6 of Order XII and Rule 2 of Order

XV. It is contended that there are serious and triable issues in the Suit for

partition. Learned Single Judge committed illegality by disposing of the Suit

while considering the application filed for selling and disposing of the Suit

Property. Subject to the outcome of the above arguments, he further argued on

the interpretation of the Will under
Section 83
, Indian Succession Act, 1925. A
18
few precedents are also relied on, mainly touching upon the construction of a Will

under
Sections 87
and
88
of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
20.   Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Plaintiffs and Defendant Nos. 1

and 3 argued that the parties in the Suit for partition are fairly aged and that the

Judgment on admission by the Learned Single Judge cannot be faulted with on

any ground. It is argued that the Learned Single Judge, to appreciate the

admission in the pleading, relied on the pre-litigation correspondence between

the parties, read with the pleading by admission. In the circumstances set out by

the parties, there is no dispute on the entitlement of the Plaintiffs and Defendant

Nos. 1 and 2. The entitlement to the share of Dr. Rajendra Kapila is an inter se

dispute between Defendant No. 3 on one hand and Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 on the

other hand. Therefore, irrespective of admission or no admission on the existence

of the Will, the Decree dated 10.05.2022 is legal and valid. Inviting our attention

to the pleadings, it is argued that the differentiation between the admitted case

and the disputed case comes within the scope of
Order XV, Rule 2 of the CPC
,

and a decree to the extent where it is governed by admission has been made and

the dispute is relegated to independent proceedings. Therefore, no exception

could be taken to the Impugned Judgment. On the alternative argument of

Defendant Nos. 4 and 5, viz., interpretation of clauses in the Will, a few judgments

are relied on to commend that correct and available interpretation of the disputed

clauses has been legally and validly carried out.
19
21.      We are, in the Civil Appeal, examining the correctness of the Judgment

and Decree made on admission and confirmed by the intra Court Appeal.
22.      The examination of merits can be compartmentalized as to whether the

pronouncement of judgment on alleged admission is legal and if so, whether the

interpretation of clauses is held valid and confirms the precedents on this point.

From the above preface, it is appreciated that the second part of the examination

arises subject to a view or conclusion on the first part of our examination.

22.1      The judicial discretion conferred on the Court is structured on the

definition of admission under
Section 17
of the Evidence Act, 1872 and Rule 5

of Order VIII, Rule 6 of Order XII and Rules 1 & 2 of
Order XV of the CPC
.

22.2      An “admission” means, ‘a statement, oral or documentary or contained in

electronic form, which suggests any inference as to any fact in issue or relevant

fact, and which is made by any of the persons, and under the circumstances,

hereinafter mentioned’.3

22.3 Admission in pleadings means a statement made by a party to the legal

proceedings, whether oral, documentary, or contained in an electronic form, and

the said statement suggests an inference with respect to a fact in issue between

the parties or a relevant fact. It is axiomatic that to constitute an admission, the

said statement must be clear, unequivocal and ought not to entertain a different

view. Coming to admission in pleadings, these are averments made by a party in

the pleading, viz., plaint, written statement, etc., in a pending proceeding of
3
P Ramanatha Aiyar’s Advanced Law Lexicon, 5th Edition, Volume 1 (A-C), p. 140.
20
admitting the factual matrix presented by the other side. To constitute a valid

admission in pleading, the said admission should be unequivocal, unconditional,

and unambiguous, and the admission must be made with an intention to be bound

by it. Admission must be valid without being proved by adducing evidence and

enabling the opposite party to succeed without trial. A court, while pronouncing

a judgment on admission, keeps in its perspective the requirements in Order VIII

Rule 5, Order XII Rule 6 and Order XV Rules 1 & 2,
CPC
read with
Sections 17
,
58
and
68
of the Indian Evidence Act.
22.4 The logic behind such jurisprudential examination of an admission is that

a judgment pronounced on admission, not only denies the right of trial on an issue

but denies the remedy of appeal. Hence, discretion has to be exercised judiciously

and objectively while making a judgment on admission in a pleading. The

existence of the power to pronounce a judgment on admission under Rule 6 of

Order XII4 and Rules 1 and 2 of Order XV,5 is not an issue in the appeal but
4
Order XII Rule 6
Judgment on admissions.—(1) Where admissions of fact have been made either in the pleading
or otherwise; whether orally or in writing, the Court may at any stage of the suit, either on the
application of any party or of its own motion and without waiting for the determination of any
other question-between the parties, make such order or give such judgment as it may think fit,
having regard to such admissions. (2) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under sub-rule (1)
a decree shall be drawn up in accordance with the judgment and the decree shall bear the date
on which the judgment was pronounced.
5
Order XV
Rule 1. Parties not at issue.—(1) Where at the first hearing of a suit it appears that the parties
are not at issue on any question of law or of fact, the Court may at once pronounce judgment.
Rule 2. One of several defendants not at issue.—2 [(1) Where there are more defendants than
one, and any one of the defendants is not at issue with the plaintiff on any question of law or
of fact, the Court may at once pronounce judgment for or against such defendant and the suit
shall proceed only against the other defendants.] 3 [(2) Whenever a judgment is pronounced
under this rule, decree shall be drawn up in accordance with such judgment and the decree shall
bear the date on which the judgment was pronounced.
21
rather the issue is whether pronouncing judgment on alleged admission is valid

and legal.
23.      When the admissions are categorical and unequivocal, the remedies

available against such a decree are limited. In a given case, as in the present

appeal, if there is an argument on whether there is an admission of a fact or a

document, before examining the merits of the matter, this Court ought to verify

whether admission exists or not and also whether the circumstances relied upon

by the Learned Single Judge can be constituted as admission for rendering a

Judgment. At this juncture, we would like to place on record the answer of the

Learned Counsel appearing for the Plaintiffs and Defendant Nos. 1 and 3, to our

query, whether their clients are admitting the existence of the Will dated

18.11.1999 or the Will is contested. We notice that the Learned Counsel, going

by the pleadings, reply that their clients do not admit the existence and the

execution of the Will dated 18.11.1999, which is said to have been executed by

Sheila Kapila.
24.
In
Uttam Singh Dugal v. United Bank of India6
, reiterating the objects

and reasons set out while amending Rule 6 of
Order XII, CPC
, it was

stated that “where a claim is admitted, the court has jurisdiction to enter

a judgment for the plaintiff and to pass a decree on the admitted claim. The

object of the Rule is to enable the party to obtain a speedy judgment at least
6
(2000) 7 SCC 120.
22
to the extent of the relief to which according to the admission of the defendant,

the plaintiff is entitled”.
24.1 Further, the Trial Court can refuse to pass a decree “when a statement is

made to a party and such statement is brought before the court showing admission

of liability by an application filed under Order XII, Rule 6 and the other side has

sufficient opportunity to explain the said admission and if such explanation is not

accepted by the court.”

24.2 In the same judgment, the scope and effect of “admissions” was examined

and it was held that “admissions generally arise when a statement is made by a

party in any of the modes provided under
Sections 18
to
23
of the Evidence Act,

1872”.
24.3 Further, this Court in
Uttam Singh Duggal
(supra), while adverting to
Section 17
, Indian Evidence Act, 1872, which provides for admissions through

statements in oral, documentary and in electronic form, expanded the scope of

admissions and recognised that “admissions are of many kinds: they may be

considered as being on the record as actual if that is either in the pleadings or in

answer to interrogatories or implied from the pleadings by non-traversal.

Secondly as between parties by agreement or notice”. The case on hand considers

an alleged admission in the pleading including the reply given on admission and

denial of documents. The provisions under Rule 5 of Order VIII, Rule 6 of Order

XII, and Rules 1 and 2 of
Order XV of the CPC
, enable a court to pronounce a

judgment on admission. The court is called upon to exercise judicial discretion
23
conferred on it by
the CPC
and the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
. The judicial

discretion shall always be in addition to the provisions covering the judgment on

admission and guided by the best of wit and wisdom of the Court in pronouncing

a judgment on admission. The bottom line is that while ensuring judicial

discretion, the court does not avoid a trial on an issue where a trial is needed, and

findings recorded; alternatively, the court does not try an issue in which there is

no contest between the parties. The weighing of options or judicial discretion is

dependent on the peculiar circumstances of the case or the nature of the

controversy that the court is considering.
25.
In
Himani Alloys Ltd. v. Tata Steel Ltd7
it is held that ‘Admissions’ should

be categorical and intentional, as Order XII, Rule 6,
CPC
allows discretion rather

than obligation. Admissions result in judgments without trial which permanently

deny any remedy to the defendant, by way of an appeal on merits. Therefore,

unless the admission is clear, unambiguous, and unconditional, the discretion of

the Court is not exercised to deny the valuable right of a defendant to contest the

claim. Hence, discretion should be used only where there is a clear and

unequivocal admission. The relevant paragraphs read thus:
“11. It is true that a judgment can be given on an “admission”
          contained in the minutes of a meeting. But the admission should
          be categorical. It should be a conscious and deliberate act of the
          party making it, showing an intention to be bound by it. Order 12
          Rule 6 being an enabling provision, it is neither mandatory nor
          peremptory but discretionary. The court, on examination of the
7
(2011) 15 SCC 273.
24
facts and circumstances, has to exercise its judicial discretion,
          keeping in mind that a judgment on admission is a judgment
          without trial which permanently denies any remedy to the
          defendant, by way of an appeal on merits. Therefore, unless the
          admission is clear, unambiguous and unconditional, the discretion
          of the Court should not be exercised to deny the valuable right of
          a defendant to contest the claim. In short the discretion should be
          used only when there is a clear “admission” which can be acted
          upon. There is no such admission in this case.” (Emphasis Added)
26.      The controversy is on the applicable legal principle to the dispute of

partition between the parties. The crux of consideration narrows down to the

existence, execution and validity of the alleged Will dated 18.11.1999. A will in

legal parlance is a testament of a testator/testatrix and is a posthumous disposition

of the estate of the testator, directing the distribution of his/her estate upon his/her

death.
The Indian Succession Act, 1925
provides for legal requisites of a will, and

proof of the execution is a sine quo non for giving effect to a will. The reasoning

of limited assumption of the Will dated 18.11.1999 for interpretative purposes of

the operative portion of clauses ignores the method and manner of establishing a

will as governing the estate of the testator/testatrix. It is useful to refer to
Gopal

Swaroop v. Krishna Murari Mangal
and others8, wherein this Court held that as

per the provisions of
Section 63
of the Indian Succession Act, 1925, the due

execution of the Will consists of the following:
i. The testator should sign or affix his mark to the Will;
8
(2010) 14 SCC 266.
25
ii. The testator’s signature or the mark of the testator should be so placed that

         it should appear that it was intended to give effect to the writing as a Will;

      iii. Two or more witnesses should attest the Will;
iv. Each of the said witnesses must have seen the testator signing or affixing

         his mark to the Will, and each of them should sign the Will in the presence

         of the testator.
26.1
Section 63(c)
of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 and
Section 68
of the

Indian Evidence Act, 1872, stipulate the proof required of a Will. The proof of

execution and attestation of a Will are strictly by the scheme of the Indian

Evidence Act, and the Indian Succession Act. A Will by the execution is an

instrument and becomes an enforceable legal document by proof in accordance

with law. A court treats a Will as a legally enforceable document only upon proof

in accordance with law. This Court in Ramesh Verma (D) Through Lrs. v.

Lajesh Saxena (D) By Lrs. and another9 referred to
Savithri and others v.

Karthyayani Amma
and other10, and held as follows:
“14.
In
Savithri v. Karthyayani Amma [Savithri
v. Karthyayani
          Amma, (2007) 11 SCC 621] this Court has held as under : (SCC
          p. 629, para 17)
                “17. … A will like any other document is to be proved in
                terms of the provisions of the Succession Act and the
                Evidence Act. The onus of proving the will is on the
                propounder. The testamentary capacity of the testator
                must also be established. Execution of the will by the
9
(2017) 1 SCC 257.
10
(2007) 11 SCC 621.
26
testator has to be proved. At least one attesting witness is
             required to be examined for the purpose of proving the
             execution of the will. It is required to be shown that the
             will has been signed by the testator with his free will and
             that at the relevant time he was in sound disposing state
             of mind and understood the nature and effect of the
             disposition. It is also required to be established that he
             has signed the will in the presence of two witnesses who
             attested his signature in his presence or in the presence
             of each other. Only when there exists suspicious
             circumstances, the onus would be on the propounder to
             explain them to the satisfaction of the court before it can
             be accepted as genuine.”
15. It is not necessary for us to delve at length to the facts of the
        matter as also the evidence adduced by the parties before the High
        Court. Suffice it to note that the execution of the wills has to be
        proved in accordance with
Section 68
of the Evidence Act.”



26.2   Upon complying with the requirements of
Section 63
of the Indian

Succession Act and proof in terms of
Section 68
of the Indian Evidence Act, a

Will is said to be in existence. The effect of proof of execution of the Will, the

ordinary/customary rights of other legal heirs, who would acquire it on the death

of the testatrix, will end. The difference between intestate succession and

testamentary succession can thus, be appreciated from the above reasoning.
27.    We have referred to, in sufficient detail, the pleadings of the parties, both

supporting and contesting the Will dated 18.11.1994. The narrative between the

parties centers around a few circumstances. At the foremost, from the perspective

of the Plaintiffs and Defendant Nos. 1 to 3, the original and absolute owner of the

Suit Property, Sheila Kapila, died on 08.04.2003, leaving behind her four children

as successors-in-interest to the Suit Property. The Plaintiffs in the Plaint, in
27
unequivocal terms, deny and dispute the Will dated 18.11.1999, and contest the

inheritance through testamentary succession. A careful reading of the plaint and

the written statement of Defendant Nos. 1 and 2 makes the position clear.

27.1   On the contrary, Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 propound the Will dated

18.11.1999 as the last testament of Sheila Kapila and set up two legal issues on

the claim for partition, i.e., firstly, the children of Late Sheila Kapila have life

interest, and secondly, the grandchildren of Late Sheila Kapila have inherited

absolute rights under the alleged Will dated 18.11.1999. The extended contention

of the above plea is that Dr. Rajendra Kapila, father of Defendant Nos. 4 and 5,

could not have bequeathed the interest in the Suit Property in favour of Defendant

No. 3. The extended limb of the objection, no doubt, is left open for consideration

in separate legal proceedings. The dispute inter se Defendant No. 3 and Defendant

Nos. 4 and 5 is left open for decision in a separate proceeding and according to

Mr. Mehta, such course is impermissible in a suit for partition, and this argument

would be considered on its turn.
27.2 The foundation of the claim in the opposing parties can be summarised as

intestate succession on one side and testamentary succession on the other. The

plaint averments principally proceed for partition of Suit Property as co-sharers,

but the Judgments impugned have laid emphasis on the interpretation of the Will,

holding that the children of Late Sheila Kapila are entitled to the Suit Property as

absolute owners and a decree for partition in four equal shares could be made.
28
28.   The above discussion takes us to the Impugned Judgments pronounced

under Order XII, Rule 6 read with Order XV, Rules 1 and 2
of the CPC
.
29.   Mr. Dhruv Mehta contends that the Learned Trial Judge pronounced a

judgment on admission by assuming that Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 admitted the

Will and interpretation of Clauses in the Will dated 18.11.1999, which alone

constitutes an issue for decision. He points out a fundamental error that Defendant

Nos. 4 and 5 are the propounders of the Will and the existence or execution of the

Will dated 18.11.1999 is not admitted by the Plaintiffs and Defendant Nos. 1 to
3. The claim for partition is based as co-sharers and not as legatees under a Will;

the Impugned Judgments on admission are based on the case pleaded by

Defendant Nos. 4 and 5. There is no consensus or admission on the principle; the

Suit Property is divided among the eligible heirs of Sheila Kapila. Reading the

pleadings in entirety, it is argued that the admission relied on for partition is

illegal and erroneous. The contesting parties are not admitting the existence, leave

alone the execution of the Will dated 18.11.1999. The answers to admission and

denial of documents are improperly and erroneously appreciated by the courts

below. The Judgment on admission, therefore, is completely illegal as it denies

the right to trial and adjudication of an issue by the court. Therefore, he prays for

setting aside the Impugned Judgment and remitting the matter to the Trial Court

for entering on issues, allowing the parties to join the trial and deciding the mode

and manner of succession to the Suit Property among the contesting parties.
29
30.   Per contra, Learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Shyam Divan and Mr. Ritin Rai,

appearing for the Plaintiffs and Defendants Nos. 1, 2 and 3, argue that the

Judgment on admission is available from the bare perusal of the reply of

Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 in the Written Statement. It has to be read in the light of

the reply given by Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 to the application filed on admission

and denial of documents. It can be noted that there is no dispute in the relationship

between the parties. There is no dispute on the ownership of Sheila Kapila either

in the presence or in the absence of the Will. The admitted case at best, refines to

the entitlement of each one of the children to a twenty-five percent in the Suit

Property but not on the principle of partition. Therefore, according to them, there

is no dispute on the seventy-five percent of the claim in the Suit Property, and the

twenty-five percent remainder representing Dr. Rajendra Kapila’s share is

allowed to be independently worked out. It is alternatively argued that a decree

passed in favour of the Plaintiffs, Defendant Nos. 1 and 2 is passed and the

contested portion is relegated to the Trial Court. In other words, the share of Dr.

Rajendra Kapila in the said Suit Property is remitted to the Learned Single Judge

for trial and adjudication. In summary, it is contended that a partial/preliminary

or final Decree is pronounced insofar as seventy-five percent is concerned and

twenty-five percent is remitted to the Court below for adjudication.
31.   One of the arguments against the Impugned Judgments is whether

admissions in law are available or admissions have been assumed. We need to

state in detail the very pleadings considered by the parties. The arguments on both
30
sides compel us to take into consideration what exactly is admitted by the parties.

The Plaintiffs in Plaint Paragraph Nos. 11 to 14 advert to and state the Plaintiffs’

case on the existence of the Will. Defendant No. 4, in Paragraphs Nos. 24 to 27,

has replied to the case of the Plaintiff. The respective averments are reproduced

in the following tabular form:
Plaint                             Written Statement


 Paragraph 11:                              Paragraph 24:

 Defendant        No.4      in       his   The contents of paragraph 11 of the
 communications has alleged that late.     Plaint are incorrect and denied to the
 Mrs. Sheila Kapila left behind a          extent that the Plaintiffs, Defendant
 purported Will which allegedly gives      No. 1 and 2 are not aware of the Will.
 rights to Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 in       The Plaintiffs, Defendant No. 1 and
 the Suit Property in respect of their     Defendant No. 2 were always aware
 father's share. The Plaintiffs are not    of the Will and the present suit is only
 aware of any such Will. The               an attempt to usurp the share of
 Defendant No. l and Defendant No.2        Defendant No. 4 and 5 in the Suit
 also informed the Plaintiffs that too     Property.
 are not aware of any Will of their late
 mother Mrs. Sheila Kapila and
 confirmed that she died intestate. All
 the family members have always
 believed that upon the demise of Mrs.
 Sheila Kapila, the Suit Property
 devolved upon Mrs. Sudha Panda,
 Mrs. Leela Kapila, Mr. Jitendra
 Kapila, and Dr. Rajendra Kapila in
 equal (25%) undivided share each.
31
Paragraph 12:                             Paragraph 25:
In another communication from             With respect to the contents of
Advocate on behalf of Defendant           paragraph 12 of the Plaint, It is
No.4, reliance has been placed on         denied that the Will contains an
photographs of a document which is        absolute bequest in favour of the four
purportedly the Will of Late Mrs.         children i.e. Mrs. Sudha Panda, Mrs.
Sheila     Kapila.    The     original    Leela Kapila, Dr. Rajendra Kapila
document has not been furnished to        and Mr. Jitendra Kapila granting
the Plaintiffs. Without prejudice,        them 25% share each in the Suit
even assuming without conceding           Property. It is reiterated that the Will
that the purported Will relied upon       clearly grants only beneficial life
by Defendant No.4 was a valid             interest to the aforesaid persons as it
document (though it is not), the said     clearly states that the aforesaid
purported Will contains an absolute       persons cannot dispose of or will the
bequest in favour of the four children    Suit Property. It is only the
i.e. Mrs. Sudha Panda, Mrs. Leela         grandchildren of Mrs. Sheila Kapila
Kapila, Dr. Rajendra Kapila and Mr.       who have absolute rights on the Suit
Jitendra Kapila granting them 25%         Property, including the right to
share each in the Suit Property. As       dispose of the same.
such, Defendant Nos.4 and 5 do not
stand to gain any share in the Suit
Property after the demise of their
father, late Dr. Rajendra Kapila.


Paragraph 13:                             Paragraph 26:
It is also not out of place to mention    The contents of paragraph 13 of the
that prior to the demise of Dr.           Plaint are incorrect and therefore
Rajendra Kapila, in April 2021,           denied. It is denied that the claim of
neither the Defendants No.4 or 5          Defendant No. 4 and 5 is barred by
asserted any rights in respect of the     delay and laches. It is clear from the
Suit Property. It is only after the       Will that the Defendant No. 4 and 5
unfortunate demise of their father        had no right in the Suit Property till
that Defe11dants No.4 and 5 have          the time Late Dr. Rajendra Kapila
propounded the purported Will of          was alive. Defendant No. 4 and 5
Mrs. Sheila Kapila, after more than       became entitled to 25% share in the
18 years of her demise. Thus, any         Suit Property only upon the demise
claim of Defendants No.4 and 5 is         of Late Dr. Rajendra Kapila.
not only belated but also barred by
delay and laches.
32
Thus, there is no dispute that the Suit
     Property is to devolve upon the four
     children of Mrs. Sheila Kapila, in
     equal share.

     Paragraph 14:                              Paragraph 27:
     Since a dispute has been created by         The contents of paragraph 14 of the
     Defendant No.4 limited to the share         Plaint are incorrect and denied. It is
     of late Dr. Rajendra Kapila in the Suit     denied that there is no dispute to the
     Property,      the    Plaintiffs    are     extent of share of Defendant Nos. 1
     constrained to institute the present        and 2 in the Suit Property. Defendant
     Suit for Partition, by Sale of the Suit     Nos. 1 and 2 are only entitled to a
     Property and division of the Sale           beneficial interest in the Suit
     Proceeds thereof among the                  Property in their lifetime and are not
     Plaintiffs.    Defendant      No.     I,    entitled to sell or will their share in
     Defendant No.2 and Defendant No.3           the Suit Property. It is therefore
     in the ratio of 25% each. As evident        denied that the dispute in the present
     from the aforesaid, to the extent of        proceedings is limited to the share of
     share of the Plaintiffs, Defendant          the late Dr. Rajendra Kapila only. It
     No.1 and Defendant No.2 there can           is further denied that Defendant No.3
     be no dispute. The Suit Property is         has any share in the Suit Property
     not capable of division by metes and        whatsoever.
     bounds. As per the Plaintiffs, the
     following persons are entitled to a
     share in the Suit Property: -
·    Plaintiffs No. I to 3: 25 % share (i.e.,
     8.33% share each)

·         Defendant No. l: 25%
·         Defendant No.2: 25%

          Defendant No.3: 25%
32.     We have excerpted the pleadings from the plaint and the written statement

    to explain that the selective consideration of pleadings or reading the pleadings

    out of context, resulted in assuming that the Suit could be decided on admission
33
and a judgment be pronounced. From a careful reading of the pleadings presented

by the parties, there exists a triable issue.
33.     The above narrative takes us to the next argument of the Learned Senior

Counsel appearing for the Plaintiffs and Defendant Nos. 1 and 2 viz that

Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 admitted the Will. The argument no doubt is persuasive

but on a closer reading of the circumstances prevailing in the case, it emerges that

Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 are propounding the existence of the Will. The party at

issue admits the existence of the Will dated 18.11.1999, then in a suit for partition,

the difference in standing of parties whether plaintiffs/defendant is not of much

significance, a decree on admitted case is pronounced. In support of their

argument, our attention is also invited to the admission and denial exchanged

between the parties. Plaintiffs, by their Affidavit dated 09.03.2022, responded to

the admission/denial of documents filed by Defendant No. 4 stating thus:
S. No.                Particulars               Page Numbers         Admitted/
                                                                      Denied

   1.     Photocopy of Will of Mrs. Sheila           1-4               Denied



   2.     Affidavit of Mrs. Bina Kapila              4-6               Denied



   3.     Emails dated 2 October 2021 from             7          Receipt admitted
          Madhu Sehgal to Plaintiff No.1                          contents denied
          and from Defendant No.4 to
          Plaintiff No.1
34
4.         Email exchanged between Mrs.            8         Receipt admitted
              Bina Kapila and Plaintiff No.1                    contents denied
              between 29 July 2021 to 10
              August 2021


   5.         Email    exchanged      between       9-11        Receipt admitted
              Defendant No.4 to Plaintiff No.1                  contents denied
              between 22 July 2021


   6.         Email exchanged between 20 May         12         Receipt admitted
              2021 from Defendant No.4 to                       contents denied
              Plaintiff No.1


   7.         Email dated 4 May 2021 from            13         Receipt admitted
              Defendant No.4 to Plaintiff No.1                  contents denied


   8.         Affidavit to compliance of            14-16            Denied
Section 65B
of Evidence Act,
1872
34.     The reply of Defendant Nos. 1 and 2 is also to the same effect.
35.     Per contra, Defendant No. 4, responding to the admission/denial of

documents filed by Plaintiff, replied as follows:
S.No.                         Particulars                      Admitted/
                                                                      Denied

       1.                              XXX                                XXX
       2.                              XXX                                XXX
       3.                              XXX                                XXX
       4.                              XXX                                XXX
35
5.                      DOCUMENT NO. 5
Admitted
             Email dated 22.07.2021 from Vikrant Kapila to
             Pankaja Panda
6.                      DOCUMENT NO. 6
Admitted
             Email dated 29.07.2021 from Bina Kapila to Pankaja
             Panda along with attachment
7.                      DOCUMENT NO. 7
Admitted
             Email dated 2.10.2021 from Madhu Sehgal to
             Pankaja Panda
36.    The above analysis would clearly show that there is no exhibit marked with

or without objection, much less a categorical admission. It is unequivocally clear

to us that the Plaintiffs, Defendant No.1 and Defendant No.3, in no uncertain

terms, state their views on the Will. What is admitted by Defendant No. 4 is not

an admission of the case of the Plaintiffs. It is at best, a statement in continuation

of what has been pleaded in Paragraphs Nos. 24 to 27 of the Written Statement.

Appreciation and acceptance of the above pleading/response to the

admission/denial as warranting a judgment on admission is patently erroneous.

We have in the preceding paragraph noted that the Learned Single Judge, after

taking note of the objection to the pronouncement of Judgment on admission, and

after doubting the existence of the Will dated 18.11.1999, still proceeded to

decide the rights or succession of the parties to the Suit Property.
36
37.   The kernel of the matter is what Sheila Kapila left behind after her demise;
(a) the suit property, (b) children and grandchildren (Plaintiffs and Defendants).

The succession to the Suit Property, whether intestate or testamentary would be

the principal issue for adjudication. We record that the Impugned Judgment

interpreted the clauses in the Will dated 18.11.1999 without the Will being

brought on record. Secondly, the propounder has not proved the Will in the

manner known to law, therefore, the Judgment on admission is an illegal exercise

of discretionary jurisdiction under Order XII Rule 6 read with
Order XV Rule 2

of the CPC
. The case on hand, in our considered view, presents both triable issues

in facts and law. For arriving at such a view, we also take note of the categorical

reiteration of the Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Plaintiffs and

Defendant Nos. 1 and 2, from the pleadings, their clients are not accepting the

existence of the Will dated 18.11.1999. Therefore, pronouncing a view on the

operating clauses of document yet to satisfy the requirements of
Section 63
of the

Indian Succession Act read with
Sections 58
and
68
of the Indian Evidence Act,

is an illegal exercise of discretion. In our considered view in the case on hand, the

admissions are not unequivocal and absolute to pave way for a Judgment on

admission.
37.1 The probable issues that may arise for consideration are:
a) Whether the suit property is divided among the parties on

          testamentary succession or intestate succession?
37
b) Whether the Will propounded by Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 is valid,

          legal and binding on the parties?
c) Whether Defendant No. 3 is entitled to succeed to Dr. Rajendra

          Kapila’s share to the exclusion of Defendant Nos. 4 and 5?
d) Whether Dr. Rajendra Kapila could bequeath the share in the suit

          property in favour of Defendant No. 3 or not?
38.   These are stated as available issues in the Suit however, it is for the Learned

Single Judge to frame the issues. Though these are the probable issues, our

expression may not be treated as issues framed by this Court but are adverted to

emphasizing that pronouncing the judgment on admission in the case on hand, is

erroneous and illegal. We notice that the Division Bench had straightaway

assumed the existence of the Will and proceeded with interpreting the clauses in

the Will. We notice the said approach begs the question and leaves more questions

than answers. For the reasons already discussed, the decree and Judgment dated

10.05.2023 and 11.10.2022 are interfered with and set aside except the direction

in Paragraph No. 45 of the Judgment dated 10.05.2022, and the matter is remitted

to the Learned Single Judge for trial and disposal of O.S. No. 701/2021,

uninfluenced by any of the findings rendered till the Judgment of this Court.
39.   The above discussion takes us to the view expressed by the Learned Single

Judge in directing the sale of property as set out in Paragraph No. 45 of the

Judgment dated 10.05.2022 of the Learned Trial Court. I.A.17202/2021 was filed

under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2
of the CPC
and the jurisdiction independent
38
of the
Partition Act
1893, to grant a prayer as made in the application is a moot

question. Therefore, we hold and authorise the sale of the Suit Property without

a Preliminary Decree in terms of
Section 2
of the Partition Act, 1893.

39.1 The majority of the parties to the lis are either septuagenarian or

octogenarian. We appreciate the need for speedy and timely adjudication of the

issues between the parties. The finding in the Judgment dated 10.05.2022,

wherein it is stated that even in the event of partition, division by metes and

bounds cannot conveniently be carried out, it is not disputed or contested by the

parties. We have excerpted the prayer in I.A. No. 17202 of 2021 above, and

therefore, to avoid repetition, are not adverting to the prayer once again. The

partition and apportionment in the case would be the proceeds realised from the

sale of the suit property. Therefore, the directions issued in Paragraph No. 45 of

the Judgment dated 10.05.2022 are adopted with a few additions and incorporated

by allowing prayers made in I.A. No. 17202 of 2021 and made part of this

Judgment. The additions made by us are shown in separate italics:
I. At first, the Local Commissioner shall take steps to get the property

       converted from leasehold to freehold.
II. The statutory fees/charges for conversion of the suit property from

       leasehold to freehold shall be borne by the plaintiffs and the defendants

       no.1 and 2 in proportion to their share in the suit property.

    III. It is agreed that defendants no.1, 2 and 3 will execute a power of attorney

       in favour of plaintiff no.1 to sign all the requisite documents, forms,
39
applications, and the like for the conversion of the suit property from

    leasehold to freehold.
IV. The Local Commissioner shall be authorized to sign all the requisite

    documents, forms, applications, and the like on behalf of the defendants

    no.4 and 5 for the conversion of the suit property from leasehold to

    freehold.
V.   The Delhi Development Authority (DDA) shall accept all the aforesaid

    requisite documents executed by the Local Commissioner on behalf of the

    parties for conversion of the suit property from leasehold to freehold.

 VI. After conversion of the suit property from leasehold to freehold, the

    Local Commissioner will conduct a private sale of the suit property and

    the parties hereto shall be given the opportunity to participate.

VII. The Local Commissioner is requested to carry out the sale as finalized or

    found expedient within three months from receipt of a copy of the

    Judgment.
VIIA. (a) The Local Commissioner is directed to initiate, conduct and

    complete the sale of the suit property by exploring all IT-enabled

    solutions such as (i) Group WhatsApp consisting of the Local

    Commissioner and the parties to the suit, (ii) An e-mail ID be opened to

    receive communication and correspondence not only with the parties and

    their Counsel, but also with the prospective bidders.
40
(b) The Local Commissioner will complete the said process of creating

a WhatsApp Group and e-mail ID within one week from today.
(c) The Local Commissioner and the parties will explore the feasibility

of hiring e-platforms that provide services for e-auction. Thereafter, the

parties are directed and also given liberty to serve a work memo on the

Local Commissioner, on the mode, manner (including paper publication,

advertisement, minimum price, etc.) and method of conducting a private

sale of the Suit Property.
(d) The Local Commissioner is directed to go by the consensus in

suggestions arrived at between the parties.
(e) In the event of disagreement on any of the issues/suggestions in

conducting the sale, etc., the Local Commissioner is given liberty to move

and proceed as directed by the Court.
(f) The sale of Suit Property and the realization of proceeds are completed

expeditiously, preferably within three months from receipt of a copy of the

Judgment, the sale proceeds are deposited to the credit of CS (OS) No.

701/2021, for division and disbursement in terms of the Decree made

therein.
The Registry of this Court, communicates the copy of the Judgment to the

Local Commissioner appointed by the Trial Court immediately.
41
VIII. In the event that the private sale is not successful, the Local

         Commissioner will take steps to auction the suit property under intimation

         by filing an interim report before the High Court of Delhi.

      IX. The fees of the Local Commissioner is fixed at Rs. 5,00,000/- plus out of

         pocket expenses, shall be borne by the plaintiffs, the defendant nos.1 and

         2 each twenty-five percent and Defendant Nos. 3, 4 and 5 put together

         twenty-five percent. In the event of one the claimants of Dr. Rajendra

         Kapila fails to contribute, the same is paid by the others to be adjusted or

         reimbursed subject to the outcome of their issues, in proportion of their

         share in the suit property in the first instance.
X. The fees paid to the Local Commissioner as well as any other statutory

         fees/charges paid towards conversion of the suit property from leasehold

         to freehold shall be recovered by the plaintiffs and the defendants no.1

         and 2 from the sale proceeds of the suit property as a first charge.

      XI. The parties to the suit shall render all assistance to the Local

         Commissioner in carrying out the aforesaid tasks.
40.     We request the Learned Single Judge on remand to dispose of O.S. No. 701

of 2021 as expeditiously as possible, preferably within four months from receipt

of a copy of this Judgment. We make the above observation keeping in

perspective the age of the contesting parties.
41.     By applying the settled position of law and ratio of the Judgments referred

to in the preceding paragraphs, we are convinced, the Judgments impugned suffer
42
from a substantial error of law. For the above reasons, we are of the view that the

impugned Judgments rendered on admission are liable to be set aside, accordingly

set aside in the manner indicated above and the matter be remitted to the Learned

Single Judge for framing issues and affording an opportunity of trial to the parties,

to prove their respective cases and pronounce the Judgment.
42.   It is contextual to note that in a suit filed for partition, the courts must

endeavour to comprehensively adjudicate and decide the right entitlement and

share of the parties in the same proceeding and must avoid multiplicity of

proceedings or relegating parties to a fresh round of litigation. The partial

adjudication in the circumstance of the case is erroneous and ought to have been

avoided.
43.   Accordingly, the Civil Appeal and I.A. No. 17202/2022 are allowed as

indicated above. There is no order as to costs.
….…………................J.
                                                           [ANIRUDDHA BOSE]




                                                          ....…………................J.
                                                           [S.V.N. BHATTI]

NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 10, 2023.
43