[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Solaris Chem Tech Industries Ltd vs Assistant Executive Engineer ... on 10 October, 2023
Author:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Bench:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
1


2023 INSC 916
                                                                                                      Reportable
                                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO            OF 2023
                                             (Arising out of SLP (C) No 21920 of 2018)


        Solaris Chem Tech Industries Ltd                                                          … Appellant

                                                              Versus

        Assistant Executive Engineer Karnataka Urban Water
        Supply and Drainage Board & Anr                                                       … Respondents



                                                             ORDER
1                Leave granted.


        2                This appeal arises from a judgment dated 18 June 2018 of a Division Bench of the
High Court of Karnataka at the Dharwad Bench. The Division Bench has dismissed a

                         Writ Appeal and thereby affirmed the correctness of an order dated 27 February 2018

                         of a Single Judge dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant.


        3                The appellant set up a factory in 1975 for the manufacture of Caustic Soda at Village

                         Binaga in North Kanara District, Mysore. On 5 July 1971, an agreement was entered

                         into between the Government of Mysore and the appellant for the continuous supply

                         of water at concessional rates for the operation of the factory. The agreement was

                         valid for a period of 20 years from the commencement of production. On 3 April

                         1987, the State Government constituted the Karnataka Urban Water Supply and
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
Date: 2023.10.16
16:15:24 IST
Reason:
2
Drainage Board 1 in accordance with the
Karnataka Urban Water Supply and

       Drainage Board Act, 1973
. The Board was supplying water to the appellant for

       industrial use as well as for non-domestic use.
4      It appears that the original agreements were replaced by subsequent agreements

       dealing with the supply of water for industrial and non-domestic use. The last of the

       agreements, relevant to the present dispute, was entered into on 11 November 2011

       for the supply of water to be charged for non-domestic use and industrial use

       respectively.    These agreements were effective from 27 October 2011 until 26

       October 2014. In terms of the agreements, the tariff for the supply of water for

       industrial use was fixed at Rs 18.40 per kL and Rs 9.20 per kL for non-domestic use.

       Between 6 June 2014 and 16 September 2014, water bills were raised on the appellant

       based on the tariff fixed in the agreements dated 11 November 2011.


5      On 18 July 2014, a demand notice was received by the appellant from the Assistant

       Executive Engineer by which new water rates were sought to be implemented and

       the appellant was called upon to pay the differential amount with effect from 20 July

       2011 till 30 June 2014. The relevant part of the communication is extracted below:
“…the Board is supplying bulk water to your Industry &
                       Quarters at Binaga, Karwar @ Rs.18.40/KL & Rs.9.20/KL
                       respectively vide rate approved under ref (1). In the
                       Government order under ref (2) the water rates are
                       revised as under :
Slabs       Industrial Rates   Non-domestic Rates
                           0-8 KL      @ Rs.28.00/- KL       @ Rs.14.00/KL

1 “The Board”.
3
8-15 KL         @ Rs.36.00/ KL       @ Rs. 18.00/KL
                         15 - 25 KL       @ Rs.44.00/ KL       @ Rs.22.00/ KL
                        Above 25 KL       @ Rs.52.00/KL        @ Rs.26.00/KL
During the audit of this Sub-Division, the Board's Resident
                     Audit Officer have raised an audit para for non-revision of
                     water rate & instructed to implement the new water rates
                     & collect the difference amount from all the consumers
                     from the date of G.O. Accordingly the 2Nos. difference
                     bills for the period from 20-07-2011 to 30-06-2014 including
                     arrears for your industrial & Non-domestic supply total
                     amounting to Rs.8,22,62,337.00 are submitted for making
                     payment.”
6      The appellant responded to the demand on 5 August 2014 and expressed readiness

       to enter into negotiations with the Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage

       Board. On 22 September 2014, another notice was issued stating that the Board

       operates on a no-profit-no-loss basis, and is liable to pay dues to HESCOM 2. The

       notice stated that the Board’s failure to pay HESCOM its dues would impact upon

       electricity and water supply. Citing losses caused to the Board, and the audit officers’

       objections against the non-revision of water bills under government orders, the notice

       requested payment of arrears, in accordance with the revised rates.



7      On 15 October 2014, the appellant requested the respondent to withdraw the notice

       demanding arrears. In a Writ Petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India

       before the High Court, the appellant challenged the notices dated 18 July 2014 and




2 Hubli Electricity Supply Company Limited.
4
22 September 2014.
8    The appellant argued that i) the impugned notices were contrary to clause 4 of the

     agreements between the parties; ii) the 20 July 2011 Notification, being prior in time

     to the agreements, was inapplicable and could not be relied on in order to enhance

     the water tariff; and iii) the enhancement of charges was against the principles of

     natural justice since the respondent had acted suo motu, without hearing the

     appellant.
9    The Writ Petition was dismissed by the Single Judge primarily on the ground that

     Clause 11 of the agreements stipulated that any dispute that would arise between

     the parties would be resolved firstly by mutual discussion and on a failure of the

     process, by referring the matter to the Chief Engineer, the second respondent, whose

     decision would be final and binding. The Single Judge also observed that in terms of

     clause 4 of the agreements, the Board was entitled to increase the rates. However,

     in view of the dispute resolution mechanism provided in Clause 11, the Single Judge

     declined to entertain the petition and relegated the petitioner to the contractual

     remedy in terms of the agreement.
10   The Division Bench, in a Writ Appeal, has confirmed the judgment of the Single Judge.
The Division Bench adverted to the language of Clause 11 of the agreement (“all

     disputes and differences that may arise”) and rejected the appellant’s argument

     that the “demand” made by way of the impugned notices was beyond the purview

     of “disputes” under Clause 11. Hence, the Division Bench held that the dispute arising

     out of the impugned notices was covered by the scope of the agreement, and no
5
interference under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India was warranted.


11   Following the issuance of notice in these proceedings under
Article 136
of the

     Constitution, the respondent has entered appearance and has filed a counter

     affidavit.
12   We have heard Mr Dalip Kumar Malhotra, counsel appearing on behalf of the

     appellant, and Ms Amrita Sharma, counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents.


13   The appellant argues that the Division Bench has misconstrued the issue while

     declining to interfere. It is argued that the principal ground of challenge is the Board’s

     non-compliance with the statutory procedure under the Karnataka Urban Water

     Supply and Sewerage Boards Act in issuing the impugned notices. According to the

     appellant, the High Court ought to have dealt with the Board’s authority to i) increase

     the tariffs over and above the agreed rates, ii) do so on the basis of a Government

     Notification that pre-dated the agreement, iii) act in violation of the agreements and

     the statute which is the source of its power. It has been submitted that the dispute

     was in rem and not in personam and that the jurisdiction of the High Court was validly

     invoked. It has been argued that by relegating the parties to Clause 11 of the

     agreements, the Court erroneously refused interference.



14   The issue that arises for our consideration is whether the High Court was justified in

     dismissing the Writ Petition and the Writ Appeal on the strength of Clause 11 of the

     agreements between the parties. We must examine whether there was a valid

     arbitration agreement between the parties, justifying the referral to the Chief
6
Engineer under Clause 11.
15    While dismissing the Writ Petition, the Single Judge of the High Court relied on Clause

      11 of the agreements. Clause 11 reads as follows:
“CLAUSE:11 SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES

                    11.1 All disputes or differences that may arise between the
                    parties hereto pertaining to the meaning of any provision
                    or in connection with the agreement shall be resolved by
                    mutual discussions.
11.2 In case the mutual discussions falls then all such
                    disputes which have arisen between the Board and the
                    consumer hereto pertaining to the meaning of my
                    provisions in the agreement, shall be resolved by referring
                    the matter in writing to the Chief Engineer (North), K.U.W.S.
                    & D Board, Dharwad, whose decision will be final and
                    binding on the consumer and the Board.”



16    Clause 11 is titled, “Settlement of Disputes”. Clause 11.1 stipulates that all disputes or

      differences that may arise between the parties pertaining to the meaning of any

      provision in the agreement or in connection with it, would be resolved by mutual

      discussion. However, if mutual discussions fail, Clause 11.2 postulates that all such

      disputes which have arisen between the Board and the consumer pertaining to the

      meaning of the provisions of the agreements would be resolved by referring the

      matter to the Chief Engineer whose decision would be final and binding.
17    Bearing in mind the provisions of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act
1996 3, we are of



3 “The 1996 Act”/ “
The Act
”
7
the view that Clause 11 does not constitute an arbitration agreement. The expression

     “arbitration agreement” is defined by
Section 2(b)
to mean an agreement referred

     to in
Section 7
.
Section 7
is extracted below:
“7.   Arbitration agreement.—(1) In this Part, “arbitration
                   agreement” means an agreement by the parties to
                   submit to arbitration all or certain disputes which have
                   arisen or which may arise between them in respect of a
                   defined legal relationship, whether contractual or not.
(2)    An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an
                   arbitration clause in a contract or in the form of a
                   separate agreement.
(3)    An arbitration agreement shall be in writing.

            (4)    An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is contained in—

                   (a)   a document signed by the parties;
(b)   an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams or other
                         means      of    telecommunication      including
                         communication through electronic means which
                         provide a record of the agreement; or
(c)   an exchange of statements of claim and defence
                         in which the existence of the agreement is alleged
                         by one party and not denied by the other.
(5)    The reference in a contract to a document containing an
                   arbitration clause constitutes an arbitration agreement if
                   the contract is in writing and the reference is such as to
                   make that arbitration clause part of the contract.”


18   Sub-section (1) of
Section 7
indicates that an arbitration agreement is an agreement

     by parties to submit to arbitration “all or certain disputes which have arisen or which
8
may arise between them in respect of a defined legal relationship, whether

       contractual or not”. It is well settled that in determining whether there is an arbitration

       agreement, the terms of the contract between the parties must be read as a whole.
The 1996 Act does not prescribe a certain form of an arbitration agreement. The use

       or the absence of the word ‘arbitration’ is not conclusive and the intention of the

       parties to resolve the disputes through arbitration should be clear from the terms of

       the clause.
In
Jagdish Chander vs Ramesh Chander
, the Court summarised the

       relevant factors for determining whether an agreement is an arbitration agreement

       within the meaning of
S. 7
of the 1996 Act. The Court held4:
“(ii) Even if the words “arbitration” and “Arbitral Tribunal (or
               arbitrator)” are not used with reference to the process of settlement
               or with reference to the private tribunal which has to adjudicate
               upon the disputes, in a clause relating to settlement of disputes, it
               does not detract from the clause being an arbitration agreement if
               it has the attributes or elements of an arbitration agreement. They
               are: (a) The agreement should be in writing. (b) The parties should
               have agreed to refer any disputes (present or future) between them
               to the decision of a private tribunal. (c) The private tribunal should
               be empowered to adjudicate upon the disputes in an impartial
               manner, giving due opportunity to the parties to put forth their case
               before it. (d)The parties should have agreed that the decision of the
               private tribunal in respect of the disputes will be binding on them.”
               (emphasis added).
19     The following conditions must be satisfied by a valid arbitration agreement:
(i)    The agreement must be in writing, as stipulated by sub-section (3) of
Section 7
;
(ii)   Parties should have agreed to refer any disputes, present or future, between




4 (2007) 5 SCC 719, 724.
9
them to an arbitral tribunal;
(iii)   The arbitral tribunal should be empowered to adjudicate upon the disputes in

              an impartial manner giving due opportunity to the parties; and
(iv)    The parties should have agreed that the decision of the tribunal would be

              binding between them.
20    In the present case, Clause 11.2 of the agreement does not constitute the Chief

      Engineer as an arbitral tribunal. A similar clause was considered by this Court in
Jaipur

      Jila Dugdh Utpadak Sahkari Sangh Limited vs Ajay Sales and Suppliers
. 5 A

      distributorship agreement between the parties contained an arbitration clause in

      clause 13, stipulating that all disputes arising out of or in any way touching or

      concerning the agreement, whatsoever shall be referred to the sole Arbitrator, the

      Chairman, Jaipur Zila Dugdh Utpadak Sahkari Sangh Ltd. and his decision shall be

      final and binding upon the parties. Accordingly, the respondent in the case

      approached the Chairman and while the dispute was pending before the Chairman,

      the respondent made an application for appointment of an arbitrator and an

      arbitrator came to be appointed by the High Court. Aggrieved by this, the appellant

      moved this Court.
Section 12(5)
of the Arbitration Act, which was introduced in the

      year 2015 by way of an amendment indicates that notwithstanding any prior

      agreement to the contrary, certain persons whose relationships with the parties fall

      under the
Seventh Schedule of the Act
, are ineligible to be appointed as an

      arbitrator. The issue was whether this disqualification applied to arbitration




5 2021 SCC OnLine SC 730, para 10.
10
agreements executed prior to the amendment which came into effect on 23

       October 2015. Dismissing the appeal, the Court answered the question in the

       affirmative. Reiterating the observations in
Voestalpine Schienen GMBH v. Delhi Metro

       Rail Corporation Limited
6, the Court held that the object and purpose of
Section 12(5)
of the Act is to ensure the “neutrality of arbitrators”. The non-obstante clause makes

       the application of this provision to pre-amendment agreements abundantly clear.



 21    The Court noted that the effect of
Section 12(5)
of the Act is that the party cannot

       insist on the appointment of an arbitrator in terms of such an agreement. Reading
Section 12(5)
with the
Seventh Schedule of the Act
, it was held that the Chairman
in

       that case
, was disqualified and that the High Court was justified in appointing an

       arbitrator other than the Chairman.
“Disqualification/ineligible under Sub-section (5) of
Section 12
read
              with
Seventh Schedule to the Act
is to be read as a whole and
              considering the object and purpose for which Sub-section (5) of
Section 12
read with
Seventh Schedule to the Act
came to be
              inserted. Sub-section (5) of
Section 12
read with Seventh Schedule
              has been inserted bearing in mind the ‘impartiality and
              independence’ of the arbitrators. It has been inserted with the
              purpose of ‘neutrality of arbitrators’.
Independence and impartiality
              of the arbitrators are the hallmarks of any arbitration proceedings as
              observed in the case of
Voestalpine Schienen
(Supra). Rule against
              bias is one of the fundamental principles of natural justice which
              apply to all judicial proceedings and quasi-judicial proceedings
              and it is for this reason that despite the contractually agreed upon,
              the persons mentioned in Sub-section (5) of
Section 12
read with
Seventh Schedule to the Act
would render himself ineligible to
              conduct the arbitration.” 7

6 (2017) 4 SCC 665.
7 2021 SCC OnLine SC 730, para 17.
11
22     In the present case, the agreements do not postulate that the Chief Engineer would

       adjudicate upon the disputes between the parties nor is there any provision to the

       effect that the Chief Engineer would resolve the dispute after letting in evidence or

       allowing the parties an opportunity of presenting their respective cases before them.

       The forum comprising the Chief Engineer lacks the trappings of an arbitral forum.

       More importantly, the Chief Engineer is an employee of the Board.
In view of the

       decision in
Jaipur Jila Dugdh Utpadak Sahkari Sangh Limited
(supra), which has been

       upheld in
Ellora Paper Mills Ltd. v. State of M.P
, 8 arbitration proceedings must account

       for the rule against bias and due process. Clause (1) of the
Seventh Schedule of the

       Act
disqualifies an employee of one of the parties from being appointed as an

       arbitrator. This prohibition applies notwithstanding an agreement to the contrary.
Read conjointly with the requirements of a valid arbitration agreement stipulated in
Jagdish Chander
(supra),
Section 12 (5)
of the Act and the Seventh Schedule would

       indicate that such a person cannot be considered fit to resolve the dispute between

       the parties independently and without bias.
23     Though the Single Judge was of the view that Clause 4 of the agreement empowered

       the Board to revise its rates, nonetheless, without dealing with the power and the

       manner of its exercise any further, the High Court relegated the appellant to the

       remedy under Clause 11 before the Chief Engineer.
24     Once we have come to the conclusion that the provisions of Clause 11 do not

       constitute an arbitration agreement, the corollary is that the High Court ought not to



8 (2022) 3 SCC 1.
12
have relegated the parties to the Chief Engineer on the strength of Clause 11. It

     would have been appropriate if the High Court had finally determined the challenge

     addressed by the appellant in the writ proceedings under Section 226 of the

     Constitution. Though the Single Judge has adverted to Clause 4, evidently there is

     no final determination in that regard.
25   The judgment of the Division Bench has exclusively relied on the provisions of Clause

     11 while coming to the conclusion that the dispute between the parties fell within the

     ambit of the clause. The fundamental aspect of the matter, however, is that the

     provision for settlement of disputes which is contained in Clause 11 does not

     constitute the Chief Engineer as an arbitral tribunal since he cannot be regarded as

     an impartial officer nor do the provisions of Clause 11 incorporate the trappings of an

     arbitral tribunal.
26   For the above reasons, we allow the appeal and set aside both, the judgment of the

     Single Judge dated 27 February 2018 and the judgment of the Division Bench dated

     18 June 2018. The Writ Petition, being Writ Petition No 111298/2014 (GM-RES), shall

     stand restored to the file of the Single Judge of the High Court of Karnataka at

     Dharwad Bench for decision afresh.
27   We clarify that we have not expressed any view on the merits of the case which is

     sought to be set up by the appellant in the Writ Petition or on the defence which has

     been urged on behalf of the respondents.
28   The Court has been apprised of the fact that in the meantime, the appellant, which

     has been taken over by the Aditya Birla Group, has continued to pay the revised
13
water rates and has cleared the arrears while reserving its rights to avail of the

      remedies. The appellant shall continue to pay the rates as fixed by the Board from

      time to time subject to such final orders as may be passed by the High Court in the

      Writ Petition which is restored to the file of the High Court.


29    The Appeal is accordingly disposed of.
30    Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
…...…...….......………………....…CJI.
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                           …...…...…..........………………....…..J
                                                            [J B Pardiwala]




                                                         …...…...….......…………..………....…..J.
                                                           [Manoj Misra]

New Delhi;
October 10, 2023
GKA