[Cites
39
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Kishan Chand Jain vs Union Of India on 9 October, 2023
Author:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Bench:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Reportable
2023 INSC 915
                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                               CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                                              Writ Petition (Civil) No. 360 of 2021

             Kishan Chand Jain                                                               …Petitioner

                                                             Versus

             Union of India & Ors                                                         …Respondents




                                                           ORDER
1.             The petitioner invokes the jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 32
of the

                            Constitution seeking directions for the better functioning of the State

                            Information Commissions 1 under the
Right to Information Act, 2005
. 2 It is

                            stated that the SICs, along with the Central Information Commission, 3 play a

                            pivotal role in the proper implementation of the
RTI Act
. However, most of the

                            SICs are located in the capital cities of the States and conduct proceedings

                            physically. The petitioner asserts that this imposes prohibitive costs on

                            applicants and appellants, especially those living in the remote areas, as they

                            have to travel long distances to approach the SICs. Such bottlenecks in the

                            functioning of the SICs deprive applicants and appellants from effectively
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
Date: 2023.10.16
16:13:52 IST
Reason:
1 “SIC”
             2 “
RTI Act
”
             3 “CIC”
1
exercising their right to information. Therefore, the petitioner urges that the

     SICs should allow the option of virtual hearings along with physical hearings.
2.   The petitioner asserts that it is the legislative intention of Parliament in

     enacting the
RTI Act
to provide information to applicants at a reasonable

     expense. Virtual hearings further this legislative intention as they provide

     access to information to an applicant in a cost-effective manner. It has been

     further asserted that most SICs do not have the facility of online filing of RTI

     appeals and complaints similar to the CIC. Moreover, the petitioner urged that

     the SICs should adopt a user-friendly digital portal to make the functioning of

     the SICs more effective and productive.
3.   On the basis of the averments, the petitioner has sought the reliefs as

     summarized below:
(i)    SICs should hear complaints as well as second appeals by giving the

            option of both, physical and virtual hearing through a digital platform

            and the State Governments must support the SICs financially and

            technically to conduct virtual hearings;
(ii)   SICs must update and have self-contained digital portals with online

            facilities for:
(a) filing RTI complaints and appeals;
(b) showing the case status of pending/decided matters;
(c) uploading daily orders and judgments;
(d) uploading cause lists; and
(e) uploading annual reports under
Section 25
in line with
Section 4(2)
.
2
(iii)   SICs must be directed to dispose of the complaints within a fixed time

             frame, preferably within four months;
(iv)    Norms be set up for disposal of a stipulated number of cases per

             working day by every Information Commissioner;
(v)     SICs should prepare annual reports on the implementation of the

             provisions of the 2005 Act and provide them to the State Government

             under Section 25(1); and
(vi)    SICs should ensure the imposition and recovery of penalties from

             erring information officers according to
Section 20(1)
.
4.   Notice was issued in these proceedings on 20 April 2021. Thereafter, the

     proceedings have been listed before this Court on 21 April 2023 and 10 July

     2023.
5.
The RTI Act
was enacted to operationalize the rights of citizens to access

     information about the functioning of the government, which is otherwise only

     held by the government authorities. The legislation sets out a practical regime

     for citizens to secure access to information under the control of the public

     authorities, promote transparency and accountability in the functioning of

     public authorities, and constitute the CIC and SICs. Thus, the RTI Act pursues

     the legitimate state aim of ensuring transparent and accountable government.
6.   In view of the stated objectives,
Section 3
of the RTI Act provides that all

     citizens shall have the right to information.
Section 2(j)
defines right to

     information to mean the right to information accessible under the
RTI Act
which is held by or under the control of any public authority and to include :
3
(i) the right to inspection of work, documents records; (ii) taking notes, extracts

      or certified copies of documents or records; (iii) taking certified samples of

      material; and (iv) obtaining information in the form of diskettes, floppies,

      tapes, video cassettes, or in any other electronic mode or through printouts

      where such information is stored in a computer or in any other device.
Section

      2(h)
defines a public authority as follows:
(h) “public authority” means any authority or body or institution of
                 self-government established or constituted –
(a) by or under the Constitution;
(b) by any other law made by Parliament;
(c) by any other law made by State Legislature;
(d) by notification issued or order made by the appropriate
                         Government, and includes any –

                      i. body owned, controlled or substantially financed;
ii. non-Government organisation substantially financed,
                         directly or indirectly by funds provided by the appropriate
                         Government.
7.
Section 4
obliges every public authority to maintain its records and

      computerize them to facilitate right to information under the
RTI Act
.
Section

      5
mandates every public authority to designate Central Public Information

      Officers 4 or State Public Information Officers5, as the case may be, to provide

      information to persons requesting for the information under the
RTI Act
.
Section 6
allows any person to make a request in writing to the CPIO or the

      SPIO, as the case may be, specifying the particulars of the information sought

      by them.
Section 7(1)
mandates the CPIO or SPIO to act on the request for

      information within thirty days and forty-eight hours in case of information


4 “CPIO”
5 “SPIO”
4
concerning the life and liberty of a person. Moreover,
Section 7(2)
states that

     failure of the CPIO or SPIO to give a decision within the stipulated timelines

     will be deemed to be a refusal of the request.
8.
Section 2(k)
defines SIC to mean “the State Information Commission

     constituted under sub-section (1) of
section 15
.”
Section 15
provides that

     every State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute

     an SIC to exercise powers conferred on, and to perform the functions

     assigned to them under the
RTI Act
. The SICs consists of the State Chief

     Information   Commissioner          and       such   number       of    State     Information

     Commissioners, not exceeding ten, as may be deemed necessary. The

     general superintendence, direction, and management of the affairs of the

     SICs is vested in the State Chief Information Commissioner.
9.
Section 18
specifies the powers and functions of Information Commissions in

     the following terms:
“18. Powers and functions of Information Commissions – (1)
               Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the duty of the Central
               Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the
               case may be, to receive and inquire into a complaint from any
               person, –
(a) who has been unable to submit a request to a Central Public
               Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case
               may be, either by reason that no such officer has been appointed
               under this Act, or because the Central Assistant Public Information
               Officer or State Assistant Public Information Officer, as the case
               may be, has refused to accept his or her application for information
               or appeal under this Act for forwarding the same to the Central
               Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer or
               senior officer specified in sub-section (1) of section 19 or the Central
               Information Commission or the State Information Commission, as
               the case may be;
5
(b) who has been refused access to any information requested
under this Act;
(c) who has not been given a response to a request for information
or access to information within the time limits specified under this
Act;
(d) who has been required to pay an amount of fee which he or she
considers unreasonable;
(e) who believes that he or she has been given incomplete,
misleading, or false information under this Act; and
(f) in respect of any other matter relating to requesting or obtaining
access to records under this Act.
(2) Where the Central Information Commission or State Information
Commission, as the case may be, is satisfied that there are
reasonable grounds to inquire into the matter, it may initiate an
inquiry in respect thereof.
(3) The Central Information Commission or State Information
Commission, as the case may be, shall, while inquiring into any
matter under this section, have the same powers as are vested in a
civil suit while trying a suit under
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908
(5 of 1908), in respect of the following matters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and
compel them to give oral or written evidence on oath and to produce
the documents or things;
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court
or office;
(e) issuing summons for examination of witnesses or documents;
and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(4) Notwithstanding anything inconsistent contained in any other Act
of Parliament or the State Legislature, as the case may be, the
Central Information Commission or the State Information
Commission, as the case may be, may during the inquiry of any
complaint under this Act, examine any record to which this Act
applies which is under the control of the public authority, and no
such record may be withheld from it on any grounds.”
6
10. The nature of powers exercised by the CIC or SICs under
Section 18
is

      supervisory in nature.6 Under
Section 18(3)
, the CIC or SICs have the same

      powers as are vested in a civil court while trying a suit in respect of the matters

      specified under the said provision.
11.
Section 19
provides the appellate procedure by allowing any person who is

      aggrieved by refusal of information to seek an effective redress and remedy.
Section 19(1)
allows any person who does not receive a decision within the

      time specified in
Section 7
to prefer a first appeal to a senior officer of CPIO

      or SPIO.
Section 7(3)
allows any person who is aggrieved by the decision of

      such senior officer of CPIO or SPIO to file a second appeal with the CIC or

      SIC. In such proceedings, the onus to prove that the denial of request was

      justified lies on the CPIO or SPIO who denied the request. Section 19(8)

      provides that a CIC or SIC, while deciding, has the power to:
(a) require the public authority to take such steps as may be necessary to

          secure compliance with the provisions of the
RTI Act
, including –
(i)     provide access to information, if so requested, in a particular

                       form;
(ii)    appoint a CPIO or SPIO, as the case may be;
(iii)   publish certain information or categories of information;
(iv)    make necessary changes to its practices in relation to the

                       maintenance, management and destruction of records;
6
Chief Information Commissioner v. State of Manipur
, (2011) 15 SCC 1
7
(v)     enhance the provision of training on the right to information for

                      its officials;
(vi)    provide it with an annual report in compliance with clause (b)

                      of sub-section (1) of
section 4
;
(b) require the public authority to compensate the complainant for any loss or

         other detriment suffered;
(c) impose any of the penalties provided under this Act; and
(d) reject the application.
12. The SICs exercise broad powers, including among them the power to conduct

     inquiries into complaints from any person, hear appeals, and impose

     penalties. They decide on matters and issues pertaining to the right to

     information.
In
Union of India v. Namit Sharma
, 7 this Court held that the

     Information Commissions are required to act in a fair and just manner while

     following the procedure
laid down in
Sections 18
,
19
, and
20
.
13.
Section 26(3)(b)
requires the appropriate government, if necessary, to update

     and publish guidelines referred to in sub-section (2) including the postal and

     street address, phone and fax number and, if available, electronic mail

     address of the CPIO or SPIO, as the case may be of every public authority

     appointed under
Section 5(1)
.
14. In pursuance of the order issuing notice, counter affidavits have been filed by

     SICs of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,

     Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh,



7 (2013) 10 SCC 359
8
and West Bengal. The position in regard to the SICs has been summarized

    in the following tabulation contained in the rejoinder:
S.No.       Name of SIC           Whether hybrid        Para
                                                 mode adopted          of CA
1    Himachal Pradesh                 Yes                4
(R-12)
2    Karnataka (R- 14)               Yes                 2
3    Haryana (R-11)                  Yes                 4
4    Sikkim (R-25)                    No                 5
5    Punjab (R-35)                   Yes                 6
6    Arunachal Pradesh           No Mention              -
                       (R-48)
                  7    Tamil Nadu (R-42)               Yes             12-13
8    Uttar Pradesh (R                 No                 17
29)                   but is not opposed to
                                             virtual hearing
9    Bihar(R-7)                     Yes                  6
but discretion to
                                                    conduct
                                             hearing through hybrid
                                             mode be left to SIC
10    Manipur (R-18)                  Yes                 4
11    Goa (R-9)                        No             7&8
                 12    West Bengal (R-38)              Yes             3(iv)
13    Madhya Pradesh (R               Yes                 6
-43)
15. The CIC conducts its proceedings in a hybrid manner, which ensures ease of

    access to citizens in pursuing their complaints and appeals under the
RTI Act
.

    However, from the material which has been placed before the Court in the

    counter affidavits filed by some of the SICs, it is evident that there is a

    variation in the practice which is followed across different States.
9
16.
The RTI Act
is based on the principle that citizens have a right to know about

      the functioning of every public authority. Correspondingly, it also places a duty

      on the public authorities to act in a responsible and transparent manner by

      providing information about their functioning to the citizens. 8 In the process,

      the legislation promotes the ideals of open government and democracy. 9

      Democracy requires an informed citizenry and transparency in functioning for

      the electors to hold the elected representatives to account. 10 Thus, the right

      to information promotes the values of participative democracy and

      accountability.
17. The right to information is not merely a statutory right for, it has also been

      recognized as a constitutional right. The freedom of speech and expression

      under
Article 19(1)(a)
includes the right to acquire and disseminate

      information. 11 The right to information has also been recognized as a facet of
Article 21.
12 This intersection with the constitutional right entails a heightened

      burden and responsibility on the CIC and SICs to ensure that individuals get

      access to information on matters of public concern under the provisions of the
RTI Act
.
In
Anjali Bharadwaj v. Union of India
, this Court held that the

      existence of the CIC and SICs is imperative and vital for the smooth working

      of the
RTI Act
.
13 Recently, a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Kishan




8 State of U P v. Raj Narain, (1975) 4 SCC 428
9 S P Gupta v. Union of India, 1981 Supp SCC 87
10 Dinesh Trivedi v. Union of India, (
1997) 4 SCC 306
11 Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India v. Cricket Association of

Bengal
, (
1995) 2 SCC 161
12 Reliance Petrochemicals Ltd v. Proprietors of Indian Express Newspapers, Bombay Pvt Ltd
, (
1988)

4 SCC 592
13 (2019) 18 SCC 246
10
Chand Jain v. Union of India14
observed that the CIC and SICs have a

     prominent place under the
RTI Act
and they must exercise their powers and

     functions keeping in mind the purpose and object of the legislation.
18.
The RTI Act
provides for setting up of Information Commissions for providing

     effective access to justice to citizens to agitate their grievance of perceived

     breaches of the right to information by public authorities. Under the scheme

     of the
RTI Act
, any person aggrieved by the denial of information under
Section 7
can approach the SICs to seek redressal. In more than one way,

     the SICs are authorities empowered to redress and remedy the grievances of

     citizens.
19. Access to justice is a right of constitutional purport which signifies that

     individuals have effective means to approach legal institutions to seek

     appropriate legal remedies. The ability to access legal institutions empowers

     individuals to understand and exercise their legal and constitutional rights.

     Access to justice enhances the quality of human life and, therefore, is an

     important facet of right to life under
Article 21.
In
Anita Kushwaha v. Pushap

     Sadan
, 15 a Constitution Bench of this Court held that access to justice is also

     a facet of
Article 14
, which guarantees equality before law and equal

     protection of laws to both the citizens and non-citizens alike. As a result, the

     inability of any person to access courts or any other adjudicatory mechanism




14 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1021
15 (2016) 8 SCC 509
11
provided for determination of rights and obligations due to institutional

      inadequacy is bound to result in a denial of right to equality.
20.
Article 39A
of the Constitution recognizes the rights of citizens to equal justice

      and free legal aid. Reading
Articles 14
, 21
, and
39A
harmoniously, it is evident

      that is the constitutional duty of the organs of the state to provide individuals

      with the means of access to justice in an effective and efficient manner. 16

      Particularly, it is duty of the Government to raise the standards of

      infrastructure by adopting technology to make our institutional processes

      accessible and inclusive.
21. The recent technological advancements in terms of video-conferencing must

      be used to promote inclusion of people living in remote areas within the fold

      of the justice delivery mechanism. Physical courts require the litigants and

      parties living in remote areas to travel long distances to appear before the

      court. With increasing costs of travel and other related expenses, video-

      conferencing solutions provide a cost-effective and efficient alternative to the

      physical courts. Technology allows us to create and use a “virtual courtroom”

      which is as real as any physical courtroom. In more than one-way, virtual

      courts democratize our legal processes by expanding the courtroom area

      beyond the walls of the courtroom.
In Swapnil Tripathi v. Supreme Court of

      India, it was observed that technological solutions can be a tool to actualize

      the right of access to justice by providing virtual entry to the litigants in the

      courtroom.17 However, virtual courtrooms are not just restricted to allowing


16
Brij Mohan Lal v. Union of India
, (2012) 6 SCC 502
17 (2018) 10 SCC 639
12
litigants to virtually enter courtrooms; they also allow citizens to participate

     effectively in the court proceedings. The transcendental effect of technology

     is not only to further the constitutional right of individuals to access justice,

     but it also strengthens the rule of law and democracy.
22. It is a constitutional duty of every adjudicatory institution, may it be courts,

     tribunals, or commissions, to adopt technological solutions such as video-

     conferencing and make them available to litigants and the members of the

     Bar on a regular and consistent basis. The use of technology is no longer an

     option. Properly deployed for the purpose of conducting hybrid or virtual

     hearings, technology has the potential to ensure access to justice by obviating

     the need for citizens to travel long distances to secure the right of being heard.
23. In view of the above discussion, we are of the considered view that access to

     the Information Commissions is integral to securing the right to information,

     which is a necessary concomitant of right to equality under
Article 14
, the

     freedom of speech and expression under
Article 19(1)(a)
of the Constitution,

     and the right to life under
Article 21.
Accordingly, we direct that all SICs across

     the country must provide hybrid modes of hearing to all litigants for the

     hearing of complaints as well as appeals. All SICs must provide an option for

     availing of a hybrid mode of hearing which shall be at the discretion of the

     applicant, or as the case may be, the appellant. The links for availing of the

     option must be stipulated in the daily cause list of the Information

     Commissions across the country. This shall be operationalized no later than

     by 31 December 2023.
13
24. That apart, there can be no gainsaying the fact that e-filing provides round

      the clock access to courts, and in the process, facilitates the convenience of

      lawyers and litigants.18 We direct that all SICs must ensure that e-filing of

      complaints and appeals is provided in a streamlined manner to every litigant.

      Steps should also be taken having regard to the provisions of
Section 26
of

      the RTI Act to ensure that service is effected on the Public Information Officers

      through the electronic mode. This shall also be implemented by 31 december

      2023.
25. All Central and State Ministries shall take steps within a period of one month

      from the date of this order to compile the email addresses of the Central and

      State Public Information Officers which shall be furnished to the CIC and to

      all the SICs, as the case may be.
26. In order to facilitate the implementation of this order, we direct that the

      Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training shall convene a meeting of

      all the Central and State Information Commissioners within a period of one

      month from the date of this order. Comprehensive modalities for the

      implementation of the above directions shall be set up.
27. All the State Governments shall cooperate in the implementation of the order.
The State Governments shall, where funds are required, ensure provision of

      necessary funds to all the SICs for setting up the infrastructure for conducting

      virtual hearings. The CIC and SICs would be at liberty to avail of the facilities




18 M P High Court
Bar v. Union of India
, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 365
14
which have been provided by the NIC for setting up the websites on the S3

      WAS Platform which provides for ease of access in the electronic mode.
28. We are hopeful that with the fulfilment of the above directions, the

      implementation of the
RTI Act
would be streamlined to facilitate access to

      justice and information to citizens.
29. The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
30. This Court wishes to record its appreciation of the assistance which has been

      rendered by Mr. Kishan Chand Jain on the one hand and Mr. K. M. Natraj,

      Additional Solicitor General, on the other.
31. Pending applications, if any, stands disposed of.
……...…………........………………....…CJI.
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                  …...…...….......………………………..…..J.
                                                  [J B Pardiwala]




                                                   …...…...….......…………….………....…..J.
                                                    [Manoj Mishra]


New Delhi;
October 09, 2023
GKA
15