[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Kewal Court Pvt Ltd And Anr. vs The State Of West Bengal And Ors on 9 October, 2023
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
,
Surya Kant
2023INSC884




                                                                         REPORTABLE
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6257 OF 2014

                            M/s. Kewal Court Pvt. Ltd. and Anr.           ..... Appellants


                                                             VERSUS


                            The State of West Bengal and Ors.           ..... Respondents


                                                            JUDGEMENT
Surya Kant, J.
1.     The issue that falls for consideration in this
                            case revolves around the true construction, meaning
                            and import of the expression ‘vacant land’ contained
                            in
Section 2(q)
of the Urban Land (Ceiling and
                            Regulation) Act, 1976 (in short, the ‘Ceiling Act’),
                            especially with reference to sub-clause (i) thereof.
2.     Notwithstanding the fact that ‘urban land’ or
                            any regulatory measures in relation thereto fall
                            within the exclusive domain of a State Legislature in
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2023.10.09
17:37:30 IST
Reason:                  terms of Entry 18 of List II—State List under the
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                       Page 1 of 33
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, the Ceiling
Act was enacted by Parliament, in exercise of its
powers under
Article 252
of the Constitution for
which as many as 11 States passed a Resolution
authorising the Parliament to enact a law imposing
a ceiling on urban property, more so after the
imposition of a ceiling on agricultural lands in most
of the States. The Ceiling Act was, consequently,
enacted to provide, inter alia, imposition of a ceiling
on    ‘vacant       land’       in   urban   agglomeration,    the
acquisition for such lands in excess of the ceiling
limit, to regulate the construction of buildings on
such lands and also to prevent the concentration of
urban land in the hands of a person etc.

Legislative Scheme of the Ceiling Act:
3.
Section 3
provides that ‘on and from the
commencement of this Act’, no person shall be
entitled to hold any ‘vacant land’ in excess of the
ceiling limit in the territories to which the Act
applies under
Section 1(2)
thereof.
Section 4
provides distinct ceiling limits for different urban
agglomerations falling within categories A to D in
Schedule I. Section 6 of the Ceiling Act obligates the
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                          Page 2 of 33
person holding ‘vacant land’ in excess of ceiling limit
to    file     statement        whereupon   the         Competent
Authority would prepare a draft statement under
Section 8
of the Act and after considering any
objection received against it, Section 9 contemplates
a final statement determining the vacant land held
by the person concerned. Such ‘vacant land’ shall
then be notified under
Section 10
of the Act and
would be acquired by the State Government. Once,
the ‘vacant land’ is notified as excess land, the
competent authority under sub-Section (3) would
issue a declaration whereupon the ‘vacant land’
shall be deemed to have vested absolutely in the
State Government free from all encumbrances. The
person in possession of the ‘vacant land’ on receipt
of the notice in writing under sub-section (5) must
surrender or deliver possession thereof to the State
Government and in the event of his refusal or failure
to comply with such order, the Competent Authority
is    authorised         under    sub-section     (6)    to    take
possession of the vacant land by use of force as may
be necessary.
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                            Page 3 of 33
4.     The land owner who has been expropriated of
the ‘vacant land’ would receive `payment’ as may be
determined on receipt of his claim in accordance
with Section 11 of the Ceiling Act.
5.     Section 20 nevertheless empowers the State
Government either on its own motion or otherwise
to exempt such ‘vacant land’ from the provisions of
the Ceiling Act if it is found to be necessary or
expedient in the public interest and/or when the
State Government is satisfied that the applicability
of the provisions of taking away the land would
cause undue hardship to such person.
6.     In the context of the facts on record which are
discussed succinctly hereinafter,
Section 2(b)
,(g),(o)
and (q) of the Ceiling Act have some bearing and the
same are reproduced below:
“2. Definition.—In this Act, unless the
          context otherwise requires,—
                xxx xxx         xxx
(b) “building regulations” means the
          regulations contained in the master plan,
          or the law in force governing the
          construction of buildings;
xxx    xxx      xxx
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                  Page 4 of 33
(g)   “land appurtenant”, in relation to
          any building, means—
(i)  in an area where there are
          building regulations, the minimum extent
          of land required under such regulations to
          be kept as open space for the enjoyment of
          such building, which in no case shall
          exceed five hundred square metres; or
(ii) in an area where there are no
          building regulations, an extent of five
          hundred square metres contiguous to the
          land occupied by such building,
               And includes, in the case of any
          building constructed before the appointed
          day with a dwelling unit therein, an
          additional extent not exceeding five
          hundred square metres of land, if any,
          contiguous to the minimum extent referred
          to in sub-clause (i) or the extent referred to
          in sub-clause (ii), as the case may be;
xxx    xxx      xxx
                (o)    “urban land” means,—
               (i)   any land situated within the
limits of an urban agglomeration and
          referred to as such in the master plan; or
(ii) in a case where there is no
          master plan, or where the master plan does
          not refer to any land as urban land, any
          land within the limits of an urban
          agglomeration and situated in any area
          included within the local limits of a
          municipality (by whatever name called), a
          notified area committee, a town area
          committee, a city and town committee, a
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                       Page 5 of 33
small town committee, a cantonment board
          or a panchayat,
              but does not include any such land
          which is mainly used for the purpose of
          agriculture.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this
          clause and clause (q),—
              (A) “agriculture” includes horticulture, but
          does not include—
(i) raising of grass,
(ii) dairy farming,
(iii) poultry farming,
(iv) breeding of live-stock, and
(v) such cultivation, or the growing of such
          plant, as may be prescribed;
(B) land shall not be deemed to be used
          mainly for the purpose of agriculture, if such
          land is not entered in the revenue or land
          records before the appointed day as for the
          purpose of agriculture:
Provided that where on any land which is
          entered in the revenue or land records before
          the appointed day as for the purpose of
          agriculture, there is a building which is not in
          the nature of a farm-house, then, so much of
          the extent of such land as is occupied by the
          building shall not be deemed to be used mainly
          for the purpose of agriculture:
Provided further that if any question
          arises whether any building is in the nature of
          a farm-house, such question shall be referred
          to the State Government and the decision of
          the State Government thereon shall be final;
              (C) notwithstanding anything contained in
          clause (B) of the Explanation, land shall not be
          deemed to be mainly used for the purpose of
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                         Page 6 of 33
agriculture if the land has been specified in the
          master plan for a purpose other than
          agriculture;
xxx      xxx           xxx
q) "vacant land" means land, not being
          land mainly used for the purpose of
          agriculture, in an urban agglomeration, but
          does not include –
(i) land on which construction of a
          building is not permissible under the
          building regulations in force in the area in
          which such land is situated;
(ii) in an area where there are building
          regulations, the land occupied by any
          building which has been constructed
          before, or is being constructed on, the
          appointed day with the approval of the
          appropriate authority and the land
          appurtenant to such building; and
(iii) in an area where there are no
          building regulations, the land occupied by
          any building which has been constructed
          before, or is being constructed on, the
          appointed day and the land appurtenant to
          such building:
Provided   that where    any    person
          ordinarily keeps his cattle, other than for
          the purpose of dairy farming or for the
          purpose of breeding of live-stock, on any
          land situated in a village within an urban
          agglomeration (described as a village in the
          revenue records), then, so much extent of
          the land as has been ordinarily used for the
          keeping of such cattle immediately before
          the appointed day shall not be deemed to
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                         Page 7 of 33
be vacant land for the purposes of this
          clause.”


FACTS:
7.     The appellants purchased premises no. 24/7,
Raja Santosh Road, Alipore, Kolkata, measuring
3429 sq.m. by way of Registered Conveyance Deed
on 11th July, 1974. They applied to the Calcutta
Municipal Corporation [in short, ‘CMC’] for sanction
of the building plan for which CMC issued notice
dated 23rd August, 1974 requiring them, to comply
with certain requisitions. The appellants claimed to
have furnished the requisite information on 17 th
October, 1974 but the CMC neither did sanction nor
reject their building plan within the stipulated
period.
8.     Meanwhile, the Ceiling Act came into force on
17th October, 1976. West Bengal is placed amongst
the States where the Act was applied by virtue of
Section 1(2)
thereof.           Kolkata City admittedly falls
within category ‘A’ specified in Schedule I of Section
4(1) of the Ceiling Act with the Ceiling Limit of 500
sq.m. The appellants filed a statement under
Section 6(1) of the Ceiling Act. They also applied for
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                       Page 8 of 33
exemption in terms of
Section 4(3)
and Section 20 of
the Ceiling Act for construction of a Group Housing
Scheme.
9.     The      Competent         Authority     issued   a     draft
statement [Section 8] on 30th April, 1979 in which
the retainable land was shown as 699 sq.m. and
3115.50 sq.m. was determined as `vacant land’. A
Notification under Section 10(1) was issued on 7 th
November,           1979        followed   by    a   declaratory
Notification under Section 10(3) on 5 th January,
1980 whereby land measuring 2929 sq.m. was held
to be ‘excess vacant land’ with effect from 16 th
January, 1980 and which was deemed to have been
acquired by the State Government.
10. The State Government, thereafter, issued a
notice under Section 10(5) of the Ceiling Act on 4 th
March, 1980 asking the appellants to deliver
possession of the ‘vacant land’.
11. The appellants challenged the action of the
State declaring the land ‘vacant’ before the High
Court in a writ petition wherein the parties were
directed to maintain the status quo on 15th April,
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                            Page 9 of 33
1980. The writ petition was dismissed by a learned
Single Judge on 25th June, 1987. The appellants
then filed an intra-court appeal in which ad interim
order was allowed to continue. The said appeal was
finally dismissed on 19 th May, 2011. The appellants
then approached this Court and on 21st November,
2011 the parties were directed to maintain the
status quo and not to create 3rd party rights or
change the nature and character of the property.
12. The precise contention raised before the High
Court and reiterated before us on behalf of the
appellants is that the procedure of calculating
‘excess vacant land’ adopted by the Competent
Authority is derogatory to
Section 2(q)(i)
and
2(q)(ii)
read with Clause 20(2) of Building Regulations
notified under the
Calcutta Municipal Corporation
Act, 1951
.
13. It       is    broadly      an   admitted   fact   that     the
appellants in their statement under Section 6(1) of
the Ceiling Act declared the entire piece of land
measuring 3429 sq.m. as ‘vacant land’. They,
however,          in   their    objection   against    the    draft
statement claimed existence of a structure, the area
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                           Page 10 of 33
of which was liable to be excluded from ‘vacant land’
in view of Section 2(q)(ii) of the Ceiling Act. Such an
objection did not find favour with the Competent
Authority, which after excluding retainable area
measuring 500 sq.m. as per
Section 4(1)(a)
, declared
the remaining land measuring 2929 sq.m. as ‘vacant
land’.
14. As of now, we need not consider the question
whether there existed any `building’ within the
meaning of sub-clause (ii) of Section 2(q) of the
Ceiling Act on the subject land which could qualify
for exclusion from the permeates of a ‘vacant land’.
This is largely a question of fact and will be
determined at the time of final hearing.
15. The arguments of Shri Jaideep Gupta, learned
Senior Counsel for the appellants are predominantly
restricted to the interpretation and scope of sub-
clause (i) of Section 2(q) of the Ceiling Act. His
precise case is that as per the statutory Building
Regulations in force, construction of a building is
permissible only up to 50% area of the subject land
and the remaining 50% is required to be kept open.
The half of the land, which is unconstructable, is
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                Page 11 of 33
liable to be excluded from the total area of ‘vacant
land’. In this manner, land measuring 1714.50
sq.m. will stand excluded under
Section 2(q)(i)
. Out
of the remaining ‘vacant land’ measuring 1714.50
sq.m., the appellants are entitled to retain 500 sq.m.
as per the ceiling limit [see
Section 4(1)(a)
] and in
this manner the ‘excess vacant land’ that can be
acquired from them comes to 1214.50 sq.m. only
and not 2929 sq.m. Further, if the appellants’ plea
to exclude the area covered under an existing
building is accepted, in that case, the area of
`vacant land’ gets further reduced in view of sub-
clause (ii) of Section 2(q) of the Ceiling Act.
16. Shri Rakesh Dwivedi, learned Senior Counsel
for the respondents contrarily urged that under the
Building Regulations, 2/3rd area of the ‘vacant land’
can be utilized for construction and not 50% as
claimed by the appellants.        Secondly, the lands
which are to be excluded under sub-clause (i) of
Section 2(q)
are such lands where no construction is
permissible at all under the Building Regulations.
He illustratively refers to the lands notified as ‘green
belt’, ‘forest land’, ‘playground’ or for such other
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                     Page 12 of 33
public purposes as may have been described in the
Town Planning Scheme whereunder construction of
a building is prohibited in an area.                  Shri Dwivedi
maintains that entire land measuring 3429 sq.m.
has been rightly treated as ‘vacant land’, out of
which the appellants are entitled to retain 500 sq.m.
only. Hence, the Competent Authority is right in
determining the surplus ‘vacant land’ in the hands
of the appellants.
17. We,          thus,      revert    back       to   the   question
formulated at the outset, namely, what should be
the true interpretation of the meaning of
Section
2(q)(i)
and (ii) of the Ceiling Act for determination of
`vacant land’?
18.
State of U.P. and Others vs. L.J. Jhonson
and Others1
is the first holding by a two-Judge
Bench of this Court to throw light on the provisions
of the Ceiling Act. That was a case where the
respondent          (Jhonson)        had     a    parcel    of    land
admeasuring 2530 sq.m. in Dehradun city on which
there stood a building. He wanted to sell some
portion of the open land in his possession but the

1 (1983) 4 SCC 110
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                               Page 13 of 33
Competent Authority refused permission on the
ground that the total area in his possession was
exceeding the ceiling limit. The District Judge as
well as the High Court held that Jhonson was
entitled to retain 500 sq.m. as the permissible area
and another 500 sq. m. for the benefit and
convenient enjoyment of the building to satisfy the
requirement of town planning and environmental
purposes. After excluding 1000 sq.m. area, there
was no `vacant land’ left with Jhonson. The High
Court, in this regard, relied upon
Section 4(9)
read
with Section 2(q)(ii) of the Ceiling Act. On an appeal,
this Court consciously resolved to construe the
nature, character, spirit and entire scheme of the
Act.     Clauses        (i)     to   (iii)   of
Section   2(q)
were
appropriately paraphrased [See para 14]. Though
the controversy did not relate to sub-clause (i) of
Section 2(q)
, this Court made an endeavour to opine
on all the sub-clauses of that provision as may be
seen from paragraphs 15 and 17 of the Report
reproduced below:
“15. So far as the first category is
          concerned, no complexity is involved
          because any open area in excess of 2000 sq
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                                Page 14 of 33
metres in Category D States will be taken
          over by the Government. For instance, if an
          open land without construction consists of
          6000 sq metres, the computation of the
          ceiling area would present no difficulty
          because 4000 sq metres will be taken over
          by the Government and 2000 sq metres will
          be left to the landholder. Secondly, if the
          entire land is covered by a building, such
          an area would completely fall outside the
          ambit of the Act and no question of
          computation would arise. Thirdly, a
          question arises as to what would happen if
          there is a land on a part of which there is a
          building with a dwelling unit and an area
          (open land) which is appurtenant thereto is
          vacant. This category of land would
          doubtless present some difficulty in making
          the computation and the principles on
          which such computation is to be made.
Section 4(9)
is designedly and artistically
          drafted to meet such a contingency which
          may be extracted thus:
“Where a person holds vacant land and
               also holds any other land on which
               there is a building with a dwelling unit
               therein, the extent of such other
               land occupied by the building and the
               land appurtenant thereto shall also be
               taken into account in calculating the
               extent of vacant land held by such
               person.”
                                   (emphasis supplied)
17. Clause (i) gives a blanket exemption to
          any land situated in an urban area where
          the entire area is covered by land on which
          it is not permissible to raise a building
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                      Page 15 of 33
which will not be deemed to be vacant land
          within the meaning of
Section 2(q)
. This is
          because such land in an urban area cannot
          be used for building purposes but being
          vacant falls beyond the purview of the Act.
Clause (ii) postulates that where a land is
          occupied by any building constructed
          before or on the appointed day [‘appointed
          day’ has been defined in
Section 2(a)
of the
          Act] and there is some vacant land
          appurtenant to the said building, land
          which is built upon and any area which is
          left out in accordance with the building
          regulations would not be included in the
          ceiling area. The term ‘land appurtenant to
          such building’ would mean the contiguous
          land which remains after giving full
          allowance for the area left out under the
          municipal or building regulations subject
          to a maximum of 500 sq metres and
          another 500 sq metres which may be left
          for the beneficial use of the owner. The
          words ‘land appurtenant’ used in
Section
          4(9)
takes us to its connotation as defined
          in
Section 2(g)(i)
and (ii) which may be
          extracted thus:
“(g) ‘land appurtenant’, in relation to
               any building, means—
(i)   in an area where there are
               building regulations, the minimum
               extent of land required under such
               regulations to be kept as open space
               for the enjoyment of such building,
               which in no case shall exceed five
               hundred square metres; or
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                     Page 16 of 33
(ii)  in an area where there are no
               building regulations, an extent of five
               hundred square metres contiguous to
               the land occupied by such building,
               and includes, in the case of any
               building    constructed      before   the
               appointed day with a dwelling unit
               therein, an additional extent not
               exceeding five hundred square metres
               of land, if any, contiguous to the
               minimum extent referred to in sub-
clause (i) or the extent referred to in
               sub-clause (ii), as the case may be;”
19. Thus, according to Jhonson1,
Section 2(q)(i)
gives a blanket exemption to any land situated in an
urban area where the entire area is covered by land
on which it is not permissible to raise a building.
Such land will not be deemed to be ‘vacant land’
because the same cannot be used for building
purposes and thus falls beyond the purview of the
Act.      As per Jhonson1 the `blanket exemption’
connotes an `entire area’ of an urban agglomeration
where no construction is permissible at all.                  In
essence, Jhonson1 while explicitly dealing with a
situation falling under
Section 2(q)(ii)
also deemed it
necessary to interpret each and every sub-clause of
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                       Page 17 of 33
Section 2(q) of the Ceiling Act. It was surely not an
obiter-dicta.
20.
In
Meera Gupta (Smt.) vs. State of West
Bengal and Others2
, a three-Judge Bench of this
Court       noticed        that   Smt.   Probhavati     Poddar
(Proforma Respondent) was owner of two properties,
one comprising 414.56 sq.m. of land of which 321
sq.m. was covered by a building and the other
comprising 339.65 sq.m. vacant plot. She entered
into an Agreement to Sell with Smt. Meera Gupta—
the Appellant. A notice was served by the Competent
Authority on the proposed vendor and vendee under
Section 6(1) of the Ceiling Act directing the vendor to
file the statement in Form No. 1 as she was holding
‘vacant land’ within the Calcutta Urban Area in
excess of the ceiling limit of 500 sq.m. Eventually, a
draft statement was prepared depicting 254.21
sq.m. of ‘vacant land’, against which objections
raised by Smt. Poddar were rejected and the same
was notified as ‘excess vacant land’ in the hands of
Smt. Poddar. There also, this Court considered the
expression ‘vacant land’ as defined under sub-
2 (1992) 2 SCC 494
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                         Page 18 of 33
clauses (i) to (iii) of Section 2(q) of the Ceiling Act
and laid down as follows:
“11. To begin with “vacant land” as per the
          definition given in clause (q) of
Section 2
means land as such, not being land mainly
          used for the purpose of agriculture, but
          situated in an urban agglomeration.
          “Vacant land”, however, does not include,
          as per the definition, land of three
          categories. The first category is land on
          which construction of a building is not
          permissible under the building regulations
          in force in the area in which such land is
          situated. But this is a category with which
          we are not concerned in the instant
          case. Johnson case3 is of this category. The
          second category is of land occupied by any
          building in an area, where there are
          building regulations, which has been
          constructed upon, or is under construction
          on the appointed day, with the approval of
          the appropriate authority, and the land
          appurtenant to such building. This means
          that if the building stood constructed on
          the land prior to January 28, 1976, the
          land occupied under the building is not
          vacant land. It also covers the land on
          which any building was in the process of
          construction on January 28, 1976 with the
          approval of the appropriate authority. That
          too is not “vacant land”. Additionally, the
          land appurtenant to these two kinds of
          buildings is also not “vacant land”. The
          third category likewise conditioned is of
          land occupied by any building in an area
          where there are no building regulations,
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                     Page 19 of 33
which has been constructed before
          January 28, 1976 or is in the process of
          construction on such date, and the land
          appurtenant to these two kinds of
          buildings.”
21. The three-Judge Bench in Meera Gupta2, with
utmost respect, misconstrued Jhonson1 as if it dealt
with
Section 2(q)(i)
category and after distinguishing
it on that count, the Court proceeded to interpret
sub-clauses (ii) and (iii) of
Section 2(q)
in the
following manner:
“12. The aforesaid three categories of lands
          would otherwise be “vacant land” but for
          the definitional exclusion. The specific non-
          inclusion of these three categories of land
          is by itself an integral part of the
          definitional and functional sphere. The
          question that arises what happens to lands
          over which buildings are commenced after
          the appointed day and the building
          progresses to completion thereafter. On the
          appointed day, these lands were vacant
          lands, but not so thereafter because of the
          surface change. Here the skill of the
          draftsman and the wisdom of the
          legislature comes to the fore in cognizing
          and filling up the gap period and covering it
          up in the scheme of sub-section (9) of
Section 4
. The visible contrast between
          “vacant land” and “any other land” held by
          a person on which there is a building with
          a dwelling unit therein becomes prominent.
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                      Page 20 of 33
The said “any other land” is reckoned and
          brought at par with the “vacant land” for
          the purpose of calculating the final extent
          of vacant land. It seems to us that the
          expression “vacant land” in the first portion
          of the provision connotes land minus land
          under buildings constructed or in the
          process of construction before and on the
          appointed day, and the expression “vacant
          land” in the latter portion of the provision
          connotes the sum total of “vacant land” of
          the first order and distinctly the “other
          land” on which is a building with a dwelling
          unit therein of which           construction
          commenced after the appointed day, and
          the land appurtenant thereto. Such an
          interpretation is required by the context as
          otherwise the concept of the appointed day
          and the gap period would be rendered
          otiose. The legislature cannot be accused to
          have indulged in trickery or futility in
          giving something with one hand and taking
          it away with the other. “Any other land” in
          the sequence would thus mean any other
          built-upon land except the one excluded
          from the expression “vacant land” on
          account of it being occupied by a building
          which stood constructed, or was in the
          process of construction, on the appointed
          day.”
22. The          Bench          finally    concluded       that    “The
interpretation         we       have      put   to   the   provisions
pertinently relate to sub-clauses (ii) and (iii) of clause
(q) of
Section 2
. This interpretation in express terms
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                                Page 21 of 33
cannot apply to sub-clause (i) of clause (q) of Section
2. Johnson case [(1983) 4 SCC 110] as said before, is
a case under sub-clause (i) of clause (q) of
Section 2
.
……..xx……….. xx…………xx……….xx”
23.
In
Angoori Devi (Smt.) vs. State of Uttar
Pradesh and Others3
, a two-Judge Bench of this
Court was confronted with a dispute re: the
interpretation of sub-section (9) of
Section 4
read
with sub-section (q) of Section 2 of the Ceiling Act.
The State of Uttar Pradesh relied upon Jhonson1. It
was then pointed out that Jhonson1 was considered
and distinguished by a three-Judge Bench in Meera
Gupta2. This Court, thereafter, took stock of the
anomalous observation in Meera Gupta2 to the
effect that Jhonson1 was a case dealing with sub-
clause (i) of Section 2(q) of the Ceiling Act. After the
correct appraisal of Jhonson1 which was actually a
case of ‘vacant land’ within the meaning of sub-
clauses (ii) and (iii) of
Section 2(q)
and was not
confined to
Section 2(q)(i)
only, the matter was
referred to a Larger Bench as may be seen from the
following operative part of the order:
3 (1997) 2 SCC 434
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                 Page 22 of 33
“17. It has been contended that Johnson
         case [(1983) 4 SCC 110] had specifically
         dealt with the definition of vacant land as
         given in
Section 2(q)(ii)
and (iii). It will not
         be right       to say that        the Johnson
         case [(1983) 4 SCC 110] was confined to
Section 2(q)(i)
of the Act.
18. There is some force in this contention.
The principle laid down in
Meera Gupta
case [(1992) 2 SCC 494] has been applied
          in the case of Atma Ram Aggarwal v. State
          of U.P. [1993 Supp (1) SCC 1].
Since Meera
          Gupta
case [(1992) 2 SCC 494] was decided
          by a Bench of three Judges, the contention
          raised by the respondents should be
          considered by a larger Bench. This case
          may be placed before the Hon'ble the Chief
          Justice of India for appropriate direction.”
24. Angoori Devi3 was then placed before a three-
Judge Bench on March 19, 1997 when it was
referred to a Larger Bench of five-Judges. The
reference order is reported as
Angoori Devi (Smt.)
vs. State of U.P. and Others4
.
25. However, before the matter could be heard by a
five-Judge Bench, the legal regime underwent a
complete U-turn. The Ceiling Act was repealed
initially by way of an Ordinance notified on 11 th
January, 1999, initially in the States of Haryana,

4 (1997) 7 SCC 757
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                        Page 23 of 33
Punjab and all the Union Territories. The Parliament
thereafter enacted the Urban Land [Ceiling and
Regulation] Repeal Act, 1999 which came into force
in the States of Haryana and Punjab and all the
Union of Territories with effect from 11 th January,
1999, and in other States from the date of adoption
of the Repeal Act under Clause (2) of
Article 252
of
the Constitution. The State of Uttar Pradesh also
adopted the Repeal Act and, consequently, the
Ceiling Act ceased to operate in the State of Uttar
Pradesh. It rendered the reference in
Angoori Devi4
case to a five-Judge Bench as infructuous.
26. It is extremely important to quote paragraph 4
of the Statement of Objects and Reasons dated 17 th
February,         1999          of   the   Repeal   Bill,   which
interestingly said that:
“4. The proposed repeal, along with some
          other incentives and simplification of
          administrative procedures, is expected to
          revive the stagnant housing industry. The
          repeal will facilitate construction of
          dwelling units both in the public and
          private sector and help achievement of
          targets contemplated under National
          Agenda for Governance. The repeal will not,
          however, affect vesting of any vacant land
          under sub-section (3) of section 10 of the
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                           Page 24 of 33
Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act,
          1976
the possession of which has been
          taken over by the State Governments. It
          will not affect payments made to the State
          Governments       for    exemptions.  The
          exemptions granted under
section 20
of the
          Act will continue to be operative. The
          amounts      paid    out   by   the  State
          Governments will become refundable before
          restoration of the land to the former
          owners.”

       While we do not mean to infuse any binding
force in a Statement of Objects and Reasons, but it
certainly gives us a glimpse of the miserable failure
of a reformatory legislation.
27. We may now turn to
State of Maharashtra
and Another vs. B.E. Billimoria and others
5 --a
dictum rendered by a three-Judge Bench and the
sheet anchor of Shri Jaideep Gupta, learned Senior
Counsel for the appellants.
28. That was a case where Billimoria (Respondent
No. 1) and Laxmi Bai Kalyanji Kapadia jointly owned
a plot measuring 5428.09 sq.m in Koregaon Park,
Pune. In addition, Billimoria owned a flat having an
area of 297.28 sq.m in a building owned by a co-
5 (2003) 7 SCC 336
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                   Page 25 of 33
operative housing in Mumbai. Kapadia also owned a
residential flat having an area of 111.11 sq.m. in a
building       owned        by   a   cooperative   housing     in
Mumbai.         The      Competent     Authority   under     the
Ceiling Act held that Billimoria owned half of the
plot in Koregaon Park which came to 2714.05 sq.m.
The area of his flat in Mumbai was added to hold
that Billimoria owned 3308.61 sq.m. which was in
excess of the ceiling limit of 1000 sq.m. in Pune city,
to the extent of 2308.61 sq.m. Kapadia was also
found owning more than the permissible retainable
land.
29. Billimoria challenged the decisions of the
competent authority and the appellate authority in a
writ petition before the High Court of Bombay. The
High Court relied upon the Building Regulations as
were in force in the Koregaon Park area of Pune
whereunder no construction on more than 1/3rd of
the total area of the plot was permissible. The High
Court viewed that since                no   construction was
possible on an area of 2308 sq.m., the same could
not be treated as ‘vacant land’ within the meaning of
Section 2(q)(i)
of the Act. The remaining land was
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                        Page 26 of 33
held to be within the permissible ceiling limit of
Pune city.
30. The aggrieved State approached this Court. In
his leading judgment, G.P. Mathur, J. [for Khare, CJ
and himself] analysed
Section 2(q)(i)
and affirmed
the view taken by the High Court, laying down as
follows:
“A plain reading of the provision would
          show that any land on which construction
          is not permissible under the building
          regulations in force in the area would not
          come within the ambit of “vacant land”.
          Sub-rule (9) of Rule 2 of the Building Rules
          framed by the Collector of Pune for
          Koregaon Park lays down that not more
          than one-third of the total area of any
          building plot shall be built upon and in
          calculating the area covered by a building
          the plinth area of the building and other
          structures excepting compound walls, shall
          be taken into account. It further provides
          that any area covered by staircase and
          projections of any kind shall be considered
          as built over. The appellant does not
          dispute the applicability of this building
          rule to Koregaon Park area where the plot
          of land CTS No. 82 is situate. The definition
          of “vacant land” as given in
Section 2(q)
clearly provides that land on which
          construction of a building is not
          permissible under the building regulations
          in force in the area has to be excluded. As
          under the relevant rules in force in the area
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                      Page 27 of 33
construction was not permissible on two-
thirds of the area of the plot, the High
          Court was perfectly justified in holding that
          for determining the vacant land in CTS No.
          82, Koregaon Park, Pune, two-third portion
          of each of the respondents had to be
          excluded and thus the vacant land held by
          each one of them in the said area was only
          905 sq metres. In fact, on the plain
          language of the statute and the prohibition
          contained in the Building Rules in
          Koregaon Park area, which are in
          operation, it is not possible to take any
          other view.”
                                    (emphasis applied)
31. S.B. Sinha, J., in his separate concurring
opinion       held       that    the   Ceiling   Act,   being     an
expropriatory legislation, is required to be construed
strictly.        Since     Parliament      has    excluded       the
categories of lands as are specified in sub-clauses
(i), (ii) and (iii) of
Section 2(q)
from the definition of
‘vacant land’,           such exclusionary clauses must
receive      a    liberal       construction.    The    expression
‘means’ in Section 2(q) of the Ceiling Act was held to
be, prima facie, restrictive and exhaustive.                    The
previous decisions of this Court in Jhonson1, Meera
Gupta2, Atmaram Aggarwal vs. State of U.P.
[1993 Supp(1) SCC 1], Kunj Behari Lal vs.
District Judge, Gorakhpur [(1997) 6 SCC 257]
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                            Page 28 of 33
besides the observations by a two-Judge Bench in
Angoori Devi3, as well as the reference made by the
three-Judge Bench in Angoori Devi4 to a larger
Bench of five-Judges were duly noticed. It was then
concluded that:
“32. It is well settled that the provisions of
          the statute are to be read in the text and
          context in which they have been enacted. It
          is well settled that in construction of a
          statute an effort should be made to give
          effect to all the provisions contained
          therein. It is equally well settled that a
          statute should be interpreted equitably so
          as to avoid hardship. So interpreted the
          decision of this Court in
Meera Gupta v.
          State of W.B.
[(1992) 2 SCC 494]
          commends to us in preference of the
          decision of this Court in
State of U.P. v.
          L.J. Johnson
[(1983) 4 SCC 110].
Meera
          Gupta
case [(1992) 2 SCC 494] has been
          followed by this Court in Atma Ram
          Aggarwal v. State of U.P. [1993 Supp (1)
          SCC 1] and Kunj Behari Lal v. District
          Judge, Gorakhpur [(1997) 6 SCC 257].
33. We are not unmindful of the
          observations made by a two-Judge Bench
          of this Court in
Angoori Devi v. State of
          U.P.
[(1997) 2 SCC 434] stating that the
          decisions of this Court in
Johnson
case
          [(
1983) 4 SCC 110] and Meera Gupta
case
          [(1992) 2 SCC 494] are in conflict with each
          other and
Johnson
case [(1983) 4 SCC 110]
          should hold the field.
However, in
Angoori
          Devi
case [(1997) 2 SCC 434] the conflict
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                       Page 29 of 33
was not resolved by the Constitution Bench
          to which a reference was made by a three-
Judge Bench in
Angoori Devi v. State of
          U.P.
[(1997) 7 SCC 757]
34.   In   view     of  our    discussions
          aforementioned, it must be held that:
(1)   that    the    respondents    having
          independent title to the property in
          question, are entitled to the two separate
          units under the said Act;
(2) despite the fact that no construction
          had been raised on the appointed day, they
          are entitled to the benefit under sub-clause
(i) of clause (q) of
Section 2
of the Act; and
          (3) for the purpose of determination of the
          ceiling limit, the area of the flats belonging
          to the respondents in Bombay would not be
          taken into consideration. I, thus, agree
          with the conclusion arrived at by the High
          Court.”
                                     [emphasis applied]
32. Shri Jaideep Gupta, learned Senior Counsel for
the appellants strongly relied upon Billimoria5 as a
binding precedent on the interpretation of
Section
2(q)(i)
and urged to remit the case to the Competent
Authority to re-determine the ‘vacant land’ in the
hands of the appellants after excluding the area on
which no construction is permissible under the
Building         Regulations    of   Calcutta     Municipal
Corporation. On the other hand, Shri Rakesh
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                       Page 30 of 33
Dwivedi, learned Senior Counsel for the respondents
strenuously urged that the outcome in Billimoria5
was largely influenced by the fact that there were
two joint owners of the subject property who were
held entitled to their separate units under the
Ceiling Act and each such unit was required to
exclude        2/3rd       area   where    construction    was
impermissible and after such exclusion, what was
left in the hands of Billimoria or Kapadia was
definitely less than the retainable land measuring
1000 sq.m. in Pune Urban area. To say it differently,
the contention is that Billimoria5 is not founded
upon a plenary interpretation of Section 2(q)(i) of the
Ceiling Act and what has been held therein is an
acknowledgement of two separate independent units
of each co-owner, where 2/3rd area of each unit was
required to be kept open mandatorily as per the
Building Regulations.
33. We have considered the rival submissions.
There is undoubtedly a note of discordance between
Jhonson1          [two-Judge      Bench]    and   Billimoria5
[three-Judge Bench]. Jhonson1, on facts, was not a
case under
Section 2(q)(i)
but this Court consciously
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                       Page 31 of 33
resorted to interpret and explain the entire scheme
of the Act including the fall out of
Section 2(q)(i)
thereof.      Meera         Gupta2         mis-applied   Jhonson1,
hence, was rightly doubted in Angoori Devi3.
However,          before        the    controversy       could        be
authoritatively          settled      by    a   five-Judge     Bench,
Angoori Devi3 was rendered infructuous due to
repeal of the Ceiling Act in the State of Uttar
Pradesh. Unfortunately, the lead judgement in
Billimoria5 did not even notice Jhonson1 though
apparently it was brought to the notice of the
Bench. We say so for the simple reason that the
concurring opinion specifically refers to Jhonson1.
Billimoria5 did not expressly overrule Jhonson1.
Whether Jhonson1, to the extent it opined on
Section 2(q)(i) of the Ceiling Act, has been impliedly
overruled or not, is a debatable issue.
34. Billimoria5 perhaps lends support to the
contentions raised on behalf of the appellants.
35. The Ceiling Act indeed is an expropriatory
Legislation. The `payment’ under
Section 11
of the
Act to a land owner is not fair and just market value
of the surplus vacant land. Principles of strict
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                                Page 32 of 33
construction would thus be attracted to such a
statute.
36. The words, “….in an area” as incorporated in
all the sub-clauses of
Section 2(g)
and
2(q)
also
deserve       special       attention    but   have     not    been
explicitly discussed in any of the cited decisions.
37. We are thus of the considered opinion that the
interpretation, spirit and object of the Ceiling Act, as
it was envisaged at the time of its enactment, when
juxtaposed            against     the      regressive         impact
experienced in different States which is indicated in
the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Repeal
Act, invite an authoritative determination of all the
related issues by a Larger Bench.               This case may,
therefore, be placed before Hon’ble the Chief Justice
of India for appropriate directions.
………..………………… J.
(SURYA KANT)


                                        ……………………………J.
                                          (DIPANKAR DATTA)
New Delhi;
October 9, 2023
Civil Appeal No. 6257 of 2014                            Page 33 of 33