[Cites
21
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Birbal Nath vs The State Of Rajasthan on 30 October, 2023
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
1


2023 INSC 957                                              REPORTABLE


                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                   CRIMINAL APPEALLATE JURISDICTION
                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1587 OF 2008


        BIRBAL NATH                                   …APPELLANT

                                   VERSUS


        THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN &            ORS.     …RESPONDENTS


                                     WITH

                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1588 OF 2008




                               JUDGMENT
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.
1.     Both the above appeals arise out of the judgment and

                order dated 08.08.2007 passed by the Rajasthan High

                Court in Criminal Appeal No.976 of 2002, whereby all the

                accused who stood convicted by the Trial Court for the

                offences under Sections 302, 307, 323, 324, 325, 447,
2
147 /148 read with
Section 149
of Indian Penal Code,

     were acquitted for the major offences under
Sections 302
and
307
, and were convicted only for the offences under
Sections 147
,
148
,
323
,
324
,
325
/
149
. Their sentences

     were also reduced to the period already undergone by

     them, which roughly varied from two to five years.
2.   The complainant as well as the State have approached

     this Court by way of the above two appeals, which were

     admitted and leave was granted on 26.09.2008.
3.   We have heard learned counsel            for   the    appellant, Dr.

     Charu Mathur for the victims and Dr. Manish Singhvi,

     learned   senior   advocate        for     State     of    Rajasthan

     respectively, as well as senior advocate Mr. Ramakrishan

     Veeraraghavan on behalf of the accused-respondents.
4.   An FIR was lodged on 22.05.2001 at about 3.00 PM by

     complainant-Birbal   Nath     at     Police     Station,    Pachori,

     District Nagaur, Rajasthan which disclosed that at about

     1:00 o’clock that afternoon, while the informant’s uncle

     ‘Chandernath’ and his aunt ‘Rami’ were working in their

     agricultural field, seven men, armed with weapons

     approached their field. They were as follows :-
3
(1) Jethnath having an ‘axe’
     (2) Dhurnath having a ‘dang’
     (3) Meghnath having a ‘farsi’
     (4) Rughnath having Favda (Shovel)
     (5) Babunath having a ‘dang’
     (6) Malanath having an ‘axe’ and
     (7) Devnath having a ‘dang’

All the above named accused, who were armed, started

assaulting the aunt and uncle of the complainant-
Birbalnath, in which both were grievously injured.

Jethnath was the first to assault Chandernath with his

axe and the rest joined the attack.        Rami was also

attacked, by these assailants.      This incident was also

witnessed by Pratapnath, Ramunath, Dhurnath, their

sister-in-law Rampyari, Cheni Devi and Ruparam as they

had reached the spot in a few minutes, who tried to

intervene in the matter and save their relatives, but in

vain. Chandernath died in the ambulance while being

taken to the hospital at Jodhpur. Meanwhile the police

started its investigation, and filed its chargesheet against

all the accused except Devnath in the case. The case was

later committed to the Sessions Court where charges

were framed under
Sections 147
,
148
,
302
,
323
/
149
,
324
/
149
,
325
/
149
,
447
,
307
/
149
of the Indian Penal
4
Code against all the six accused, named in the

     chargesheet.
5.   There were in all 24 witnesses who were examined by the

     prosecution. The star eye witness being Rami (PW-2) who

     is the wife of the deceased and was herself grievously

     hurt in the incident. Apart from her there were other eye

     witnesses as well such as PW-3, PW-6 and PW-7 i.e.,

     Rampyari, Mohannath, Birbalnath respectively. There was

     also recovery of clothes and weapons which was made on

     the disclosure of the accused.
6.   In their statement under Section 313 of CrPC, all the

     accused denied the charges and the evidence against

     them and also presented defence witnesses in the form of

     – Birmaram (DW-1), Hanutaram (DW-2), Khemaram (DW-
3), Dr. Devkaran (DW-4) and Hukmaram (DW-5).
7.   Out   of   all   the   prosecution   witnesses   which   were

     examined by the prosecution, Rami (PW-2) is the most

     important witness, as she was the wife of the deceased

     and at the relevant point of time was working in the field,

     along with her husband. In addition, this witness had

     sustained grievous injuries in the incident, including a
5
near fatal injury on her head and therefore the testimony

     of this particular witness is the most credible evidence

     produced by the prosecution before the Trial Court. The

     examination-in-chief and cross examination of Rami was

     done before the Trial Court on 27.11.2001.         She was

     cross examined at length by the defence, but nothing has

     come out in the cross examination, except minor

     discrepancies.   These   discrepancies   as   we   shall   be

     examining later do not discredit the witness as has been

     held by the High Court. The social background and the

     overall surrounding circumstances of the case are

     important considerations for the court while examining a

     witness, which has not been done. The High Court, as

     we shall see, has relied on these discrepancies, while

     acquitting the accused of the charges under
Sections 302
&
307
.
8.   In her examination-in-chief PW-2 consistently held the

     position that she and her husband were working on their

     field, and each of the accused was armed with either

     ‘axe’, ‘farsi’ or other weapon and that they were seven in

     number, who assaulted her and her husband. It was
6
Jethnath who attacked on head with axe, Meghnath with

           ‘fawda’, Dhurnath with ‘dang’ on the head of her

           husband,    Raghunath    assaulted   him    with   ‘fawda’ 1,

           Malanath attacked her husband with an axe, as did

           Raghunath and Babunath. All of them had attacked her

           as well, and as a result she sustained injuries on her

           head, left hand, right hand, joints and legs. Her husband

           too had injuries on his head, hands and legs. His hand

           and legs were fractured. When she raised an alarm,

           Pratapnath, Rampyari, Cheni, Ramnath, Birbalnath,

           Dudhnath, Purkharam and Ruparam came running to

           the spot and tried to save them. Chandernath her

           husband died on the way to the hospital at Jodhpur. She

           (PW-2) was given medical treatment and was examined by

           a doctor.
9.     Rampyari (PW-3) who is again a witness to the incident

           states that on the fateful day at about 1.00 o’clock in the

           afternoon she heard someone crying for help. She

           recognised the voice of Rami and Chandernath and then

           she immediately ran towards the field. Chena, Birbalnath,


1 Shovel
7
Dudhnath and Purkharam were also with her. They saw

      Jethnath, Dhumnath, Meghnath, Rughnath, Babunath,

      Malanath and Devnath, all armed with either axe, farsi,

      dang and “fawda”. They were all attacking Chandernath.

      On seeing them the accused ran away from the spot.

      They saw Chandernath lying on his belly and was

      bleeding, and so was Rami. There were injuries on her

      head and ear.
10.   Dr. Ramvilas who was examined as (PW-4) confirmed that

      the deceased died due to injuries particularly the injuries

      sustained on his head. Apart from Rami (PW-2) and

      Rampyari (PW-3) there are other eye witnesses as well

      (PW-6 and PW-7), who had reached the spot after they

      heard an alarm raised by Rami.      The ‘site plan’ shows

      that the “chapper” of these witnesses is nearby and hence

      the fact that these witnesses were in the neighbourhood

      was rightly held by the Trial Court, and their presence

      seemed natural.
11.   PW-6 and PW-7 had again made similar depositions as

      PW-3, being in the neighbourhood at the time of the

      incident. Though it may be doubtful whether they had
8
witnessed the entire sequence of events, yet they had

      definitely seen the assailants fleeing from the place of

      occurrence. These are also important witnesses though

      the High Court has said nothing on their deposition.
12.   The post mortem of the body was conducted on

      23.05.2001. The post mortem report shows the following

      ante mortem injuries:
“(i):    Lacerated wound in the size of 1 ½” X
                    ½” bone deep over the left parietal region
                    of scalp. There is depressed podium of
                    left parietal bone.
(ii):    Lacerated wound in the size of 1” X ¼”
                    bone deep over right parietal region of
                    scalp.   There is puncture/fracture of
                    right parietal bone.
Pupils = Dilated, haggy.
(iii):   Lacerated wound in the size of ¾” X ¼”
                    bone deep over occipital region of scalp.
                    There is puncture of occipital bone on
                    skull.
(iv):    Lacerated wound in the size of ½” X
                    1/8” bone deep, huge contusion over
                    upper part of left leg. There is fracture of
                    upper 1/4th portion of tibia and fibula
                    bone.
(v):     Lacerated wound in the size of ½” X ¼”
                    deep to bone and quitesome swelling had
                    developed near at the wound.       This
                    wound was in the lower left leg. There
                    was fracture in lower end of tibia and
                    fibula bones.
9
(vi):  Swelling in medium size had developed
                  towards the upper side of the right hand
                  and therein there was fracture of first
                  meta-carpal bone.
…..
…..
In my opinion, cause of death of Chander Nath
           s/o Gopunath is Head-Injury and brian
           haemorrhage.”
13.   The injuries sustained by Rami as per her injury report

      dated 22.05.2001 is as follows:
1. Incised wound in the size of 2 ½" x ½" x bone
           deep, deep/over anterior portion of scalp trans-
vertically placed, simple in nature; Advised for
           X-Ray Report, by Sharp weapon.
2. As defined swelling on right arm upto shoulder;
           advised for X-ray, simple in nature, by blunt
           object.
3. Bruise in the size of 1 ½" x ½" over lower part of
           left thigh, lower side, simple in nature, by blunt
           object.
4. Bruise in the size of 1 ½" x ½" on middle of left
           arm laterally, simple in nature, by blunt object.
5. Bruise in the size of 4" x 1" over lower back,
           simple in nature, by blunt object.
14.   The Trial Court convicted all the accused under
Sections

      302
,
323
,
324
,
325
,
147
,
148
,
447
read with
Section 149
of Indian Penal Code, and sentenced them inter alia for

      rigorous imprisonment for life. Jethnath, Dhurnath and
10
Meghnath in addition were also convicted under
Section

      307
of IPC.
15.   The accused filed an appeal before the High Court which

      was partly allowed, as discussed above.
16.   The statement given by PW-2 before the Police under
Section 161
Cr.PC, during investigation were relied by the

      defence in order to contradict the witness as to her

      statement in her examination-in-chief. The witness in her

      earlier statement before the police, had said that the

      accused Jethnath was working on his adjacent field and

      he had some altercation with the deceased regarding

      their   boundary   in   which   heated   arguments    were

      exchanged between the two. Jethnath, then, raised an

      alarm which resulted in his sons and relatives coming to

      the spot, who were all armed with weapons. It is true that

      this fact of Jethnath working in the field and the

      altercation she did not state in her examination-in-chief.

      The High Court thus finds a discrepancy in the statement

      of PW-2 made under
section 161
Cr.PC and her

      examination-in-chief, which it believes to be sufficient to

      discredit this witness.
17.   As we have already stated this particular witness i.e. PW-
2 is an injured witness and wife of the deceased, who has
11
given her clear and unambiguous statement in her

examination-in-chief and though she was cross-examined

at length this witness stood her ground. Moreover, it is

her husband who has been killed by the assailants. Why

should she be accusing wrong persons? The High Court

discredits the star witness of the prosecution due to her

so called discrepancies between her statement under
Section 161
Cr.PC and in her        examination-in-chief.   It

then holds that it was not a pre-meditated attack at all

and therefore no case of common intention or common

object of unlawful assembly is made out nor will it be a

case for
Section 302
or 307. This is what was said :--
“First and foremost , the question which we
         require to look into is whether the beginning
         of the story, as given by the prosecution, is
         reliable or not. According to the eye witness'
         account the accused arrived at the scene of
         occurrence and they assaulted the deceased
         on his head and he fell down by the head
         injuries caused by Jeth Nath and then the
         other accused persons caused injuries. Jeth
         Nath having been assigned an axe and there
         being no axe injury, the beginning of the
         story as given by the prosecution witness,
         PW/2 Rami injured eye witness, does not
         appear to be correct.
In that view or the matter, if we consider the
         contradiction in her statement that in her
         police statement she has stated that things
         started with the handling or the thorn
         fencing on the boundary wall, it was a case
         where both the parties got enraged on the
         spur of the moment and there was no pre-
12
meditation . If there was no pre-meditation,
               then there was no pre-motive to kill the
               deceased before the incident started, then it
               is difficult to conclude that there was a
               common object to eliminate the deceased. If
               there was no common object then conviction
               under
sections 302
/
149
IPC is not made out
               and in that view of the matter, the conviction
               and sentence of accused persons deserves to
               be set aside.”
18.   Statement given to police during investigation under
Section 161
cannot be read as an “evidence”.              It has a

      limited applicability in a Court of Law as prescribed
13
under
Section 1622
of the Code of Criminal Procedure

          (
Cr.P.C
.).
19.   No doubt      statement   given   before   police   during

          investigation under
Section 161
are “previous statements”

          under
Section 145
of the Evidence Act and therefore can

          be used to cross examine a witness. But this is only for a

          limited purpose, to “contradict” such a witness. Even if

          the defence is successful in contradicting a witness, it

          would not always mean that the contradiction in her two

          statements would result in totally discrediting this

          witness. It is here that we feel that the learned judges of

          the High Court have gone wrong.
20.   The contractions in the two statements may or may not

          be sufficient to discredit a witness.
Section 145
read

          with
Section 155
of the Evidence Act, have to be carefully
2
14
applied in a given case. One cannot lose sight of the fact

that PW-2 Rami is an injured eye witness, and being the

wife of the deceased her presence in their agricultural

field on the fateful day is natural. Her statement in her

examination in chief gives detail of the incident and the

precise role assigned to each of the assailants. This

witness was put to a lengthy cross examination by the

defence. Some discrepancies invariably occur in such

cases when we take into account the fact that this

witness is a woman who resides in a village and is the

wife of a farmer who tills his land and raises crops by his

own hands. In other words, they are not big farmers. The

rural setting, the degree of articulation of such a witness

in a Court of Law are relevant considerations while

evaluating the credibility of such a witness. Moreover, the

lengthy cross examination of a witness may invariably

result in contradictions. But these contradictions are not

always sufficient to discredit a witness.    In Rammi v.
State of M.P. (1999) 8 SCC 649, this Court had held as

under:
15
“24. When an eyewitness is examined at length
        it is quite possible for him to make some
        discrepancies. No true witness can possibly
        escape from making some discrepant details.
        Perhaps an untrue witness who is well tutored
        can successfully make his testimony totally non-
        discrepant. But courts should bear in mind that
        it is only when discrepancies in the evidence of a
        witness are so incompatible with the credibility
        of his version that the court is justified in
        jettisoning his evidence. But too serious a view to
        be adopted on mere variations falling in the
        narration of an incident (either as between the
        evidence of two witnesses or as between two
        statements of the same witness) is an unrealistic
        approach for judicial scrutiny.”

In the same case, how far a contradiction in the two

statements can be used to discredit a witness has also

been discussed.
“25. It is a common practice in trial courts to
        make out contradictions from the previous
        statement of a witness for confronting him during
        cross-examination. Merely because there is
        inconsistency in evidence it is not sufficient to
        impair the credit of the witness. No doubt
Section
        155
of the Evidence Act provides scope for
        impeaching the credit of a witness by proof of an
        inconsistent former statement. But a reading of
        the section would indicate that all inconsistent
        statements are not sufficient to impeach the
        credit of the witness. The material portion of the
        section is extracted below:
“155. Impeaching credit of witness.—The credit
        of a witness may be impeached in the following
        ways by the adverse party, or, with the consent
        of the court, by the party who calls him—
        (1)-(2)***
        (3) by proof of former statements inconsistent
        with any part of his evidence which is liable to
        be contradicted;”
26. A former statement though seemingly
        inconsistent with the evidence need not
16
necessarily be sufficient to amount to
              contradiction. Only such of the inconsistent
              statement which is liable to be “contradicted”
              would affect the credit of the witness.
Section
              145
of the Evidence Act also enables the cross-
examiner to use any former statement of the
              witness, but it cautions that if it is intended to
              “contradict” the witness the cross-examiner is
              enjoined to comply with the formality prescribed
              therein.
Section 162
of the Code also permits the
              cross-examiner to use the previous statement of
              the witness (recorded under
Section 161
of the
              Code) for the only limited purpose i.e. to
              “contradict” the witness.”
21.
In
Tahsildar Singh v. State of U.P.
, AIR 1959 SC

      1012, it was held that to contradict a witness would

      mean to “discredit” a witness. Therefore, unless and until

      the former statement of this witness is capable of

      “discrediting” a witness, it would have little relevance. A

      mere variation in the two statements would not be

      enough to discredit a witness.
This has been followed

      consistently by this Court in its later judgment, including

      Rammi (supra).     Moreover, in this case the High Court

      lost sight of other more relevant factors such as the

      witness being an injured eye witness.
22.   The purpose of the cross examination of a witness in

      terms of
Section 145
and
155
of the Evidence Act is to

      bring contradictions in the two statements of the witness,

      in the case at hand, one given to police under
Section 161
17
Cr.PC., and the other given before the court. Even

      assuming for the sake of argument that there is a

      difference in the        two statements of PW-2 as she

      evidently does not disclose in her examination-in-chief

      that Jethnath was also working in the adjacent field and

      there was altercation between the two, this may discredit

      the witness only so far as the beginning of the incident;

      how it started. The fact that the incident happened is not

      in doubt. The offenders were the accused is also not in

      doubt. There is no doubt that the incident took place,

      which resulted in one death and grievous injuries to

      another. It may not have happened exactly as narrated by

      PW-2, yet for this discrepancy the entire testimony of PW-

      2 cannot be discarded.
23.   The so called injuries sustained by two of the assailants,

      Meghnath and Jethnath, were again relied upon by the

      High Court to reach a finding that this case could be the

      case of free fight between the two parties which was not

      pre-meditated   particularly   where   both   sides   had

      sustained injuries!
24.   In our opinion, the High Court has given undeserved

      credit to the evidence placed by the defence in this
18
regard. The Trial Court on the other hand had examined

this aspect in detail and ultimately did not find the

evidence placed by defence as credible. It is not very

difficult for us to appreciate why this was done. To prove

that the accused too had sustained injuries in the

incident, the defence had produced DW-4 Dr. Devkaran

as their witness. This witness is a Government Doctor,

and was under suspension at the time of his deposition,

and from his own statement before the Trial Court this

was so because he was charged of giving a post mortem

report, though he had not conducted any post mortem.

So much for the credibility of this witness. He was cross

examined by the prosecution as to the overwriting and

mistakes in his medical report. He denies having made

the changes in the report. The Trial Court held that the

medical report of this witness (DW-4) to be “suspicious”,

for the reasons that there was no explanation as to how

the two accused had sustained these injuries. The only

proof of injuries suffered by Jethnath was that there was

a mention of these injuries in his arrest memo, when it

was mentioned as ‘abrasion on hand’. This the Trial
19
Court rightly held could be caused due to the force this

      assailant   had   exerted   in   attacking   the   deceased.

      Moreover, the injuries were in any case simple in nature.
25.   The High Court, though examines this aspect in a totally

      different perspective. It has magnified simple, doubtful

      and totally unexplained injuries of the accused and has

      belittled the brutal and murderous attack on PW-2 and

      her deceased husband, and most importantly expressed

      serious doubt on the testimony of an injured witness, i.e.,

      PW-2. This approach of the High Court in our considered

      opinion was not correct.
26.   The High Court has gone wrong in its appreciation of the

      case, both on facts as well as on law. The statement of an

      injured eye-witness is an important piece of evidence

      which cannot be easily discarded by a Court. Minor

      discrepancies do not matter.
In
State of M.P. vs.

      Mansingh and Others
(2003) 10 SCC 414 where

      conviction of the accused by the trial court, inter alia,

      under Section 302, was set aside by the High Court on

      the so called discrepancies of an injured witness this
20
court while allowing the State’s appeal against the

      acquittal said this :
“9. The evidence of injured witness has greater
               evidentiary value and unless compelling reasons
               exist, their statements are not to be discarded
               lightly. Merely because there was no mention of
               a knife in the first information report, that does
               not wash away the effect of the evidence
               tendered by the injured witnesses PWs 4 and 7.
               Minor discrepancies do not corrode the credibility
               of an otherwise acceptable evidence.            The
               circumstances highlighted by the High Court to
               attach vulnerability to the evidence of the injured
               witnesses are clearly inconsequential.”
27.   The reasons assigned for disbelieving the statement of

      PW-2 by the High Court are not correct. The High Court

      discredits   the   statement      of   PW-2     because        of   the

      discrepancies in her earlier statement given under
Section

      161
Cr.P.C., and the one given in her examination-in-

      chief.   This as we have already discussed was not

      sufficient to totally discredit an injured eye witness.

      Apart from this eye-witness, there were other eye-

      witnesses as well, which we have
referred above
. Further,

      there is also the recovery made of the weapons and the

      blood-stained cloth of the accused. There is nothing to

      doubt either the recovery or the manner in which the

      recovery has been made. The conclusion derived by the
21
High Court that the assailants were not having common

      intention   or   common    object      of   killing   deceased

      Chandernath is not entirely correct.
28.   The grounds for acquitting the accused under Section 302

      &
Section 307
of IPC were mainly based on the

      presumption that it was not a pre meditated attack,

      rather it was a clash between two groups, where both

      were somewhat armed, which resulted in injuries on both

      sides, though somewhat larger injuries and a death, on

      the side of the complainant.   This determination of the

      High Court is based on primarily on two aspects, first

      that the assailants too had sustained injuries and

      secondly the discrepancies in the evidence of PW-2.
29.   As far as the injuries sustained by some of the accused is

      concerned this could never be proved in the trial. DW-4

      who was produced as a witness stood thoroughly

      discredited and rightly so, as we have discussed in the

      preceding paragraphs. As to the so-called discrepancies

      in the statement of PW-2 we are again of the view that

      this witness is an injured eye witness and therefore her

      evidence cannot be completely disregarded.
22
30.   Having said this, however, we are also of the opinion that

      the possibility of the incident not being premeditated,

      cannot be totally disregarded, considering the overall

      ‘circumstances’ of the case, as urged before us and even

      considering the contradictions in the two statements of

      PW-2. We do not discredit the evidence of PW-2. She is a

      reliable witness. But only to the extent of what led to the

      incident, we are inclined to grant a limited benefit to the

      accused but not like the one given by the High Court. We

      are of the opinion that this case is of culpable homicide

      not amounting to murder, and not of murder. There were

      contradictions in the two statements of PW-2 as we have

      discussed    in   the    preceding    paragraphs.     These

      contradictions, however, are not enough to completely

      discredit this witness. All the same, these contradictions,

      in the given fact of the case, do give a benefit of doubt to

      the accused as to the case of premeditated attack of the

      prosecution. In our opinion, therefore the attack would

      come under Exception 4 to Section 300, the attack not

      being premeditated, but was, “in a sudden fight in the

      heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel and without the
23
offender having taken undue advantage or acted in a

      cruel or unusual manner.”
31.   Both the appeals are allowed and the order of the High

      Court dated 08.08.2007 is liable to be set aside and is

      hereby quashed. As far as the order of the Trial Court is

      concerned, we convert the findings of Section 302 to that

      of Section 304 part I
IPC
, and that of Section 307 to
Section 308
IPC. We sentence each of the accused for

      seven years of rigorous imprisonment (R.I.) under Section

      304 part I
IPC
and three years of rigorous imprisonment

      under
Section 308
IPC.      The remaining findings and

      sentences awarded by the Trial Court shall remain.
32.    Out of the six accused, we have been informed that

      Jethnath has passed away.            The case against him

      therefore stands abated. The remaining accused shall

      surrender before the Court concerned within four weeks

      from today, from where they shall be sent to prison to

      carry out the remaining sentence. Bail bonds, if any, shall

      stand   discharged.   The   period    of   sentence   already

      undergone by the accused shall be adjusted from the

      sentences presently awarded. All sentences will run
24
concurrently. Let a copy of this order be sent to the

  concerned court for onward compliance of our orders.
……..............................J.
                                [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]
                                                                 .
…….............................J.
                                [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]


New Delhi,
October 30, 2023.