[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
X vs Union Of India on 16 October, 2023
Author:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Bench:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Reportable
2023 INSC 919



                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 ORIGINAL WRIT JURISDICTION


                            Miscellaneous Application No. 2157 of 2023
                                                 in
                               Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1137 of 2023




             X                                                  … Petitioner


                                             Versus


             Union of India and Anr.                           …Respondents




   Signature Not Verified

   Digitally signed by
   Manish Issrani
   Date: 2023.10.16
   21:11:21 IST
   Reason:




                                                1
                                                     JUDGMENT




Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI


                                                    Table of Contents



A.         Facts and procedural history ........................................................................... 3

B.         The medical termination of pregnancies ...................................................... 10

C.         Analysis ........................................................................................................... 15

     i.       The jurisdiction of this Court to hear this case .................................................. 15

     ii.      Decision on the prayer ......................................................................................... 18




                                                                  2
A.    Facts and procedural history


1.     The Registry is directed to anonymize the name of the petitioner in this

judgment, all orders that have been passed as well as in the records which are

publicly available.


2.     The petitioner is a married woman of twenty-seven years. She and her

husband have two children, the younger of which is about one year old. She filed

the petition under
Article 32
for directions to the respondents to permit a medical

termination of her ongoing pregnancy. The petitioner states that she did not

discover that she was pregnant until after twenty weeks of the pregnancy had

elapsed because she had lactational amenorrhea. As a result of lactational

amenorrhea, women who are breastfeeding do not menstruate. She therefore did

not realize that the absence of menstruation was indicative of pregnancy. The

petitioner states that she visited the gynaecologist for the first time after the

delivery of her second child because she was feeling weak, nauseous, dizzy and

experiencing abdominal discomfort. She underwent an ultrasound scan, upon

which she realized that she was pregnant. The pregnancy was estimated to be

around twenty-four weeks at that time.


3.     The petitioner avers that she and her husband attempted to medically

terminate the pregnancy at various hospitals but that they were unable to because

of the
Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act
1971 1 read with the Medical

Termination of Pregnancy Rules 2003 2 (as amended in 2021). She therefore



1 “
MTP Act
”
2 “MTP Rules”



                                         3
approached this Court by invoking its writ jurisdiction. She sought permission for

the medical termination of her pregnancy on the following grounds:


      a.    She suffers from post-partum depression and her mental condition does

            not permit her to raise another child; and


      b.    Her husband is the only earning member of their family and they already

            have two children to care for. Additionally, they have other family

            members who depend on them.


4.      The matter was listed before a two-Judge Bench comprising Hima Kohli, J.
and B V Nagarathna, J. on 5 October 2023. On the same day, the Bench directed

the petitioner to appear before a Medical Board constituted by the All India Institute

of Medical Sciences, New Delhi. 3 The report submitted to this Court by the Medical

Board is extracted below:
“Details of the woman seeking termination of pregnancy:
1.   …
2.   Age : 27 years.
3.   Registration/Case Number: UHID – 107060237.
4.   Additional review done at AIIMS:
S.No.     Investigations done            Key finding
                                     1         Ultrasound done at    Ultrasonography suggest: Single
                                               AIIMS on              live intra uterine fetus of 25
                                               20.09.2023            weeks 5 days POG. Estimated
                                                                     Fetal Weight – 886
                                                                     gm. Placenta upper segment.
5. Opinion by Medical Board for termination of pregnancy:
(a)    Allowed (X)
                           (b)    Denied ( )
                           Justification for the decision:
The case has been reviewed by the medical board. The weight of the baby by the

3 “AIIMS”
4
scan done on 06/10/2023 is 886gm with gestational age of 25 weeks 5 days.
As per the current status, the baby is viable and has a reasonable chance of
                      survival.
The chances of post partum psychosis of which the couple is worried of, are present
                      even at this gestation following delivery.
The mother is a previous 2 LSCS and the chances of complications dueto hysterotomy
                      are there at this gestation.
In such a scenario, the termination of pregnancy may be reconsidered.
                      The option of antenatal care and delivery at AIIMS, New Delhi has been discussed with
                      the couple.
6.   Physical fitness of the woman for the termination of pregnancy:
(a)        Yes ( )
                              (b)        No ( ) ”
By its order dated 9 October 2023, this Court allowed the petition and permitted

the medical termination of the pregnancy on the ground that continuing with the

pregnancy could seriously imperil the mental health of the petitioner. The order

was pronounced in Court and the reasons were to follow later.
5.    On 10 October 2023, a doctor from AIIMS (who was a member of the

Medical Board which examined the petitioner) emailed Ms. Aishwarya Bhati,

learned ASG, stating that the foetus has a strong chance of survival and seeking

directions from this Court as to whether the foetal heartbeat ought to be stopped.

The email also stated that if the foetal heartbeat was not stopped, the baby would

be placed in an intensive care unit and that there was a high possibility of

immediate and long-term physical and mental disability. AIIMS sought a direction

from the Court as to whether a foeticide should be carried out. The email is

extracted below:
“…
5
This is regarding the Supreme Court order dated 9.10.2023, regarding
                termination of pregnancy of Ms .... Before proceeding for termination, we would
                request the following clarifications from the Hon Supreme Court:
As the baby is currently viable (will show signs of life and have a strong
                possibility of survival), we will need a directive from the Supreme court on
                whether a feticide (stopping the fetal heart) can be done before termination. We
                perform this procedure for a fetus which has abnormal development, but
                generally not done in a normal fetus.
If fetecide is not performed, this Is not a termination, but a preterm delivery
                where the baby born will be provided treatment and care. A baby who Is born
                preterm and also of such low birth weight will have a long stay in intensive care
                unit, with a high possibility of immediate and long term physical and mental
                disability which will seriously jeopardise the quality of life of the child. In such a
                scenario, a directive needs to be given as to what is to be done with the baby?
                If the parents agree to keep the child this will take a major physical, mental,
                emotional and financial toll on the couple.
If it is to go for adoption, the process needs to be spelt out clearly as to needs
                to clear that baby who comes into the world will have a better chance at life if
                the delivery happens after at least 8 weeks.
It Is also to be kept In mind that the consequences of delivery which have
                happened in the previous two babies can happen at this time also, with a
                delivery now at this time.
We would be obliged if a directive on these is given by the Hon Supreme Court
                to ease out the process.
…”
6.    Ms. Bhati mentioned the case at 4 pm on 10 October 2023 before the Bench

presided over by the Chief Justice. Ms Bhati informed this Court that in view of the

email extracted above and the ensuing urgency, she mentioned the matter before

Kohli, J (Nagarathna J was presiding over another Bench) and requested that it be

listed. Kohli, J. orally informed Ms. Bhati that she was functus officio after passing

the order dated 9 October 2023 and that the matter ought to be mentioned before

the Chief Justice of India so that he may exercise his powers on the administrative

side and constitute a bench to hear the matter. As stated above, Ms. Bhati

mentioned the matter before the Bench presided over by the Chief Justice. The
6
ASG stated that she would move a recall application, before the same bench

which had heard the petition earlier the urgency arising as a result of the fact that

the Court had directed an MTP to be carried out immediately upon the petitioner

reporting to AIIMS. This was the appropriate course on the part of the ASG to

follow since the Judges who had heard the petition (Justices Kohli and

Nagarathna) were not sitting as a Bench thereafter and a special Bench had to be

constituted. This lay within the powers of the Chief Justice on the administrative

side. The Chief Justice constituted the same two-Judge Bench comprising of Kohli,

J. and Nagarathna, J. to hear the application for recall of the order dated 9 October

2023 and the case was directed to be notified on the next day in the sitting list of

11 October 2023.
7.    The two-Judge Bench heard the counsel for the petitioners as well as the

ASG. At this juncture, the petitioner filed an affidavit which stated, “I have made a

wilful and conscious decision to medically terminate my pregnancy and don’t want

to keep the baby even if survives.”
8.    The judges were unable to agree when the application moved by the ASG

was heard and delivered a split verdict. In her judgment, Kohli, J. held that her

judicial conscience prevented her from allowing the prayer in view of the email sent

to Ms. Bhati. Nagarathna, J., on the other hand, held that the order dated 9 October

2023 ought not to be overturned for the following reasons:
a.   The interest of the mother, who already had two children and would

          deliver a third child within a year of delivering the second, must be given

          preference;
7
b.   The socio-economic conditions and the mental state of the petitioner

          must be considered by this Court;
c.   The decision of the petitioner ought to be respected and must not be

          substituted by the decision of this Court; and


     d.   A foetus is dependent on the mother and cannot be recognized as a

          personality apart from that of the mother as its very existence is owed to

          the mother.
9.    Following the split verdict, the petition was directed to be listed before the

present three judge Bench, in view of the difference of opinion between the two

judges on the application for recall of the order dated 9 October 2023. On 13

October 2023, this Court passed an order calling for a further report from AIIMS

on certain specific issues. They were formulated thus:
“(i) Whether the fetus is suffering from any abnormality as provided by
               subsection 2(b) of
Section 3
of the Act. Though the earlier report mentions that
               the fetus is normal, nonetheless, in order to place the matter beyond doubt, we
               request a further report to be submitted on the above aspect;
(ii) Whether the continuance of the pregnancy of the petitioner to full term would
               be jeopardised by the drugs which may be prescribed for the alleged condition
               from which the petitioner is stated to be suffering; and
(iii) The medical professionals at AIIMS would be at liberty to carry out their own
               diagnosis in regard to the alleged medical condition and to indicate their own
               independent evaluation of the mental and physical condition of the petitioner.
Upon doing so, we request the doctors to apprise this Court if the petitioner is
               found to be suffering from post partum psychosis and whether any alternate
               administration of medication consistent with the pregnancy would be available
               so as to neither jeopardise the well-being of the petitioner or the fetus in that
               regard. This exercise shall be carried out during the course of the day.”
8
10.    The Medical Board constituted by AIIMS comprised of nine doctors,

including in the fields of obstetrics and gynaecology, paediatrics, and psychiatry.

The conclusions in the report submitted by the Medical Board to this Court are

extracted below:
“1. As assessed by USG and Fetal Echo, the fetus does not have any structural
                anomaly at the present time.(Report attached).Here the board would also like
                to put on record that all abnormalities cannot be picked up on USG scans.
2. The continuation of pregnancy to full term while the woman is on the revised
                medications (as advised by the psychiatrist on the board) is not likely to
                significantly increase the risk of adverse outcomes for the mother and fetus as
                compared to other pregnant woman.
3. On a psychiatric assessment the board is of the opinion that she has a past
                history of postpartum psychosis, currently controlled on medications. Her
                medications have been reviewed and revised for an optimal management. It is
                felt that with proper care and treatment under appropriate medical supervision,
                the mother and baby can be managed well during pregnancy and postpartum
                as has been previously evidenced by her response to medications in case of
                worsening of symptoms, she may be admitted and treated.”
11.    Hence, the points put to the Medical Board for determination were answered

in the following terms:
a.   No abnormality has been detected in the foetus;
b.   The continuation of the pregnancy would not be jeopardised by the

           medication which the petitioner is currently taking; and


      c.   The petitioner has a history of postpartum psychosis which is currently

           being controlled on medication.
A revised medication regime was prescribed for optimal management of the

postpartum psychosis.
9
12.     The issues which arise for the consideration of this Court are:
a.     What is the nature of the jurisdiction under which this Court is

             adjudicating this case; and

      b.     Can the relief sought in the writ petition be granted?
B.    Medical termination of pregnancies
13.     The termination of pregnancies is governed by the
MTP Act
and the rules

framed under it.
The MTP Act
is a progressive legislation which regulates the

manner in which pregnancies may be terminated.
Section 3
spells out certain

conditions which must be satisfied before a pregnancy can be terminated.4 The



4 “
Section 3
- When pregnancies may be terminated by registered medical practitioners

(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860), a registered medical
practitioner shall not be guilty of any offence under that code or under any other law for the time being
in force, if any pregnancy is terminated by him in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
2[(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), a pregnancy may be terminated by a registered
medical practitioner,--
(a) where the length of the pregnancy does not exceed twenty weeks, if such medical practitioner is, or
(b) where the length of the pregnancy exceeds twenty weeks but does not exceed twenty-four weeks
in case of such category of woman as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act, if not less than
two registered medical practitioners are, of the opinion, formed in good faith, that- -
(i) the continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk to the life of the pregnant woman or of grave
injury to her physical or mental health; or
(ii) there is a substantial risk that if the child were born, it would suffer from any serious physical or
mental abnormality.
Explanation 1.--For the purposes of clause (a), where any pregnancy occurs as a result of failure of any
device or method used by any woman or her partner for the purpose
of limiting the number of children or preventing pregnancy, the anguish caused by such pregnancy may
be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.
Explanation 2.--For the purposes of clauses (a) and (b), where any pregnancy is alleged by the pregnant
woman to have been caused by rape, the anguish caused by the pregnancy shall be presumed to
constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.
(2A) The norms for the registered medical practitioner whose opinion is required for termination of
pregnancy at different gestational age shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made under this
Act.
(2B) The provisions of sub-section (2) relating to the length of the pregnancy shall not apply to the
termination of pregnancy by the medical practitioner where such termination is necessitated by the
diagnosis of any of the substantial foetal abnormalities diagnosed by a Medical Board.
(2C) Every State Government or Union territory, as the case may be, shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, constitute a Board to be called a Medical Board for the purposes of this Act to exercise such
powers and functions as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(2D) The Medical Board shall consist of the following, namely:-- (a) a Gynaecologist; (b) a Paediatrician;
(c) a Radiologist or Sonologist; and (d) such other number of members as may be notified in the Official
Gazette by the State Government or Union territory, as the case may be.
10
conditions depend upon the length of the pregnancy. Where the length of the

pregnancy does not exceed twenty weeks, one Registered Medical Practitioner 5

must be of the opinion, formed in good faith, that: 6


      a.     The continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk to the life of the

             pregnant woman or of grave injury to her physical or mental health.7 The

             anguish caused by a pregnancy which occurs due to the failure of a

             contraceptive method is presumed to constitute a grave injury to the

             mental health of the woman; 8 or


      b.     There is a substantial risk that if the child were born, it would suffer from

             any serious physical or mental abnormality. 9


Where any pregnancy is alleged by the pregnant woman to have been caused by

rape, the anguish caused by the pregnancy is presumed to constitute a grave injury

to the mental health of the woman. 10 The presumption adverted to in (a) above

makes it evident that the
MTP Act
recognizes the autonomy of the pregnant

woman and respects her right to choose the course of her life.




(3) In determining whether the continuance of a pregnancy would involve such risk of injury to the health
as is mentioned in sub-section (2), account may be taken of the pregnant woman’s actual or reasonably
foreseeable environment.
(4) (a) No pregnancy of a woman, who has not attained the age of eighteen years, or, who having
attained the age of eighteen years, is a mentally ill person, shall be terminated except with the consent
in writing of her guardian.
(b) Save as otherwise provided in clause (a), no pregnancy shall be terminated except with the consent
of the pregnant woman.”
5 “RMP” as defined under Section 2(d) of the MTP Act
6 Section 3(2)(a), MTP Act
7 Section 3(2)(b)(i), MTP Act
8 Explanation 1 to Section 3(2), MTP Act
9 Section 3(2)(b)(ii), MTP Act
10 Explanation 2 to Section 3(2), MTP Act
11
14.        Where the length of the pregnancy exceeds twenty weeks but does not

exceed twenty-four weeks, two RMPs must be of the opinion discussed in the

preceding paragraph.11 The categories of women where a pregnancy beyond 20

weeks and up to 24 weeks may be terminated are permitted to be prescribed by

rules made by the delegate of the legislature. Rule 3B of the MTP Rules (as

amended in 2021) provides grounds for the termination of a pregnancy up to

twenty-four weeks. The termination may be allowed in the following cases or for

the following persons:
a.      Survivors of sexual assault or rape or incest;


      b.      Minors;


      c.      Change of marital status during the ongoing pregnancy (widowhood and

              divorce);


      d.      Women with physical disabilities with a major disability in terms of the
criteria laid down under the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act 2016;


      e.      Mentally ill women including mental retardation;
f.      Foetal malformation that has a substantial risk of being incompatible

              with life or where in the event of birth, the child may suffer from physical

              or mental abnormalities and be seriously handicapped; and




11
Section 3(2)(b)
, MTP Act
12
g.     Women with pregnancy in humanitarian settings or disaster or

             emergency situations as may be declared by the Government.12




      In
X v. Principal Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare,

      GNCTD
, 13 this Court held that the benefits of Rule 3B(c) extend equally to

      both single and married women and that the benefits of Rule 3B extend to all

      women who undergo a change in their material circumstances.
15.     Significantly, if in the opinion of an RMP, the termination of a pregnancy is

immediately necessary to save the life of a pregnant woman, the provisions of
Section 3
which relate to the length of the pregnancy and the opinion of two RMPs

shall not apply. 14
Section 4
(which concerns the place at which a pregnancy may

be terminated) shall not apply to such cases as well. The design of the statute

makes it evident that saving the life of the pregnant woman is of paramount

importance, notwithstanding the length of the pregnancy.




12 Rule 3B, MTP Rules: 3-B. Women eligible for termination of pregnancy up to twenty-four weeks.—

The following categories of women shall be considered eligible for termination of pregnancy under
clause (b) of sub-section (2)
Section 3
of the Act, for a period of up to twenty-four weeks, namely—
(a) survivors of sexual assault or rape or incest; (b) minors;
(c) change of marital status during the ongoing pregnancy (widowhood and divorce);
(d) women with physical disabilities [major disability as per criteria laid down under the Rights of
Persons with
Disabilities Act, 2016
(49 of 2016)];
(e) mentally ill women including mental retardation;
(f) the foetal malformation that has substantial risk of being incompatible with life or if the child is born
it may suffer from such physical or mental abnormalities to be seriously handicapped; and
(g) women with pregnancy in humanitarian settings or disaster or emergency situations as may be
declared by the Government.
13 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1321
14
Section 5
, MTP Act: 5.
Sections 3
and
4
when not to apply.—(1) The provisions of
Section 4
, and so

much of the provisions of sub-section (2) of
Section 3
as relate to the length of the pregnancy and the
opinion of not less than two registered medical practitioners, shall not apply to the termination of a
pregnancy by a registered medical practitioner in a case where he is of opinion, formed in good faith,
that the termination of such pregnancy is immediately necessary to save the life of the pregnant woman.
…
13
16.       Further, the provisions of
Section 3(2)
relating to the length of the pregnancy

shall not apply to the termination of a pregnancy by an RMP, where such

termination is necessitated by the diagnosis of any of the substantial foetal

abnormalities diagnosed by a Medical Board. 15 The Medical Board has the power

to allow or deny the termination of a pregnancy the length of which is beyond

twenty-four weeks. 16 It may do so only after ensuring that the procedure would be

safe for the woman at that gestation age and after considering whether the foetal

malformation leads to a substantial risk of the foetus being incompatible with life,

or where the child (if it is born) may suffer from such physical or mental

abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped. 17 Therefore, the outer temporal limit

within which a pregnancy may be terminated is lifted in some cases.
17.       The position of law can therefore be summarized as follows:
Length of the pregnancy                Requirements for termination
          Up to twenty weeks                   Opinion of one RMP in terms of
Section 3(2)
Between twenty and twenty-four Opinion of two RMPs in terms of
          weeks
Section 3(2)
read with Rule 3B.
If the termination is required to save
                                               the life of the pregnant woman, the
                                               opinion of one RMP in terms of
Section
5
Beyond twenty-four weeks             If   there     are   substantial   foetal
                                               abnormalities, with the approval of the




15
Section 3(2B)
, MTP Act
16 Rule 3A(a)(i), MTP Rules
17 Ibid
14
Medical Board in terms of
Section
                                                 3(2B)
read with Rule 3A(a)(i)




C.    Analysis


           i.    The jurisdiction of this Court to hear this case
18.    Having described the factual background, the procedural history, and the

framework of law, we turn to the issues raised in this case. As noticed in the first

segment of this judgment, the Union of India filed an application for the recall of

the order dated 9 October 2023 passed by a two-Judge Bench of this Court on the

ground that one of the doctors on the Medical Board emailed the learned ASG,

seeking a clarification of that order.
19.    It is trite law that once a judgment or order attains finality, a party seeking to

challenge the decision rendered may do so only by taking recourse to one of the

following:
a.        Invoking the jurisdiction of the court to review the judgment or order;
b.        Preferring an appeal against the judgment or order (where an appeal

                lies); or


      c.        In the case of the Supreme Court, filing a curative petition;
The reason for the availability of a limited number of routes by which a

      judgment can be challenged is that there must be quietus to a dispute.

      Unlimited modes by which judgments or orders can be challenged would
15
result in chaos, uncertainty, and unpredictability. This is also the reason why

      an application for recall of an order or judgment cannot be entertained by this

      Court, save and except in exceptional circumstances such as where a party

      which is directly affected was not served with notice of the proceedings.

      Otherwise, the hearing and disposal of an application for recall may even

      have the effect of creating an intra-court appeal, which is impermissible and

      wholly unknown to this Court. Indeed, this Court has repeatedly deprecated

      the practice of filing applications for recall and noted that they may sometimes

      be an abuse of the process of the law. 18
20.    In the present case, the Union of India filed an application for recall because

certain aspects of the situation at hand were brought to its attention after the

petition was disposed of by the order dated 9 October 2023. We have no doubt

that there was no intention to abuse the process of the law. However, the

appropriate procedure which it ought to have followed would be to file a Review

Petition, accompanied by an application for urgent listing and an application for

hearing in open court, given the urgency of the matter. The Bench consisting of

Kohli and Nagarathna, JJ agreed to hear the matter. The immense urgency at that

time did not permit this Court to address the reasons for doing so. The reasons are

addressed presently.
21.    Under
Article 142
of the Constitution, this Court has the power to pass such

decree or make such order as is necessary for doing complete justice in any cause



18 Delhi Admn. v. Gurdip Singh Uban, (2000) 7 SCC 296; Order dated 3 September 2020 in M.A.

No.1434 of 2020 in Misc. Application Diary No.15272 of 2020 in Suo Moto Contempt Petition (Criminal)
No. 2 of 2019
16
or matter pending before it. In
State v. Kalyan Singh
, 19 this Court observed that
Article 142
permitted it to relax the application of law depending upon the particular

facts and circumstances of the case:
“22. ... This article gives a very wide power to do complete justice to the parties
                 before the Court, a power which exists in the Supreme Court because the
                 judgment delivered by it will finally end the litigation between the parties. It is
                 important to notice that
Article 142
follows upon
Article 141
of the Constitution,
                 in which it is stated that the law declared by the Supreme Court shall be binding
                 on all courts within the territory of India. Thus, every judgment delivered by the
                 Supreme Court has two components — the law declared which binds courts in
                 future litigation between persons, and the doing of complete justice in any cause
                 or matter which is pending before it. It is, in fact, an Article that turns one of the
                 maxims of equity on its head, namely, that equity follows the law. By
Article 142
,
                 as has been held
inState of Punjab [State of Punjab v. Rafiq Masih
, (2014) 8
                 SCC 883: (2014) 4 SCC (Civ) 657: (2014) 6 SCC (Cri) 154: (2014) 3 SCC (L&S)
                 134] judgment, equity has been given precedence over law. But it is not the kind
                 of equity which can disregard mandatory substantive provisions of law when the
                 court issues directions under
Article 142.
While moulding relief, the court can
                 go to the extent of relaxing the application of law to the parties or
                 exempting altogether the parties from the rigours of the law in view of the
                 peculiar facts and circumstances of the case. This being so, it is clear that
                 this Court has the power, nay, the duty to do complete justice in a case
                 when found necessary. ... ”
                                                                                  (emphasis supplied)
22.    In the present case, this Court is justified in exercising its jurisdiction under
Article 142
in view of the following circumstances:
a.   This is not an ordinary civil case. Rather, it is one which concerns the

           viability of a medical termination of a pregnancy and the course of action

           to be adopted by the doctors on the basis of the development of the

           foetus;
b.   Certain aspects of the case which ought to have been brought to the

           attention of this Court came to light after the order dated 9 October 2023
19 (2017) 7 SCC 444
17
had been passed. This was not within the control of any of the parties to

             the case but was the result of the actions of a third party altogether (the

             Medical Board). However, this information could have had a bearing on

             the directions issued by this Court; and


      c.     There was immense urgency in this matter.
ii.    Decision on the prayer
23.    We now turn to the issue of whether the relief sought in the writ petition can

be granted.
24.    As noticed above, the length of the pregnancy has crossed twenty-four

weeks. It is now approximately twenty-six weeks and five days. A medical

termination of the pregnancy cannot be permitted for the following reasons:
a.     Having crossed the statutory limit of twenty-four weeks, the

             requirements in either of
Section 3(2B)
or
Section 5
must be met;
b.     There are no “substantial foetal abnormalities” diagnosed by a Medical

             Board in this case, in terms of
Section 3(2B)
. This Court called for a

             second medical report from AIIMS to ensure that the facts of the case

             were accurately placed before it and no foetal abnormality was detected;
and


      c.     Neither of the two reports submitted by the Medical Boards indicates

             that a termination is immediately necessary to save the life of the

             petitioner, in terms of
Section 5
.
18
25.    Under
Article 142
of the Constitution, this Court has the power to do

complete justice. However, this power may not be attracted in every case. If a

medical termination were to be conducted at this stage, the doctors would be faced

with a viable foetus. One of the options before this Court, which the email from

AIIMS has flagged, is for it to direct the doctors to stop the heartbeat. This Court

is averse to issuing a direction of this nature for the reasons recorded in the

preceding paragraph. The petitioner, too, did not wish for this Court to issue such

a direction. This was communicated by her to the court during the course of the

hearing. In the absence of a direction to stop the heartbeat, the viable foetus would

be faced with a significant risk of lifelong physical and mental disabilities. The

reports submitted by the Medical Board speak for themselves.
26.    For these reasons, we do not accede to the prayer for the medical

termination of the pregnancy.
27.    The delivery will be conducted by AIIMS at the appropriate time. The Union

Government has undertaken to pay all the medical costs for the delivery and

incidental to it.
28.    Should the petitioner be inclined to give the child up for adoption, the Union

Government has stated through the submission of the ASG that they shall ensure

that this process takes place at the earliest, and in a smooth fashion. Needless to

say, the decision of whether to give the child up for adoption is entirely that of the

parents.
29.    The application for recall of the order dated 9 October 2023 is allowed. The

petition and the application are disposed of in terms of the directions above.
19
30. Pending applications (if any) stand disposed of.
…….……………………………………CJI
                                        [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]



                                       …….………………………………………J
                                       [J B Pardiwala]



                                       …….………………………………………J
                                       [Manoj Misra]


New Delhi;
October 16, 2023
20