[Cites
17
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Nutan Kumari vs B.R.A.Bihar Univ. And Ors. Etc. Etc. on 12 October, 2023
Author:
Hima Kohli
Bench:
Hima Kohli
REPORTABLE


                                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
2023 INSC 966
                                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                      CIVIL APPEALS NO. 6232-6236 OF 2013



                                    NUTAN KUMARI                                                              APPELLANT

                                                                              VERSUS


                                    B.R.A. BIHAR UNIVERSITY AND OTHERS                                        RESPONDENTS


                                                                          ORDER
1.      The appellant1 is aggrieved by the judgment dated 16 th May, 2011, passed by

                            the Division Bench of the High Court of Patna whereunder the appeals 2 filed by the

                            respondents No. 5 to 8 herein working as Physical Training Instructors 3 in four

                            different colleges under the respondent No.1- University were allowed and the

                            judgment of the learned Single Judge dated 10 th February, 2011 passed in CWJC No.

                            14680 of 2020 filed by the appellant terminating their services was quashed. It was

                            further clarified that if the respondent No.1 – University, including the Chancellor

                            were so inclined, they would be entitled to proceed afresh with the inquiry directed to

                            be conducted in the matter after due notice to the private respondents herein.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
Date: 2023.11.01
15:26:35 IST
Reason:
1 Parties have been described in the manner in which they have been arrayed in Civil Appeal No.
                            6232/2013.
2 Letter Patent Appeals No. 408/2011, 482/2011, 593/2011, 713/2011 and 751/2011
                            3 For short ‘PTI’
1
2.      We may first take note of some relevant facts of the case.

2.1.    An advertisement was issued by the respondent No.1-University on 13 th July,

2008, inviting applications for appointment of PTIs in four of its constituent colleges.

The said advertisement laid down three specific conditions which are as follows: -
(a)     Each candidate would separately apply for the post of PTI in
                          respect of each college.
(b)     The eligibility criteria for applying for the subject post was
                          possession of a Bachelor’s degree in Physical Education or
                          Graduation with Diploma in Physical Education from a recognized
                          institution.
(c)     The age limit for all the posts was prescribed to be as per the
                          Government rules/orders.
2.2.    Pursuant to the aforesaid advertisement, the appellant and the private

respondents submitted their applications along with several other applicants. All the

parties submitted separate applications in respect of each of the four colleges.

2.3.    It is not in dispute that the appellant and the private respondents No.5 to 8

were found eligible and were called for an interview. For conducting the interview, the

respondent No.1 - University constituted a five Members’ Selection Committee 4.

2.4.    The Selection Committee met on 6 th November, 2008 and interviewed the

applicants. The Committee conducted four different sets of interviews for each

candidate in respect of the applications submitted by them for four colleges in

question. Thereafter, a merit list was prepared.            A perusal of the said merit list

reveals that though all the parties in the present proceedings were interviewed by the

Selection Committee for the posts available in the four colleges on the same day but

at four different times, there was a great variation in the marks assigned to the
4 Vide office order dated 27th October, 2008
2
appellant and the respondents No.5 to 8 during the interview. This aspect was

particularly noticed by the learned Single Judge, who observed as follows: -
“At this stage, I may notice one thing that stands out in the
              tabulation of the merit list. As noted above, all the five writ petitioners
              were interviewed for all the four Colleges by the same Committee of
              five persons allegedly four times on the same day. All other marks with
              regard to academic qualifications and marks for higher qualifications
              and experience were the same in all the four charts but the marks
              given in interview (viva) varied drastically. For example, petitioner,
              Nutan Kumari in one interview was awarded 24 marks out of 30 in
              another 16 out of 30 in the third 12 out of 30 and in the 4th 20 out of
30. Such erratic variation is there in all the four merit lists where
              someone scores less in one and more in another. University is not
              able to give any justification for these markings. Details of other
              markings will be discussed at appropriate stage. Upon tabulation of
              results on 14th February, 2009 University issued appointment letters
              in favour of the four writ petitioners leaving aside Nutan Kumari.
Apparently, the four selected petitioners gave their joining immediately
              in February, 2009 itself. Thereafter, pursuant to the orders of the Vice-
              Chancellor, by office order dated 13.05.2009, the Registrar of the
              University fixed their pay scale at Rs.5000-150-8000.”


2.5.   As is evident from the aforesaid observations, the appellant was interviewed

four times by the same Selection Committee on the very same day and each time,

the marks assigned to her varied from 12 to 16 to 20 to 24 (out of a total of 30

marks).
2.6.   In February, 2009, the four selected candidates, i.e., respondents No.5 to 8

herein, gave in their joining report and pursuant to the orders passed by the Vice-

Chancellor of the respondent No.1 - University, their pay scales were fixed vide order

dated 13th May, 2009.
2.7.   It transpires from the records that immediately thereafter, complaints were

received by the Chancellor of the University of Bihar in respect of the aforesaid
3
selection process and vide order dated 18th June, 2009, a three Members’ Committee

(Inquiry Committee) was appointed to inquire into the selection process adopted in

respect of the PTIs by the respondent No.1 - University.
2.8.    The appellant herein also lodged a protest with the Chancellor as to the

manner in which the Selection Committee had conducted the interviews. The Inquiry

Committee submitted a report to the Chancellor of the respondent No.1 - University

on 7th October, 2009, recommending cancellation of the appointments made and for

action to be taken against the Vice Chancellor and the Registrar of the University.

On receiving the said Inquiry report, the Chancellor directed cancellation of the

appointments made to the post of PTIs and further directed the respondent No.1 -

University to take necessary action in terms of the communication dated 5 th January,

2010.
2.9.    As a result, respondent No.1 - University issued a separate letter dated 15 th

February, 2010 to the respondents No.5 to 8, who were selected to the subject post

calling upon them to show cause as to why their appointments should not be

cancelled. The said notice was challenged by the respondents No.5 to 8, who filed

separate writ petitions5 before the High Court that came to be decided by the

common judgment and order dated 10 th February, 2011, passed by the learned

Single Judge.
5 CWJC No. 3580 of 2010, CWJC No. 3611 of 2010, CWJC No. 3713 of 2010 and CWJC No. 3724 of 2010
4
3.      Pertinently, before notices to show cause were issued to respondents No.5 to

8, the appellant herein filed a separate writ petition 6 challenging the selection of the

respondents No.5 to 8. Afterwards, all the petitions filed by the appellant and

respondents No.5 to 8 were taken up together and decided by the learned Single

Judge vide common judgment and order dated 10th February, 2011. The writ petition

filed by the appellant was allowed and those filed by the respondents No.5 to 8 were

dismissed. The recommendations made by the Chancellor of the University were

accepted.
4.      Aggrieved by the aforesaid decision, respondents No.5 to 8 preferred intra

court appeals7 before the Division Bench. By the impugned judgement, the Division

Bench has set aside the well-reasoned order passed by the learned Single Judge

and held that merely because there were some variations in the marks obtained by

various candidates in the four different interviews conducted by the Selection

Committee would alone not indicate with certainty that the selection process was

grossly vitiated for requiring interference. The Division Bench frowned upon the

learned Single Judge for having gone into the said issue and observed that all the

candidates had been subjected to the same yardstick and therefore, no

discrimination could be alleged. As a result, the writ petition 4 filed by the appellant,

which was allowed by the learned Single Judge, was dismissed as meritless.
5.      As far as the respondents No.5 to 8 were concerned (appellants before the
6 CWJC No. 14680 of 2009
7 Letter Patent Appeals No. 482/2011, 408/2011, 593/2011, 713/2011 and 751/2011
5
Division Bench), it was observed that since no notice was issued to the said

respondents at the stage of the inquiry ordered by the Chancellor, respondent No.1 –

University, their termination was bad in law and in violation of the principles of natural

justice. Resultantly, the orders terminating the services of the private respondents,

including the directions issued by the Chancellor, were quashed and set aside with

liberty granted to the authorities to proceed afresh with the inquiry after due notice to

the respondents.
6.     It is the aforesaid judgment that has brought the appellant before this Court.

Learned counsel for the appellant has primarily argued that there was no good

reason for the Division Bench to have interfered in a well-reasoned and analyzed

judgment passed by the learned Single Judge where all aspects were carefully

considered on merits before returning the findings. It is submitted that the Division

Bench has completely ignored the fact that there were drastic variations in the marks

assigned to the appellant in the interview which cannot be termed as “some

variation” as sought to be described in the impugned judgment. While in one

interview, the appellant had scored 24 marks out of 30 marks, on the same day, the

same Selection Committee on conducting another interview of the appellant

assigned her 12 marks out of 30 marks, thus materially affecting the outcome of the

selection process.
7.     It is next submitted by learned counsel for the appellant that the respondent

No.6 herein, Shri Chandrama Singh, who was selected and appointed as a PTI in a

women’s college (M.S.K.B. College, Muzaffarpur), was over-aged and therefore,
6
ineligible to have even applied for the subject post. Learned counsel submits that the

respondent No.6 was born on 3rd April,1971; the advertisement in question was

published on 13th July, 2008 and the last date of receipt of the applications was 5 th

August, 2008. As on 3rd April, 2007, the respondent No.6 had already completed 37

years of age and therefore, he was clearly over age on the date of the advertisement

itself, i.e., on 13th July, 2008. This aspect was duly noted by the learned Single

Judge and the submission made by the appellant was upheld but the Division Bench

did not discuss the said issue at all in the impugned judgment.
8.     On the aforesaid aspect, Dr. Adish C. Aggarwala, learned Senior Advocate

appearing for the respondent No.6 seeks to place reliance on a document filed by the

appellant with the appeal paper book and marked as “Annexure-P4” which is a typed

copy of the file notings of the respondent No.1 - University wherein, it has been

recorded by the Registrar that for the purposes of calculating the eligibility with

respect to the age of the candidates, it was decided that the age shall be counted as

on 1st January, 2008 since the advertisement process was commenced in the said

year. The said recommendation made by the Registrar was duly approved by the

Vice-Chancellor on the same day.
9.     We have perused the records and given our thoughtful consideration to the

arguments advanced by both sides.
10.    It has been time and again held in judicial verdicts that the selection process

is bound by the terms and conditions of an advertisement inviting applications from

eligible candidates. Unless it can be demonstrated that an advertisement has been
7
issued contrary to any Statute or the applicable rules, it is binding on all the

participants to the point that not even the Selection Committee has the jurisdiction to

lay down a separate yardstick or basis for selection as that would be tantamount to

legislating rules of selection. It is equally well settled that once the process of

selection commences, the criteria prescribed in the advertisement for conducting the

selection of the eligible candidates cannot be altered. There is sound logic behind the

same which is that if the selection criteria is tinkered with in midstream, say for

example by lowering the standards, a party can have a legitimate grievance that had

it known that the criteria would be reduced subsequently, it too could have applied for

the said post.
10.1. To elucidate the point above, we may usefully refer to the decision in
Dr. Krushna Chandra Sahu and Others v. State of Orissa and Others
8 where it

has been held thus :
“31. Now, power to make rules regulating the conditions of service of
                   persons appointed on Government posts is available to the Governor
                   of the State under the proviso to
Article 309
and it was in exercise of
                   this power that the present rules were made. If the statutory rules, in a
                   given case, have not been made, either by Parliament or the State
                   Legislature, or, for that matter, by the Governor of the State, it would
                   be open to the appropriate Government (the Central Government
                   under
Article 73
and the State Government under
Article 162
) to issue
                   executive instructions. However, if the rules have been made but they
                   are silent on any subject or point in issue, the omission can be
                   supplied and the rules can be supplemented by executive instructions
                   (See:
Sant Ram Sharma v. State of Rajasthan
[AIR 1967 SC 1910 :
(1968) 1 SCR 111 : (1968) 2 LLJ 830] .)
32. In the instant case, the Government did neither issue any adminis-
trative instruction nor did it supply the omission with regard to the cri-
                   teria on the basis of which suitability of the candidates was to be de-

8 (1995) 6 SCC 1
8
termined. The members of the Selection Board, of their own, decided
                to adopt the confidential character rolls of the candidates who were al-
                ready employed as Homoeopathic Medical Officers, as the basis for
                determining their suitability.
33. The members of the Selection Board or for that matter, any
                other Selection Committee, do not have the jurisdiction to lay
                down the criteria for selection unless they are authorised
                specifically in that regard by the Rules made under Article
                309……”
                                                             [Emphasis added]

    (Also refer :
B.S. Yadav and Others v. State of Haryana and Others
9;
P.K.
    Ramachandra Iyer and Others v. Union of India and Others
10;
Umesh
    Chandra Shukla v. Union of India and Others
11; and
Durgacharan Misra v.
    State of Orissa12
)

10.2.
In
Bedanga Talukdar v. Saifudaullah Khan and Others
13, this Court

highlighted the fact that any power of relaxation of the stipulated selection procedure

ought to be mentioned in the advertisement in the following words:-
“29. We have considered the entire matter in detail. In our opinion, it is
                too well settled to need any further reiteration that all appointments to
                public office have to be made in conformity with
Article 14
of the
                Constitution of India. In other words, there must be no arbitrariness
                resulting from any undue favour being shown to any candidate.
                Therefore, the selection process has to be conducted strictly in
                accordance with the stipulated selection procedure.
                Consequently, when a particular schedule is mentioned in an
                advertisement, the same has to be scrupulously maintained.
                There cannot be any relaxation in the terms and conditions of the
                advertisement unless such a power is specifically reserved. Such
                a power could be reserved in the relevant statutory rules. Even if
                power of relaxation is provided in the rules, it must still be
                mentioned in the advertisement. In the absence of such power in
                the rules, it could still be provided in the advertisement.
                However, the power of relaxation, if exercised, has to be given
                due publicity. This would be necessary to ensure that those
9 (1980) Supp. SCC 524
10 (1984) 2 SCC 141
11 (1985) 3 SCC 721
12 (1987) 4 SCC 646
13 (2011) 12 SCC 85
9
candidates who become eligible due to the relaxation, are afforded an
                equal opportunity to apply and compete. Relaxation of any condition
                in advertisement without due publication would be contrary to
                the mandate of equality contained in
Articles 14
and
16
of the
                Constitution of India.
30. A perusal of the advertisement in this case will clearly show that
                there was no power of relaxation. In our opinion, the High Court
                committed an error in directing that the condition with regard to the
                submission of the disability certificate either along with the application
                form or before appearing in the preliminary examination could be
                relaxed in the case of Respondent 1. Such a course would not be
                permissible as it would violate the mandate of
Articles 14
and
16
of
                the Constitution of India.”
                                                                       [Emphasis added]

               (Also refer:
Krishna Rai and Others v. Banaras Hindu
               University and Others14
)


10.3. It is also a part of settled service jurisprudence that merely by applying for a

post pursuant to an advertisement, a candidate does not automatically acquire any

vested right of selection. He only acquires a right for being considered for selection

strictly in accordance with the extant rules.
This Court has held in
N.T. Devin Katti

and Others v. Karnataka Public Service Commission and Others
15 as follows:
“11. There is yet another aspect of the question. Where advertisement
                is issued inviting applications for direct recruitment to a category of
                posts, and the advertisement expressly states that selection shall be
                made in accordance with the existing rules or government orders, and
                if it further indicates the extent of reservations in favour of various
                categories, the selection of candidates in such a case must be made
                in accordance with the then existing rules and government orders.
                Candidates who apply, and undergo written or viva voce test acquire
                vested right for being considered for selection in accordance with the
                terms and conditions contained in the advertisement, unless the
                advertisement itself indicates a contrary intention. Generally, a
                candidate has right to be considered in accordance with the
14 (2022) 8 SCC 713
15 (1990) 3 SCC 157
10
terms and conditions set out in the advertisement as his right
               crystallizes on the date of publication of advertisement, however
               he has no absolute right in the matter. If the recruitment Rules are
               amended retrospectively during the pendency of selection, in that
               event selection must be held in accordance with the amended Rules.
Whether the Rules have retrospective effect or not, primarily depends
               upon the language of the Rules and its construction to ascertain the
               legislative intent. The legislative intent is ascertained either by express
               provision or by necessary implication; if the amended Rules are not
               retrospective in nature the selection must be regulated in accordance
               with the rules and orders which were in force on the date of
               advertisement. Determination of this question largely depends on the
               facts of each case having regard to the terms and conditions set out in
               the advertisement and the relevant rules and orders. Lest there be
               any confusion, we would like to make it clear that a candidate on
               making application for a post pursuant to an advertisement does
               not acquire any vested right of selection, but if he is eligible and
               is otherwise qualified in accordance with the relevant rules and
               the terms contained in the advertisement, he does acquire a
               vested right of being considered for selection is accordance with
               the rules as they existed on the date of advertisement. He cannot
               be deprived of that limited right on the amendment of rules during the
               pendency of selection unless the amended rules are retrospective in
               nature.”
                                                                       [Emphasis added]


              (Also refer :
Sureshkumar Lalitkumar Patel v. State of Gujarat16
)


10.4. Further, once an advertisement has been issued and the selection criteria

prescribed, there is little scope for relaxing the norms, more so, by the Selection

Committee unless and until it can be adequately demonstrated that it had the power to

do so. We may allude to a decision of this Court in Secretary, A.P. Public Service

Commission and B. Swapna and Others 17 which highlights the adverse

consequences of interfering with the criteria of selection laid down under the rules in

the following words:
16 2023 SCC OnLine SC 167
17 (2005) 4 SCC 154
11
“14. The High Court has committed an error in holding that the
             amended rule was operative. As has been fairly conceded by learned
             counsel for Respondent 1 applicant it was the unamended rule which
             was applicable. Once a process of selection starts, the prescribed
             selection criteria cannot be changed. The logic behind the same is
             based on fair play. A person who did not apply because a certain
             criterion e.g. minimum percentage of marks can make a legitimate
             grievance, in case the same is lowered, that he could have applied
             because he possessed the said percentage. Rules regarding
             qualification for appointment if amended during continuance of the
             process of selection do not affect the same.
That is because every
             statute or statutory rule is prospective unless it is expressly or by
             necessary implication made to have retrospective effect. Unless there
             are words in the statute or in the rules showing the intention to affect
             existing rights the rule must be held to be prospective. If the rule is
             expressed in a language which is fairly capable of either interpretation
             it ought to be considered as prospective only. (See
P.
             Mahendran v. State of Karnataka
[(1990) 1 SCC 411 : 1990 SCC
             (L&S) 163 : (
1990) 12 ATC 727] and Gopal Krushna Rath v. M.A.A.
             Baig
[(1999) 1 SCC 544 : 1999 SCC (L&S) 325] .)
15. Another aspect which this Court has highlighted is scope for
             relaxation of norms. Although the Court must look with respect upon
             the performance of duties by experts in the respective fields, it cannot
             abdicate its functions of ushering in a society based on rule of law.
Once it is most satisfactorily established that the Selection
             Committee did not have the power to relax essential
             qualification, the entire process of selection so far as the
             selected candidate is concerned gets vitiated.
In
P.K.
             Ramachandra Iyer v. Union of India
[(1984) 2 SCC 141 : 1984 SCC
             (L&S) 214] this Court held that once it is established that there is no
             power to relax essential qualification, the entire process of selection of
             the candidate was in contravention of the established norms
             prescribed by advertisement. The power to relax must be clearly spelt
             out and cannot otherwise be exercised.”
                                                                    [Emphasis added]
11.   Coming back to the case in hand, the learned Single Judge has scrupulously

examined the records and the pleadings in the petitions and made the following

pertinent observations in respect of the selection process adopted by the Selection
12
Committee constituted by the respondent No.1 - University :
“There are three types of physical education qualification. The
             first is a three year physical education course after Intermediate
             resulting in degree of B.P.E. The second is a three year Graduation
             course in any subject after Intermediate plus one year physical
             education course conducted by University leading to B.P. Ed. Degree
             and the third is three year Graduation course in any subject after
             Intermediate and one year physical education diploma course
             conducted by School Examination Board leading to D.P. Ed. The
             selection committee on the date of interview evolved marking system
             for Graduation level which as noted above was as follows.
For candidates with B.P.E and B.P. Ed. their marks scored in
             B.P.E and B.P. Ed. were only taken and in a graded manner. If they
             had scored more than 75% they were awarded 40 out of 40, if they
             scored 60-75% they were awarded 30 out of 40, if they had scored 45-
             60% they were awarded 25 out of 40 and if they had scored below
             45% they were awarded 20 out of 40 but when it came to D.P. Ed.
             their marks scored were calculated differently. Their marks out of 40
             for Graduation was split into two of 20 marks each, 20 marks for their
             three years Graduation course and only 20 marks maximum for their
             physical education course. The result was that though petitioner,
             Nutan Kumari had 83.6% in D.P. Ed., she was awarded only 20 marks,
             whereas others who had scored lesser marks in physical education
             but had B.P.E. or B.P. Ed. were given higher marks on that basis
             ignoring their Graduation or other marks. For example, Ravi Shankar
             Kumar who had got 80% was given 40 marks, Mithilesh Kumar Mani
             who had scored 72.6% was given 30 marks, Chandrama Singh who
             had scored 55% was given 25 marks and Sanjay Kumar Singh scored
             57% was given 25 marks.
Then the challenge is to the marks on higher qualification and
             experience. It is submitted that the two are different criterion but the
             total marks combined has been fixed at 10 not disclosing any
             bifurcation or any criteria.
Then is the marks for viva (interview), which is 30% of the
             total marks, as noted in the very beginning, the same set of five
             members on the same day interviewed the selected candidates four
             times, one time each for each College and gave drastically different
             marks. First, in this regard it is submitted that this shows the erratic
             irrational marking on subjective satisfaction, which interview marks
             being as high as 30% is irrational, especially, when it is showed that
             the difference between selection and non-selection was barely a few
             marks.”
12.   After carefully examining the entire records, the learned Single Judge has

made the following pertinent observations:-
13
“Having considered the rival submissions, in my view, the
hostile discrimination and arbitrariness is writ large on the face
of the records. No one with any amount of reasonable certainty
knew the selection procedure or the process. It stands
undisputed that the criterion were laid down only on the date of
interview even then it was not made known to people. This is a
clear cut case of bad and wrong administrative action. There is
absolutely no transparency and such process cannot be
sanctified by the Court. On top of it to say that petitioner, Nutan
Kumari had participated in the selection process and, as such,
could not challenge it after appointments were made, would be
travesty of justice. Anyone could have challenged the criteria if they
were disclosed in the advertisement or before the interview or before
the selection but all that was kept secret. That came to be known
much later after appointments were made. That cannot estop Nutan
Kumari from challenging what she did not know and what was never
made public. This objection by the University and the other petitioners
cannot be sustained. In my view, the law is settled. If a person
participates in selection process with his eyes open knowing the
selection process then upon failure to get selected he cannot
turn around and challenge the same. He would be deemed to
have acquiescence to the same. That is not at all the case in the
present as noted above. Nutan Kumari challenged the process
even before the enquiry committee gave its report. The challenge
cannot be said to be belated in any aspect of the matter. The
criterion were not disclosed. It is only after the criterion were
disclosed to some extent can it be said that a person was in a
position to challenge. If that is kept in mind it would be seen that
there was no unreasonable delay in the challenge at all. Moreover, the
extent of arbitrariness in the selection process, as would be noticed,
fully justifies in setting aside the selection process and the selection
itself.
Now, coming to the markings in respect of Graduation. As
noted above, there are three types of physical education courses. One
is a three year course after Intermediate and the other two being one
year courses after three years Graduation in any subject. It matters
little whether it is a one year Diploma course or one year degree
course because under statute University alone can grant degree, the
School Examination Board cannot and that is the only reason for this
distinction. If classification had to be made, subject to it being
reasonable, it could be between the three years physical
education course and the one year physical education course
but the moot point to be noted here is that in the advertisement
all are treated similarly for eligibility with no preference. or
14
distinctions. If the advertisement itself did not provide for any
              differentiation or different treatment then at the time of
              evaluation no new criteria could be laid down. The effect is evident
              from the marks sheet of petitioner, Nutan Kumari. She got 83.6%
              marks in D.P.Ed and in three years Graduation course she had got
              48.8%. Thus, totally she was given 32 marks being 20 plus 12
              respectively out of 40 marks. Ravi Shankar Kumar, had 80% either in
              B.P.E. or B.P.Ed. he was given 40 marks out of 40. There are
              various instances, as noted earlier, to show the arbitrary results
              of this arbitrary criteria, which criteria, as noted above, was
              decided at the time of interview. When all applications had been
              scrutinized the assertion that these criterion were evolved to
              promote certain candidates cannot, thus, be said to be
              unfounded.
Again, when we come to marks of higher qualifications
              and experience, no one has disclosed as to what was the criteria
              of awarding marks under this head. Again, it is left to the whims
              of the selection committee which cannot be countenanced.
              Again, we come to the case of marks for interview, the things are
              worst. The same set of five people on the same day interviewed
              all the five petitioners four times. for the same job and in each
              interview the marks drastically varied. These are subjective
              evaluation based on subjective satisfaction it is these marks which
              have made substantial difference, as noted above, the margin being
              very small. Apart from this, to this Court it appears that subjective
              marks cannot be, in the nature of appointment, as high as 30%. These
              two things coupled together make the process quite arbitrary and
              discriminatory. Thus, the process as a whole as adopted cannot be
              said to be valid in law. The process must thus be struck down and is
              struck down. Consequently, it is held that the selection was bad.”

                      [Emphasis added]
13.   As can be seen from the above, the learned Single Judge took pains to

scrutinize the entire process adopted by the Selection Committee and returned a

finding that the same was arbitrary, irrational and liable to be set aside. We are in

concurrence with the said findings returned by the learned Single Judge.
14.   Keeping in mind the challenge laid by the appellant herein to the selection

process what emerges from the observations made by the learned Single Judge is
15
as follows:-
(i)     That the Selection Committee proceeded to fix the criteria for assigning

               marks to the candidates on the date of conducting the interviews. The

               said criteria was neither revealed in the advertisement, nor disclosed to

               the candidates prior to or even at the time of conducting the interviews.
(ii)    That though the advertisement only laid down the eligibility criteria by

               virtue of the qualifications prescribed for inviting applications from

               applicants, the Selection Committee on its own fixed a total of 100

               marks and assigned different marks for different academic

               qualifications, i.e., 10 marks for matriculation, 10 marks for intermediate

               and 40 marks for graduation.
(iii)   That the marks for the interview were fixed by the Selection Committee

               as 30 per cent of the total marks on the day of the interview itself.
Instead of conducting a single interview for each candidate particularly,

               since all of them had applied and submitted separate applications for

               seeking appointment in the four constituent colleges under the

               respondent No.1 – University, the Committee decided to conduct four

               sets of interviews in respect of each of the candidates who had applied

               for appointment in different colleges. A close look at the marks assigned

               in the interviews showed the erratic assessment made by the Members

               of the Selection Committee.
15.    In view of the above facts and circumstances, the learned Single Judge rightly
16
concluded that the entire process adopted by the Selection Committee was vitiated

and could not withstand judicial scrutiny.
16.    As for the respondent No.6, besides the observations made above, we may

additionally note that the maximum age limit for appointment to the subject post as

prescribed by the State Government for General category male candidates, which in

the instant case all the private respondents before the Court fall under, was 37 years

and for the unreserved Category (Women) was 40 years. In the counter affidavit

filed by the respondent No.3, Registrar, University of Bihar, it has been stated in

paragraph 14 as follows:-
“That in reply to paragraph 5(c) of ground it is stated that as contained
              in advertisement, the age limit for the post will be applicable as per
              Government Rule or Order. It is stated that the Government has
              provided the cut off date to be 1st of August, of the each year for
              determination of age.”
17.    In the light of the aforesaid categorical stand taken by the respondent No.1 -

University that the cut-off date for determining the age limit of the applicants in terms

of the applicable rules was to be taken as the first day of August of each year, which

in the present case would mean 1st August, 2008, quite evidently, the respondent

No.6 was not qualified for even applying for the subject post, having crossed the

maximum age prescribed for a general category (Male) candidate, i.e., 37 years. In

any event, the Government Rule/ Order mentioned in the advertisement having been

elaborated by the respondent No.3 in the counter affidavit, any reliance sought to be

placed by the respondents No.5 to 8 on the internal file notings of the University that

too, much after the date of issuance of the advertisement (25 th October, 2008 to 27th
17
October, 2008), would not be of any consequence.
18.    As a result of the aforesaid discussion, we are of the opinion that the

impugned judgment cannot be sustained and the same is accordingly quashed and

set aside. The judgment of the learned Single Judge dated 10 th February, 2011 is

restored. As a sequitur to the aforesaid order, the appointment orders in respect of

the respondents No.5, 7 and 8 are quashed and set aside. It is further held that the

respondent No.6 being ineligible for applying to the subject post, his application

ought to have been rejected outright and therefore, his appointment order is hereby

quashed. This leaves us with four posts of PTI’s in four constituent colleges under

the respondent No.1 - University that are required to be filled up. For this purpose, it

is deemed appropriate to direct the University to constitute a Selection Committee,

which shall consider the candidature of the appellant and the respondents No.5, 7

and 8. The Selection Committee shall conduct a single interview in respect of the

aforesaid candidates irrespective of the number of applications that they may have

been filed for the subject posts. While conducting the interview, no separate marks

shall be assigned for the different qualifications possessed by the candidates

inasmuch as the advertisement issued by the respondent No.1 - University did not

contain any such stipulation.
19.    A common merit list shall be prepared by the Selection Committee, keeping in

mind the qualifications of each of the aforesaid candidates as also the marks

allocated to them in the interview to be conducted. Thereafter, a seniority list shall be

drawn and the candidates shall be assigned to the respective colleges, in
18
accordance with the said list. The entire exercise shall be completed within eight

weeks from the date of constitution of the Committee and the results shall be

declared under intimation to the appellant and the respondents No. 5, 7 and 8.
20.    It is further directed that in view of the past history of the matter where serious

allegations were levelled against the Vice-Chancellor and the Registrar of the

respondent No.1 - University and the report submitted by the Inquiry Committee

constituted by the Vice-Chancellor has indicted the aforesaid officers, we leave it to

the discretion of the Chancellor to constitute a Selection Committee in accordance

with law within four weeks from the date a copy of this order is placed before him.
21.    It is made clear that since no other candidate had approached the High Court

except for the appellant herein and the respondents No.5 to 8, the selection process

shall be confined to the said parties alone.
22.    The civil appeals are allowed and disposed of on the above terms. There shall

be no orders as to costs.
…………………………………J.
                                                                   (HIMA KOHLI)



                                                             …………………………………J.
                                                            (AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH)
NEW DELHI;
12th October, 2023
19