[Cites
86
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Urban Improvement Trust Bikaner vs Gordhan Dass(D) Through Lrs. on 19 October, 2023
Author:
Hrishikesh Roy
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
2023 INSC 935

                                                                                              REPORTABLE
                                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO.8411 OF 2014


                            URBAN IMPROVEMENT TRUST,
                            BIKANER                                                           … APPELLANT


                                                                                     Versus
                            GORDHAN DASS (D)
                            THROUGH LRs. & OTHERS                                             … RESPONDENTS




                                                                                   JUDGMENT
MANOJ MISRA, J.
1.                       I had the benefit of reading the scholarly
                            judgment of my learned Brother, Hrishikesh Roy, J.,
                            dismissing this appeal filed against the judgment and
                            order of the High Court1 dated 12.01.2010 passed in
                            S.B. Civil Regular Second Appeal No. 114 of 2004.
                            However, since I’m of the opinion that plaintiff’s suit
                            was not maintainable in respect of the land which was
                            acquired by a notification, the defendant’s appeal is
                            entitled to be allowed. Therefore, I’m recording my
Signature Not Verified   opinion separately.
Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora
Date: 2023.10.19
16:44:06 IST
Reason:
1. High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jodhpur
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                                       Page 1 of 50
Appeal
2.             This is a defendant’s appeal against the order of
the High Court dismissing his second appeal preferred
against the judgment and decree of reversal passed by
the first appellate Court2 The first appellate Court had
not only set aside the decree of the Trial Court3 to the
extent it denied complete relief as sought in the suit,4
but decreed the suit of the first respondent in its
entirety.
3. To have a clear understanding of the issues that
arise for consideration in this appeal, it would be
apposite to advert to the pleadings in the suit out of
which the appeal arises.
Suit
4. Gordhan Dass5 instituted the suit on 23.4.1997
against Urban Improvement Trust, Bikaner6, Narayan
Das (Respondent no.2), Kanhaiya Lal (Respondent
no.3) and Ganesh Ram (Respondent no. 4) seeking
permanent prohibitory injunction to restrain the Trust
from entering or acquiring the land in dispute7 without
adopting due process of law.
Plaint Case

2 District Judge, Bikaner
3 Additional Civil Judge (Sr. Division/Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate No.1, Bikaner
4   Original Suit No.29 of 1997
5 Predecessor-in-interest of respondent nos.1/1 to 1/3
6
The Trust (Appellant)
7
Khasra Nos. 211/81 and 239/83-New No. 294/83, measuring 3 bighas, adjoining Bikaner Sagar Road
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                                                            Page 2 of 50
5.                The plaint case was that, -- (a) the land in
dispute admeasuring 3 bighas was jointly purchased
by the plaintiff and defendant nos.2 to 48 vide two
separate                    sale-deeds                 dated     02.03.1970         and
16.03.1970; (b) out of the total area of the disputed
land, 1 bigha, comprising a portion of plot no.294/83,
was converted to non-agricultural use for setting up a
Petrol Pump and, for that purpose, the District
Collector issued NOC9 on 23.07.1971; (c) the Trust
had not acquired the land by any lawful manner, yet,
it started showing itself as owner in possession of the
disputed land, as a result, when, on 23.4.1997, the
Trust threatened to acquire the land, the suit had to
be instituted. Additionally, it was pleaded that neither
the provisions of the 1894 Act10 nor of the 1959 Act11
were            followed              to   acquire         the   land   as    neither
opportunity of hearing nor compensation was provided
to either the plaintiff or defendant nos. 2 to 4.
Appellant’s case in the Written Statement
6.                The appellant12 in its written statement
rebutted the plaint case and pleaded that, -- the land
pertaining to Khasra no.239/83 stood in the name of
8
Respondent Nos.2 to 4
9
No Objection Certificate
10
The Land Acquisition Act, 1894
11
The Rajasthan Urban Improvement Trust Act, 1959
12
Defendant No.1 in the suit
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                                             Page 3 of 50
Bhanwari Devi, which had already been acquired
whereas, the land bearing Khasra no.211/81 is out of
Jainarain Vikas Colony Scheme; the land in dispute
has been duly acquired and compensation paid to the
Khatedars13;                     the         suit        of       the         plaintiff    is     not
maintainable; the land in dispute being agricultural,
the Civil Court has no jurisdiction; and the plaintiff
has not come to the court with clean hands as the
disputed                land had                  already been acquired                          and
compensation paid to the recorded Khatedars.
Amended Pleadings
7.                During the suit proceeding, comprehensive
amendments in the plaint were sought and allowed,
resulting in filing of an amended plaint on 11.11.2002.
Therein it was stated that though, pursuant to the
order of the High Court dated 26.02.1998 in S.B. Civil
Writ Petition No.2243/95 (
Bhanwarlal vs. State of
Rajasthan
), the Trust had taken possession of the land
in dispute on 10.06.1998 but the writ court’s order
related to some other land. Therefore, relief for a
mandatory injunction to restore the possession of the
plaintiff was sought.
8.                In the amended written statement filed by the
appellant, it was stated that after plaintiff had
13
Person whose name is recorded as tenure holder in the record of rights
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                                                             Page 4 of 50
instituted         the         suit,   report   from   Tehsildar     was
obtained. Then it was discovered that the plaintiff
along with others had purchased the land in dispute
vide sale deeds dated 02.03.1970 and 16.03.1970 and
had also given an application for conversion of 1 bigha
of that land for non-agricultural use, which was
allowed, and, on payment of conversion fee, NOC was
issued for setting up a Petrol Pump. It was, however,
clarified that the appellant had, in all, acquired 24
bighas and 12 biswas of land comprising Khasra
No.294/83             after       following     due    procedure      and
compensation thereof was paid to the recorded
owners. It was also stated that the plaintiff had never
raised any objection to the acquisition. In respect of 1
bigha of that land, for which NOC was issued to set up
a petrol pump, it was stated that the State vide order
dated 7.8.2002 had taken a decision to return it to its
owner. In paragraph 18 of the amended written
statement, it was specifically stated that 2 bighas of
the disputed land were acquired and its compensation
was paid to the recorded tenure-holders.
Trial Court Findings
9.          The trial court found that there is no dispute
between the parties that 1 bigha, out of 3 bighas of the
land in dispute, was converted to non-agricultural
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                                  Page 5 of 50
land and that it was not acquired by the State.
Therefore, the plaintiff is entitled to get possession of
that one bigha. Regarding the remaining 2 bighas of
land, in paragraph 15 of the judgment it was held that,
though plaintiff had purchased it through separate
sale-deeds of the year 1970, in the Jamabandi (i.e.,
record of rights), the name of the plaintiff was not
entered rather it continued to reflect previous
Khatedar’s name. Moreover, notice under
Section
52(2)
of the 1959 Act was issued to the recorded
Khatedars, award was passed in the year 1985 and
compensation was also paid to them. Trial Court also
observed that plaintiff raised no objection, despite
knowledge, even though the Trust had commenced
development work over the land to make it habitable.
A passing observation was also made that plaintiff’s
intention appeared to be to enjoy the land and later
stake a claim over it. The trial court thus concluded
that plaintiff did not approach the Court with clean
hands. Consequently, the suit was decreed only to the
extent of that 1 bigha of the disputed land regarding
which, the appellant had given up its claim.
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                    Page 6 of 50
Appeal Before the First Appellate Court
10.               Aggrieved by dismissal of the suit in part, the
plaintiff preferred an appeal14. No appeal was preferred
by the Trust. Consequently, the decree of the trial
court to the extent of 1 bigha of the disputed land
became final as against the Trust.
11.              Before the first appellate court, on behalf of the
plaintiff, it was argued that acquisition proceedings of
the land had commenced in the year 1972 whereas the
two sale-deeds in favour of the plaintiff were registered
in the year 1970. The sale-deeds were in the
knowledge of the officers of the State as conversion of
1 bigha land to non-agricultural land was sought, and
the Collector had issued NOC in favour of the plaintiff.
Therefore, even if plaintiff’s name was not recorded as
Khatedar, it could be presumed that the State and its
officers were aware about ownership rights of the
plaintiff and other co-purchasers (i.e., defendant nos.2
to 4). Yet, no notice of the proposed acquisition was
given to the plaintiff. Hence, the acquisition is void. It
was also argued that the plaintiff and defendant nos.2
to 4 have been in continuous possession, which was
disturbed during pendency of the suit on 10.06.1998.
14
Appeal Decree No.30 of 2004
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                             Page 7 of 50
First Appellate Court Findings
12.         The first appellate court in paragraph 14 of its
judgment noted the admitted case of the parties that
the land was purchased by the plaintiff vide sale-deeds
dated         02.03.1970       and   16.03.1970    whereas
notification, commencing proceedings for acquisition,
was issued on 09.06.1972. Yet, the plaintiff was not
served notice of proposed acquisition. In paragraph 18
of the judgment, the first appellate court observed that
admittedly prior to the acquisition, NOC was issued to
the plaintiff for conversion of agricultural land to non-
agricultural land, therefore it is to be assumed that the
State was aware of the ownership right of the plaintiff.
Yet, notice of acquisition was not served on the
plaintiff. In these circumstances, non-mutation of
plaintiff’s name in the revenue records would not
defeat plaintiff’s claim that acquisition notification was
bad for non-service of notice on him. With these
observations, and finding upon that possession of the
land was taken on 10.6.1998, the first appellate court
decreed plaintiff’s suit in its entirety.
Second Appeal Before the High Court
13.         Aggrieved by decision of the first appellate
court, the appellant preferred second appeal before the
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                       Page 8 of 50
High Court contending, inter alia, (a) mere suit for
injunction is not maintainable unless a relief for
declaration of title is sought; (b) the civil court has no
jurisdiction to decide the suit when the land in dispute
is subject matter of acquisition and, under
Section 52
of the 1959 Act, on publication of the notification in
the gazette, the land stood vested in the State free from
all encumbrances; and (c) the plaintiff had failed to
implead the State as a defendant even though it was a
necessary party.
14.         In rebuttal, on behalf of the plaintiff, it was
argued that since the notification for acquisition was
not preceded by service of notice on the owner of the
land, as contemplated by sub-section (2) of
section 52
of the 1959 Act, the acquisition was void and,
therefore, the Civil Court held jurisdiction to grant the
relief sought.
High Court’s decision
15.         The High Court opined that purchase of land
by the plaintiff in the year 1970, prior to the
acquisition           was      not   disputed;   the   acquisition
notification was issued without serving notice on the
plaintiff, therefore, the acquisition was void and suit
as instituted was maintainable. Moreover, the plaintiff
was in possession up to the date of institution of the
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                             Page 9 of 50
suit. It thus upheld the decree of the first appellate
court and dismissed the second appeal.
16.         Aggrieved by dismissal of its second appeal,
the Trust is in appeal before us.
17.         We have heard Sri Aruneshwar Gupta, learned
senior       counsel,          assisted   by   Sri   Rajeev      Singh,
Advocate-on-Record for the defendant-appellant; and
Sri Manoj Swaroop, learned senior counsel, for the
respondents.
Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant
18.         Learned counsel for the appellant contended
that Chapter VII of the 1959 Act deals with acquisition
and disposal of land by the Trust.
Section 52
of the
1959 Act provides for compulsory acquisition of land.
Sub-section (1) of
Section 52
empowers the State
Government to acquire land by publishing in the
Official Gazette a notice specifying the special purpose
for which the land is required and stating therein that
the State Government has decided to acquire the land
in pursuance thereof. Sub-section (4) of
section 52
provides that when a notice under sub-section (1) is
published in the official Gazette, the land shall, on and
from the date of such publication, vest absolutely in
the State Government free from all encumbrances.
Sub-section (5) of
Section 52
provides that where any
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                                  Page 10 of 50
land is vested in the State Government under sub-
section (4), the State Government may, by notice in
writing, order any person who may be in possession of
the land to surrender or deliver possession thereof to
the State Government or any person duly authorized
by it in this behalf within 30 days of the service of the
notice. Sub-section (7) of
Section 52
provides that
where the land has been acquired for the Trust, the
State Government shall, after it has taken possession
of the land and on payment by the Trust of the amount
of compensation determined under
Section 53
, and of
the other charges incurred by the State Government
in connection with the acquisition, transfer the land to
the Trust for the purpose for which the land has been
acquired.
19.         Learned            counsel   submitted   that       the
mechanism for determination of compensation, the
mode of its payment, and resolution of disputes in
respect thereof are provided for by
Sections 53
,
54
,
55
,
56, 57, 58 and 59 of the 1959 Act. Thus, the 1959 Act
is a complete Code insofar as acquisition of the land,
payment of compensation for its acquisition and
settlement of disputes regarding the compensation
payable therefor are concerned. As a result, by
necessary implication, the Civil Court’s jurisdiction is
barred from entertaining any claim in respect of that
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                           Page 11 of 50
land. Moreover, once the land vests in the State free
from all encumbrances, in absence of seeking a
declaration           qua       the   validity   of    the    acquisition
notification, mere suit for injunction would not be
maintainable. According to him, the trial court was
justified in dismissing the suit to the extent the land
was covered by the notification whereas the first
appellate court and the High Court committed
manifest error of law in holding the suit maintainable.
In addition to the above, it was submitted that
admittedly 2 bighas out of 3 bighas of the land in
dispute was agricultural land, therefore, by virtue of
Section 207
of the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 (in
short, “the 1955 Act”), the suit was barred before a
Civil Court and could only be filed in a Revenue Court.
20.         Regarding non-service of notice upon the
owners of the land prior to the notification under
Section 52(1)
of the 1959 Act, the learned counsel for
the     appellant              submitted   that       as     the    original
Khatedars, who stood recorded in the record of rights,
were served with notice of the proposed acquisition,
there was substantial compliance of the provisions of
sub-section (2) of
Section 52
of the 1959 Act. Hence,
the notification under sub-section (1) of
Section 52
cannot be treated as void.
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                                       Page 12 of 50
21.              In support of his submissions, the learned
counsel for the appellant placed reliance on the
following decisions:
(
i)       Ahuja Industries Ltd. v. State of Karnataka
                   & Others15
;
(
ii)     Bhola Shanker v. The District Land
                   Acquisition Officer, Aligarh and Ors16
;
(
iii) Commissioner,    Bangalore     Development
                Authority and another v. Brijesh Reddy
and
                another17;
(
iv)         Kiran Singh v. Chaman Paswan18
; and

          (
v)      Munshi Ram         v.   Municipal   Committee,
                   Chheharta19
.
Submissions on behalf of the Respondents
22.              Per       contra,   learned     counsel     for      the
respondents submitted that under sub-section (2) of
Section 52
of the 1959 Act, the State Government is
under an obligation to call upon the owner of the land
and any other person who, in the opinion of the State
Government, may be interested therein to show cause,
within such time as may be specified in the notice, why
the land should not be acquired. The requirement of
issuing such notice, before publishing the notification
15
(2003) 5 SCC 365
16
(1973) 2 SCC 59
17
(2013) 3 SCC 66
18
AIR 1954 SC 340
19
(1979) 3 SCC 83
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                                Page 13 of 50
under sub-section (1) of
Section 52
, is mandatory. In
absence thereof, the notification under sub-section (1)
of
Section 52
is void. Hence, there could be no deemed
vesting under sub-section (4) of
Section 52
. Thus, the
suit was maintainable, notwithstanding no relief was
sought to annul the notification.
In support of his
submissions, the learned counsel for the respondents
placed reliance on a Constitution Bench decision of
this Court in
Dhulabhai vs. State of Madhya
Pradesh20
and a three-judge Bench decision in Firm
Seth Radha Kishan vs. Municipal Committee21.
Questions that arise for Our Consideration
23.              On consideration of the rival submissions, in
my           view,      the     following   questions   arise      for
determination:
(i)      Whether for failure to serve notice under
                  sub-section (2) of
Section 52
of the 1959
                  Act on the plaintiff, the notification
                  acquiring the land under sub-section (1)
                  of
Section 52
of the 1959 Act could be
                  treated as void by the Civil Court?
(ii)     Whether in respect of the land covered
                  by the acquisition notification, the suit of
20
(1968) 3 SCR 662
21
(1964) 2 SCR 273
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                             Page 14 of 50
the plaintiff for injunction simpliciter,
                   without seeking a declaratory relief and,
                   that too, without impleading the State as
                   defendant, maintainable?
(iii) Whether the civil suit of the plaintiff was
                   also barred by section 207 (2) of the 1955
                   Act?
Discussion and Analysis
24.              Though the aforesaid issues are interrelated
but, for clarity, I propose to deal with them separately.
Issue No.(i) — Whether the notification under
Section 52(1)
of the 1959 Act could have been
treated as void by the Civil Court?
25.              Before proceeding further on issue no.(i), it is
apposite to observe that when an act is void, it is a
nullity and can be disregarded and impeached in any
proceeding before any court or tribunal whenever it is
relied upon. In other words, it is subject to a “collateral
attack”. But, in
Nawabkhan Abbaskhan vs. State of
Gujarat22
, followed in
Bharati Reddy vs. State of
Karnataka23
, this Court held that if illegal acts of
authorities are defied on self-determined voidness,
startling consequences will follow. In the light of
22
(1974) 2 SCC 121
23
(2018) 6 SCC 162
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                            Page 15 of 50
settled legal position, the question which falls for
consideration is, whether for want of service of notice
of proposed acquisition under sub-section (2) of
Section         52
of     the   1959   Act,   the   acquisition
notification, under
section 52 (1)
of the 1959 Act,
could be treated as void and, therefore, vulnerable to
a collateral attack.
26.         To appropriately address the aforesaid issue, it
would be useful to first examine the provisions of the
1959 Act which deals with compulsory acquisition of
land. Chapter VII of the 1959 Act deals with
acquisition and disposal of land.
Section 52
deals with
compulsory acquisition of land. For convenience, the
same is reproduced below:
“52. Compulsory acquisition of land- (1) Where
          on a representation from the Trust it appears to
          the State Government that any land is required
          for the purpose of improvement or for any other
          purpose under this Act, the State Government
          may acquire such land by publishing in the
          official Gazette a notice specifying the particular
          purpose for which such land is required and
          stating that the State Government has decided
          to acquire the land in pursuance of this section.
(2) Before publishing a notice under sub-section
          (1), the State Government shall by another notice
          call upon the owner of the land and any other
          person who in the opinion of the State
          Government may be interested therein to show
          cause, within such time as may be specified in
          the notice, why the land should not be acquired.
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                               Page 16 of 50
(3) After considering the cause, if any, shown by
          the owner of the land and by any other person
          interested therein and after giving such owner
          and person an opportunity of being heard, the
          State Government may pass such orders as it
          deems fit.
(4) When a notice under sub-section (1) is
          published in the official Gazette, the land shall,
          on and from the date of such publication, vest
          absolutely in the State Government free from all
          encumbrances.
(5) Where any land is vested in the State
          Government under sub-section (4), the State
          Government may, by notice in writing, order any
          person who may be in possession of the land to
          surrender or deliver possession thereof to the
          State Government or any person duly authorized
          by it in this behalf within thirty days of the
          service of the notice.
(6) If any person refuses or fails to comply with
          an order made under sub-section (5), the State
          Government may take possession of the land and
          may for that purpose use such force as may be
          necessary.
(7) Where the land has been acquired for the
          Trust, the State Government shall, after it has
          taken possession of the land and on payment by
          the Trust of the amount of compensation
          determined under
Section 53
, on the amount of
          interest thereon, and of the other charges
          incurred by the State Government in connection
          with the acquisition, transfer the land to the
          Trust for the purpose for which the land has
          been acquired.”
27.
Section 53
of the 1959 Act is regarding
payment of compensation for compulsory acquisition
of land. Sub-section (3) of
Section 53
provides that
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                             Page 17 of 50
where the amount of compensation can be determined
by agreement between the State Government and the
person to be compensated, it shall be determined in
accordance with such agreement. Sub section (4) of
Section 53
provides that where no such agreement is
reached, the State Government shall refer the case to
the Collector for determination of the person to whom
the amount of compensation is to be paid and the
amount of compensation to be paid for such
acquisition.
28.
Section 54
of the 1959 Act provides that any
party aggrieved by the decision of the Collector
determining the amount of compensation may, within
sixty days from the date of such decision, appeal to the
court of the District Judge having jurisdiction.
29.
Section 55
of the 1959 Act provides for
reference of disputes regarding apportionment of
compensation to the Court of the District Judge. It
reads:
“55. Disputes as to apportionment of
          compensation. - If any dispute arises as to the
          apportionment of compensation among persons
          claiming to be entitled thereto the State
          Government shall refer such dispute for the
          decision of the Court of the District Judge having
          jurisdiction.”
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                             Page 18 of 50
30.         Section 56 confers on a person, aggrieved by
the decision of the District Judge under
Section 55
of
the Act, a right to file an appeal to the High Court
31.         Section 57 provides for the mode of payment of
compensation, or deposit of the same in Court.
32.         Section 58 empowers the Court to invest the
amount of compensation deposited in court.
33.         Section 59 provides that if any question or
dispute         arises         as   to    the   sufficiency    of     the
compensation paid or proposed to be paid under any
provision of the Act, otherwise than under the
foregoing provisions of that Chapter, the matter shall
be     determined              by   the    District   Judge     having
jurisdiction upon a reference made to him either by
the Trust or by the claimant within a specified period.
34.         Section 60 provides for the disposal of the land
by the Trust.
35.         A conspectus of the provisions of Chapter VII
of the 1959 Act makes it clear that once the acquisition
notification is published in the Official Gazette under
sub-section (1) of
Section 52
of the 1959 Act, by virtue
of sub section (4) of
Section 52
, the land shall, on and
from the date of such publication, vest absolutely in
the State Government free from all encumbrances
and, thereafter, the owner or person interested in the
land is entitled to receive compensation. Further, as
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                                  Page 19 of 50
to whom the compensation is payable and the
quantum            payable     are   all   issues   for   which       a
mechanism is in place under the provisions of the
1959 Act.
36.         Now, the question that falls for consideration
is whether the notification under sub-section (1) of
Section 52
of the 1959 Act could be treated as void for
non-service of notice, under sub-section (2) of
Section
52
, on the plaintiff and other co-owners of the land
who had purchased the same from the erstwhile
owners, or their predecessors, entered in the record of
rights.
37.         According to the learned counsel for the
respondents, where the mandatory provisions of sub-
section (2) of
Section 52
of 1959 Act are not followed,
the notification issued thereunder would be a nullity
and, therefore, the Civil Court’s jurisdiction to grant
appropriate relief shall not be ousted. Taking the
proposition further, it was submitted that ouster of a
Civil Court’s jurisdiction cannot be a matter of course
even where finality to the orders of the Special
Tribunals is provided for, particularly, where the
provisions of the concerned Act have not been
complied with or the statutory Tribunal has not acted
in conformity with the fundamental principles of
judicial procedure.
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                              Page 20 of 50
38.
In support of the above submission, the
learned counsel for the respondent relied on the
decisions of this Court in
Dhulabhai
(supra) and
Firm Seth Radha Kishan (supra).
39.
In
Dhulabhai
(supra) the appellant before this
Court had instituted a suit to recover sales tax alleged
to have been realized illegally by the State of Madhya
Pradesh. The State contested the suit by claiming that
it was barred by Section 17 of the Madhya Bharat
Sales Tax Act. The court of the District Judge decreed
the suit. On appeal by the State, the High Court
reversed the decision holding that the suit was barred
even though it was conceded by the Revenue that the
tax could not have been imposed in view of the bar of
Article 301
of the Constitution of India. In that context,
the question that arose for this Court to decide was
whether the suit was barred expressly by
Section 17
of that Act or by any implication arising from the Act.
The contention on behalf of the appellant therein was
that if it was a question of the correctness of the
imposition within the valid framework of the statute,
rules or notification,
Section 17
might have operated
but not when the imposition was under a void law.
After considering several decisions, the Constitution
Bench summarized the legal position as under:
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                     Page 21 of 50
“35. … The result of this inquiry into the diverse
          views expressed in this Court may be stated as
          follows:
(1)      Where the statute gives a finality to the
          orders of the special Tribunals the civil courts’
          jurisdiction must be held to be excluded if there
          is adequate remedy to do what the civil courts
          would normally do in a suit. Such provision,
          however, does not exclude those cases where the
          provisions of the particular Act have not been
          complied with or the statutory Tribunal has not
          acted in conformity with the fundamental
          principles of judicial procedure.
(2) Where there is an express bar of the
          jurisdiction of the court, an examination of the
          scheme of the particular Act to find the adequacy
          or the sufficiency of the remedies provided may
          be relevant but is not decisive to sustain the
          jurisdiction of the civil court.
Where there is no express exclusion the
          examination of the remedies and the scheme of
          the particular Act to find out the intendment
          becomes necessary and the result of the inquiry
          may be decisive. In the latter case it is necessary
          to see if the statute creates a special right or a
          liability and provides for the determination of the
          right or liability and further lays down that all
          questions about the said right and liability shall
          be determined by the Tribunals so constituted,
          and whether remedies normally associated with
          actions in civil courts are prescribed by the said
          statute or not.
(3)     Challenge to the provisions of the
          particular Act as ultra vires cannot be brought
          before Tribunals constituted under that Act.
          Even the High Court cannot go into that question
          on a revision or reference from the decision of the
          Tribunals.
(4)   When a provision is already declared
          unconstitutional or the constitutionality of any
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                              Page 22 of 50
provision is to be challenged, a suit is open. A
          writ of certiorari may include a direction for
          refund if the claim is clearly within the time
          prescribed by the
Limitation Act
but it is not a
          compulsory remedy to replace a suit.
(5)     Where the particular Act contains no
          machinery for refund of tax collected in excess of
          constitutional limits or illegally collected, a suit
          lies.
(6)     Questions of the correctness of the
          assessment apart from its constitutionality are
          for the decision of the authorities and a civil suit
          does not lie if the orders of the authorities are
          declared to be final or there is an express
          prohibition in the particular Act. In either case
          the scheme of the particular Act must be
          examined because it is a relevant enquiry.
(7)      An exclusion of the jurisdiction of the
          civil court is not readily to be inferred unless the
          conditions above set down apply.”
                                         (Emphasis Supplied)
40.         In Firm Seth Radha Kishan (supra), the
question that fell for determination was whether a suit
would lie in a civil court claiming refund of the
terminal tax collected by a municipality under the
provisions of the
Punjab Municipal Act, 1911
. The trial
court         decreed          the   suit   on     finding        that
imposition/collection of tax was illegal. On appeal, the
High Court of Punjab held that even though the
imposition of tax might not be authorized but the civil
court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit as the
Act provided for a remedy by way of appeal against the
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                               Page 23 of 50
wrong orders of the authorities thereunder. In that
context, this Court, after considering a plethora of
decisions, held:
“7. Under
Section 9
of the Code of Civil
          Procedure the court shall have jurisdiction to try
          all suits of civil nature excepting suits of which
          cognizance is either expressly or impliedly
          barred. A statute, therefore, expressly or by
          necessary implication, can bar the jurisdiction of
          civil courts in respect of a particular matter. The
          mere conferment of special jurisdiction on a
          tribunal in respect of the said matter does not in
          itself exclude the jurisdiction of civil courts. The
          statute may specifically provide for ousting the
          jurisdiction of civil courts; even if there was no
          such specific exclusion, if it creates a liability not
          existing before and gives a special and particular
          remedy for the aggrieved party, the remedy
          provided by it must be followed. The same
          principle would apply if the statute had provided
          for the particular forum in which the remedy
          could be had. Even in such cases, the civil
          court's jurisdiction is not completely ousted. A
          suit in a civil court will always lie to question the
          order of a tribunal created by a statute, even if
          its order is, expressly or by necessary
          implication, made final, if the said tribunal
          abuses its power or does not act under the Act
          but in violation of its provisions.”
                                         (Emphasis supplied)
41.         The decisions of this Court in
Dhulabhai
(supra) and Firm Seth Radha Kishan (supra)
reiterate the settled legal position that if the act
impugned is not under the statute but in violation of
its provisions, the jurisdiction of a civil court is not
completely ousted even though the statute may have
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                                 Page 24 of 50
created the liability and provided for a specific remedy
to the person aggrieved.
42.         In the light of aforesaid legal principle, the
argument on behalf of the plaintiff-respondent is that,
as notice contemplated under sub-section (2) of
Section 52 of the 1959 Act was not given to the owner
of the land prior to the acquisition notification, the
notification would be void and, therefore, the Civil
Court would have jurisdiction to grant appropriate
relief by treating the same as void notwithstanding
that there is no specific challenge to it.
43.         In my view, the aforesaid submission is not
acceptable for the following reasons:
(a) there is no challenge to the jurisdictional
           power          of   the   acquiring   body   to        issue
           notification under
Section 52(1)
of the 1959
           Act, therefore the notification is under the
           1959 Act and not beyond the scope of the 1959
           Act;
(b) it is not the case of the plaintiff that
           pursuant to the sale-deeds qua the land in
           dispute, prior to the date of acquisition
           notification, plaintiff’s name was entered in the
           record of rights, yet no notice under
Section
           52(2)
was    served   on   him   prior     to    the
           acquisition;
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                               Page 25 of 50
(c) it is also not the case of the plaintiff that
           landowners/ Khatedars already recorded in
           the record of rights qua the land in dispute,
           were not served with notice as contemplated by
           sub-section (2) of Section 52 of the 1959 Act;
           and
(d) there is a presumption that official acts have
           been regularly performed (see: Section 114
           Illustration (e) of the
Indian Evidence Act,
           1872
), therefore, once a notification under sub-
section (1) of
Section 52
was issued, by virtue
           of sub-section (4) of
Section 52
, in my view, a
           legal fiction with regard to the vesting of land
           in the State free from all encumbrances from
           the date of publication of the notification in the
           Official Gazette would come into play and it
           cannot be treated as void.
44.         Elaborating upon the above reasons, it may be
noted that assuming the plaintiff and defendant nos.
2 to 4 had purchased a portion of the disputed land,
but if they do not get their names mutated in the
record of rights, how would the State come to know of
their ownership. Therefore, if the land is acquired after
serving notice on the recorded owners, as is the case
of the appellant, the State’s action in issuing
notification under
Section 52 (1)
, in my view, cannot
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                        Page 26 of 50
be treated as void. More so, because the State had the
power to acquire the land.
45.         It may also be noted that from the submissions
made before us, it appears that proceedings for
acquisition were initiated under
Section 52(2)
of the
1959 Act in the year 1972 and, thereafter, in the year
1974, notification under sub-section (1) of
Section 52
was published. The plaintiff and defendant nos.2 to 4
neither claim that they were recorded in the record of
rights prior to that, nor do they claim that none of the
recorded owners was served with notice. Importantly,
the     plaintiff         does   not   dispute   publication       of
notification under sub-section (1) of
Section 52
of the
1959 Act. In fact, plaintiff’s claim is that he along with
defendant nos. 2 to 4 were owners of the land,
pursuant to sale-deeds of the year 1970, yet they were
not served notice, under sub-section (2) of
Section 52
,
prior to the notification under sub-section (1) of
Section 52
and, therefore, the notification, under sub-
section (1) of
Section 52
, is illegal and void.
46.
In
Ahuja Industries
(supra), a somewhat
similar claim under another land acquisition law was
rejected. In that case, the appellant who filed the
appeal before this Court had purchased a piece of land
on 10.02.1993. However, the said land was not
mutated in his name in the record of rights which
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                            Page 27 of 50
continued to show the name of the person who had
sold the land to the vendor of the appellant.
Subsequently, the said land and surrounding lands
were acquired vide notification dated 30.10.1997. The
appellant questioned the acquisition, by claiming,
inter alia, that no notice under
Section 28(2)
and
28(6)
of the Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Act,
1966 was served on him and that such violation of
principle of natural justice vitiated the acquisition
proceedings. It was also argued that
Sections 127
,
128
and
129
of the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964
cast an obligation on the Registering Officer to make a
report to the revenue authority to enter his name in
the record of rights and its failure to do so resulting in
non-service of the notice on the appellant, depriving
him of the opportunity to file his objections, should
not act to his detriment or disadvantage.
47.         Dealing with the above submissions, in
Ahuja
Industries
(supra), upon finding that notices were
issued to/served on the owners/occupants, or their
representatives, as shown in the record of rights, and
the appellant had not got his name mutated in the
record of rights, this Court, after taking notice of
earlier decisions, held:
“12. This Court in
Winky Dilawari v. Amritsar
          Improvement Trust
[(1996) 11 SCC 644] has
          taken the view that failure to serve personal
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                        Page 28 of 50
notices on the persons whose names have not
          been mutated in the official record-of-rights in
          pursuance of any sale in their favour does not
          vitiate the proceedings for acquisition.
Similar
          view      was     taken     in
W.B.     Housing
          Board v. Brijendra Prasad Gupta
[(1997) 6 SCC
          207] wherein this Court observed: (SCC p. 214,
          para 8):
“It is no part of the duty of the Collector to make
          a roving inquiry into ownership of the persons.
          We are of the opinion that the requirements of
          the law were met when notices were served upon
          the recorded owners as per the record- of-rights.
          Again we do not think in a case like the present
          one, it is for the Collector to make enquiries from
          the registration office to find out if the land had
          since been sold by the recorded owners.
In
Winky Dilawari v. Amritsar Improvement
          Trust
[(1996) 11 SCC 644], this Court observed
          that the public authorities were not expected to
          go on making enquiries in the Sub-Registrar’s
          office as to who would be the owner of the
          property. The Collector in the present case was
          thus justified in relying on the official record
          being the record-of-rights as to who were the
          owners of the land sought to be requisitioned
          and prudence did not require any further
          enquiry to be made. We are therefore of the view
          that notices were properly served under
Section
          3(2)
of the Act on the owners of the land.”
13.      It could be seen from the above order
          that service of notice on a person shown as
          owner or occupier in the record-of-rights is
          sufficient even though the said person had
          already sold the land prior to the said notification
          unless it is substantiated otherwise that the
          authorities concerned had knowledge of the
          rights or interest of any person other than those
          found recorded as owner/occupier in the
          revenue records. It is further held that the
          Collector is not obliged to make a roving enquiry
          about the ownership of the land. If the name of
          the purchaser is not yet entered in the record-of-
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                               Page 29 of 50
rights then non-service on such a person does
          not vitiate the acquisition proceedings.
          Admittedly, the appellant had not got his name
          entered in the revenue records as owner or
          occupant of the said land and therefore he could
          not complain about non-service of notice on him
          nor about the failure to grant a hearing to him.
          Contention that as per provision of the
Land
          Revenue Act
there was no obligation on his part
          to either inform the Revenue Authorities about
          the sale in his favour or to request them to
          transfer the katha in his name cannot stand as
          it has not been brought on record with reference
          to any pleadings with supporting documents
          that in fact the appellant had made payment for
          making the necessary entries in the record-of-
          rights and the register in his name at the time of
          registration of the sale deed in his favour. This
          apart, failure to make entries on the part of the
          Revenue Authorities by itself would not cast any
          obligation on the authorities under the Act to
          make a roving enquiry and try to locate an owner
          who may have subsequently purchased the land
          from the previous owner. Failure on the part of
          the Revenue Authority to make entry in the
          register of mutation in favour of the subsequent
          owner would not render the acquisition
          proceedings bad in law on account of non-
issuance of notice inviting objections to the
          acquisition proceedings or service thereof.”
                                        (Emphasis supplied)
48.         Having             noticed   the   decision   in
Ahuja
Industries
(supra), in my view, the legal position that
emerges is, that if the name of the owner is not entered
in the record of rights pertaining to the land proposed
to be acquired, there is no legal obligation on the state
authorities to make a roving enquiry to find out as to
who its actual owner is for effecting service of notice
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                                   Page 30 of 50
upon him prior to issuance of the acquisition
notification. In such circumstances, there would be
sufficient compliance of the statutory obligation of
serving notice on the owner if the notice is served on
the owners entered in the record of rights, unless it is
specifically proved that the real owners, other than
owners entered in the record of rights, were known to
the revenue authorities.
49.         In the instant case, the plaintiff’s case is not
that his name was mutated in the record of rights,
rather his case is that the district administration was
aware of his title to the land because they had issued
NOC for conversion of that agricultural land to non-
agricultural land. To test the correctness of the
aforesaid claim, I have perused the amended plaint.
The relevant averments to that effect are in paragraph
1 (b) of the amended plaint. A careful reading of the
same would indicate that the plea of the plaintiff was
that he sought conversion of one bigha, out of three
bighas of the disputed land, for non-agricultural use
and, in connection therewith, a favorable report was
given by the Patwari resulting in issuance of an NOC
by the District Magistrate for non-agricultural use of
one bigha land. However, there is no averment in the
plaint that sale-deeds of the entire disputed land were
produced by the plaintiff before the officers of the State
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                       Page 31 of 50
/administration at the time of seeking NOC. In these
circumstances, in my view, a constructive notice of the
sale-deeds cannot be imputed on the State. I,
therefore, reject the argument that by issuing NOC for
non-agricultural use of one bigha of the disputed land,
the State acquired knowledge regarding plaintiff’s title
in respect of the entire land comprising 3 bighas.
50.         Even assuming that by issuing NOC the State
got knowledge about plaintiff’s title, it could at best be
in respect of that one bigha land which was converted
for non-agricultural use. But that would not be
material for deciding this appeal because the appellant
has already given up its claim qua that portion of land
in the amended written statement. In fact, the trial
court has already passed a decree in favour of the
plaintiff in respect of that portion which has attained
finality. Thus, that one bigha of land is not the subject
matter of the current appeal.
51.         In light of the discussion above, in my view,
once there is no dispute that a notification regarding
acquisition of the land was issued and duly published
under sub-section (1) of
section 52
of the 1959 Act, a
presumption would arise under illustration (e) of
Section 114
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 that the
notification was in conformity with the provisions of
the 1959 Act. This presumption, in my view, has not
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                     Page 32 of 50
been dislodged by the plaintiff, as there is no specific
plea in respect of: (a) lack of power/authority of the
person issuing the notification; and (b) the procedure
prescribed being not followed in its entirety. No doubt,
there is a plea that notice as contemplated under sub-
section (2) of
Section 52
of the 1959 Act was not served
upon the plaintiff prior to the notification but there is
no plea that no notice at all was issued to and served
on any of the persons recorded as owners in the record
of rights. Therefore, once it is established that the
plaintiff was not recorded as the owner in the record
of rights on the date of issuance of the notification for
acquisition of the land, taking into account the law
laid down in
Ahuja Industries
(supra), I’m of the view
that mere non-service of notice, under
Section 52 (2)
of the 1959 Act, upon non-recorded owner, such as
the plaintiff, would not render the acquisition
notification under
Section 52(1)
void. Thus, the Civil
Court could not have treated the notification under
Section 52 (1)
of the 1959 Act as void. Issue no.(i) is
decided accordingly.
Issue No.(ii) – Whether in respect of the land
covered by acquisition notification, the suit of the
plaintiff for injunction simpliciter, without
seeking a declaration and, that too, without
impleading the State as defendant, maintainable?
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                    Page 33 of 50
52.         As I have held that the acquisition notification
could not have been disregarded as void, the question
that would now arise for consideration is whether the
suit of the plaintiff for injunction simpliciter, without
seeking a declaratory relief, would be maintainable in
a Civil Court.
53.         At this stage, at the cost of repetition, it may
be observed that initially the suit was instituted for
injunction to restrain the Trust (i.e., the defendant
no.1- appellant) from taking possession of the land
without following due process of law. When, in the
written statement, the appellant took a specific plea
that the land had already been acquired and
compensation was paid, the plaint was amended
stating therein that during pendency of the suit
possession was taken and, therefore, a direction be
issued upon the Trust to restore possession. Despite
knowledge of appellant’s case that land has been
acquired, no declaratory relief, either to declare the
notification invalid or to declare plaintiff as the owner,
was sought, despite the legal position that under sub-
section (4) of
Section 52
of the 1959 from the date of
publication of notification under sub-section (1) of
Section 52
of the 1959 Act the land would vest in the
State free from all encumbrances.
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                       Page 34 of 50
54.
In
Anathula Sudhakar v. P. Buchi Reddy24
,
this Court had the occasion to lay down general
principles as to when a mere suit for permanent
injunction will lie, and when it is necessary to file a
suit for declaration and/or possession with injunction
as a consequential relief. The relevant portion of that
judgment is extracted below:
“13. The general principles as to when a mere
              suit for permanent injunction will lie, and when
              it is necessary to file a suit for declaration and/or
              possession with injunction as a consequential
              relief, are well settled. We may refer to them
              briefly.
13.1. Where a plaintiff is in lawful or peaceful
              possession of a property and such possession is
              interfered or threatened by the defendant, a suit
              for an injunction simpliciter will lie. A person has
              a right to protect his possession against any
              person who does not prove a better title by
              seeking a prohibitory injunction. But a person in
              wrongful possession is not entitled to an
              injunction against the rightful owner.
13.2. Where the title of the plaintiff is not
              disputed, but he is not in possession, his remedy
              is to file a suit for possession and seek in
              addition, if necessary, an injunction. A person
              out of possession, cannot seek the relief of
              injunction simpliciter, without claiming the relief
              of possession.
13.3. Where the plaintiff is in possession, but
              his title to the property is in dispute, or under a
              cloud, or where the defendant asserts title
              thereto and there is also a threat of
              dispossession from the defendant, the plaintiff
              will have to sue for declaration of title and the
24
(2008) 4 SCC 594
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                                   Page 35 of 50
consequential relief of injunction. Where the title
          of the plaintiff is under a cloud or in dispute and
          he is not in possession or not able to establish
          possession, necessarily the plaintiff will have to
          file a suit for declaration, possession and
          injunction.
14. We may, however, clarify that a prayer for
          declaration will be necessary only if the denial of
          title by the defendant or challenge to the
          plaintiff's title raises a cloud on the title of the
          plaintiff to the property. A cloud is said to raise
          over a person's title, when some apparent defect
          in his title to a property, or when some prima
          facie right of a third party over it, is made out or
          shown. An action for declaration, is the remedy
          to remove the cloud on the title to the property.
On the other hand, where the plaintiff has clear
          title supported by documents, if a trespasser
          without any claim to title or an interloper without
          any apparent title, merely denies the plaintiff's
          title, it does not amount to raising a cloud over
          the title of the plaintiff and it will not be
          necessary for the plaintiff to sue for declaration
          and a suit for injunction may be sufficient.
          Where the plaintiff, believing that the defendant
          is only a trespasser or a wrongful claimant
          without title, files a mere suit for injunction, and
          in such a suit, the defendant discloses in his
          defence the details of the right or title claimed by
          him, which raise a serious dispute or cloud over
          the plaintiff's title, then there is a need for the
          plaintiff, to amend the plaint and convert the suit
          into one for declaration. Alternatively, he may
          withdraw the suit for bare injunction, with
          permission of the court to file a comprehensive
          suit for declaration and injunction. He may file
          the suit for declaration with consequential relief,
          even after the suit for injunction is dismissed,
          where the suit raised only the issue of possession
          and not any issue of title.”
                                         (Emphasis supplied)
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                               Page 36 of 50
55.              In the instant case, the stand of defendant no.1
(i.e., the appellant herein) was categorical that the
land in dispute had already been acquired. Therefore,
in light of the provisions of
Section 52(4)
of the 1959
Act, a cloud existed over the title of the plaintiff.
Further, during pendency of the suit, plaintiff
admitted that possession was also taken.
In these
circumstances, in the light of the law
laid down by
this
Court in
Anathula Sudhakar
(supra), without
seeking a declaratory relief qua the validity of the
acquisition notification, mere suit for injunction, in my
view, was not maintainable.
56.              In addition to what has been discussed above,
there are multiple decisions to the effect that the
validity of an acquisition notification, acquiring land
under compulsory land acquisition laws for public
purpose, cannot ordinarily be questioned in a Civil
Court, though its validity may be questioned before a
superior court by invoking its powers under the
Constitution of India.
In
State of Bihar v. Dhirendra
Kumar
and others25, a notification under
Section 4(1)
of the 1894 Act was published on 13.02.1957
acquiring the disputed land along with other lands for
public purpose. The declaration under
Section 6
was
25
(1995) 4 SCC 229
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                           Page 37 of 50
published on 27.03.1957 and possession of the land
was taken on 22.03.1957. Several encroachments
were made on that land. When steps were taken to
have the encroachers evicted, a suit came to be
instituted. In that suit, an application seeking
temporary injunction under
Order 39 Rule 1 of C.P.C
.
was filed. The trial court found that there existed a
triable        issue           and   thereby   granted   injunction
restraining the defendants from dispossessing the
plaintiff till the disposal of the suit. Against the order
of the trial court, the matter went to the High Court.
The High Court modified the temporary injunction and
directed status quo. Thereafter, the matter travelled to
this Court. The question that arose for consideration
by this Court was whether a civil suit would be
maintainable and whether ad-interim injunction could
be issued where proceedings under the 1894 Act were
taken pursuant to a notice issued under
Section 9
of
the 1894 Act. Dealing with the said question, it was
held:
“3. … The provisions of the Act are designed to
          acquire the land by the State exercising the
          power of eminent domain to serve the public
          purpose. The state is enjoined to comply with
          statutory requirements contained in
s.4
and
s.6
of the Act by proper publication of notification
          and declaration within limitation and procedural
          steps of publication in papers and the local
          publications envisaged under the Act as
          amended by Act 68 of 1984. In publication of the
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                               Page 38 of 50
notifications and declaration under
s.6
, the
             public purpose gets crystalised and becomes
             conclusive. Thereafter, the State is entitled to
             authorise the Land Acquisition Officer to proceed
             with the acquisition of the land and to make the
             award. Section 11A now prescribes limitation to
             make the award within 2 years from the last of
             date of publication envisaged under
s.6
of the
             Act. In an appropriate case, where the Govt.
             needs possession of the land urgently, it would
             exercise the power under
s.17(4)
of the Act and
             dispense with the enquiry under s.5-A. Thereon,
             the State is entitled to issue notice to the parties
             under
s.9
and on expiry of 15 days, the State is
             entitled to take immediate possession even
             before the award could be made. Otherwise, it
             would take possession after the award under
             s.12. Thus, it could be seen that the Act is a
             complete code in itself and is meant to serve
             public purpose. We are, therefore, inclined to
             think, as presently advised, that by necessary
             implication the power of the civil court to take
             cognizance of the case under
s.9
of CPC stands
             excluded, and a civil court has no jurisdiction to
             go into the question of the validity or legality of
             the notification under
s.4
and declaration under
             s.6, except by the High Court in a proceeding
             under
Article 226
of the Constitution. So, the
             civil suit itself was not maintainable. When such
             is the situation, the finding of the trial court that
             there is a prima facie triable issue is
             unsustainable. Moreover, possession was
             already taken and handed over to Housing
             Board. So, the order of injunction was without
             jurisdiction.”
                                           (Emphasis supplied)
57.
In
Laxmi   Chand      v.   Gram      Panchayat,
Kararia26
, validity of the acquisition and of the award
was challenged by instituting a civil suit for a
26
(1996) 7 SCC 218
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                                  Page 39 of 50
declaration that the land could not be acquired. In that
suit, a preliminary issue was framed regarding
maintainability of the suit. The trial court held that the
suit was not maintainable. The judgment of the trial
court was affirmed. The matter came before this Court.
The contention raised on behalf of the petitioner before
this Court was that once the acquisition proceedings
were dropped by the Land Acquisition Officer, he had
no jurisdiction or power to reopen the same and to
make the award under
Section 11
of the 1894 Act. It
was argued that the award is squarely illegal for want
of jurisdiction. After noticing the facts, this Court held:
“2. … It is seen that
Section 9
of the Civil
          Procedure Code, 1908 gives jurisdiction to the
          civil court to try all civil suits, unless barred. The
          cognizance of a suit of civil nature may either
          expressly or impliedly be barred. The procedure
          contemplated under the Act is a special
          procedure envisaged to effectuate public
          purpose, compulsorily acquiring the land for use
          of public purpose. The notification under
Section
          4
and declaration under
Section 6
of the Act are
          required to be published in the manner
          contemplated thereunder. The inference gives
          conclusiveness to the public purpose and the
          extent of the land mentioned therein. The award
          should be made under
Section 11
as envisaged
          thereunder. The dissatisfied claimant is provided
          with the remedy of reference under
Section 18
and a further appeal under
Section 54
of the Act.
If the Government intends to withdraw from the
          acquisition before taking possession of the land,
          procedure contemplated under
Section 48
requires to be adhered to. If possession is taken,
          it stands vested under
Section 16
in the State
          with absolute title free from all encumbrances
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                                 Page 40 of 50
and the Government has no power to withdraw
          from acquisition.
3. It would thus be clear that the scheme of the
          Act is complete in itself and thereby the
          jurisdiction of the civil court to take cognizance
          of the cases arising under the Act, by necessary
          implication, stood barred. The civil court thereby
          is devoid of jurisdiction to give declaration on the
          invalidity of the procedure contemplated under
          the Act. The only right an aggrieved person has
          is to approach the constitutional courts, viz., the
          High Court and the Supreme Court under their
          plenary power under
Articles 226
and
136
respectively with self-imposed restrictions on
          their exercise of extraordinary power. Barring
          thereof, there is no power to the civil court.”
                                         (Emphasis supplied)
58.         Following the above two decisions (i.e.,
State of
Bihar v Dhirendra Kumar
and
Laxmi Chand v. Gram
Panchayat
),                in
Commissioner,          Bangalore
Development Authority and another v. Brijesh
Reddy and another
(supra), it was held:
“18. It is clear that the
Land Acquisition Act
is a
          complete code in itself and is meant to serve
          public purpose. By necessary implication, the
          power of the civil court to take cognizance of the
          case under
Section 9
CPC stands excluded and
          a civil court has no jurisdiction to go into the
          question of the validity or legality of the
          notification under
Section 4
, declaration under
Section 6
and subsequent proceedings except by
          the High Court in a proceeding under
Article 226
of the Constitution. It is thus clear that the civil
          court is devoid of jurisdiction to give declaration
          or even bare injunction being granted on the
          invalidity of the procedure contemplated under
          the Act. The only right available for the aggrieved
          person is to approach the High Court under
Article 226
and this Court under
Article 136
with
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                               Page 41 of 50
self-imposed restrictions on their exercise of
          extraordinary power.”
59.         Reverting to the present case, the acquisition
is for a public purpose, namely, development of land
for residential colony and, by virtue of sub-section (4)
of
Section 52
of the 1959 Act, the land stood vested in
the State free from all encumbrances with effect from
the date of publication of the notification. Once that is
the position, in the light of discussion above, and
applying the law
laid down by
this Court in
State of
Bihar v. Dhirendra Kumar
(supra);
Laxmi Chand v.
Gram         Panchayat
(supra);   and
Commissioner,
Bangalore Development Authority and another v.
Brijesh Reddy and another
(supra), I am of the
considered view that in respect of land covered by the
acquisition notification, the suit as framed was not
maintainable.
60.         Otherwise also, there was another patent
defect in the plaint as the State was not impleaded as
defendant in the suit. The State was a necessary party
because all the steps taken for acquisition of land
under sub-section (1) of
Section 52
of the 1959 Act
were taken by it. And, by virtue of sub-section (4) of
Section 52
of the 1959 Act, the land vested in the
State.        Therefore, when a collateral attack to the
validity of the acquisition was launched by the
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                          Page 42 of 50
plaintiff, by alleging that necessary steps for a lawful
acquisition were not taken, it was the State which
could have effectively disclosed whether all the
necessary steps required for a valid acquisition of the
land were taken or not. In this view of the matter, in
my opinion, the suit was also bad for non-joinder of
necessary party.
61.              In my view, the suit in question is a classic
example of clever drafting where to avoid crucial
issues, such as the bar of limitation and response from
the State, firstly, no declaration in respect of the
acquisition notification was sought and, secondly, the
State, which issued the acquisition notification and in
whom the title of the land vested by a deeming fiction,
was not impleaded as a party. Such clever drafting to
avoid critical issues have been deprecated time and
again by this Court as it amounts to an unfair
practice.
62.
In
T. Arivandandam v. T.V. Satpal
and
another27 cautioning the Courts to be mindful of the
craft of creating an illusion of a cause of action for
instituting the suit, it was observed:
“5…………..The learned Munsif must remember
              that if on a meaningful -not formal- reading of
              plaint it is manifestly vexatious, and meritless,
              in the sense of not disclosing a right to sue, he
27
(1977) 4 SCC 467
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                               Page 43 of 50
should exercise his power under
Order 7, Rule
              11 CPC
taking care to see that the ground
              mentioned therein is fulfilled. And, if clever
              drafting has created an illusion of a cause of
              action, nip it in the bud at the first
              hearing ……….”
                                         (Emphasis supplied)
63.              The necessity to implead the State in a suit
where an issue is raised qua vesting of surplus land in
the State, under the ceiling laws, for failure to take
possession before enforcement of the Repeal Act of
1999, has been highlighted by this Court in Shri
Saurav Jain & Another Vs. M/s A.B.P. Design &
Another (Civil Appeal No.4448 of 2021, arising out
of         SLP        (C)   No.29868   of   2018,     decided        on
05.08.2021)28 by observing:
“36…….The High Court held that no material
              was forthcoming on whether actual and physical
              possession was taken by the Competent
              Authority from the land owner and it held that in
              the absence thereof, the first respondent, as the
              purchaser from Zahid Hussain, would continue
              to have a valid title. The High Court has entered
              these findings despite the fact that by a process
              of engineered drafting, the first respondent
              sought no reliefs in regard to the proceedings
              under the ULCRA (to obviate bar to the
              maintainability of the suit) and did not implead
              either the State or the Competent authority who
              would have been in a position to answer the
              challenge.”
                                            (Emphasis supplied)
28
LL 2021 SC 354
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                               Page 44 of 50
64.         No doubt, in the instant case, the land was
transferred by the State to the Trust after acquisition,
and the Trust was a party in the suit. But it was the
State which had acquired the land for the benefit of
the Trust and by virtue of
Section 52 (4)
of the 1959
Act the land vested in the State pursuant to the
notification          issued   by   it   under
Section   52(1)
.
Therefore, in my view, when the relief of injunction was
dependent on validity of the acquisition notification,
the State was a necessary party as it alone could have
appropriately produced all the records about the steps
taken for acquisition of the land. Institution of the suit
without challenging the acquisition notification and
without impleading the State is a clever ploy to avoid
crucial questions. Such an exercise is akin to
approaching the Court with unclean hands. This
alone, in my view, as also observed by the trial court,
disentitles the plaintiff to obtain discretionary relief of
injunction. Thus, in my considered view, in respect of
the land covered by the acquisition notification, the
Suit as framed was not maintainable, not only for not
seeking a declaratory relief but also for not impleading
the State as a party. The issue no. (ii) is decided
accordingly.
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                           Page 45 of 50
Issue no.(iii)-- Whether the civil suit of the plaintiff
was barred by section 207 (2) of the Rajasthan
Tenancy Act?
65.         To appropriately address the issue as to
whether the suit in the Civil Court was barred by
Section 207 (2) of the 1955 Act, it would be useful to
examine the scheme of the 1955 Act as also whether
the reliefs claimed in the suit were within the scope of
the reliefs which could be sought for under the 1955
Act.
66.         The preamble of the 1955 Act provides that it
is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to
tenancies of agricultural lands, and to provide for
certain measures of land reforms and matters
connected therewith.
67.
Section 5(24)
of the 1955 Act defines “land” as
“land” shall mean land which is let or held for
agricultural purposes or for purposes subservient
thereto or as grove land or for pasturage including land
occupied by houses or enclosures situated on a holding,
or land covered with water which may be used for the
purpose of irrigation or growing Singhara or other
similar produce but excluding abadi land; it shall
include benefits to arise out of land and things attached
to the earth or permanently fastened to anything
attached to the earth.
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                      Page 46 of 50
68.         In the instant case, there exists no dispute
between the parties that for conversion of one bigha,
out of 3 bighas of the land in dispute, from agricultural
to non-agricultural use, application was given, and
conversion was made after charging conversion fee,
etc. This fact clearly demonstrates that the land in
dispute was agricultural land and was recorded as
such in the Jamabandi (i.e., record of rights). In so far
as that one bigha of land, which was converted to non-
agricultural use, is concerned, no dispute survives as
the appellant gave up its claim to it and the trial court
passed a decree in respect thereof, which has attained
finality. The dispute which survives is confined to that
2 bighas of the disputed land, which remained
agricultural land.
69.         Section 207 of the 1955 Act provides:
“207. Suits and applications cognizable by
          revenue court only—
          (1) All suits and application of the nature
          specified in the Third Schedule shall be heard
          and determined by a revenue court.
(2) No court other than a revenue court shall
          take cognizance of any such suit or
          application or of any suit or application based
          on a cause of action in respect of which any
          relief could be obtained by means of any such
          suit or application.
Explanation — If the cause of action is one in
          respect of which relief might be granted by the
          revenue court, it is immaterial that the relief
          asked for from the civil court is greater than,
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                                Page 47 of 50
or additional to, or is not identical with, that
              which the revenue court could have granted.”
70.              Section 256 of the 1955 Act reads:
“S.256. Bar to jurisdiction of civil courts. – (1)
              Save as otherwise provided specifically by or
              under this Act, no suit or proceeding shall lie
              in any civil court with respect to any matter
              arising under this Act or the rules made
              thereunder, for which a remedy by way of suit,
              application, appeal or otherwise is provided
              therein.
(2) Save as aforesaid no order by the State
              Government or by any revenue court or officer
              in exercise of the powers conferred by this Act
              or the rules made thereunder shall be liable to
              be questioned in any civil court.”
71.
In
Pyarelal v. Shubhendra Pilania29
this
Court, by relying on earlier decision of this Court in
Bank of Baroda v. Moti Bai30
, held that Section 207
read with Section 256 of the 1955 Act bars the
jurisdiction of the civil courts in respect of suits and
applications of the nature specified in the Third
Schedule of the 1955 Act.
72.              The Third Schedule of the 1955 Act, gives a list
of suits, applications and appeals which could be
maintained under the Act. Entry 8A provides that a
suit for injunction could be filed before the Court of
Assistant Collector within a period of three years from
29
(2019) 3 SCC 692
30
(1985) 1 SCC 475
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                                      Page 48 of 50
the date the cause of action arises. Entry 23-C
provides that a suit for perpetual injunction can be
filed before the Court of Assistant Collector within a
period of three years from the date the cause of action
arises. Entry 5 provides that a suit for declaration of
the plaintiff’s right as a tenant, or as a tenant of
Khudkasht, or as a sub-tenant, or for a share in a joint
tenancy are also to be filed in the Court of Assistant
Collector. Similarly, suit for declaration of tenancy
rights or for recovery of possession or for ejectment of
trespassers can be filed under
Sections 89
,
187
and
183
respectively, vide entries 6, 23 and 23-A
respectively in the Third Schedule.
73.         Once it is established that two bighas out of
three bighas of the land in dispute was agricultural
land and as such fell within the purview of the 1955
Act, in my view, though the revenue court may not
have had the jurisdiction to annul the notification
acquiring the land, which, in any case, was not sought
for by the plaintiff, the suit for injunction was
maintainable before the Revenue Court by virtue of
Entries 8A and 23-C read with Entries 5, 6, 23 and
23A of the Third Schedule of the 1955 Act. Thus, the
Suit before the Civil Court was barred by Section 207
read with Section 256 of the 1955 Act. Issue no.(iii) is
decided accordingly.
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                     Page 49 of 50
Conclusion
74.         As I have found the suit not maintainable
insofar as it related to the land covered by the
acquisition notification and also barred by Section 207
read with
Section 256
of the Rajasthan Tenancy Act,
1955, the defendant’s appeal is entitled to be allowed
and is hereby allowed. The judgment and decree of the
High Court as well as of the First Appellate Court are
set aside and the decree passed by the Trial Court is
restored.
......................................J.
                               (MANOJ MISRA)
New Delhi;
October 19, 2023
Civil Appeal No.8411 of 2014                              Page 50 of 50
REPORTABLE
              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
               CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8411 OF 2014


URBAN IMPROVEMENT TRUST BIKANER                     APPELLANT(S)


                             VERSUS
GORDHAN DASS (D) THR. LRS. & ORS.              RESPONDENT(S)




                         JUDGMENT
Hrishikesh Roy, J.
A. Factual Backdrop
1.   The challenge here is to the judgment dated 12.1.2010 by the

High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jodhpur in SB Civil

Regular Second Appeal No.114 of 2004 whereby the High Court

upheld the verdict of the first Appellate Court and opined that the

acquisition proceeding is null and void since notice was not given

to the owners who were in possession but was given to original

khatedaars whose names were existing in the revenue record.
2.   The respondent Gordhan Dass filed Regular Civil Suit No.

03/04 projecting the case that the plaintiff and the defendant

nos.2 to 4 jointly purchased 3 bighas of land in Bikaner town in
Page 1 of 40
two tranches. Under the registered sale deed dated 2.3.1970, two

and a half bigha land was first purchased and under the second

registered sale deed dated 16.3.1970, another half bigha land was

purchased from one Lal Khan. The plaintiff and the defendant nos.
2 to 4 thereby became joint khatedars of the said three bighas of

purchased land. While the purchasers were in peaceful possession

of the land bearing Khasra no.211/81 and 239/83, the defendant

no.1 i.e. the Urban Improvement Trust, Bikaner started making

claim over this land projecting that they had acquired the said

land. Initially, the suit was filed seeking permanent injunction to

restrain the defendant no.1 from trespassing into the land and

initiating any acquisition process but later when the defendant

no.1 was trying to obtain forceful possession of the land during the

pendency of the suit, the plaintiff amended the suit on 11.11.2002

to secure restoration of possession through mandatory injunction.
It was also pleaded that on the basis of a judgment dated

26.2.1998(WP 2243/95) in
Bhanwarlal v State of Rajasthan
,

concerning some other land, the defendant no. 1 had taken

possession of the plaintiff’s land and that the plaintiff was enjoying

possession till 9.6.1998 during the pendency of civil suit.    In the

written statement, the Urban Improvement Trust admitted that the
Page 2 of 40
plaintiff together with the defendant nos.2 to 4 purchased total 3

bighas of land through 2 sale deeds dated 2.3.1970 and 16.3.1970,

and those sale deeds are registered in the office of Sub-Registrar,

Bikaner.   The defendant no.1 also admitted that the plaintiff

submitted an application before District Magistrate to convert one

bigha land to non-agricultural category on which the District

Magistrate issued NOC since the said land was needed to set up a

petrol pump. Projecting their right over the concerned land, the

defendant no.1 in the written statement claimed that they had

acquired 24 Bigha 12 Biswa land comprising Khasra No.294/82

and requisite compensation was paid to the original khatedar.
Therefore, no compensation is payable to either the plaintiff or the

defendant nos.2 to 4 who had purchased the 3 Bigha land.
3.   The Trial Court on the basis of the rival contentions framed

the following issues:
“(i) Whether properties mentioned in paras 1, 1 (a), 1
(b) of the plaint are under the ownership of plaintiff
           and defendant no.2 to 4?
(ii) Whether out of the above-stated lands, two bigha
           land has been wrongly acquired by the defendant
           no.1?
(iii) Whether defendant no.1 has wrongly got
           possession over suit land according to para no.9 of the
           plaint, plaintiff is entitled to get the same restored?
(iv) Whether compensation has already been paid to
           the concerning people having acquired 24 Bigha 12
           Biswa suit land comprising Khasra No.294/83
Page 3 of 40
adopting lawful process according to para No.115 of
          written statement?
(v) Relief (s) ?”
4.   The learned Additional Civil Judge (Sr. Division) Bikaner

partially decreed the suit against the defendant no.1 by holding

that the plaintiff is entitled to get possession of 1 Bigha land meant

for petrol pump in Khasra No.284/83. However, for the balance suit

land, it was held that the defendant no.1 had acquired the said

land and accordingly the suit of the plaintiff for the 2 Bighas land,

was dismissed.      While granting relief for the 1 Bigha land, the

learned Trial Judge noted that possession of the same was restored

to the plaintiff after due permission from the State Government

and therefore his ownership remained undisturbed.               For the

balance 2 Bighas land, relief was refused and it was held that even

though the said land was purchased in 1970 through registered

sale deeds, the names of the new owners were not mutated in the

revenue records which continued to reflect the name of the

previous owner (seller), to whom compensation was paid. It was

further held that the onus was on the plaintiff to prove ownership,

claim compensation, and get his name recorded in jamabandi.
5.   The plaintiff then filed an appeal before the District Judge,

Bikaner and the learned Appellate Court by its judgment dated
Page 4 of 40
16.4.2004 decreed the entire suit land in favour of the plaintiff and

against the defendant no.1 and the defendant was restrained from

interfering with the plaintiff’s peaceful possession, use and

occupation of the suit land.    The Appellate Court concluded in

favour of the plaintiff after noting that no opportunity of hearing

was provided to the plaintiff for acquisition of the land and

furthermore, the plaintiff, Gordhan Dass was enjoying undisturbed

possession of the land until 10.6.1988.        Notwithstanding the

mutation correction not being carried out in the revenue records by

the purchasers, the Appellate Court noted that the plaintiff had

already applied before the District Magistrate for conversion of 1

Bigha land for establishing petrol pump and NOC for the said

purpose was issued in favour of the plaintiff with the active

cooperation by the defendants and it was thus concluded that

despite knowledge of the plaintiff’s ownership and possession, the

defendant no.1 did not discharge its duty to issue notice to the land

owner/plaintiff and accordingly the land acquisition proceedings

were held to be invalid. Moreover, since during the pendency of the

suit the plaintiff was forcefully evicted from the land on 10.6.1988

under cover of some other judgment of the High Court, the Court

opined that without proper acquisition proceedings with notice to
Page 5 of 40
the owner, the possession of the plaintiff (who was enjoying

uninterrupted possession till 10.6.1988), could not have been

disturbed. It was further noted that neither was any acquisition

notice issued to the plaintiff nor they were paid any acquisition

compensation although they were the actual owners of the land.
On the claim that the compensation was paid, the Court opined

that it was a vague contention in the written statement and it was

not categorically mentioned to whom compensation was paid nor

any evidence on such payment was produced by the defendant No.
1. It was also found that the defendant no.1 had forcibly evicted the

plaintiff from his property during the pendency of the suit without

due legal process i.e. without service of notice, without providing

the opportunity of hearing and without payment of compensation

to the plaintiff, and thus, the proceedings of the defendant no.1

were declared to be invalid. The decree of the Trial Court dated

23.2.2004 was thus set aside allowing the plaintiff’s appeal. The

decree of permanent injunction was accordingly granted favouring

the plaintiff against the defendant no.1 and it was further ordered

that defendant no.1 is to restore the suit land mentioned in para

no.1 (a) & 1 (b) of the plaint and they were restrained from
Page 6 of 40
interfering with the use and occupation of the said land by the

plaintiff.
6.    The defendant no.1 i.e. Urban Improvement Trust, Bikaner

assailed the judgment and decree dated 16.4.2004 in Appeal

Decree No.30/04. The High Court in the second appeal noted that

the defendant no.1 in the written statement had admitted that the

plaintiff together with the defendant nos.2 to 4 are the owners of

the suit land.    Therefore, it was held that suit for injunction

without seeking relief of title declaration is maintainable as even

the defendant no.1 does not claim any title over land purchased by

the plaintiff and the defendant nos.2 to 4, by way of two registered

sale deeds in the year 1970. Since the plaintiff together with the

defendant nos.2 to 4 had obtained valid title by purchase in the

year 1970 and were in peaceful possession, they were not required

to seek relief of declaration of title, particularly when the title has

not been disputed by the defendant no.1.
7.    The High Court adverted to the provisions of
The Rajasthan

Urban Improvement Act, 1959
(hereinafter referred to as the “1959

Act”) and observed that for compulsory acquisition of land under
Section 52
, the procedure to be followed is prescribed in the sub-
Sections under
Section 52
such as giving notice and providing
Page 7 of 40
opportunity of hearing to the owner and/or any other interested

person and compensation must also be paid to the owner under
Section 53
.   However, since the defendant no.1 failed to comply

with the mandatory provisions under
Section 52
and
53
of the

1959 Act and that acquisition process was initiated much after the

purchase of the land by the plaintiff, the acquisition proceeding in

the absence of notice and compensation was declared to be void

and a nullity. It was specifically noted that the defendant no. 1

admitted the possession and title of the plaintiff in their written

statement and thus it was opined that the plaintiff is entitled to

protect their property. As the defendant no.1 had also raised an

issue questioning the jurisdiction of the Civil Court, it was held

that a suit in a civil Court will always lie to question the order of

the tribunal created by a statute even if its order is expressly or by

necessary implication made final, if the said tribunal abuses its

power or acts in violation of its provisions.     Consequently, the

second appeal filed by the defendant no.1 was dismissed upholding

the decree passed in favour of the plaintiff by the first Appellate

Court.
B. Submissions
Page 8 of 40
8.    Challenging the above judgment of the High Court, Mr.

Aruneshwar Gupta, Learned Senior Counsel on behalf of the

appellant argued that pursuant to the notification dated 22.8.1974,

public notice and personal notices were duly issued to the original

Khatedars whose names were in the revenue records. The amount

of compensation was also duly paid. Service of notice to the

original khatedars in the record of rights was sufficient notice as

State Government is not liable to make a roving or fishing inquiry

about the ownership of land. Secondly, the purchaser of acquired

land is ‘any other person interested’ and could have raised

objections under
Section 52(3)
of the 1959 Act. There is no right to

challenge the acquisition of land after expiry of 23 years as the suit

for permanent injunction was filed on 21.4.1997. (
Ahuja Industries

Ltd. v State of Karnataka
1; Bhola Shanker v The Disst. Land

Acquisition Officer2). Thirdly,   it was argued that       the
Land

Acquisition Act, 1894
is a complete code in itself and thus, by

necessary implication Civil Court has no jurisdiction to pass

injunction for a land which is already acquired. Finally, it was

argued that the nature of land acquired under the 1959 Act was

‘agricultural land’ as the same was not converted for ‘non-
1 2003 5 SCC 365
2 (1973) 2 SCC 59
Page 9 of 40
agricultural use’ u/s 90-
A of Land Revenue Act,1956
. Owing to
Section 207
of the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 (hereinafter

“Tenancy Act,1955”)read with entry 8A and entry 23C of third

Schedule, matter relating to temporary and permanent injunction

in respect of agricultural land could be heard and determined only

by a revenue Court. No civil suit is maintainable for permanent

injunction w.r.t agricultural land.
9.   Projecting the contrary view, Mr. Manoj Swarup, learned

Senior   Counsel    for   the   Respondents     argued   that   revenue

authorities i.e. Patwari, Tehsildar and Collector had knowledge of

the rights and interests of the plaintiffs. As per the requirements

under
Section 52(2)
of the 1959 Act, notice should be given not only

to the owner of the land but also any other person who in the

opinion of State Government would be interested therein. The

Learned Counsel has placed on record letters from Tehsildar,

Bikaner acknowledging the sale deeds, thereby indicating that they

had knowledge of plaintiffs being in possession of the land.
Reliance was also placed on the decision of this Court in
Ahuja

Industries Limited v State of Karnataka
3. On the aspect of

maintainability, it was canvassed that the civil suit was not barred

in law to adjudicate on the dispute.
To substantiate the same, Mr.
3 (2003)5 SCC 365
Page 10 of 40
Swarup cites the Constitution Bench decision of this Court in

Dhulabai and others v State of Madhya Pradesh 4(hereinafter referred

to as “Dhulabai”) and Firm Seth Radha Kishan v The Administrator5.
C. Issues
10.     Having summarised the contentions of the respective parties,

the following questions fall for our consideration:
a)     Whether land acquisition proceedings can be declared null

          and void for failure to give notice to the owners who had

          purchased the land two years earlier through registered

          sale deeds, before the initiation of the land acquisition

          proceedings, even though the name of original khatedaar

          was reflected in the Revenue records?
b)     Whether Civil Court has jurisdiction to grant injunction as

          Section 207 of the Tenancy Act,1955 bars jurisdiction of

          Civil Court in respect of agricultural land?
c)     Whether plaintiff’s suit for injunction is maintainable

          without seeking Declaration in a Civil Court?
D. Notice requirements in land acquisition proceedings
i) Constitutional right to property and procedural justice
11.     This is a case of compulsory acquisition of land where the

land owner has no choice in the matter. The respondent purchased
4 (1968) 3 SCR 3 662
5 (1964) 2 SCR 2 273
Page 11 of 40
the concerned land for valuable consideration and was in peaceful

possession of the land. At that stage, the appellant attempted to

dispossess the respondent. Acquisition of land for public purpose

is permitted by law, but the acquiring authority is required to

ensure     adherence        to   the   statutory      regime    for   compulsory

acquisition. Only by strict adherence to the procedure, a measure

of protection is afforded to the landowners and the interested

persons, and implicit therein is fairness in the procedure. After all,

one is concerned with protection of constitutional rights under
Article 300A
of the Constitution.
12.
In the context, the recent observations of this Court in
Sukh

Dutt Ratra v. State of H.P6.
, would bear consideration where the

Court traced the recognition of the right to property since the

1700s and reiterated the high threshold of legality that ought to be

satisfied, to dispossess an individual of their property:
“13. While the right to property is no longer a fundamental
        right [“
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978
”], it is
        pertinent to note that at the time of dispossession of the subject
        land, this right was still included in Part III of the Constitution.
        The right against deprivation of property unless in accordance
        with    procedure    established   by      law,   continues   to   be
        a constitutional right under Article 300-A.




6 (2022) 7 SCC 508
Page 12 of 40
14. It is the cardinal principle of the rule of law, that nobody
        can be deprived of liberty or property without due process, or
        authorisation of law. The recognition of this dates back to the
        1700s      to     the     decision      of    the     King's      Bench
        in Entick v. Carrington [Entick v. Carrington, 1765 EWHC (KB)
        J98 : 95 ER 807] and by this Court in Wazir Chand v. State of
        H.P. [Wazir Chand v. State of H.P., (1955) 1 SCR 408 : AIR 1954
        SC 415] Further, in several judgments, this Court has
        repeatedly held that rather than enjoying a wider bandwidth of
        lenience, the State often has a higher responsibility in
        demonstrating that it has acted within the confines of legality,
        and therefore, not tarnished the basic principle of the rule of
        law.
15. When it comes to the subject of private property, this Court
        has upheld the high threshold of legality that must be met, to
        dispossess an individual of their property, and even more so
        when done by the State.”
13.    The Land acquisition laws in India have their origins in

British colonial law. Compulsory acquisition of land is based on

the principle of eminent domain which can be understood as the

State’s power to acquire private property without the owner’s

consent for a ‘public purpose’ 7. Thus, when the State acquires

property while exercising its eminent domain powers, the economic

loss suffered by the owner is followed by a corresponding economic

gain to the State. The State deals with the property as if it is the

owner of the property8. Scholarly writings on the principle of

7 Julius L. Sackman, Russell D Van Brunt, ‘Nichols on Eminent Domain’ vol 1 (3rd edn,
Mathew Bender & co, 1959). § 1.11
8 Namita Wahi, ‘Property’ in Sujit Choudhry, Madhav Khosla, Pratap Bhanu Mehta (eds), The
Oxford Handbook of the Indian Constitution (Oxford University Press 2016)
Page 13 of 40
eminent domain have shed light on this subject 9. In an article

titled, “History of Eminent Domain in Colonial Thought and Legal

Practice” published in the Economic and Political Weekly 10, the

author, while critiquing the principle of eminent domain reflects on

the need to rethink compulsory acquisition from the lens of ethics

and justice. Referring to the opening paragraph in the Tenth Report

of   the    Law     Commission         of   India: Law         of    Acquisition      and

Requisitioning of Land (1958)11 dealing with land acquisition as per

which “critical examination of the various stages of evolution of

this(compulsory land acquisition) power and its ethical basis will

serve no useful purpose as the power has been established in all

civilised countries”, the author questions the precedence given to

customary practices over ethics. There ought to be substantive

limits on the power of eminent domain in order to avoid arbitrary

action. Strict adherence to procedure is an essential safeguard

towards      achieving       fairness       and    transparency         in    the    land

acquisition process. Such procedures provide land owners and

interested persons a fair opportunity to say why their land should
9 Tom Allen, The Right to Property in Commonwealth Constitutions (Cambridge University Press
2000) 172; Preeti Sampat, ‘Limits to Absolute Power: Eminent Domain and Right to Land in
India’ (2013) 48 Economic and Political Weekly 40; Usha Ramanathan, ‘A Word of Eminent
Domain’ in Lyla Mehta(ed), Displaced by Development: Confronting Marginalisation and Gender
Injustice. (SAGE 2009)
10 Debjani Bhattacharyya, ‘History of Eminent Domain in Colonial Thought and Legal Practice’
(2015) 50 Economic and Political Weekly 45.
11 Law Commission, ‘Law of Acquisition and Requisitioning of Land’ (Law Com No. 10, 1977).
Page 14 of 40
not be acquired and also whether the compensation assessed for

their lands is adequate. To deny procedural safeguards to the land

loser would mean that the doors of justice are shut for him. Such

an interpretation, in my view, should be avoided.
ii) International Legal Framework on Compulsory Land Acquisition
14.   Before proceeding to deal with the issue of the legitimacy of

the land acquisition proceeding, it would be appropriate to set out

the international legal framework on compulsory land acquisition.
The right to self-determination is enshrined within the Charter of

the United Nations, the International Covenant on Economic,

Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) and the International

Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), amongst other

instruments which is defined as the right of all people to freely

dispose of their natural wealth and resources, and that no person

may be deprived of its own means of subsistence.
Article 17
of the

Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides that, “Everyone

has the right to own property alone as well as in association with

others. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his property.” Self-
determination also includes obligation for states to refrain from any

forcible actions that deprive people of enjoying such rights. The

concept   of   Free,   Prior   and   Informed   Consent(FPIC)   within
Page 15 of 40
international development law is most clearly stated in the United

Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in
Articles

10
, 11
, 19
, 28
and
29
which prescribes situations in which FPIC

must     be    obtained      before     granting      compensation,          taking     of

indigenous property etc. Development experts have recognized that

FPIC is not only important for Indigenous people but can also be

used as a positive approach to involve local communities in

decision-making about any proposed development. Engaging them

in such processes fosters a greater sense of ownership and

engagement        and,     moreover,       helps      safeguard      their    right     to

development as a basic human rights principle 12. These principles

are not to be found under the Land Acquisition Act, 1984 but the

concept of acquiring land through consent and Social Impact

Assessment (SIA) on whether a project serves “public purpose” has

been added in the 2013 avatar of the
Land Acquisition Act
.
Therefore, The Right To Fair Compensation and Transparency in

Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 is found

to be more attuned to the notion of fairness and is progressive to

this extent.
12 Sambhav Shrivastava et al., ‘Subversion of Due Process for Seeking the Consent of
Communities in Land Acquisition and Resultant Land Conflicts’ (Oxfam 2020) <https://policy-
practice.oxfam.org/resources/subversion-of-due-process-for-seeking-the-consent-of-
communities-in-land-acquis-621109/> accessed 19 September 2023.
Page 16 of 40
15.    While there are many instances of authorities failing to

adhere to the acquisition regime, this Court has the benefit of a

study conducted by the Lands Rights Initiative of the Centre for

Policy Research13. The outcome of the extensive study of around

1269 judgments of the Supreme Court of India between 1950 to

2016 on the legal trajectory of land acquisition cases in India lead

to the following comments:
“The process of land acquisition in India has been the
              source of increasing political and legal contestation for
              almost two hundred years. This stems from the inherently
              coercive nature of the process, which creates a severe
              imbalance in power between the state and land losers. Our
              review of Supreme Court litigation since the time India
              became a constitutional republic in 1950 shows that while
              much of this imbalance was created within the very text of
              the
Land Acquisition Act
, a considerable part of it could also
              be attributed to executive non-compliance with the rule of law.
              The result was a situation of great inequity for the land
              losers”

                                                           [emphasis supplied]
16.    The Supreme Court in a recent judgment had the occasion to

look at the process of compulsory land acquisition where the

landowners had practically no means to oppose the proposed

acquisition. A two judge bench in
Vidya Devi v. State of H.P14
13 Namita Wahi, Ankit Bhatia et al, ‘Land Acquisition in India: A Review of Supreme Court
Cases 1950-2016’(Centre for Policy Research 2017)
14 (2020) 2 SCC 569
Page 17 of 40
speaking through Indu Malhotra J. made the following significant

observation:
“12.2. The right to property ceased to be a fundamental right
           by the
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978
,
           however, it continued to be a human right (Tukaram Kana
           Joshi v. Maharashtra           Industrial         Development
           Corpn. [Tukaram Kana Joshi v. Maharashtra Industrial
           Development Corpn., (2013) 1 SCC 353 : (2013) 1 SCC (Civ)
           491] ) in a welfare State, and a constitutional right under
Article 300-A
of the Constitution.
Article 300-A
provides that
           no person shall be deprived of his property save by authority
           of law. The State cannot dispossess a citizen of his property
           except in accordance with the procedure established by law.
           The obligation to pay compensation, though not expressly
           included in
Article 300-A
, can be inferred in that Article [K.T.
           Plantation (P) Ltd. v. State of Karnataka [K.T. Plantation (P)
           Ltd. v. State of Karnataka, (2011) 9 SCC 1 : (2011) 4 SCC
           (Civ) 414] ].
12.3. To forcibly dispossess a person of his private property,
           without following due process of law, would be violative of a
           human right, as also the constitutional right under
Article
           300-A
of the Constitution.”
17.   The significance of complying with procedural requirements

cannot, therefore, be overstated.
iii) Burden is on the Authority to fulfil procedural requirements under
Section 52 of the 1959 Act
18. Returning to the facts of the present case, let us now consider

the implication of
Section 52
of the 1959 Act. The provision having

a bearing in this discussion, is extracted below:
“52. Compulsory Acquisition of Land-
Page 18 of 40
(1) Where on a representation from the Trust it appears to the
          State Government that any land is required for the purpose of
          improvement or for any other purpose under this Act, the State
          Government may acquire such land by publishing in the
          official Gazette a notice specifying the particular purpose for
          which land is required and stating that the State Government
          has decided to acquire the land in pursuance of this Section.
(2) Before publishing a notice under sub-section (1), the State
          Government shall by another notice call upon the owner of the
          land and any other person who in the opinion of the State
          Government may be interested therein to show cause, within
          such time as may be specified in the notice, why the land
          should not be acquired.
(3) After considering the cause, if any, shown by the owner of
          the land and by any other person interested therein and after
          giving such owner and person an opportunity of being heard,
          the State Government may pass such orders as it deems fit.
(4) When a notice under sub-section (1) is published in the
          official gazette, the land shall on and from the date of such
          publication, vest absolutely in the State Government free from
          all encumberances.
(5) Where any land is vested in the State Government under
          sub-section (4), the State Government may by notice in writing
          order any person who may be in possession of the land to
          surrender or deliver possession thereof to the State
          Government or any person duly authorised by it in this behalf
          within thirty days of the service of notice.
****       ****         ****        ****        ****”
19.   The implication of
Section 52
of the 1959 Act, is that notice is

required to be served not only to the owner but also to “any other

person interested” thereby covering everyone interested in the

concerned land. To avoid the rigour of this Section, the appellant-
Trust have given their version by saying that the plaintiff, Gordhan
Page 19 of 40
Dass intentionally did not receive compensation so as to make it a

ground thereafter and that the onus would lie on the plaintiff as

found by the trial Court. Gordhan Dass was indisputably the

actual owner and hence, as per the mandate of the law, it was the

responsibility of the concerned Authority 15 to adhere to the due

statutory process before depriving the landowner or interested

persons, of their property. The burden is on the defendant No. 1 i.e.

the Urban Improvement Trust to satisfy the high procedural

threshold before acquiring any private property. Moreover, the

defendant no. 1 was also unable to produce any evidence to

indicate whether compensation was ever paid to the original

khatedaars as was vaguely claimed by them. This fact was also

noted by the First Appellate Court in para 20 of the decision that,

despite a vague contention, there is no proof of payment of

compensation even to the original khatedars. On the other hand,

the plaintiffs have produced a letter wherein the original khatedaar

is seeking compensation as on 10.1.1990. Be that as it may,

neither    was     notice    issued     to   the    actual    owners     nor    any

compensation was paid to them by defendant no. 1. As already

noted,
Section 52
of the 1959 Act requires the Government to issue


15 D.B. Basnett v Collector, East District, Gangtok, Sikkim (2020) 4 SCC 572;
Jagan
Singh & Co. v Ludhiana Improvement Trust
2022 SCCOnLine 1144
Page 20 of 40
notice to the owner of the land and to any other person, who may

be interested therein to seek protection of their land from

acquisition. Only after consideration of the response to the notice,

the concerned land is to vest on the State Government.               The land

owner or interested persons are also required to be given the

opportunity of being heard. In the present case, neither any notice

was issued nor any compensation was paid to the land owner.
Moreover, it has been alleged that even after initiation of land

acquisition proceedings in 1972, the plaintiff continued to enjoy

possession till 10.6.1998 during the pendency of the civil suit. The

plaintiff was forcefully dispossessed under the cover of a judgment

concerning some other land. The said judgment has nothing to do

with the land of respondents. This further points towards glaring

procedural irregularities in the entire land acquisition process.
20.   The observations in
M.P. Housing Board v Mohd. Shafi
16 are

relevant in this context where the significance of giving proper

notice was noted as under:
“8…..The object of issuing a notification under
Section 4
of
            the Act is two- fold. First, it is a public announcement by
            the Government and a public notice by the Collector to the
            effect that the land, as specified therein, is needed or is
            likely to be needed by the Government for the "public
            purpose" mentioned therein; and secondly, it authorises
            the departmental officers or officers of the local authority,
16 (1992)2 SCC 168
Page 21 of 40
as the case may be to do all such acts as are mentioned
          in
Section 4(2)
of the Act. The notification has to be
          published in the locality and particularly persons likely to
          be affected by the proposal have to be put on notice that
          such an activity is afoot. The notification is, thus, required
          to give with sufficient clarity not only the "public purpose"
for which the acquisition proceedings are being commenced
          but also the "locality" where the land is situate with as full
          a description as possible of the land proposed to be
          acquired to enable the "interested" persons to know as to
          which land is being acquired and for what purpose and to
          take further steps under the Act by filing objections etc.,
          since it is open to such persons to canvass the non-
          suitability of the land for the alleged "public purpose" also.
          If a notification under
Section 4(1)
of the Act is defective and
          does not comply with the requirements of the Act, it not only
          vitiates the notification, but also renders all subsequent
          proceedings connected with the acquisition, bad.”
                                                     [emphasis supplied]
21.   It logically follows from above that dispossession without

following prescribed statutory process such as giving proper notice,

is not only highly prejudicial but it is also a violation of

constitutional rights and would thereby vitiate the entire process of

land acquisition. Law is well-settled that strict adherence to the

mandatory procedural requirements outlined in the legislation is

sine-qua-non for the compulsory acquisition of land. Legally

conducted acquisition procedures minimize the potential for

arbitrary action by the concerned Authority. The findings to this

effect by the Appellate Court and the High Court would therefore
Page 22 of 40
merit our approval. In other words, land acquisition proceedings for

the entire 3 bighas of land is held to be void-ab-initio.
22.   As far as the judgment of this Court in
Bhola Shankar v Dist
.
Land Acquisition Officer17relied upon by Mr. Aruneshwar Gupta,

learned     Counsel    for   the       Appellant     is    concerned,   it   is

distinguishable      from    the     facts     of   this   case.
In
Bhola

Shankar
(supra), the factual matrix was such that the concerned

plot was purchased subsequent to the publication of notification

under
Section 4
of the Land Acquisition Act,1894. However, in the

present case, the plaintiff together with defendant no. 2 to 4 had

bought the land well before commencement of the land acquisition

proceedings. Therefore issue(i) is answered accordingly.
E. Maintainability
i) Expansive jurisdiction of Civil Courts under
Section 9
, Civil
Procedure Code
23.   Adverting next to the appellant’s argument on maintainability

of a suit, it is no more res-integra that ouster of jurisdiction of civil

Courts cannot be a matter of course.
Section 9
of the Code of Civil

Procedure empowers the Courts to try all civil suits, unless barred.
The contour of the jurisdiction of the Civil Court has been

succinctly enunciated by a five-judge Constitution Bench in
17 (1973) 2 SCC 59
Page 23 of 40
Dhulabai(supra). Chief Justice M Hidayatullah writing for the

Bench laid down the tests on the bar of jurisdiction of the civil

courts. The relevant principles are extracted below:
“(1) Where the statute gives a finality to the orders of the
           special Tribunals the civil courts' jurisdiction must be held
           to be excluded if there is adequate remedy to do what the
           civil courts would normally do in a suit. Such provision,
           however, does not exclude those cases where the provisions
           of the particular Act have not been complied with or the
           statutory Tribunal has not acted in conformity with the
           fundamental principles of judicial procedure.
               (2) Where there is an express bar of the jurisdiction of the
           court, an examination of the scheme of the particular Act to
           find the adequacy or the sufficiency of the remedies provided
           may be relevant but is not decisive to sustain the jurisdiction
           of the civil court.
Where there is no express exclusion the examination of
           the remedies and the scheme of the particular Act to find
           out the intendment becomes necessary and the result of the
           inquiry may be decisive. In the latter case it is necessary to
           see if the statute creates a special right or a liability and
           provides for the determination of the right or liability and
           further lays down that all questions about the said right
           and liability shall be determined by the Tribunals so
           constituted, and whether remedies normally associated with
           actions in civil courts are prescribed by the said statute or
           not.
(7) An exclusion of the jurisdiction of the civil court is not
            readily to be inferred unless the conditions above set down
            apply.”
                                             [emphasis supplied]
24.   In Ramesh Gobindram v. Sugra Humayun Mirza 18, a two-Judge

Bench of this Court observed that the jurisdiction of the civil

courts to try suits of a civil nature is expansive and the onus to

prove the ouster of the jurisdiction is on the party that asserts it.
The court observed that even in cases where the jurisdiction of the

18 (2010) 8 SCC 726
Page 24 of 40
civil court is barred by a statute, the test is to determine if the

authority or tribunal constituted under the statute has the power

to grant reliefs that the civil courts would normally grant in suits

filed before them. The relevant observations are extracted below:
“12. The well-settled rule in this regard is that the civil courts
           have the jurisdiction to try all suits of civil nature except
           those entertainment whereof is expressly or impliedly barred.
           The jurisdiction of the civil courts to try suits of civil nature
           is very expansive. Any statute which excludes such
           jurisdiction is, therefore, an exception to the general rule that
           all disputes shall be triable by a civil court. Any such
           exception cannot be readily inferred by the courts. The court
           would lean in favour of a construction that would uphold the
           retention of jurisdiction of the civil courts and shift the onus
           of proof to the party that asserts that the civil court's
           jurisdiction is ousted.”
25.   In this case, applying the test laid down in Dhulabai (supra), it

has to be determined whether the Act provides an adequate final

remedy of the kind the civil Court would normally grant in a suit,

such that the jurisdiction of the civil court must necessarily be

inferred to have been ousted. For that purpose, the statutory

scheme of the Tenancy Act, 1955 is to be carefully examined.
Additionally, as per the test laid down by Dhulabai (supra),

jurisdiction of civil Court would not be ousted in cases where the

fundamental principles of judicial procedure and the provisions of

the particular Act are not complied with.
Page 25 of 40
26.   Proceeding with the above understanding of the law as laid

down by this Court in Dhulabai (supra), let us now examine the

scheme of the Tenancy Act, 1955 to determine whether the reliefs

claimed in the suit, were within or outside the scope of the 1955

Act. The Preamble to the Tenancy Act, 1955 provides that it’s an Act

to “consolidate and amend the law relating to tenancies of

agricultural lands, and to provide for certain measures of land

reforms and matters connected therewith”. The statutory scheme of

the Act provides for tenancies of agricultural lands.
Section 1
contained in
Part I of the Act
deals with short title and

commencement.
Section 5
deals with definitions. Importantly,
Section 5(35)
provides the definition of Revenue Court “as a court

or an officer having jurisdiction to entertain suits or other

proceedings relating to agricultural tenancies, profits and other

matters connected with land or any other right or interest in land,

wherein such court or officer is required to act judicially.”
Section

5(43)
provides for the definition of tenant. Chapter III deals with

classes of tenant while Chapter IV is about Devolution, Transfer,

Exchange, and Division of Tenancies. Chapter V is concerned with

Surrender, Abandonment, and Extinction of Tenancies.       A cursory

look at the other chapters would also show that they relate to
Page 26 of 40
agricultural tenancies which has nothing to do with the relief of

permanent injunction claimed in the suit.                The title, as noted

earlier, is not disputed. Section 207 and 208 of the Tenancy

Act,1955 which is central to the present issue, reads as under:
“207. Suits and applications cognizable by revenue
           court only— (1) All suits and application of the nature
           specified in the Third Schedule shall be heard and
           determined by a revenue court.
(2) No court other than a revenue court shall take
           cognizance of any such suit or application or of any suit
           or application based on a cause of action in respect of
           which any relief could be obtained by means of any such
           suitor application.
Explanation— If the cause of action is one in respect of
           which relief might be granted by the revenue court, it is
           immaterial that the relief asked for from the civil court is
           greater than, or additional to, or is not identical with, that
           which the revenue court could have granted.
208. Application of Civil Procedure Code— The
           provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (Central
           Act V of 1908), except:
(a) provisions inconsistent with anything in this Act,
                 so far as the inconsistency extends.
(b) provisions applicable only to special suits or
                proceedings outside the scope of this Act, and
(c) provisions contained in List I of the Fourth
                 Schedule, shall apply to all suit and proceedings
                 under this Act, subject to the modifications
                 contained in List II of the Fourth Schedule.”
27.   Let us now look at the relief claimed in the suit in the context

of the overall scheme of the Tenancy Act,1955.                In the suit, the

plaintiff, inter alia, sought permanent injunction from disturbing

the ownership and possession w.r.t 3 bighas of land purchased
Page 27 of 40
through two registered sale deeds. Such a relief could not possibly

be granted by the forums empowered under the Tenancy Act,1955

which primarily deals with tenancy rights and their protection.
Therefore, the jurisdiction of the civil Court is not ousted by

Section 207 or Section 208 of the Tenancy Act,1955 and the

contrary submission made by the appellant has to be rejected.
Therefore, evaluation of the scheme of the Act would lead us to the

conclusion that jurisdiction of the revenue Court would be barred

under Tenancy Act,1955, in view of the reliefs claimed by plaintiff.
28.   Moreover, even where a statute gives finality to the process, it

does not exclude cases where the provisions of the particular

statute have not been complied with or the Tribunal has failed to

decide in conformity with the fundamental principles of judicial

procedure19. In the present case, in the absence of notice to the

actual owner under
Section 52
of the 1959 Act, the acquisition

proceedings are legally vitiated and therefore the affected owner

should be entitled to seek relief from the civil Court. As noticed, the

defendant no. 1 i.e., the Urban Improvement Trust failed to adhere

to the essential requirements under
Section 52
of the 1959 Act.
When the fundamental judicial procedure is disregarded, the


19
Dewaji v. Ganpatlal
, AIR 1969 SC 560;
Sree Kandregula Srinivasa Jagannath Rao
Pantulu Bahadur Garu v. State of A.P.
, (1969) 3 SCC 71
Page 28 of 40
action rendered is legally void and should be seen as being “outside

the Act”.
The observations in Firm Seth Radha Kishan v.
Administrator, Municipal Committee20 would therefore be applicable

in this context:
“7. Under
Section 9
of the Code of Civil Procedure the
            court shall have jurisdiction to try all suits of civil
            nature excepting suits of which cognizance is either
            expressly or impliedly barred. A statute, therefore,
            expressly or by necessary implication, can bar the
            jurisdiction of civil courts in respect of a particular
            matter. The mere conferment of special jurisdiction on
            a tribunal in respect of the said matter does not in
            itself exclude the jurisdiction of civil courts. The
            statute may specifically provide for ousting the
            jurisdiction of civil courts; even if there was no such
            specific exclusion, if it creates a liability not existing
            before and gives a special and particular remedy for
            the aggrieved party, the remedy provided by it must
            be followed. The same principle would apply if the
            statute had provided for the particular forum in which
            the remedy could be had. Even in such cases, the civil
            court's jurisdiction is not completely ousted. A suit in
            a civil court will always lie to question the order of a
            tribunal created by a statute, even if its order is,
            expressly or by necessary implication, made final, if
            the said tribunal abuses its power or does not act
            under the Act but in violation of its provisions.”
29.   Applying the principles
laid down in
Dhulabai (supra) and

Firm Seth Radha Krishnan(supra) to the facts of the present case,

there can be no difficulty in holding that a suit of this nature would

be maintainable before the civil Court particularly considering the

nature of relief prayed in the suit.
ii) Plaintiff’s title is not under a cloud


20 (1964) 2 SCR 273
Page 29 of 40
30.   The next issue is whether a civil suit for permanent injunction

can be filed without declaration. On this, it is settled that where

the plaintiff's title is not in dispute or under a cloud, a suit for

injunction could be decided with reference to the finding on

possession. The relevant tests were laid down in
Anathula

Sudhakar v P. Buchi Reddy21
:
“13.1. Where a plaintiff is in lawful or peaceful
              possession of a property and such possession is
              interfered or threatened by the defendant, a suit for an
              injunction simpliciter will lie. A person has a right to
              protect his possession against any person who does not
              prove a better title by seeking a prohibitory injunction.
              But a person in wrongful possession is not entitled to an
              injunction against the rightful owner.
                  13.2. Where the title of the plaintiff is not disputed,
              but he is not in possession, his remedy is to file a suit for
              possession and seek in addition, if necessary, an
              injunction. A person out of possession, cannot seek the
              relief of injunction simpliciter, without claiming the relief
              of possession.
13.3. Where the plaintiff is in possession, but his title
              to the property is in dispute, or under a cloud, or where
              the defendant asserts title thereto and there is also a
              threat of dispossession from the defendant, the plaintiff
              will have to sue for declaration of title and the
              consequential relief of injunction. Where the title of the
              plaintiff is under a cloud or in dispute and he is not in
              possession or not able to establish possession,
              necessarily the plaintiff will have to file a suit for
              declaration, possession and injunction.”
31.   At the cost of repetition, it must be noted that in the written

statement in the suit, the defendant no.1 admitted that the plaintiff

together with the defendant nos.2 to 4 purchased total 3 bighas of


21 2008) 4 SCC 594
Page 30 of 40
land through two sale deeds respectively dated 2.3.1970 and

16.3.1970 and it was also admitted that the plaintiff submitted an

application before District Magistrate to convert one bigha land to

non-agricultural category on which the District Magistrate issued

NOC since the said land was needed to set up a petrol pump. Here,

the title for the plaintiff is not disputed by the defendants and the

same is not under a cloud. Therefore, the question of title is not an

issue in the suit. Moreover, the mandatory requirements under the

provisions of the 1959 Act were itself not followed before issuing

notification, without which the title cannot be said to be disputed.
Such a suit for injunction in the absence of contest to the title

would therefore, be maintainable.
32.
In
State of Bihar v Dhirendra Kumar22
,
Laxmi Chand v Gram

Panchayat        Kararia23
,
Commissioner,      Bangalore   Development

Authority and another v Brijesh Reddy and another
24, it was held

that validity of acquisition notification cannot be questioned in a

Civil Court and it can only be challenged in the High Court under

its writ jurisdiction. Would these ratios apply to the present case is

a question that needs to be addressed. It is the case of the

Appellant i.e. the Urban Improvement Trust that the nature of land

22 (1995) 4 SCC 229
23 (1996) 7 SCC 218
24 (2013) 3 SCC 66
Page 31 of 40
acquired under the 1959 Act was ‘agricultural land’ which got

converted for ‘non-agricultural use’ under
Section 90-A
of the Land

Revenue Act,1956. As per Section 207 of the Tenancy Act,1955 read

with entry 8A and entry 23C of Third Schedule, the matter relating

to agricultural land could be heard and determined only by a

Revenue Court. As the scheme of the Tenancy Act, 1955 was earlier

examined, it is quite apparent that the prayers made in the suit are

beyond the scope of the 1955 Act. Moreover, the relief for quashing

the notification was also not sought in the Suit. That apart, it is

not the case of the appellant that writ court is the legal option for

relief but they want the land owners to be relegated to the Revenue

Court under the 1955 Act.    It is already noticed why the Revenue

Court is not the appropriate forum for the reliefs claimed by the

respondents.
The facts here are clearly distinguishable and hence,

the
ratio
laid down in
Dhirendra Kumar
(supra) can have no

application here.
Moreover, as per the five-judge bench judgment

in Dhulabai (supra), an exception is carved out as per which if there

is a violation of fundamental principles of judicial procedure and

the provisions of a particular Act are not followed, a Civil suit is

maintainable.
Page 32 of 40
iii) Non-impleadment of State cannot be considered fatal for

maintainability
33. It was also pleaded by the Appellant that the suit was not

maintainable on account of considerable delay and because the

State was not impleaded as a party defendant in the suit

proceeding. Such a contention upon consideration is only to be

rejected. The legal position relating to necessary and proper parties

was summarized in Mumbai International Airport Private Limited v.
Regency Convention Centre and Hotels Private Limited25 as under:
“15. A “necessary party” is a person who ought to have been joined
         as a party and in whose absence no effective decree could be
         passed at all by the court. If a “necessary party” is not impleaded,
         the suit itself is liable to be dismissed. A “proper party” is a party
         who, though not a necessary party, is a person whose presence
         would enable the court to completely, effectively and adequately
         adjudicate upon all matters in dispute in the suit, though he need
         not be a person in favour of or against whom the decree is to be
         made. If a person is not found to be a proper or necessary party,
         the court has no jurisdiction to implead him, against the wishes of
         the plaintiff. The fact that a person is likely to secure a
         right/interest in a suit property, after the suit is decided against
         the plaintiff, will not make such person a necessary party or a
         proper party to the suit for specific performance.”
34. It must be borne in mind that the Urban Improvement Trust,

Bikaner is an instrumentality of the State and was a contesting

party in the suit as it was the beneficiary of the acquisition

process. The observation of the seven-judge bench of this Court in
25 (
2010) 7 SCC 417
Page 33 of 40
Nagpur Improvement Trust v. Vithal Rao
26, would be relevant in this

context where, it was noted that “the acquisition is for the trust and

may be at its instance, but nevertheless the acquisition is by the

Government". In the backdrop of differential compensation under

different land acquisition Acts, it was held that as far as the owner

is concerned, it does not matter whether the land was acquired by

Improvement Trust, Municipal Corporation or the Government. In

the facts of the present case, non-impleadment of the State cannot

be perceived as fatal for the maintainability of the suit as the

contesting      defendant     i.e.    Urban     Improvement       Trust     is   an

instrumentality of the State and the beneficiary of the acquisition

process.
At this point, we may also usefully refer to the conclusion

of the Rajasthan High Court in
Urban Improvement Trust v Shri

Padmanand27
, where after analysing the provisions of the Act 1959,

it was noted as under:
"15..............In our view, a close scrutiny of the provisions of
       the 1959 Act leave no doubt that the Improvement Trust,
       created under the aforesaid Act, works as an agent or
       instrumentality of the State Government and as such the
       Trust must be considered as a 'State Government
       department', for the purposes of
Section 18
of the Act of
       1953."
26 (1973) 1 SCC 500
27 AIR 1980 Raj 176
Page 34 of 40
35. In light of the above observation, can it possibly be said that

the Urban Improvement Trust for the present purpose, is a

separate entity altogether in relation to the State of Rajasthan,

without whose participation, no authoritative pronouncement

could possibly be made in the suit? The answer for this has to be

in the negative. The ratio in Shri Saurav Jain v M/s ABP Design &

Another28 would also not be applicable here. In that case, a suit was

instituted by the 1st respondent in the Court of Civil Judge who

claimed to be a “transferable owner and cultivator” of a certain

piece of land. This Court, in the said case, inter alia, arrived at a

finding that invalid transfer of land was made to the Respondent

and it was null and void for being in violation of
Section 5(3)
of

Urban Ceiling Act,1976.    Significantly, neither the State nor any

authority under the
Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act
1976

were impleaded in that suit. The Court specifically noted that the

real object of the suit was to affirm plaintiff’s title on the basis of

an alleged permission for sale in his favour. It was in that context

that the Court noted that the 1 st respondent resorted to engineered

drafting for declaration of title. However, in the present case, the

title is undisputed and the necessary contesting party i.e. the Trust



28 2021 SCC OnLineSC 552
Page 35 of 40
was arrayed as a party. These are the key distinguishing features

for that case to be of no relevance in the present matter.
36. At this point, let us now refer to the observations of this Court

in
Urban Improvement Trust v Mohan Lal
29 which are closer to the

facts of the present case. This Court deprecated the tendency of

State and its instrumentalities of filing appeals against all orders

that came against them on false, frivolous, vexatious and technical

grounds. The facts
in that case
were that the Urban Improvement

Trust, Bikaner without notice, acquisition or consent, took over the

allotted plot of the landowner and thereafter, when relief was

granted to landowners by the National Commission, challenged it on

technical grounds for absence of protest and Complaint, within two

years of the cause of action. Moreover, it was argued by the

Counsel for the Trust that even if it was an illegal encroachment,

jurisdiction under
Consumer Protection Act,1986
could not be

invoked. Rejecting the arguments of the Counsel for the Trust, the

Supreme Court made the following pertinent observations:
“5. It is a matter of concern that such frivolous and unjust
         litigations by Governments and statutory authorities are on
         the increase. Statutory authorities exist to discharge statutory
         functions in public interest. They should be responsible
         litigants. They cannot raise frivolous and unjust objections,
         nor act in a callous and high-handed manner. They can not
         behave like some private litigants with profiteering motives.
29(2010) 1 SCC 512
Page 36 of 40
Nor can they resort to unjust enrichment. They are expected
       to show remorse or regret when their officers act negligently or
       in an overbearing manner. When glaring wrong acts by their
       officers are brought to their notice, for which there is no
       explanation or excuse, the least that is expected is
       restitution/restoration to the extent possible with appropriate
       compensation. Their harsh attitude in regard to genuine
       grievances of the public and their indulgence in unwarranted
       litigation requires to be corrected.
6. This Court has repeatedly expressed the view that
       Governments and statutory authorities should be model or ideal
       litigants and should not put forth false, frivolous, vexatious,
       technical (but unjust) contentions to obstruct the path of justice.”
37. What we see here are few landowners whose lands were

subjected to compulsory acquisition for the benefit of the Urban

Improvement Trust, Bikaner. The Trust took possession of their

land without serving any notice on the landowners. It is also not

clear whether any compensation was actually paid to the recorded

khatedars. The respondents then filed suit seeking to injunct the

appellant from dispossessing the landowners from their land. This

was a situation of a genuine grievance attempted to be canvassed

by the landowners before a Court of law.              For a litigant who has

partially succeeded from the 1 st Court and later at the appellate

stage obtained full relief from two courts be told that his suit is not

maintainable?     In my opinion, justice would be better served if the

respondents are not forced to commence another round of litigation

before the High Court to secure a redressal for their grievances
Page 37 of 40
pertaining to being deprived of their land without getting any

notice or just compensation.
38.   As can be seen, the landowners had arrayed the Urban

Improvement Trust, Bikaner as a defendant in the suit as their

grievance was primarily against the appellant who dispossessed

the respondents and took over their land.                    The State Authority

which wronged the landowners was a defendant in the suit and

also contested the suit by filing written submission and adducing

evidence. In this backdrop, to non-suit the landowners would lead

to manifest injustice.          The issue no. (iii) is therefore answered

against the appellant.
F. Conclusion
39.   It must now be noted that the litigation in this case has been

continuing for 25 years. Empirical Data 30 shows that land disputes

clog all levels of courts in India, and according to certain studies,

land-related litigations account for the largest set of cases, in terms

of both absolute numbers and judicial pendency.                      For those who

are going to lose their land through compulsory acquisition, a key

redressal mechanism is to enable them to access courts, at first


30 ‘Access to Justice Survey 2015-16’ (Daksh, May 2016) <https://dakshindia.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/05/Daksh-access-to-justice-survey.pdf > accessed 19 September
2023.
Page 38 of 40
instance.        The aggrieved land loser is often unable to access

justice from the judicial system. Therefore, having regard to the

limited relief that can be obtained from a revenue court under

Tenancy Act, 1955, to deny the land losers access to civil court in

my opinion, would aggravate the injustice that would otherwise

enure, in all cases of compulsory land acquisition.
40.   The upshot of the above is that the appellant here failed to

establish that they had acquired the land in accordance with the

law or paid due compensation to the affected party. The appellant

took forceful possession of the respondents’ valuable land by

disregarding the legal process and thereby denied the protection of

procedural fairness to the respondents. At this moment, I am

reminded of the words of former Associate Justice of the US

Supreme Court, William O. Douglas who in his concurring opinion

in Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee v Mc Grath 31 wrote the

following:
“It is procedure that spells much of the difference
           between rule by law and rule by whim or caprice.
           Steadfast    adherence      to       strict   procedural
           safeguards is our main assurance that there will
           be equal justice under law.”


31 341 US 123 (1951)
Page 39 of 40
41.    Noticing the departure from the due process by the

authorities, relief was granted to the land owners. No infirmity is

thus seen with those verdicts which invalidated the acquisition

process. The impugned judgment of the High Court therefore

merits this Court’s approval.
42.    The appellant i.e., the Urban Improvement Trust however

claims to have developed the balance 2 bighas for the purpose of

the Jai Naryan Vyas Yojana and divided it into plots. Therefore,

considering the public interest and balancing the equity, it is

clarified that notwithstanding the findings in this judgment, if the

authorities wish to, they may even now acquire the land by

following the due process of law.
43.   The appeal is accordingly dismissed leaving the parties to

bear their own cost.
……….……………………J.
                                                      [HRISHIKESH
                                                              ROY]

NEW DELHI
OCTOBER 19, 2023
Page 40 of 40
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8411 OF 2014


URBAN IMPROVEMENT TRUST BIKANER                                    APPELLANT(S)


                                          VERSUS
GORDHAN DASS (D) THR. LRS. & ORS.                              RESPONDENT(S)




                                            ORDER


       In view of the difference of opinions and the distinguishing judgments (Justice

Hrishikesh Roy dismissing the appeal and Justice Manoj Misra allowing the appeal), the

Registry is directed to place the matter before Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India for

referring the matter to a larger Bench.
……….……………………J.
                                                                 [HRISHIKESH ROY]



                                                                 ……….……………………J.
                                                                 [MANOJ MISRA]

NEW DELHI
OCTOBER 19, 2023