[Cites
27
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Naveen @ Ajay vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 19 October, 2023
Author:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
,
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
B.R. Gavai
1


2023 INSC 936                                                    REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NOs. 489-490 OF 2019


             NAVEEN @ AJAY                                    …. APPELLANT


                                               VERSUS


             THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                     ...RESPONDENT



                                           JUDGMENT
PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J.
These appeals would call in question, the impugned

             Judgment of conviction and sentence dated 24.12.2018 passed

             by the High Court of Judicature of Madhya Pradesh at Indore in

             Criminal Reference No. 03 of 2018 and Criminal Appeal No.
Signature Not Verified
3830 of 2018 upholding the conviction of the appellant under
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2023.10.19
16:46:29 IST
Reason:
Sections 363
,
366-A
,
376(A)
,
376(2)(i)
,
376(2)(j)
,
376(2)(k)
,
2
376(2)(m)
,
302
and
201
of the Indian Penal Code1, and
Section

5(m)
,
5(i)
read with
Section 6
of Protection of Children from

Sexual Offences Act 20122, and confirming the sentence of

death imposed on the appellant by the Fifth Additional Sessions

Judge, Indore (MP) in Sessions Trial No. 87 of 2018 arising out

of Crime No. 50 of 2018 dated 20.04.2018, registered at P.S.

Sarafa, Indore, Madhya Pradesh.
2.         The appellant has been convicted and sentenced for

committing rape and murder of 3 months old girl child.     The

appellant was tried for the afore-mentioned offences on the

allegation that complainant-Sunil and his wife were engaged in

the business of selling balloons and they were residing at

Rajawada, Indore (MP).        On 20.04.2018, complainant-Sunil

along with his family members were sleeping at a platform near

Rajawada, at about 03:00 a.m., his daughter (deceased) aged

about three months and four days started weeping on which

her mother Sonubai fed milk, thereafter, the deceased slept. At

about 05:00 a.m. when complainant-Sunil and his family

members woke up, they did not find the deceased at the place
1
(for short, ‘
IPC
’)
2
(for short, ‘POCSO’)
3
where she was sleeping.             Despite search, they could not find

her. Thereafter, Sunil lodged a missing report of his daughter

at Police Station, Sarafa, Indore registered as Crime No. 50 of

2018 (Ex.P-7).              At about 13.27 hours, one Mr. Deepak Jain

(PW-5) informed the Police Station MG Road, Indore (MP) that

one dead body of a girl of about three months old has been

found at Shreenath Palace Society, Indore.            MERG intimation

was recorded under
Section 174
of the Code of Criminal

Procedure, 19733. On coming to know about the discovery of a

dead body, Sunil went to the spot and identified the deceased

as his daughter. Postmortem of the dead body was conducted,

and the Report thereof was submitted by Dr. Poonam Mathur

(PW-20) vide Ex. P-53. After completing the investigation

including collection of evidence from CCTV footage, recovery of

incriminating articles, chemical analysis report etc., the charge-

sheet was filed on 27.04.2018. The DNA report was produced

later during the trial.
3.          On the basis of evidence brought on record during the

course of trial, wherein the prosecution examined 29 witnesses
3
(for short, ‘
Cr.P.C
.)
4
and     also   proved    78    documents     including   expert

opinion/chemical report/FSL report, the Trial Court convicted

the appellant for the subject offences against which the

appellant preferred appeal before the High Court. The Sessions

Court also sent reference to the High Court under
Section 396
Cr.P.C. for confirmation of death sentence. The High Court has

confirmed the death sentence and resultantly the Criminal

Appeal preferred by the appellant has also been dismissed by

the impugned Judgment.
4.    We have heard learned counsel for the parties. They have

advanced lengthy arguments and have taken us through the

entire evidence on record. However, considering the nature of

the order, we propose to pass, we are not referring to the

details of the evidence on record.
5.    At the outset, learned senior counsel Mr. B.H. Marlappalle

assisted by Mr. Rajat Mittal, Advocate-on-Record for the

appellant argued that the entire trial for such serious offences

has been completed within a span of 15 days i.e. from 27th

April, 2018 (when the charge-sheet was filed) to 12th May,
5
2018 (when the Judgment was delivered by the Sessions

Court). Referring to the order-sheet recorded by the trial court

from 27th April, 2018 to 12th May, 2018, learned senior

counsel would submit that the appellant has not been afforded

a fair trial depriving him of his valuable legal rights. It is also

argued that the DNA report (Ex.P-72) has not been proved in

accordance with law. The forensic experts were not examined

during the trial, nor the report was put to the accused for

admission or otherwise.
6.   Per contra learned counsel for the respondent-State, while

supporting the impugned Judgment of the High Court, would

submit that the appellant having not raised any objection

regarding hasty completion of trial or denial of a fair trial, it is

not open for the appellant to argue, at this stage, that the trial

has not been conducted properly and fairly. He would submit

that in view of clinching evidence against the appellant which

are scientific in nature, the Sessions Court and the High Court

as well, have not committed any illegality in convicting and

sentencing the appellant.
6
7.     To appreciate the arguments regarding denial of fair trial,

we have gone through the complete order-sheet recorded by

the trial court from 27th April, 2018 to 12th May, 2018. The

gist whereof is reproduced hereunder: -
27.04.2018
     ➢ Charge-sheet filed.
➢ Cognizance taken.
➢ Charge-sheet supplied to the accused. He requested for
       appointment of an advocate through legal aid.
     ➢ Advocate from legal aid appointed on the same day.
     ➢ The case was posted on the same day, after some time,
       for arguments on charge.
➢ Later on, the case was posted for next day for hearing
       arguments on charge.
28.04.2018
     ➢ Arguments on charge heard, charges framed.
     ➢ Accused was asked as to whether he admits any
       documents as required under
Section 294
of Cr.P.C. to
       which the accused refused to admit any document.
     ➢ District Public Prosecution Officer was directed to submit
       trial program today itself.
➢ Prosecution submitted trial program for examining 34
       witnesses.
01.05.2018
     ➢ PW Nos. 1 to 4 examined.
➢ The prosecution was directed to keep its remaining
       witnesses present (summons not issued).
7
02.05.2018
  ➢ PW Nos. 5 to 10 examined.
➢ The prosecution was directed to keep its remaining
    witnesses present (summons not issued).



03.05.2018
  ➢ PW Nos. 11 to 15 examined.
➢ Two witnesses discharged without examination.
  ➢ The prosecution was directed to keep its remaining
    witnesses present (summons not issued).

04.05.2018
  ➢ PW Nos. 16 to 20 examined.
➢ FSL report received from State Forensic Science
    Laboratory, Sagar, Viscera Report of deceased received
    from    the   Regional   Forensic   Science   Laboratory,
    Jhumarghat, Rau, Indore and DNA report received from
    the State Forensic Science Laboratory, Government of M.P.
    produced by the prosecution.
➢ The prosecution was directed to keep its remaining
    witnesses present through summons tomorrow.

05.05.2018
  ➢ PW Nos. 21 to 25 examined.
➢ No other witnesses were presented.
➢ Remaining Witnesses were directed to be called through
    summons.
➢ Witness-Sunil was directed to be called from the District
    Jail, Dhar through production warrant (this witness was
    never examined).
➢ The case fixed for 07.05.2023 for remaining witnesses.


07.05.2018
  ➢ PW No. 26 examined.
➢ The prosecution was directed to keep its remaining
    witnesses present tomorrow.
8
08.05.2018
     ➢ PW Nos. 27 to 29 examined.
➢ The prosecution closed its evidence.
➢ The case was posted for accused examination under
Section 313
of Cr.P.C. tomorrow.
09.05.2018
     ➢ The accused examined under
Section 313
of Cr.P.C.
     ➢ The accused requested to provide an opportunity to
       produce defence witness on his behalf.
➢ He was directed to keep the defence witness present
       tomorrow.
10.05.2018
     ➢ Defence witness was not present.
➢ Defence closed.
➢ Parties were directed for final arguments today itself (after
       recess).
➢ Final arguments heard.
➢ The case was posted for Judgment on 12.05.2018.

12.05.2018
     ➢ Judgment pronounced.
➢ The accused and his advocate heard on the question of
       sentence.
➢ The case posted after some time for hearing the accused
       on sentence (order-sheet does not record that copy of the
       Judgement supplied to the accused).
➢ After some time, sentence pronounced.
     ➢ Copy of the Judgment provided to the accused.
8.     A close reading and scrutiny of the order-sheet recorded

by the Trial Court, as stated above in brief, would manifest that

the accused was not provided an opportunity to engage a
9
counsel of his choice and instead his submission was recorded

that he desires to be defended by a counsel appointed through

legal aid. From the very beginning, the trial proceeded on day-

to-day basis except on Saturday and Sunday and all the

witnesses examined by the prosecution were produced without

issuing summons. One witness-Sunil was directed to be

produced from District Jail, Dhar through production warrant.

However, this witness was never examined nor there is any

indication that this witness has been given up. It is this witness

(Sunil) who was named as a suspect in the FIR.               Non-

examination of this witness has therefore left a crucial gap in

the prosecution case.    It is significant to note that the FSL

report, Viscera report and DNA report were not submitted along

with the charge-sheet.    The same were presented before the

Trial Court on 04.05.2018. The accused was never asked as to

whether he admits the documents, as required under
Section

294
of Cr.P.C..   Neither any witnesses were called to prove

these reports.    After the prosecution case was closed on

08.05.2018, the accused examination was conducted on the

very next day i.e. on 09.05.2018 and thereafter on the next

day i.e. on 10.05.2018, the case was fixed for examination of
10
defence witness.   It requires special notice that the accused

was in jail and was not defended by a counsel of his choice but

by a legal aid counsel. He was not in a position to present the

witness himself, yet he was directed to keep his witnesses

present on the next day i.e. on 10.05.2018. On this date, he

could not produce his witnesses, therefore, his defence was

closed, and the case was posted for final arguments after

recess.
9.   In a case of this nature, the trial was conducted on day-

to-day basis and the order-sheet does not record that copies of

statement of witnesses were supplied to the accused or his

counsel, it is not known as to whether the defence counsel was

supplied all the requisite material basing which he could have

advanced his final arguments.
10. The Order-sheet would thus clearly indicate that the trial

was conducted in a hurried manner without providing ample

and proper opportunity to the defence counsel, who was

engaged through legal aid, to prepare himself effectively. It is

also to be noted that copies of DNA Report, FSL Report and
11
Viscera Report were presented before the Court during the

course of trial on 04.05.2018.
11.
In the matter of
Bashira vs. State of U.P.4
, almost

similar situation, like in the present case arose, when the trial

was conducted in 13 days. Dealing with submissions made by

the accused counsel apropos lack of sufficient opportunity to

defend the accused, this Court held in paragraph 8 and 9 as

follows: -
“8. There is nothing on the record to show that,
               after his appointment as counsel for the
               appellant, Sri Shukla was given sufficient time
               to prepare the defence. The order- sheet
               maintained by the Judge seems to indicate
               that, as soon as the counsel was appointed, the
               charge was read out to the accused and, after
               his plea had been recorded, examination of
               witnesses began. The counsel, of course, did
               his best to cross-examine the witnesses to the
               extent it was possible for him to do in the very
               short time available to him. It is true that the
               record, also does not contain any note that the
               counsel asked for more time to prepare the
               defence, but that, in our opinion, is immaterial.
               The Rule casts a duty on the court itself to
               grant sufficient time to the counsel for this -
               purpose and the record should show that the
               Rule was complied with by granting him time
               which the court considered sufficient in the
4
AIR 1968 SC 1313
12
circumstances of the case. In this case, the
record seems to show that the trial was
proceeded with immediately after appointing
the amicus curiae counsel and that, in fact, if
any time at all was granted, it was nominal. In
these circumstances, it must be held that there
was no compliance with the requirements of
this Rule.
9. In this connection, we may refer to the
decisions of two of the High Courts where a
similar situation arose. In Re: Alla Nageswara
Rao, Petitioner(1) reference was made to Rule
228 of the Madras Criminal Rules of Practice
which. provided for engaging a pleader at the
cost of the State to defend an accused person
in a case where a sentence of death could be
passed. It was held by Subba Rao, Chief Justice
as he then was, speaking for the Bench, that:-
" a mere formal compliance with this
    Rule will not carry out the object
    underlying the rule. A sufficient time
    should be given to the advocate
    engaged on behalf of the accused to
    prepare his case and conduct it on
    behalf of his client. We are satisfied
    that the time given was insufficient
    and, in the circumstances, no real
    opportunity was given to the accused to
    defend himself."
This view was expressed on the basis of the
fact found that the advocate had been engaged
for the accused two hours prior to the trial.
In
Mathai Thommen v. State the Kerala High
Court was dealing with a sessions trial in which
the counsel was engaged to defend the accused
on 02nd August, 1958, when the trial was
posted to begin on 04th August, 1958, showing
13
that barely more than a day was allowed to the
         counsel to get prepared and obtain instructions
         from the accused.       Commenting on the
         procedure adopted by the Sessions Court, the
         High Court finally expressed its opinion by
         saying:
“Practices like this would reduce to a
             farce the engagement of counsel under
             Rule 21 of the Criminal Rules of Practice
             which has been made for the purpose of
             effectively carrying out the duty cast on
             courts of law to see that no one is
             deprived of life and liberty without a fair
             and     reasonable    opportunity    being
             afforded to him to prove his innocence.
             We consider that in cases like this
             counsel should be engaged at least some
             10 to 15 days before the trial and should
             also be furnished with copies of the
             records.”

         In our opinion, no hard and fast rule can be laid
         down as to the time which must elapse
         between the appointment of the counsel and
         the beginning of the trial; but, on the
         circumstances of each case, the Court of
         Session must ensure that the time granted to
         the counsel is sufficient to prepare for the
         defence. In the present case, when the counsel
         was appointed just before the trial started, it is
         clear that there was failure to comply with the
         requirements of the rule of procedure in this
         behalf.”
12.
In
Bashira
(supra),   this   Court   concluded   that   the

conviction of the appellant in a trial held in violation of Rule and

the award of death sentence will result in the deprivation of his
14
life in breach of the procedure established by law. Holding

further that, the conviction is void because of an error in the

procedure adopted at the trial, it was directed that the accused

shall be tried afresh, and the matter be remitted back to the

Sessions Court.
13. The issue concerning importance of a fair trial was

considered by this Court in
Zahira Habibulla H. Sheikh &

Anr. Vs. State of Gujarat & Ors.5
(known as ‘Best Bakery

Case’) wherein this Court made the following observations in

paragraphs 38 to 40:-
“38. A criminal trial is a judicial examination of
               the issues in the case and its purpose is to
               arrive at a judgment on an issue as to a fact or
               relevant facts which may lead to the discovery
               of the fact issue and obtain proof of such facts
               at which the prosecution and the accused have
               arrived by their pleadings; the controlling
               question being the guilt or innocence of the
               accused. Since the object is to mete out justice
               and to convict the guilty and protect the
               innocent, the trial should be a search for the
               truth and not a bout over technicalities and
               must be conducted under such rules as will
               protect the innocent, and punish the guilty. The
               proof of charge which has to be beyond
5
(2004) 4 SCC 158
15
reasonable doubt must depend upon judicial
               evaluation of the totality of the evidence, oral
               and circumstantial, and not by an isolated
               scrutiny.
39. Failure to accord fair hearing either to the
               accused or the prosecution violates even
               minimum standards of due process of law. It is
               inherent in the concept of due process of law,
               that condemnation should be rendered only
               after the trial in which the hearing is a real one,
               not sham or a mere farce and pretence. Since
               the fair hearing requires an opportunity to
               preserve the process, it may be vitiated and
               violated by an overhasty, stage-managed,
               tailored and partisan trial.
40. The fair trial for a criminal offence consists
               not only in technical observance of the frame
               and forms of law, but also in recognition and
               just application of its principles in substance, to
               find out the truth and prevent miscarriage of
               justice.”
                                          (Emphasis supplied)
14.
In the case of
Anokhilal vs. State of Madhya Pradesh,6
this Court, after referring to Best Bakery (supra) on the issue,

has held in paragraphs 21 to 23 as follows: -
“21. In the present case, the Amicus Curiae,
               was appointed on 19.02.2013, and on the same
               date, the counsel was called upon to defend the
               accused at the stage of framing of charges.
               One can say with certainty that the Amicus
               Curiae did not have sufficient time to go
6
(2019) 20 SCC 196
16
through even the basic documents, nor the
       advantage of any discussion or interaction with
       the accused, and time to reflect over the
       matter. Thus, even before the Amicus Curiae
       could come to grips of the matter, the charges
       were framed.
22. The provisions concerned viz. Sections 227
       and 228 of the Code contemplate framing of
       charge upon consideration of the record of the
       case and the documents submitted herewith,
       and after ‘hearing the submissions of the
       accused and the prosecution in that behalf’. If
       the hearing for the purposes of these provisions
       is to be meaningful, and not just a routine
       affair, the right under the said provisions stood
       denied to the appellant.
23. In our considered view, the Trial Court on
       its own, ought to have adjourned the matter for
       some time so that the Amicus Curiae could
       have had the advantage of sufficient time to
       prepare the matter. The approach adopted by
       the Trial Court, in our view, may have
       expedited the conduct of trial, but did not
       further the cause of justice. Not only were the
       charges framed the same day as stated above,
       but the trial itself was conducted within a
       fortnight thereafter.
In the process, the
       assistance that the appellant was entitled to in
       the form of legal aid, could not be real and
       meaningful.”


     This Court, in
Anokhilal
(supra), also set aside the

conviction and sentenced imposed by the Trial Court and the

High Court and directed for de novo trial. This Court also laid

down   certain   norms   in   matters   where   the   accused   is
17
represented by a counsel appointed through legal aid.         The

norms, as stated in paragraph 31 of
the said judgment
are

reproduced hereunder: -
“31.1 In all cases there is a possibility of life
        sentence or death sentence, learned Advocates who
        have put in minimum of 10 years’ practice at the
        Bar alone be considered to be appointed as Amicus
        Curiae or through legal services to represent an
        accused.
31.2 In all matters dealt with by the High Court
        concerning confirmation of death sentence, Senior
        Advocates of the Court must first be considered to
        be appointed as Amicus Curiae.
31.3 Whenever any learned counsel is appointed
        as Amicus Curiae, some reasonable time may be
        provided to enable the counsel to prepare the
        matter. There cannot be any hard and fast rule in
        that behalf. However, a minimum of seven days’
        time may normally be considered to be appropriate
        and adequate.
31.4 Any learned counsel, who is appointed as
        Amicus Curiae on behalf of the accused must
        normally be granted to have meetings and
        discussion with the concerned accused.        Such
        interactions may prove to be helpful as was noticed
        in Imtiyaz Ramzan Khan.”
15. In Best Bakery (supra), this Court has observed that the

principle of fair trial now informs and energises many areas of

the law. It is reflected in numerous rules and practices. It is a
18
constant, ongoing development process continually adapting to

new and changing circumstances, and exigencies of the

situation – peculiar at times and related to the nature of crime,

persons involved – directly or operating behind social impact

and societal needs and even so many powerful balancing

factors which may come in the way of administration of criminal

justice system. The concept of fair trial entails familiar

triangulation of interests of the accused, the victim, and the

society.
16. It was further observed that there can be no analytical,

all-comprehensive or exhaustive definition of the concept of a

fair trial, and it may have to be determined in seemingly infinite

variety of actual situations with the ultimate object in mind viz.
whether something that was done or said either before or at

the trial deprived the quality of fairness to a degree where a

miscarriage of justice has resulted. Each one has an inbuilt

right to be dealt with fairly in a criminal trial. Denial of a fair

trial is as much injustice to the accused as is to the victim and

the society.   Fair trial obviously would mean a trial before an

impartial judge, a fair prosecutor, and the atmosphere of
19
judicial calm. Fair trial means a trial in which bias or prejudice

for or against the accused, the witnesses, or the cause which is

being tried is eliminated. It is inherent in the concept of due

process of law, that condemnation should be rendered only

after the trial in which the hearing is a real one, not sham or a

mere farce and pretence.        Since fair hearing requires an

opportunity to preserve the process, it may be vitiated and

violated by an overhasty, stage-managed, tailored and partisan

trial. It is thus settled that a hasty trial in which proper and

sufficient opportunity has not been provided to the accused to

defend   himself/herself   would     vitiate   the   trial   as   being

meaningless & stage-managed. It is in violation of the principle

of judicial calm.
17. The principle of “judicial calm” in the context of a fair

trial needs to be elaborated for its observance in letter and

spirit. In our view, in the hallowed halls of justice, the essence

of a fair and impartial trial lies in the steadfast embrace of

judicial calm. It is incumbent upon a judge to exude an aura of

tranquillity, offering a sanctuary of reason and measured

deliberation.   In the halls of justice, the gavel strikes not in
20
haste, but in a deliberate cadence ensuring every voice, every

piece of evidence, is accorded its due weight. The expanse of

judicial calm serves not only as a pillar of constitutional

integrity, but as the very bedrock upon which trust in a legal

system is forged. It is a beacon that illuminates the path

towards a verdict untainted by haste or prejudice, thus

upholding the sanctity of justice for all.
18. The issue concerning evidentiary value of DNA report has

been considered by this Court in a recent Judgment reported in

the case of
Rahul v. State of Delhi, Ministry of Home

Affairs & Anr.7
wherein the following has been held in

Paragraphs 36 and 38 as under: -
“36. The learned Amicus Curiae has also
                assailed the forensic evidence i.e. the report
                regarding the DNA profiling dated 18-4-2012
                (Ext. P-23/1) giving incriminating findings. She
                vehemently submitted that apart from the fact
                that the collection of the samples sent for
                examination itself was very doubtful, the said
                forensic evidence was neither scientifically nor
                legally proved and could not have been used as
                a circumstance against the appellant-accused.
                The Court finds substance in the said
                submissions made by the Amicus Curiae. The
7
(2023) 1 SCC 83
21
DNA evidence is in the nature of opinion
               evidence as envisaged under
Section 45
and
               like any other opinion evidence, its probative
               value varies from case to case.
38. It is true that PW 23 Dr B.K. Mohapatra,
               Senior Scientific Officer (Biology) of CFSL, New
               Delhi had stepped into the witness box and his
               report regarding DNA profiling was exhibited as
               Ext. PW 23/A, however mere exhibiting a
               document, would not prove its contents. The
               record shows that all the samples relating to
               the accused and relating to the deceased were
               seized by the investigating officer on 14-2-2012
               and 16-2-2012; and they were sent to CFSL for
               examination on 27-2-2012. During this period,
               they remained in the malkhana of the police
               station. Under the circumstances, the possibility
               of tampering with the samples collected also
               could not be ruled out. Neither the trial court
               nor the High Court has examined the
               underlying basis of the findings in the DNA
               reports nor have they examined the fact
               whether the techniques were reliably applied by
               the expert. In the absence of such evidence on
               record, all the reports with regard to the DNA
               profiling become highly vulnerable, more
               particularly when the collection and sealing of
               the samples sent for examination were also not
               free from suspicion.”
                                          (Emphasis supplied)
19.
In the case of
Manoj & Ors. Vs. State of M.P.8
, it was

held that if DNA evidence is not properly documented,

collected, packaged, and preserved, it will not meet the legal
8
(2023) 2 SCC 353
22
and scientific requirements for admissibility in a court of law.

Because extremely small samples of DNA can be used as

evidence,             greater   attention        to   contamination   issues   is

necessary while locating, collecting, and preserving DNA

evidence as it can be contaminated when DNA from another

source gets mixed with DNA relevant to the case. This can

happen even when someone sneezes or coughs over the

evidence or touches his/her mouth, nose, or other part of the

face and then touches the area that may contain the DNA to be

tested. The exhibits having biological specimen, which can

establish link among victim(s), suspect(s), scene of crime for

solving the case should be identified, preserved, packed, and

sent for DNA Profiling.
20.
In the case of
Anil @ Anthony Arikswamy Joseph Vs.

State of Maharashtra9
, the following has been held in

paragraph 18 as under:-
“18. Deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, is a
                molecule that encodes the genetic information
                in all living organisms. DNA genotype can be
9
(2014) 4 SCC 69
23
obtained from any biological material such as
        bone, blood, semen, saliva, hair, skin, etc.
        Now, for several years, DNA profile has also
        shown a tremendous impact on forensic
        investigation. Generally, when DNA profile of a
        sample found at the scene of crime matches
        with the DNA profile of the suspect, it can
        generally be concluded that both the samples
        have the same biological origin. DNA profile is
        valid and reliable, but variance in a particular
        result depends on the quality control and
        quality procedure in the laboratory.”
                                  (Emphasis supplied)
21. In the case at hand, the prosecution is based on

circumstantial evidence in which the prosecution has to prove

each link in the chain of circumstantial evidence and the

important chains in the link are DNA report, FSL report and

Viscera report.   When the reports were challenged by the

accused before the High Court, it was brushed aside by

observing that even if the authors of the reports were not

called for evidence, in terms of
Section 293
Cr.P.C., the reports

are not open to question as the defence had an opportunity to

cross-examine the authors of the reports during the trial.    In

our considered view, the High Court was not correct in saying

that the defence had an opportunity to cross-examine the

experts. The trial has been conducted on day-to-day basis
24
wherein the accused, who was in jail and defended by a

counsel from legal aid, was compelled by the Trial Court to

produce defence witness of his own in one day.           It was

impossible for the accused himself to produce Dr. Anil Kumar

Singh and Dr. Kamlesh Kaitholiya, the authors of the Reports

(Ex.P-72), in one day because the said experts are government

servants and could not have attended the Court at the request

of an accused in jail. The Trial Court treated the accused as if

he is carrying a magic wand which is available to produce

highly qualified experts, who are government servants, on a

phone call. There was no opportunity, in the real sense, to the

appellant to cross-examine the experts.
22. For all the afore-stated reasons, we are of the considered

view that the Trial Court conducted the trial in a hurried

manner without giving proper opportunity to the accused to

defend himself.   Therefore, the Judgment of conviction and

sentence passed by the Trial Court and affirmed by the High

Court is hereby set aside and the matter is remitted back to the

trial court for de novo trial by affording proper opportunity to

the appellant to defend himself. The trial court and the District
25
Legal Services Authority, Indore, are directed to provide

assistance of a senior counsel to the appellant to contest the

trial on his behalf.
23. The appeals stand disposed of accordingly.
….…….………………………………………J.
                               (B.R. GAVAI)



                       …..…………….………………………………J.
                       (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)



                       …....….………………………………………J.
                           (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)


NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 19, 2023.