[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Orbit Electricals Private Limited vs Deepak Kishan Chhabria And Ors on 30 October, 2023
Author:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Bench:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
2023 INSC 967
                                                                                                 REPORTABLE

                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                     INHERENT JURISDICTION

                                          CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO 1195 OF 2023
                                                              In
                                                Civil Appeal No 6108 of 2023


        Orbit Electricals Private Limited                                                     … Petitioner

                                                               Versus

        Deepak Kishan Chhabria & Ors                                                          … Respondents



                                                             ORDER
1                   The order of this Court of 26 September 2023 sets out the background. Rather

        than replicate the background, we set it out below :
“1    The National Company Law Tribunal 1 dismissed the
                                           application filed by the first respondent for the grant of
                                           interim relief by an order dated 31 December 2019. The
                                           first respondent is in appeal before the National
                                           Company Law Appellate Tribunal2. Admittedly, no
                                           interim relief operated in favour of the first respondent
                                           during the pendency of the appeal.
2     The appeal has been heard and orders were reserved
                                           by the NCLAT on 21 September 2023. However, while
                                           reserving orders, the NCLAT has directed the parties “to
                                           maintain status quo as was available prior to EOGM
                                           dated 03.05.2019” till the judgement is delivered. No
                                           reasons have been indicated by the NCLAT even prima
                                           facie for issuing the interim order, particularly in the
                                           context of the fact that there was no interim relief
                                           operating since the dismissal of the application for
                                           interim relief on 31 December 2019. It is admitted that
                                           no relief was obtained by the first respondent in the
Signature Not Verified
1 “NCLT”
Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
Date: 2023.11.03
2 “NCLAT”
   12:22:57 IST
   Reason:
2
proceedings before the Bombay High Court, as well.
3    In the circumstances, we vacate the interim direction as
                   noted above. The Annual General Meeting (AGM) of the
                   company, Finolex Cables Limited is to take place on 29
                   September 2023. Any action which is taken on
                   proposed resolution No 4 pertaining to the appointment
                   of the Executive Chairperson shall be subject to the
                   outcome of the appeal which is pending before the
                   NCLAT.
4    Subject to the aforesaid modifications, the appeals are
                   allowed and the impugned order is set aside to the
                   aforesaid extent.
5    Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.”


2   By the above order of this Court, the interim direction which was passed by the

    NCLAT on 21 September 2023 at the stage of reserving orders, restoring the

    status quo ante “as was available prior to EOGM dated 3 May 2019” was vacated

    bearing in mind that :
(i)     No reasons at all were indicated;

    (ii)    No interim relief had operated since the dismissal of the application for

            interim relief on 31 December 2019; and
(iii)   No relief was obtained by the first respondent in proceedings before the

            Bombay High Court.
3   While vacating the interim order, this Court noted that the Annual General

    Meeting of Finolex Cables Limited was to take place on 29 September 2023 and

    specifically directed that “any action which is taken place on proposed resolution

    No 4 pertaining to the appointment of the Executive Chairperson shall be subject

    to the outcome of the appeal which is pending before the NCLAT.”
3
4   Subsequently on 13 October 2023, the proceedings were mentioned before this

    Court in the morning session in Contempt Petition No 1195 of 2023, when the

    Court was apprised of the fact that the declaration of the result of the AGM was

    being deferred till the declaration of the judgment by the NCLAT. Taking note of

    the submission, this court observed :
“We are prima facie of the view that the mandate of the
             order cannot be defeated by deferring the declaration of the
             result till a judgment is rendered by NCLAT.”
5   This Court specifically issued the following directions :
“5     The scrutinizer shall, in compliance with the order of
                    this Court proceed to declare the result of the Annual
                    General Meeting which was held on 29 September
                    2023 forthwith;
6      The NCLAT shall proceed to declare its judgment in the
                    pending appeal after it is duly apprised of the fact that
                    the result of the Annual General Meeting has been
                    declared.”

6   The above directions of this Court were in two parts. The first part which applied

    to the Scrutiniser contained a specific direction to the effect that in compliance

    with the previous order, the Scrutiniser shall proceed to declare the result of the

    AGM which was held on 29 September 2023.            The second part, which was a

    direction to the NCLAT, was specifically to the effect that the NCLAT shall proceed

    to declare its judgment in the pending appeal after it is duly apprised of the fact

    that the result of the AGM has been declared.
7   In the afternoon session on 13 October 2023, a grievance was made before this

    Court on behalf of the petitioners that though the NCLAT was apprised of the

    order of this Court with a request that the judgment should not be delivered until
4
the report of the Scrutiniser is made available, the Bench of the NCLAT had

    proceeded to deliver the order.
8   Consequently, this Court took note of the submission and required the

    Chairperson of the NCLAT to duly verify the position and report back to the Court.
Paragraphs 3 to 9 of the order are set out below :
“3   Mr Neeraj Kishan Kaul and Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi,
                  senior counsel and Mr Shikhil Suri, counsel joined in
                  stating that counsel, Mr Ankur Saigal (who is personally
                  present before this Court) produced the order of this
                  Court before the National Company Law Appellate
                  Tribunal (NCLAT) at 2 pm with a request that the
                  judgment should not be delivered until report of the
                  scrutinizer is made available.
4    The Court has been apprised of the fact that the Bench
                  of the NCLAT consisting of Mr Rakesh Kumar and Dr Alok
                  Srivastava proceeded to deliver the order. If what is
                  stated is correct, this will clearly constitute the defiance
                  of the order of this Court by the NCLAT.
5    At this stage we are not commenting on the merits of
                  the submissions which have been made.
6    The Court is apprised that the scrutinizer report was
                  uploaded at 2.40 pm.

             7    We direct that an enquiry shall be conducted on the
                  above allegations by the Chairperson of the NCLAT. A
                  report shall be submitted before this Court by 5 pm on
                  16 October 2023 after specifically verifying the facts
                  from the Judges who constituted the Bench of the
                  NCLAT.
8    The Chairperson of the NCLAT shall specifically verify:
(i)    That the order of this Court dated 13 October
                         2023 passed in the morning session was drawn to
                         the attention of the two Judges;
(ii)   If that is so, the circumstances in which the Judges
                         proceeded to pronounce the judgment despite the
                         clear mandate of the order of this Court which was
5
passed in the morning session.
9    We    are    passing this  order in    extraordinary
                  circumstances, upon an urgent mentioning being made
                  in that regard.”

9   In compliance with the order of this Court, the Chairperson of the NCLAT

    submitted a report before this Court which was taken note of in the order of this

    Court dated 18 October 2023. The relevant part of the order of this court reads

    thus :
“7   Pursuant to the order of this Court, Justice Ashok
                  Bhushan, the learned Chairperson of the NCLAT has
                  upon due verification from the Judges submitted a
                  report to this Court. The report alludes to two separate
                  statements which have been made before the
                  Chairperson. The statement by Mr Rakesh Kumar,
                  Member (Judicial) is recorded in paragraph 3 of the
                  report in the following terms:
“Justice Rakesh Kumar, Member (Judicial) has given
                       a response vide his letter dated 16.10.2023 which
                       was received by me during lunch hours of
                       16.10.2023. In the response, the Member (Judicial)
                       has stated “I may inform that on Friday in the
                       Supplementary Cause List dated 13.10.2023 at 2
                       PM Company Appeal (AT) No 64/2020 (Deepak
                       Chhabaria and Another) was listed under the
                       caption “For Judgment” for its pronouncement. The
                       said supplementary cause list was uploaded and
                       published on one day earlier i.e. Thursday,
                       12.10.2023. My Lord is aware that normal
                       procedure which is being followed in Bench of this
                       Tribunal is that mentioning is entertained after the
                       pronouncement of Judgment(s)/Order(s). I am not
                       holding a constitutional post and as such I am
                       required to follow the procedure. Accordingly as
                       per procedure established here Judgment was
                       pronounced on Friday i.e.13.10.2023.”


             8    The statement by Dr Alok Srivastava, Member
                  (Technical) to the Chairperson is in the following terms:
“On 13.10.2023, when the Presiding Judge and I
6
entered the Court Room No II in the post-lunch
        session, it was jam-packed with lawyers and there
        was unusually high noise in the court room.
A total 26 cases in the Supplementary Cause List
        and 18 cases in the Daily Cause List were listed
        under the categories “For Judgment/For Admission
        (Fresh Cases)/For Admission (After Notice)/For
        Orders/for Hearing” which had to be taken up in
        the post-lunch session.
The practice adopted in NCLAT is to have
        “mentionings” after pronouncement of judgment(s)
        listed in the cause list.
As the proceedings for the post-lunch session
        commenced, and the “For Judgment” case CA(AT)
        No.64 of 2020 was called out (as is the practice to
        take up “For Judgment” cases in the beginning),
        some lawyers started to intervene on which the
        Presiding Judge commented that whatever you
        want to file, please bring it on record.
Thereafter, the pronouncement        of   the   said
        judgment was completed.
It may be pointed out that no lawyer conveyed the
        judgment orally to me during the lunch hour when
        I was available in my office chamber, nor copy of
        the said order was provided to the Court Master. If
        this would have been done, the unfortunate
        situation may not have arisen.
I respectfully submit that I hold the Hon’ble
        Supreme Court in highest regard and esteem and
        there has been no intention to disobey the order of
        the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
I deeply regret that such a situation arose in the
        matter and offer sincere apology for the same.”

9   The Member (Technical) has adverted to the events
    which transpired before the NCLAT in the appeal on 13
    October 2023. Paragraph 5 of the report reads as
    follows:
“I have taken the response given by the Judicial
        Member as well as the Technical Member.
        Company Appeal (AT) No.64 of 2020 was listed for
7
pronouncement in Court No.II before the Bench
            constituted of Judicial Member and Technical
            Member. After the Court assembled, Learned
            Counsel for the parties who were present in the
            Court sought to intervene to make a request to the
            Bench, however, the Bench proceeded to
            pronounce the judgment not permitting the
            mentioning by the Learned Counsels. Copy of the
            order dated 13.10.2023 was not given either to the
            Court Officer or to the Bench. The Bench did not
            accept the request made on behalf of the Counsel
            and proceeded to pronounce the judgment. The
            judgment was pronounced in ignorance of the
            order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court dated
            13.10.2023.”
10     The report of the Chairperson has also adverted to an
       order dated 16 October 2023 passed by the Bench of
       the NCLAT subsequently, in the following terms:
“16.10.2023: In aforesaid appeal on 13.10.2023,
            Judgment was pronounced. In the evening, the
            Registry brought to the notice an e-mail dated
            13.10.2023 issued at 05.35 PM addressed to
            Registrar NCLAT enclosing therewith an order
            dated 13.10.2023, passed by Hon’ble Supreme
            Court in Contempt Petition (C) No.1195/2023 in
            C.A. No.6108/2023. After the order was produced
            we perused the same and we noticed that Hon’ble
            Supreme Court in its order in paragraph 1 sub-
paragraph 6 had directed that Judgment in pending
            appeal shall be delivered by the NCLAT after it is
            duly apprised of the fact that the result of Annual
            General Meeting has been declared.
In view of the order of Hon’ble Supreme Court it is
            imperative for us to pass an order for Suspending
            the Judgment of this court dated 13.10.2023 till
            this appellate Tribunal is duly apprised of the fact
            that the result of the Annual General Meeting has
            been declared or subject to order/direction passed
            by the Hon’ble Supreme Court.”

11     There are two affidavits before the Court at the present stage:
(i)    A “limited affidavit” which has been filed on behalf of
       the first respondent; and
(ii)   An affidavit in rejoinder on behalf of the petitioner.
8
12   We have heard Mr Mukul Rohatgi, Dr Abhishek Manu
     Singhvi, Mr Ranjeet Kumar, senior counsel on behalf of
     the petitioner and Mr Shyam Divan and Mr Ramji
     Srinivasan, senior counsel on behalf of the contesting
     respondents. Mr Darius Khambata, senior counsel has
     appeared on behalf of the scrutinizer.
13   Mr Mukul Rohatgi, senior counsel appearing on behalf
     of the petitioner reiterates, as was submitted before
     this Court when it passed its order dated 13 October
     2023 in the second session that Mr Ankur Saigal,
     counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner had
     produced the order of this Court before the NCLAT at 2
     pm with a request that the judgment should not be
     delivered until the report of the scrutinizer is made
     available. This was specifically recorded in paragraph 3
     of the order dated 13 October 2023.
14   Mr Ramji Srinivasan, senior counsel appearing on behalf
     of the appellant before the NCLAT has fairly stated
     before this Court that the order of this Court which was
     passed on 13 October 2023 was duly communicated to
     the contesting parties. Moreover, Mr Ramji Srinivasan
     also stated that at about 2.15 pm when the Bench of
     the NCLAT assembled, he personally sought to tender a
     copy of the order passed by this Court on 13 October
     2023 in the morning session to the Bench of the NCLAT
     and apprised the Bench of the fact that this Court had
     specifically directed that the judgment of the NCLAT
     shall be delivered only after the Court was apprised of
     the results of the AGM. However, as things stand, the
     Bench of the NCLAT proceeded to declare the
     judgment. Mr Ramji Srinivasan further states that he
     apprised the Bench that the representative of the
     petitioner herein had already voted against the
     resolution at the AGM.
15   Apart from the statements which have been made by
     the senior counsel before this Court, the affidavit which
     has been filed by the first respondent contains the
     following averments:
“On 13.10.2023, the Contempt Petition was
          preliminary heard by this Hon’ble Court around
          12.20 pm. On 13.10.2023, passed its first order on
          that date, which became available at around 1.55
          pm (“First Order”). This Hon’ble Court directed
          Respondent No.2 to declare the result of the AGM
9
which was held on 29.09.2023 forthwith. This
          Hon’ble Court directed that the Learned NCLAT
          shall proceed to declare its judgment in the
          pending appeal after it is duly apprised of the fact
          that the result of the AGM has been declared.
The directions as dictated in open court by this
          Hon’ble   Court    in   the    First Order    were
          communicated to Respondent No.1 through his
          Advocates at around 12.30 pm. Respondent No.1
          immediately called the Company Secretary of FCL,
          to convey the directions to Respondent No.2.”


16   The affidavit further states that on 13 October 2023, the
     report of the scrutinizer was prepared and was sought
     to be uploaded on the website of the Stock Exchanges
     in compliance of the order of this Court, but as the
     official servers of BSE Limited and National Stock
     Exchange of India Limited took time to respond, the
     report was uploaded at 2.41 pm and 2.44 pm
     respectively. The first respondent has disclosed what
     transpired before the NCLAT after the order of this Court
     dated 13 October in the following terms:
“At around 02.15 pm, when the NCLAT Appeal was
          called out ‘for judgment’, the Ld. Senior Counsel
          representing me informed the Learned NCLAT
          about the First Order and the directions contained
          therein. It was also informed to NCLAT that
          petitioner had voted against resolution No.4. It
          was also informed that the Consolidated
          Scruitinzer’s Report was being uploaded. The
          Learned NCLAT proceeded to pronounce the
          operative part of the Judgment dated 13.10.2023
          (“NCLAT Judgment”), which occurred at around
          2:15 pm. The NCLAT Judgment was only made
          available on the official website of the Learned
          NCLAT, at 4.30 pm and it was only after that time
          that it was even made public.” (emphasis
          supplied)
17   We will first deal with the report which has been
     submitted before this Court by the Chairperson of the
     NCLAT. The Presiding Judge, Mr Rakesh Kumar, Member
     (Judicial) states that the appeal was listed for
     pronouncement of judgment in the supplementary
     cause list which was uploaded on 12 October 2023. He
     states that the normal procedure which is followed in
10
the tribunal is that mentioning is entertained after the
     pronouncement of judgments/orders and since he is
     “not holding a constitutional post” as such he is
     “required to follow the procedure”. The Member
     (Judicial) has therefore stated that “as per the
     procedure established here” the judgment was
     pronounced on 13 October 2023.
18   The Member (Technical) on the other hand states that
     when the proceedings were called out in the post-lunch
     session in the case which was listed for judgment,
     “some lawyers started to intervene on which the
     Presiding Judge commented that whatever you want to
     file, please bring it on record”, after which, the
     pronouncement of the judgment was made. The
     Member (Technical) has tendered an unconditional
     apology to this Court. These facts are conspicuously
     absent in the statement of the Member (Judicial).
19   Neither the statement of the Member (Judicial) nor the
     statement which has been tendered by the Member
     (Technical) refer to the fact that the order dated 13
     October 2023 passed by this Court in the morning
     session was communicated to the Bench of the NCLAT
     together with the directions which were contained
     therein. In paragraph 3 of the order dated 13 October
     2023 passed in the afternoon session, the statement of
     senior counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner that
     the Bench of the NCLAT was apprised of the order of this
     Court in the afternoon session was recorded. This is also
     the clear case of the first respondent on affidavit since
     he has stated that around 2.15 pm when the NCLAT
     appeal was called out for judgment, the senior counsel
     representing him informed the Bench of the NCLAT of
     the order which was passed by this Court earlier and the
     directions which were contained therein. Neither the
     statement of the Member (Judicial) nor the statement of
     the Member (Technical) reveals this to the Chairperson
     of the NCLAT. In fact, the statement of the Member
     (Judicial) would seem to indicate that no mentioning is
     permitted at all before the declaration of judgment as a
     consequence of which the judgment was delivered
     without hearing any counsel on the order passed by this
     Court. Likewise, the statement of the Member
     (Technical) indicates that while some lawyers had
     attempted to intervene, the Presiding Officer had not
     permitted such an intervention and had proceeded to
     pass the judgment. The matter does not rest there.
11
20   On 16 October 2023, the Bench of the NCLAT passed an
     order recording that the Registry of the Tribunal had
     brought to its notice an email dated 13 October 2023
     issued at 5.35 pm enclosing a copy of the order dated
     13 October 2023 passed by this Court. The NCLAT has
     stated that after the order was produced, it had perused
     it and noticed that this Court had issued directions to
     the effect that judgment in the pending appeal shall be
     delivered by NCLAT after it is duly apprised of the fact
     that the result of the AGM is being declared. The NCLAT
     has proceeded to pass an order for suspending the
     judgment which it pronounced on 13 October 2023.
21   We are constrained to observe that the order dated 16
     October 2023 purports to create an impression that the
     Bench of the NCLAT was apprised of the order passed
     by this Court for the first time when the email was
     received at 5.35 pm on 13 October 2023. This prima
     facie is a falsehood since it has emerged before this
     Court, both on the statements of the counsel as well as
     on affidavit that the Bench of the NCLAT was duly
     apprised of the order passed by this Court on 13
     October 2023 in the morning session when the appeal
     was taken up at around 2.15 pm for pronouncement of
     judgment.
22   We are, therefore, prima facie, of the view that the
     Members of the NCLAT have (i) failed to disclose facts to
     the Chairperson of the NCLAT who was under a duty to
     carry out an enquiry in pursuance of the judicial order
     passed by this Court; and (ii) incorrectly sought to
     create a record in the order dated 16 October 2023 that
     the order of this Court was drawn to the notice of the
     Bench only at 5.35 pm on 13 October 2023.
23   We will deal with the consequential steps which should
     be taken by this Court and the action which has to be
     adopted in pursuance of what has transpired in these
     proceedings.
24   The manner in which the NCLAT has proceeded to
     deliver judgment in defiance of the directions of the
     Court is unbecoming of a judicial tribunal. NCLAT is
     subject to the jurisdiction of this Court. It was duty
     bound to comply with the order of this Court. It was
     apprised of the fact that this Court had passed an order
     in the morning session on 13 October 2023 to the effect
     that it shall proceed to declare judgment after being
     apprised of the results of the AGM. The statements
12
made by the Member (Judicial) before the Chairperson
     of NCLAT seem to indicate that he did not permit
     mentioning in accordance with the practice of his Bench
     to the effect that mentioning is taken up after
     judgments are delivered. The Member (Technical)
     indicates that while some lawyers had sought to
     intervene, the Presiding Judge had not heard them. Both
     these statements are belied by the fact that it is
     common ground between the parties, who are seriously
     contesting a dispute before NCLAT, that the Bench was
     dully apprised of the order of this Court when it
     assembled at around 2.15 pm before the judgment was
     pronounced. Moreover, the passing of the further order
     on 16 October 2023 compounds the situation. If indeed
     the judgment had been declared after the NCLAT was
     duly apprised of the result of the AGM, there was no
     occasion for it to suspend the operation of its judgment.
     The Members forming part of the Bench have not
     purported to say so.
25   In this view of the matter, insofar as the lis is
     concerned, we are of the view that it is necessary for
     this Court to ensure that the dignity of the Court is
     maintained. A party cannot be allowed by recourse to
     devious means to obviate compliance with a solemn
     order passed by this Court.
26   We accordingly, in exercise of the jurisdiction under
Article 142
of the Constitution, direct that the judgment
     of the NCLAT dated 13 October 2023 shall stand set
     aside without this Court expressing any opinion on the
     merits. We consequently direct that the appeal shall be
     heard afresh by a Bench presided over by the
     Chairperson of NCLAT. We clarify that we have not
     entered any finding on the merits of the rival
     contentions of the parties in the pending appeal. This
     Court has been constrained to pass this order in
     extraordinary circumstances which we have referred to
     above.
27   We are prima facie of the view that Shri Rakesh Kumar,
     Member (Judicial) and Dr Alok Srivastava, Member
     (Technical) of the NCLAT are liable to be proceeded
     against in the exercise of the contempt jurisdiction of
     this Court. We accordingly issue a notice to show cause
     to Mr Rakesh Kumar, Member (Judicial) and Dr Alok
     Srivastava, Member (Technical) of the NCLAT to show
     cause as to why they should not be committed under
     the
Contempt of Courts Act
1971 for having willfully
13
defied the directions of this Court. They shall remain
                   personally present before this Court on 30 October 2023
                   at 10.30 am, by which date, they shall submit their
                   replies to the notice.
28   The scrutinizer shall file their explanation in response to
                   the notice which has been issued by this Court on or
                   before the next date of listing and shall remain
                   personally present before this Court on that day.”


10   In pursuance of the above order, affidavits have been filed before this Court by

     the two members who constituted the Bench of the NCLAT and by the Scrutiniser.
We shall deal with each of these affidavits in a subsequent part of this order.
11   Mr Mukul Rohatgi, Dr AM Singhvi, Mr Neeraj Kishan Kaul and Mr Ranjit Kumar,

     senior counsel appear on behalf of the appellant.       Mr Tushar Mehta, Solicitor

     General of India appears on behalf of the NCLAT and the Member (Technical). Mr

     PS Patwalia, senior counsel appears on behalf of the Member (Judicial). Mr Darius

     Khambata, senior counsel appears on behalf of the Scrutiniser.
12   An affidavit has been filed by the Member (Technical) unconditionally tendering

     an apology before this Court. The Member (Technical) has, inter alia, stated that

     control over the procedure during the course of the proceedings before the

     Bench, particularly the procedure of mentioning, is with the Member (Judicial) on

     account of his judicial training and experience in the functioning of the courts.
The Member (Technical) has stated that on 13 October 2023, when the Presiding

     Judge and he entered the courtroom in the post-lunch session, the courtroom was

     overcrowded with an unusually large number of advocates. Once the mentioning

     process was over, the Member (Judicial) asked him to pronounce the judgment

     which he thereafter proceeded to pronounce. It has been stated that none of the
14
advocates from any of the parties made any effort to bring on record and place

     before the Bench on 13 October 2023 the actual order which was passed by this

     Court in the pre-lunch session and that it was much after the pronouncement of

     the judgment in the post-lunch session at around 6.27 p.m. that the NCLAT

     Registry received an email containing a copy of the order after the proceedings

     for the Tribunal had been concluded for the day. The Member (Technical) has

     referred to the CCTV footage of the proceedings of the NCLAT and to a pen drive

     which has been received.
13   The Member (Judicial), on the other hand, has filed an affidavit in which the

     following averments appear in Paragraph 10 :
“10   … The bench presided by the deponent and the
                    Technical Member Shri Alok Shrivastava assembled a
                    few minutes after 2 PM, at about 2.05 PM, on
                    13.10.2023, when some counsel tried to mention the
                    matter. However, neither any order of this Hon’ble
                    Court was filed with the Registry or Court Maste3r nor
                    was any order even handed over to the bench by the
                    parties before assembling of the bench. Rule 38 of
                    NCLAT Rules, 2016 authorises the parties or their
                    authorised representatives to furnish any document to
                    the Court Master which he wishes to place on record
                    for reference by the Bench, before the commencement
                    of the proceedings for the day. However, no such
                    attempt was even made by the counsel of either of the
                    parties.”

14   Paragraphs 13 and 14 of the affidavit of the Member (Judicial) are set out below :
“13   That it is further submitted that the procedure
                    followed in the NCLAT, like in this Hon’ble Court and
                    many other courts is that when a matter is listed for
                    pronouncement of judgment, mentioning by counsel
                    for any case is permitted only after pronouncement of
                    judgment and not before that. Following that practice,
                    the deponent did not entertain any attempt at
                    mentioning by the counsel and thereafter the
15
Technical Member proceeded       to   pronounce   the
                         judgment authored by him.
14        That it is reiterated that the copy of the order dated
                         13.10.2023 passed by this Hon’ble Court was not on
                         record before the bench presided by the deponent on
                         13.10.2023. Had the said order been brought on
                         record as per procedure before the bench presided by
                         the deponent, there is no doubt that the bench would
                         not have pronounced its judgment.”


15   The Member (Judicial) states that a copy of the order dated 13 October 2023 was

     brought before him for the first time after 5:35 PM on 13 October 2023 when it

     was received by the Registrar of the NCLAT by email.
16   During the course of the hearing, the Solicitor General has produced a copy of

     the authenticated CCTV footage of the actual hearing which took place before

     the NCLAT on 13 October 2023 in the course of the afternoon session. The CCTV

     footage has been played twice in the Court for being seen and heard by all

     present in the open Court.         A transcript of the proceedings has also been

     tendered by the Solicitor General. During the course of the hearing, since the

     CCTV recording was replayed twice, we have had the occasion to tally the

     transcript which has been tendered with the video recording of the proceedings.
The transcript which has been tendered by the Solicitor General is set out below

     in its entirety :
“Transcript of conversation and exchanges in Court
               Room-II, NCLAT in post-lunch session on 13.10.2023

               Note:
(1) Clock of CCTV is about 27 minutes ahead of the actual
                   time. Times given below are actual times.
(2) There were approximately 85-90 persons inside the Court
16
Room-II at the beginning of post lunch session at 02:07
   PM (actual time) on 13.10.2023.
(3) Mr Ramji Srinivasan, Sr. Advocate entered the Court
    Room at 13:51 hrs and Mr. Krishnendu Dutta, Sr.
    Advocate entered at 13:53 hrs.

(4) The proceedings in Court-II began at 14:06:50 hrs with
    the entry of bench members in the court room and
    concluded in the matter at 14:30 hrs.

Mr Ramji Srinivasan   May I mention, with your Lordships
                      permission, before Your Lordship proceeds
                      to pronounce the judgment My Lords in the
                      Orbit matter, I must apprise your Lordships
                      of a further development that has
                      happened. My Lords the matter was heard
                      by the Supreme Court My Lords in a
                      contempt petition filed by the other side.
Your Lordships recollect Your Lordships had
                      reserved the order.
Justice Rakesh        Not clear
Kumar
Mr. Ramji Srinivasan My Lords I am bound by the order, the order
                     of the Supreme Court My Lords. All that it
                     says is this just so that Your Lordships My
                     Lords. This has nothing to do with Your
                     Lordships pronouncing the order. But this
                     was what was directed that we must apprise
                     your Lordships before Your Lordships
                     pronounce the order today that the
                     Supreme Court had passed an order saying
                     that any declaration My Lords the action
                     taken will be subject to outcome of the
                     appeal. So My Lords the voting had taken
                     place.   The scrutinizer had withheld the
                     result of resolution board subject to
                     outcome whatever. We had taken some
                     opinion of some judges. Therefore, he took
                     the advice and said that I will withhold. The
                     other side went up in contempt and moved
                     an application before the Hon’ble Supreme
                     Court saying that the scrutinizer should not
                     have withheld result subject to outcome,
                     whatever be the result, whether Mr.
                     Chabaria was to continue or not, that should
                     be declared but Your Lordships should not
                     pronounce.     The Hon’ble Supreme Court
                     today now said that Your Lordships can
                     pronounce the judgment and I must apprise
                     Your Lordships before Your Lordships
                     pronounce. That’s all.
17
Hon’ble Justice      Nothing is before us on record…(not clear)
              Rakesh Kumar         allow us to pronounce judgment.
              Mr. Ramji Srinivasan Apprise Your Lordship.    I will just read,
                                   nothing else. May I just show the order
                                   passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
Hon’ble Justice      Just a minute. There is no point… (not clear)
              Rakesh Kumar
              Mr. Krishnendu       No no no… (cross talk, not clear)… Hon’ble
              Dutta                Supreme Court says order may be
pronounced only after results are eclared,
                                   thats the order of Hon’ble Supreme Court.
Hon’ble Justice      Neither any order        has   been    official
              Rakesh Kumar         communicated to us..
              Mr. Krishnendu       (interjecting) It was passed this morning.
              Dutta
              Hon’ble Justice      (continuing) nor it has been passed, nor it
              Rakesh Kumar         has been mentioned before us. We have
reserved the judgment, we are pronouncing
                                   it.. you can go to the Supreme Court.
Mr. Ramji Srinivasan (Cross talk, not clear) my friend is
                                   misstating the order.    It only says that
                                   Lordships have to be apprised of the order…
                                   that’s all.
Hon’ble Justice      We are not taking cognizance of anything.
              Rakesh Kumar         The case is listed under the caption ‘for
                                   orders’ we are pronouncing it… If you think
                                   that we are passing order in violation of the
                                   Supreme Court order, you go and complain
                                   (not clear)…. Allow us to pass the order.
Mr. Krishnendu       No its not that. Hon’ble Supreme Court has
              Dutta                passed an order this morning, it is my duty
                                   to place it before you (he does not tender
                                   copy of the order)
              Justice Rakesh       Whatever you want to bring on record, do so
              Kumar                through affidavit.
Court Master         Calls out Item 1, For Judgment – Company
                                   Appeal (AT) No. 64 of 2020.
Dr Alok Srivastava   (pronounces the judgment in CA (AT) 64 of
                                   2020)
              Senior Lawyers Mr    So deeply obliged….”



17   The above transcript of the proceedings together with the video recording which

     has been produced before the Court leaves no manner of doubt that :
18
(i)     The Bench of the NCLAT was duly apprised of the fact that an order had

             been passed by this Court in the morning session on 13 October 2023;
(ii)    The Scrutiniser had withheld the result of the AGM; and
(iii)   The purport of the order of this Court dated 13 October 2023 was that the

             NCLAT shall pronounce judgment in the pending appeal after the results of

             the AGM were declared.
18    The transcript indicates that both Mr Krishnendu Dutta (senior counsel) and Mr

      Ramji Srinivasan (senior counsel) appearing on behalf of the contesting parties

      had apprised the Bench of the NCLAT of the order of this Court.          The CCTV

      footage makes it abundantly clear that both the counsel had a copy of the order

      of this Court and made an effort to read out the order. The Member (Judicial),

      however, stated that no copy of the order “has been officially communicated to

      us”.   The Member (Judicial) also observed that since the NCLAT had reserved

      judgment, it was proceeding to pronounce the judgment and the appellants

      (represented by their counsel Mr Krishnendu Dutta) “can go to the Supreme

      Court”. The Member (Judicial) stated that “if you think that we are passing order

      in violation of the Supreme Court order, you go and complain”. The parties were

      directed to place on affidavit anything that they wish to bring on the record.
19    From the CCTV footage as well as from the transcript, it is evident beyond a

      shadow of doubt that though the NCLAT was duly apprised of the fact that this

      Court had in the morning session on 13 October 2023 passed an order to the

      effect that the judgment shall be pronounced only after the results by the

      Scrutiniser are declared, the Bench of the NCLAT declined to pay heed to the

      order of this Court.   The Member (Judicial) has referred in his affidavit to the
19
Rules governing procedure in the NCLAT, more particularly, Rules 38, 101 and

     102 which read as follows :
“38. Statutes or citations for reference.- The parties or
                   authorised    representatives      shall,   before the
                   commencement of the proceedings for the day, furnish
                   to the Court Master a list of law journals, reports,
                   statutes and other citations, which may be needed for
                   reference or photo copy of full text thereof.
xxx              xxx                 xxx
101. Placing of Supreme Court orders before
                   Appellate Tribunal.- Whenever an interim or final
                   order passed by the Supreme Court of India in an
                   appeal or other proceeding preferred against a
                   decision of the Appellate Tribunal is received, the same
                   shall forthwith be placed before the Chairperson or
                   Members for information and kept in the relevant case
                   file and immediate attention of the Registrar shall be
                   drawn to the directions requiring compliance.
102. Registrar to ensure compliance of Supreme
                   Court orders.- It shall be the duty of the Registrar to
                   take expeditious steps to comply with the directions of
                   the Supreme Court.”


20   The order of this Court was brought to the attention of the Bench of the NCLAT.
The correct course of action, if the Bench was of the view that the order should

     be produced in accordance with Rules, was to defer the pronouncement of the

     judgment so as to enable the parties to comply with the procedure. The order of

     this Court was uploaded at 1.55 PM on 13 October 2023. The gist of the order

     was intimated to the Court. It is evident from the CCTV footage that even copies

     of the order were with the respective counsel. Hence, it is only to be expected

     from a judicial body that the order should have been allowed to be tendered or,

     in the alternative, if the Bench felt that it should be produced in a proper format

     on affidavit, sufficient time ought to be given to do so. The transcript, however,
20
reveals that Bench went on to deliver the judgment ignoring the substantive

     direction which had been issued by this Court earlier on 13 October 2023.
21   We have, therefore, no manner of doubt that the Bench of the NCLAT has acted

     in willful defiance of the order despite the fact that its attention was drawn to the

     order of this Court.
22   The Member (Technical) has tendered an unconditional apology stating that

     control over the procedure of the Court, particularly on matters which are

     mentioned rests with the Member (Judicial) who has training and experience in

     judicial matters.
23   Bearing in mind the unconditional apology which has been tendered before this

     Court we do not wish to take this matter to a further stage having held that there

     was a breach of the order of this Court. We are of the considered view that the

     matter should be allowed to rest there by accepting the apology of the Member

     (Technical).
24   As regards the Member (Judicial) we have already noted in the previous order of

     this Court that what has been stated is contrary to the record. We find that this

     has been compounded by what has been stated in the affidavit filed tendered

     before this Court in pursuance of the previous order.         Paragraph 10 of the

     affidavit of the Member (Judicial) takes note of the fact that when some counsel

     tried to mention the matter, neither any order of the Supreme Court was filed

     with the Registry or with the Court Master nor was any order handed over to the

     Bench by the parties before assembling of the Bench. The affidavit further states

     that following the practice of the NCLAT, the deponent did not entertain any
21
attempt at mentioning by the counsel and that the order of this Court dated 13

     October 2023 was not on the record before the Bench presided by the deponent

     on 13 October 2023. What the affidavit does not state is that a conscious effort

     was made by the Bench to prevent the order of this Court being placed on the

     record despite the fact that the court was apprised of the passing of the order by

     this Court in the morning session.      We censure the conduct of the Member

     (Judicial). We would rest the matter at that level.
25   As regards, the Scrutiniser, it is evident that in the order of this Court dated 26

     September 2023, there was a clear direction that the interim order passed by the

     NCLAT on 21 September 2023 would stand vacated.             There was a further

     direction that any action that would be taken in pursuance of the result of the

     AGM would be subject to the pending appeal. The Scrutiniser was duty bound to

     implement the order of this Court. Instead, what emerges from the record was

     that after the order dated 26 September 2023, the AGM took place on 29

     September, 2023. The Court is apprised of the fact that a limited window was

     made available on 29 September 2023 for those who wished to vote to do so. At

     5.55 PM on 29 September 2023, an email was addressed by the Scrutiniser to the

     Company Secretary of Finolex Cables Limited seeking a legal opinion about the

     manner in which the votes which were cast at the AGM would have to be treated.
By then, voting had concluded on 28 September 2023. The Scrutiniser states

     that a legal opinion was obtained by the company on the basis of which he took

     steps to withhold the result of the AGM.
26   The beneficiary of this action was Mr Deepak Kishan Chhabria, who was then

     acting as Chairman-cum-Managing Director.        Mr Deepak Kishan Chhabria has
22
been represented by Mr Shyam Divan and Mr Maninder Singh, senior counsel.
The Scrutiniser, Mr VM Birajdar has been represented in these proceedings by Mr

     Darius Khambata, senior counsel.       We have no manner of doubt that the

     Scrutiniser has acted in concert with Deepak Kishan Chhabria to delay the

     declaration of the result of the AGM, effectively in breach of the directions that

     were issued by this Court on 26 September 2023.
27   We are of the view that such action by commercial interests must be dealt with

     firmly so as to serve a clear reminder that the process of this Court cannot be

     allowed to be misused for partisan purposes in commercial disputes involving

     warring factions.
28   We accordingly order and direct that Mr Deepak Kishan Chhabria shall pay a sum

     quantified at Rs One crore to the Prime Minister’s Relief Fund within a period of

     four weeks from the date of the order. Mr VM Birajdar shall pay a sum quantified

     at Rs Ten lakhs to the Prime Minister’s Relief Fund within a period of four weeks.
29   Before concluding, we record the statement of Mr PS Patwalia, senior counsel

     appearing on behalf of the Member (Judicial) that the Member (Judicial) has

     tendered his resignation from office by a letter addressed to the Chairperson of

     the NCLAT and to the Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs today.
30   The Scrutiniser has tendered an unconditional apology through Mr Khambata. Mr

     Deepak Kishan Chhabria has also tendered an unconditional apology through Mr

     Shyam Divan, senior counsel.
31   Since the proceedings are being closed, we reiterate the directions which were
23
issued in the earlier order of this Court setting aside the judgment which was

      delivered by the Bench of the NCLAT on 13 October 2023. The proceedings in

      the appeal shall now be listed before a Bench presided over by the Chairperson

      of the NCLAT for hearing and final disposal of the appeal. We have not made any

      observations on the merits of the rival contentions.
32    The issues which are sought to be raised by Mr Deepak Khosla, counsel

      appearing on behalf of the intervenor, have nothing to do with the main

      proceedings before this Court.      Hence it is not necessary to entertain the

      Interlocutory Application. The IA is accordingly dismissed.
33    The Contempt Proceedings are accordingly disposed of in terms of the above

      directions.
34    Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
…...…...….......………………....…CJI.
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]



                                                    …...…...….......………………....…..J.
                                                    [J B Pardiwala]



                                                    …...…...….......………………....…..J.
                                                    [Manoj Misra]
New Delhi;
October 30, 2023
GKA