[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ambalal Parihar vs The State Of Rajasthan on 16 October, 2023
Author:
Abhay S.Oka
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
Abhay S.Oka
2023 INSC 946

                                                                                         REPORTABLE


                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.3233 OF 2023
                                 (Arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) No. 8027 of 2023)


                            AMBALAL PARIHAR                               ... APPELLANT(S)

                                                            VS.


                            STATE OF RAJASTHAN & ORS.                     ... RESPONDENT(S)


                                                     J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S.OKA, J.
Leave granted.
2.     Heard     the     learned   counsel     appearing      for     the

                         parties.
3.     This is a shocking case of gross abuse of process

                         of   law by    the second     to fourth      respondents.       At the

                         instance of the appellant, six First Information Reports

                         were registered against the second to fourth respondents.

                         There were two other First Information Reports registered

                         against    the    same     respondents    by    some   other        first

                         informants.      Two Criminal Miscellaneous Petitions were
Signature Not Verifiedfiled by the second to fourth respondents for quashing
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.10.20
17:05:36 IST
Reason:
the First Information Reports filed at the instance of

                         the other first informants.
Criminal Appeal No.3233 of 2023                                              Page 1 of 6
4.      Our attention is invited to the orders passed on

     the    two    petitions       under
Section    482
of    the    Code      of

     Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short "
CrPC
") filed by the

     second       to   fourth     respondents.           The    petitions      came      up

     before a learned Single Judge of the Rajasthan High Court

     in April, 2023 in which no interim relief was granted.
5.      Thereafter, the second to fourth respondents took a

     very    extra      ordinary     step.         On    5th May,       2023    a    Writ

     Petition was filed on the civil side by the second and

     fourth respondents in which a prayer was made for issuing

     a     writ    of    mandamus        for     clubbing        the    eight       First

     Information Reports and consolidating them into one.                             The

     impugned order has been passed in the said Civil Writ

     Petition on 8th May, 2023.                 The learned Single Judge of

     the High Court directed that no coercive action shall be

     taken     against      the     second       to     fourth        respondents        in

     connection with all eight First Information Reports.
6.      The appellant has made a very serious allegation by

     relying upon the then prevailing roster notified by the

     Chief     Justice      of     the     Rajasthan           High    Court.         The

     allegation is that as the learned Single Judge taking up

     assignment of the criminal matters dealing with
Section

     482
CrPC did not grant interim relief to the second to
Criminal Appeal No.3233 of 2023                                            Page 2 of 6
fourth respondents in two cases, this method of filing a

     Civil Writ Petition was invented in which a prayer was

     made     for     consolidation         of    eight        First   Information

     Reports. The allegation is that this was done to avoid

     the roster Judge who had not granted interim relief.                          Not

     only that this course was adopted, the second to fourth

     respondents in the Civil Writ Petition prayed for interim

     relief directing that no coercive action shall be taken

     against the second to fourth respondents in relation to

     all eight First Information Reports.                       The complainants

     were     not     impleaded       in    the    Civil        Writ     Petitions.

     Interestingly, both in civil and criminal cases, the same

     advocate represented the second to fourth respondents.
7.      This is a classic case of forum hunting by the

     second     to    fourth      respondents.            It     transpires      that

     notwithstanding the aforesaid relief granted on 8th May,

     2023 in the Civil Writ Petition, in the petitions under
Section 482
of CrPC for quashing, on 1st June, 2023 the

     second     to    fourth      respondents      persuaded       the    concerned

     Bench    to     grant   relief    of    not    taking       coercive     action

     against them.
8.      Thus, this is a case of gross abuse of process of

     law. We wonder how a Civil Writ Petition for clubbing

     First Information Reports could be entertained.                          In the
Criminal Appeal No.3233 of 2023                                          Page 3 of 6
roster notified by the Chief Justice, there is a separate

     roster for Criminal Writ Petitions.              If the Courts allow

     such sharp practices, the roster notified by the Chief

     Justice will have no meaning.             The Judges have to follow

     discipline and ought not to take up any case unless it is

     specifically assigned by the Chief Justice. A Judge can

     take up a case provided either the cases of that category

     have been assigned to him as per the notified roster or

     the particular case is specifically assigned by the Chief

     Justice. Taking up a case not specifically assigned by

     the Chief Justice is an act of gross impropriety. Though

     a Civil Writ Petition was filed, the learned Judge ought

     to have converted into a Criminal Writ Petition which

     could    have    been     placed   only   before     the   roster       Judge

     taking up Criminal Writ Petitions.
9.      We are sure that this conduct of the second to

     fourth respondents will be considered by the concerned

     Court    taking      up   petitions    under
Section     482
CrPC     for

     quashing the First Information Reports.
10.     This    is   a    fit   case   where   the   second      to   fourth

     respondents must be saddled with costs.                We quantify the

     costs amount at Rs.50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand).
Criminal Appeal No.3233 of 2023                                       Page 4 of 6
11.     Hence, we allow the appeal by passing the following

     order:
(a)    We hold that action of filing SB Civil

             Writ Petition No.6277 of 2023 by the second to

             fourth     respondents    was   nothing      but   a   gross

             abuse of process of law and it was a classic

             case of forum hunting;
(b)    Accordingly,      we   dismiss   SB    Civil     Writ

             Petition     No.6277     of   2023.     Therefore,        the

             impugned order does not survive;
(c)    We direct the second to fourth respondents

             to pay costs quantified at Rs.50,000/- (Rupees

             fifty thousand) to the Rajasthan State Legal

             Services Authority within a period of one month

             from today and to produce the receipt before

             this Court within a period of six weeks from

             today;
(d)    As narrated earlier, the conduct of the

             second to fourth respondents shall be brought

             to the notice of the concerned Court which is

             hearing petitions under Section 482 CrPC filed

             by the second to fourth respondents; and
Criminal Appeal No.3233 of 2023                                     Page 5 of 6
(e)    We direct the Registrar (Judicial) of the

             Rajasthan High Court to place a copy of this

             order in all eight petitions under
Section 482
of    CrPC     filed       by   the     second   to   fourth

             respondents          for   quashing     First    Information

             Reports.
12.     The appeal is allowed on the above terms.
..........................J.
                                                    (ABHAY S.OKA)


                                               ..........................J.
                                                (PANKAJ MITHAL)
      NEW DELHI;
October 16, 2023.
Criminal Appeal No.3233 of 2023                                    Page 6 of 6