[Cites
28
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Infrastructure Leasing And Financial ... vs Hdfc Bank Ltd. on 19 October, 2023
Author:
S. Ravindra Bhat
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
1

                                                                                     REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 929
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 4708 OF 2022

             INFRASTRUCTURE LEASING AND
             FINANCIAL SERVICES LTD.                                               …APPELLANT(S)

                                                             VERSUS


             HDFC BANK LTD. & ANR.                                                …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                           JUDGMENT
S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.
1.             This appeal1, is preferred by Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services
             Ltd (hereafter “IL&FS” or “the borrower”) aggrieved by an order of the National
             Company Law Appellate Tribunal (hereafter, ‘NCLAT’)2. The point in issue is
             whether the documents executed by IL&FS by which rents were made over to the
             respondent, Housing Development Finance Corporation Ltd (hereafter “HDFC”
             or “the lender”) constituted an assignment and thus fell outside the scope of an
             asset and security freeze order made by the NCLAT.
2.             IL&FS had approached the HDFC for financial assistance. By Sanction
             Letter dated 22.06.2018, the lender sanctioned a financial facility of ₹ 400 crores
             to the borrower. On 25.06.2018, a “Master Facility Agreement” (“MFA”) was
             entered between IL&FS and HDFC for ₹ 400 crores. The MFA envisioned the
             creation of a separate escrow account with Housing Development Finance
             Corporation Bank Limited (hereinafter 'Escrow Bank') for opening of a separate
Signature Not Verified
escrow account with the Escrow Bank. Along with MFA, an “Assignment
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2023.10.19
13:54:48 IST
Reason:
1
Under
Section 432
, the Companies Act, 2013
2
Dated 13.5.2022 in IA 2196/2020 [in CoAp. (AT) No. 346/2018]
2
Agreement” (hereafter “AA”) dated 25.06.2018 was also executed between the
IL&FS and HDFC. Under this document (i.e., the AA) the parties agreed that the
authorised indebtedness of IL&FS in terms of the MFA, by way of the facility
together with the interest thereon was payable from the gross income and revenue
to be derived from the operation of the Business Centre Services
Agreements/Lease/Leave and License Agreement/s. It was also agreed that ‘all
the receivables derived/to be derived from the operation of the Borrower's
Contracts, a sufficient portion of which, to pay the principal and interest as and
when the same shall become due’ in terms of the said MFA was assigned and
pledged and was to be ‘set aside for that purpose on the same day’ and a Power
of Attorney by way of Security Interest was also executed between the IL&FS
and HDFC.
3.        By an order, dated 01.10.2018, NCLT in a petition3, filed by the Union of
India ("UoI") under
Sections 241
and
242
of the Companies Act, 2013 (hereafter
“the 2013 Act”) ordered to supersede the existing board of directors of the IL&FS.
A new board of directors was also constituted, to take charge of the affairs of that
company. Later, by its order dated 12.10.2018, the NCLT declined to issue a
moratorium sought by the UOI, (akin to a moratorium under
Section 14
of the
IBC) in respect of IL&FS and its 348 group companies. Aggrieved, appeals were
filed before the NCLAT. By order dated 15.10.2018 NCLAT, inter-alia, stayed:
(i) the institution or continuation of suits or any other proceedings against the
IL&FS or its 348 group companies, before any court/tribunal/arbitration
panel/arbitration authority; (ii) any action to foreclose, recover or enforce any
security interest created over the assets of the IL&FS or those of its 348 group
companies; and (iii) the acceleration, premature withdrawal or other withdrawal,
invocation of any term loan, corporate loan, bridge loan, commercial paper,
debentures, fixed deposits, guarantees, letter of support, commitment or comfort
3
No. 3638 (M.B.) of 2018
3
and other financial facilities or obligations availed by the IL&FS and its 348
group companies.
4.    After the interim order of NCLAT, the borrower informed the Escrow
Bank about it, by an email dated 16.10.2018. On 19.10.2018, HDFC instructed
the Escrow Bank to transfer monthly instalments from the Escrow Account to the
Lender's Account. On 23.10.2018, IL& FS informed the HDFC about the interim
order from NCLAT (dated 15.10.2018). The letter stated that the interim order
restrained HDFC from appropriating IL& FS account’s with Escrow Bank.
IL&FS called upon the lender by letter dated 27.10.2018 to reverse the debit of ₹
6.24 crores and credit the amount back into the account of the borrower. HDFC
responded to IL&FS's letter, stating that receivables (i.e. rents) in respect of the
secured property were assigned by IL&FS in its favour and that the asset ceased
to belong to IL&FS.
5.    On 04.01.2019, IL&FS called upon HDFC to reverse the amount which
was debited by the Escrow Bank in the escrow accounts. By the order dated
04.02.2019, NCLAT directed the UOI and IL&FS to approach Justice (Retd.)
D.K. Jain (“former judge of this court”) for consent and discuss the terms and
conditions to supervise the operation of the resolution process. The UOI, through
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, in an affidavit stated that certain banks were
still debiting amounts from IL&FS group entities classified as “Amber” and
“Red” without authorization from the IL&FS board and those debits flouted the
order dated 15.10.2018. Restraint orders were sought against banks and financial
institutions enjoining them not to debit the accounts of the IL&FS and its group
entities and/or appropriate the funds held in the said accounts without
authorization of IL&FS and the relevant group entities; and further
return/refund/release such amounts that have been debited. On 08.08.2019,
NCLAT directed as follows:
"...If any of the Bank/Financial Institution has debited any amount in
          violation of order of this Appellate Tribunal dated 15th October, 2018, it
          will be open to Union of India/ILFS to bring the same to the notice of Justice
4
Shri D.K. Jain for appropriate orders and also intimate the Bank/Financial
         Institution that it may amount to contempt of court.”
6.    IL&FS wrote, on 22.08.2019 to former judge of this court to make an
appropriate order. IL& FS made representation before the learned judge on
28.08.2019. A letter dated 03.09.2019 was sent by the HDFC reiterating that
monies in the escrow account were its exclusive property and that IL&FS could
not claim ownership over such property. The Escrow Bank wrote on 04.09.2019
to IL&FS that it had acted in terms of Escrow Agreement and was obliged to hold
the money lying in trust for the purpose for which it was received i.e. for the
benefit of HDFC. Former judge of this court issued a show-cause notice dated
30.09.2019 to the HDFC and issued a notice to the Escrow Bank on 10.10.2019.
The Escrow Bank on 23.10.2019 wrote to former judge of this court stating that
the receivables stood assigned in favour of HDFC and monies received were not
the assets of the IL&FS. Former judge of this court granted a personal hearing to
the parties. On 12.05.2020, former judge of this court recommended the Escrow
Bank and HDFC to maintain the status quo in the Escrow Account till a final
view was taken on the IL&FS’s application. The Escrow Bank stopped debiting
any amount from the Escrow Account and informed the IL&FS and HDFC about
this. On 03.07.2020, former judge of this court issued a final order holding that
the actions of the HDFC and Escrow Bank in debiting the amount from the
Escrow Account violated the orders passed by NCLAT and thus HDFC and the
Escrow Bank were directed to purge themselves within two weeks.
7.    HDFC and IL&FS claimed opposing reliefs: the lender, on the one hand,
claimed- predictably that the interpretation and directions of former judge of this
court in the orders/directions dated 12 May 2020 and 03 July 2020 were incorrect
and had to be set aside; the borrower, IL&FS in its applications sought directions
that ₹ 112,79,18,348 (Rupees One Hundred Twelve Crore Seventy Nine Lakh
Eighteen Thousand Three Hundred Forty Eight), appropriated from its accounts
towards debt service payments, were in violation of the order dated 15.10.2018
5
from NCLAT and in compliance with the order passed by former judge of this
court on July 3, 2020.
8.    By the impugned order, NCLAT held that so far as part of the receivables
deposited in the Escrow Account which were sufficient to meet the principal and
interest (payable by IL&FS) assigned by the said borrower to HDFC, no
proprietary interest continued -with IL&FS nor could it exercise any right over
that part of the Escrow Account which was assigned. It was held, borrower “may
have right and interest on the residual of deposits which is an excess of principal
and interest for which security interest is created in favour of the lender which
Escrow Bank is permitted to transfer to the borrower.” IL&FS’s argument that
there was no assignment of the receivables, but only the creation of security
interest in the receivables was rejected. It was also held that since there was an
express assignment of lease rental- sufficient to meet the principal and interest
payments-, the “assignment has to be accepted as assignment” in favour of
HDFC and that 'pledge' in AA did not take away the nature of the transaction
documents which was the assignment of receivables. NCLAT also held that the
freeze order of 15.10.2018 did not negate the AA nor did it take away the property
right of HDFC in the lease rental receivables. However, the right over receivables
deposited in the Escrow Account to the extent they were in excess of principal
and interest, was retained by the IL&FS and in the event, any amount in excess
of the said principal and interest was transferred to or debited in the HDFC's
account and they needed to be reversed, after adjusting the shortfall in debiting
any interest or principal of any earlier months.
Parties’ contentions
9.    Mr. Ramji Srinivasan, Sr. Advocate urged, on behalf of IL&FS that the
MFA (dated 25.06.2018) and other agreements executed on 25.06.2018 clearly
indicate that the Facility advanced to the Borrower was loan repayable within 96
months. The Security Interest was created by the Borrower and the receivables
6
were nothing but security for repayment of the loan. The Escrow Account was
created in the Escrow Bank to facilitate the repayment of principal and interest as
per the repayment schedule. There was no transfer of title in the receivables from
Borrower to Lender. The receivables deposited in the Escrow Bank were the
assets of the Borrower which were deposited in the Escrow Bank as security for
the repayment of the loan of ₹ 400 Crores. Till 15.10.2018, the escrow agent was
debiting the amount as in terms of the Escrow Agreement. However, after the
interim order (dated 15.10.2018), the Escrow Bank was not entitled to debit any
amount to the Lender's Account which was prohibited by the interim order (dated
15.10.2018) of NCLAT in the pending appeal. IL & FS secured repayment of the
loan by assigning the lease rental to the extent of principal and interest payable
per month. The MFA and all the agreements clearly depict the relationship
between IL&FS and HDFC. The AA cannot be read in isolation. The Escrow
Bank held the amount in the account as a trustee and the Power of Attorney
Agreement executed on 25.06.2018 was by way of security interest. Repayment
was secured by receivables and other additional securities.
10.   It was thus argued that the assignment of receivables is only security and
not transfer. It is submitted that detailed written submissions were filed before
former judge of this court by the parties and after considering every contention,
the order dated 03.07.2020 was made by him. That order by former judge of this
Court, considered all the submissions by the lender, the borrower and the Escrow
Bank, and after examining the principal (and the facility agreement) and all other
agreements and attendant circumstances. Under that order, the lender and Escrow
Bank were obliged to return the amount debited i.e. ₹112,79,18,348/-.
11.   Learned senior counsel argued that the lender’s claim that the facilities
extended are in the nature of lease rental discounting facility (LRD) as argued by
HDFC, and not covered by the injunction is not borne out from the record. He
argued that the facility is nothing but a type of term loan offered with security of
rental income. The clear indicators that the Facility is secured by charge created
7
over the property and the receivables (rent) can be gathered from the following:
firstly, sanction letter for the term loan and the Facility specifically refers to this
as a loan for a term of 96 months to be repaid by IL&FS from the lease rentals
from commercial premises. Secondly, the terms relating to security and
repayment also establish this. In fact, none of the documents contain any element
or even a mention of the sale and purchase of the debt of IL&FS. The transaction
is a loan transaction and not a sale of debt at all.
12.     Learned counsel refers to Clauses 3 (sets out purpose of availing facility)
and 4 (Establishes nature of relationship between the parties) of the MFA to argue
that purpose of availing facility was merely re-financing of the existing debt and
clause 4 of MFA clearly establish that nature of relationship between the parties
was that of lender-borrower and not that of seller and buyer. It is also pointed out
that pursuant to the execution of the financing documents IL&FS submitted form
CHG-one4, which is confirmed by HDFC Ltd, i.e., the lender form for registration
of creation of charge to secure the Facility. Therefore, the lender in fact filed its
claim as a secured creditor of IL&FS before Grant Thornton India, the client’s
management consultant.
13.     It is argued that various conditions in the MFA and the Escrow Agreement
indicate that the transaction is essentially a loan transaction between the lender
and the borrower with the creation of a security. Counsel points out that the
documents which are part of the MFA nowhere use the expression “lease rent
discounting”. It is also argued that in terms of the Assignment and Administration
Agreement (also executed on 25 June 2018), receivables which are relevant with
respect to the security property were created in favour of the lender bank. Because
one clause5 uses the word assignment and at the same time it also states that the
amounts i.e. receivables are pledged and will be set aside for that purpose. This
clearly indicates that the plain meaning of the term pledge and that the intention
4
An application for registration, or modification of charge.
5
Clause 1 of the Assignment and Administration Agreement dated 25.06.2018 – Assignment and Pledge of
Receivables.
8
of the parties was that this amount was to be treated as a security. The expression
assigned is clarified later, in the words “shall be set aside for that purpose”.
When used in conjunction with the expression “pledge”, what was contemplated
was the creation of a security of the property and not its transfer.
14.        It is highlighted that the charge is a kind of security, whether the creditor
obtains possession of ownership of the assets or not; it is appropriated to the
satisfaction of the debt. From the provisions of the AA and the facility agreement,
it is absolutely clear that receivables were charged in favour of HDFC Ltd, the
lender, only for securing the obligations of the appellant IL&FS under the Facility
agreement and facilitation of repayment and it did not amount to a transfer of the
legal title over such receivables which continues to vest with IL&FS. It is
submitted that in these circumstances, the holistic reading of all documents as
resorted to by former judge of this court was the correct approach. Lastly, it is
pointed out that the receivables or the rent paid into the account was to be held in
trust by the escrow agent which had to secure compliance with the tribunal's order
dated 15.08.2018 and the judgement dated 12.03 2020.
15.        Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned Sr. Advocate appeared for HDFC Ltd. and
refuted the submissions of the learned senior counsel for IL&FS. It was argued
that a plain analysis of the transaction documents makes it clear that the facility
extended to the borrower is a Lease Rental Discounting (LRD) loan transaction,
which is materially different from a traditional loan transaction. An LRD loan
transaction involves the assignment/sale of the rent receivables by the landlord to
the financing entity at a discounted value in terms of the transaction documents.
A certain component of lease rentals arising from the use of the TIFC Property
(or Secured Property) i.e., sufficient for repayment of the facility, has been
irrevocably assigned in favour of the lender till repayment of the said Facility.
Clause 5(c)6 of Schedule I of the Facility Agreement recognizes that the assigned
6
5. Security and Repayment Specific Covenants:
9
receivables are the exclusive property of HDFC Ltd. The assigned receivables are
clearly the property of HDFC Ltd. The borrower has no right/title or interest in
the monies/receivables/amount deposited in the Escrow Account. The relief of
release/refund/reversal of amounts debited from the Escrow Account stating that
the same is in line with the order dated 03.07.2020 issued by former judge of this
court is misplaced since the same has not attained finality and was under scrutiny
by the tribunal in the applications filed by the lender.
16.      It was submitted that no judicial order or judgment prohibited the licensees
of the TIFC property from depositing monthly lease rent in the Escrow Account,
nor the orders held that the lender was disentitled from using the assigned
receivables/rents. The transaction was not prohibited by the order dated
15.10.2018, which was restricted to the assets of the IL&FS. Assigned receivables
were not its assets. They were consequently outside the purview of the order dated
15.10.2018. It was contended that former judge of this court by the order (dated
03.07.2020) unduly broadened the ambit of the order dated 15.10.2018. The
committee overlooked that the distribution of the rentals/receivables was property
of the lender and therefore, fell outside the scope of any direction of the 15 th
October 2018 order. The borrower was not entitled to any reliefs as claimed in
I.A. No 2196/ 20207.
17.      It was contended by HDFC that the transfer of ownership of a portion of
the rent receivables by IL&FS in its favour was sufficient to pay the principal and
interest whenever it became due in terms of the Facility Agreement. It was not
the entire rent receivables but only a portion of the same sufficient to cover the
principal and interest, was assigned. The balance portion was not assigned; it
continues to be owned by IL&FS. The borrower hence continues to have title and
interest in the residual receivables which too was secured.
[..] (c) The Borrower agrees that the Receivables shall be exclusive property of the Lender for the purpose of
secured repayment of the Facility and as such the Borrower will not make any further borrowing on the
strength of the Receivables on being Borrower's property.
7
Said IA was Filed for directions against Escrow Bank and lender seeking return of amount debited.
10
Analysis and Conclusions
18.   For appreciation of the transaction (to determine whether the assignment
or arrangement was a transfer, or security interest), it would be convenient to
peruse portions of the impugned order, which reproduced the relevant conditions
in the various documents.
19.   The parties entered into a Master Facility Agreement (MFA) on
25.06.2018. The definition clause in the MFA, inter alia, defined [Cl. 2 (1)] “due
date”; Clause 2 (aa) defined “repayment” and clause 2 (cc) defined “security”.
Per Clause 2 (cc), “Security” had to have the same “meaning as described in
Clause-8 of this Agreement and also described in the Schedule-III”. Likewise,
secured property inter alia, included immovable property described in Schedule
III. The MFA envisioned that the borrower (IL&FS) enters into an escrow
agreement “on such terms as agreed by the lender. The power was to give
irrevocable instructions to Escrow Bank. Clause 8 of the MFA deals with the
'security interest'.” Clause 8(8.1) is as follows:
“8. SECURITY INTEREST- DESCRIPTION/CREATION/PERFECTION
          8.1. The Borrower create Security Interest in such form and manner as
          instructed by Lender on the asset/property more particularly described in
          Schedule-III to this Agreement as the principal Security for securing the
          repayment of the Facility.
The Borrower hereby unconditionally and irrevocably undertakes and
          confirms to create security interest on the said Secured Property in favour
          of the Lender and perfect the security creation as mentioned herein above
          in favour of the Lender in such form and manner as may be deem fit by
          Lender within 6 months from the date of first disbursement of the Facility.
          The Company further undertakes and confirms to open an Escrow Account
          within 30 days of the first disbursement of the Facility for the assignment of
          receivables arising/accruing from the TIFC Property and creating charge
          on the said Escrow Account in manner and form as made be deem fit by
          Lender.”
20.   Clause 13 of the MFA provided for ‘Assignment/Transfer’. Clause 13.1 of
MFA is as follows:
“13. ASSIGNMENT/TRANSFER
          13.1. The Borrower shall not assign or transfer all or any of its rights,
          benefits or obligations under the Facility Agreement and the Transaction
          Documents without the approval of Lender. Lender may, at any time, assign
11
or transfer all or any of its rights, benefits and obligations under the Facility
            Agreement and the Transaction Documents. Notwithstanding any such
            assignment or transfer, the Borrower shall, unless otherwise notified by
            Lender, continue to make all payments under the Facility Agreement to
            Lender and all such payments when made to Lender shall constitute a
            discharge to the Borrower from its liabilities only to the extent of such
            payments.”

Clause 15 covers ‘Event of Default’. Clause 15.2 deals with ‘Consequence of
Default and remedies’. Schedule-1 of the MFA provides for ‘Special Conditions
for Rental Discounting. ‘Receivables’ is defined in Clause 1 of Schedule -I of the
MFA in the following words:
“Receivables” shall mean and include gross income and revenue derived
            from the operation of Client’s Contracts and shall include Deferred
            Receivables as stated in Appendix-1.”
21.   Clause 4 of Schedule-1 of the MFA deals with ‘Borrower’s Contracts
Specific Covenants’. Clauses 4(c) and Clause 5 (a), (b) and (c) provide as follows:
"4. [..] (c) The Borrower shall not alter, change or modify the terms of the
            Borrower's Contracts in so far as it relates to such terms which would have
            an adverse effect or impact on the Receivables and/or which shall otherwise
            detrimentally effect the Lender's interest in the Secured Property and
            income thereof."
"5. SECURITY AND REPAYMENT SPECIFIC COVENANTS
a) The Borrower agrees that the Facility shall be secured by exclusive
            security interest on the Receivables in such mode and manner as deemed fit
            and desired by the Lender.
b) The Borrower shall, on execution of this Facility Agreement, assign the
            Receivables in favour of the Lender on such terms as would be entered into
            between the Borrower and the Lender and pursuant thereto shall execute a
            Power of Attorney and Assignment and Management Agreement in line with
            the draft enclosed herewith in Appendix-3 to the Special Conditions.
c) The Borrower agrees that the Receivables shall be exclusive property of
            the Lender for the purpose of secured repayment of the Facility and as such
            the Borrower will not make any further borrowing on the strength of the
            Receivables as being Borrower's Property."
22.   An 'Escrow Account Agreement' was also entered between the lender and
the borrower on the same date under which the borrower has to open an Escrow
Account with the Escrow Bank. Recital (C) of the Escrow Account Agreement
provided:
12
"(C) The Borrower has agreed that, the payments to be collected/received
         by the Borrower from the clients of Business Service Centre/License/Lessee
         of various Units/properties (hereinafter referred to as "the said Units") built
         and/or to be built and leased/to be leased on the Secured Property detailed
         in Schedule B hereunder (hereinafter called "the said Property")
         for/against which the Facility granted/to be granted by Lender as per the
         Offer Letter and Facility Agreement, shall be credited to the said Escrow
         Account (hereinafter referred to as "the Receivables") and the Lender shall
         on satisfaction of the condition as described in Item No. 6 of Schedule A
         hereunder, adjust all the amounts to be paid by the Borrower to the Lender
         under the Facility Agreement, from time to time, out of the amounts credited
         in the said Escrow Account, and permit the transfer in the Designated
         account of the Borrower opened with the Escrow Bank, the amount as
         mentioned in Item No. 7 of Schedule A out of the remaining balance in the
         said Escrow Account after such adjustment as agreed hereunder."
Clause-3 of the Escrow Account Agreement provides 'Bank's Covenants' which
reads as follows:
"3. BANK'S COVENANTS:
(a) The Escrow Bank hereby agrees to act as such and to accept all monies
         to be delivered to or held in the Escrow Account, pursuant to the terms and
         conditions of this agreement. This Escrow Bank shall hold and safeguard
         the Escrow Account, during the terms of this Agreement and shall hold all
         cash in the Escrow Account, at the request of the Borrower and to safeguard
         the repayment of the Facility and for the benefit of the Borrower and the
         Lender in accordance with the terms mentioned herein.
(b) The Escrow Bank shall not be required to verify and ensure that the
         money(ies) deposited is the Receivables and all money(ies) deposited at any
         time in any quantum should be treated as the Receivables.
(c) The Escrow Bank agreed that during the currency of the term of this
         Agreement as may be amended from time to time, the Escrow Bank shall
         ensure that the Escrow Account is operated and maintained as per the terms
         set out herein and shall not permit any deviation, without the written
         consent of the Lender.
(d) The Escrow Bank agrees that all money(ies) received by it under this
         Agreement shall, until transferred in accordance with this Agreement, be
         held in trust for the purposes for which they were received, and shall be
         segregated from other accounts of the constituents of the Escrow Bank and
         from the funds and Property of the Escrow Bank, in accordance with the
         banking law and practice.
(e) The Bank shall transfer such amounts to the account of the Borrower
         which are in excess of the minimum balance required to be maintained in
         the Escrow Account in accordance with the terms stated herein."
23.   Clause 4(b) of the Escrow Account Agreement deals with 'Operation and
Maintenance'. Clause 4(a), (c) and (e) provides as follows:
13
"4. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
(a) The Borrower agrees that, the payments to be collected/received by the
          Borrower from the Business Service Centre/Licensee/lessee of various
          Units/properties built and/or to be built and leased/to be leased on the
          Property which is more particularly described in Schedule of the said
          Facility Agreement (hereinafter called "the said Property") for/against
          which the Facility granted/to be granted by Lender as per the Offer Letter
          and Facility Agreement, shall be credited to the said Escrow Account
          (hereinafter referred to as "the Receivables") and the Lender shall on
          satisfaction of the condition(s) as described in Item No. 6 of Schedule A
          hereunder, adjust all the amounts to be paid by the Borrower to the Lender
          under the Facility Agreement, from time to time, out of the amounts credited
          in the said Escrow Account, and transfer to the Designated Account of the
          Borrower, the amount as mentioned in Item No. 7 of Schedule A out of the
          remaining balance in the said Escrow Account after keeping the minimum
          balance in the Escrow Account.
(c) The Lender shall be entitled to instruct the Escrow Bank from time to
          time to transfer amounts from the Escrow Account including as stated
          hereinabove. The Lender shall appropriate these monies towards the
          repayment of the Facility, as and when the same is due and payable in full
          together with all other amounts payable under the Facility Agreement.
-------------------------
(e) The Borrower hereby irrevocably authorizes the Escrow Bank to pay
          and to transfer the money(ies) received in the Escrow Account to the Lender
          as per the terms and conditions agreed in the Offer Letter, Facility
          Agreement and this Agreement as may be applicable from time to time."
24.   An Assignment and Administration Agreement was also entered on the
same date i.e., 25.06.2018 with the lender and borrower. This agreement provided
for the assignment of the receivables by the borrower to the lender. Recital clause
3 is as follows:
"3. It has been agreed that the authorised indebtedness incurred by the
          Borrower in terms of the Facility Agreement by way of the Facility together
          with the interest thereon shall be payable from the gross income and
          revenue to be derived from the operation of the Business Centre Services
          Agreements/Lease/Leave and License Agreement/s as more particularly
          detailed in the Schedule-1 ("Borrower's Contracts") to this Agreement
          (hereinafter referred to as "Receivables").
Xxxx

Further Clause 1 of the Assignment and Administration Agreement reads
as:
1. Assignment and Pledge of Receivables
          All the Receivables derived/to be derived from the operation of the
          Borrower's Contracts, sufficient portion of which, to pay the principal and
          interest as and when the same shall become due in terms of the said Facility
          Agreement, is hereby assigned and pledged and shall be set aside for that
14
purpose and this Assignment and Pledge shall extend to and include any
            assessments that may be levied pursuant to Clause 4(a) hereof."
25.     A Power of Attorney document too was executed by IL& FS on
25.06.2018. By the Power of Attorney, the borrower irrevocably nominated,
constituted and appointed HDFC as its true and lawful attorney on behalf of the
borrower. By recital clause 2 of the said Power of Attorney document, HDFC
could “appropriate the proceeds received towards the discharge of the Facility”;
recital clause 5 enabled the lender to put to use, the secured property and give the
business centre, etc, on leave, license or lease basis in the event the borrower’s
existing arrangements were terminated or ended. Recital clause 7 enabled HDFC
to receive all rents and all other sums in respect of such premises.
26.     The effect of these documents is what the court is concerned with. It is a
known principle of contract interpretation, that the substance of a document, is
discernible from its terms, rather than the label or its nomenclature.
In
Yellapu
Uma Maheswari and Ors. vs. Buddha Jagadheeswararao & Ors.8
, the court held:
“It is well settled that the nomenclature given to the document is not
            decisive factor but the nature and substance of the transaction has to be
            determined with reference to the terms of the documents and that the
            admissibility of a document is entirely dependent upon the recitals
            contained in that document but not on the basis of the pleadings set up by
            the party who seeks to introduce the document in question.”

In Assam Small Scale Ind. Dev.
Corp. Ltd. & Ors. v. J.D. Pharmaceuticals & Anr9
the court stated as follows:
“The nature of transaction is required to be determined on the basis of the
            substance there and not by the nomenclature used. Documents are to be
            construed having regard to the contexts thereof wherefor 'labels' may not
            be of much relevance.”

This was also stated in
V. Lakshmanan v. B.R. Mangalagiri & Ors10
( that the
“nomenclature or label given in the agreement as advance is not either decisive
8
2015 (11) SCR 849
9
2005 (4) Suppl. SCR 232
10
1994 Supp (6) SCR 561
15
or immutable.”).
This principle of substance, over the form, was followed in
Super Poly Fabriks Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Central Excise, Punjab11
.
27.       That one document is styled or described in a certain manner, or that it uses
a certain expression, or term is not conclusive; it is the effect of all the terms, of
the documents, which bring out the true purport and intention of the parties.
Likewise, another allied principle of contract interpretation, is that where the
transaction is not the subject of one document, but several, which refer to each
other, or a reading of all, describe the entire contract, then, it is open to the court
to consider all of them together. This principle was stated in
S. Chattanatha
Karayalar v The Central Bank of India & Ors12
wherein this court held that:
“The principle is well-established that if the transaction is contained in
              more than one document between the same parties they must be read and
              interpreted together and they have the same legal effect for all purposes as
              if they are one document. In Manks v. Whiteley, [1912] 1 Ch. 735 Moulton,
              L.J. stated :
"Where several deeds form part of one transaction and are
              contemporaneously executed they have the same effect for all purposes such
              as are relevant to this case as if they were one deed. Each is executed on
              the faith of all the others being executed also and is intended to speak only
              as part of the one transaction, and if one is seeking to make equities apply
              to the parties they must be equities arising out of the transaction as a
              whole."
28.       Undoubtedly as argued on behalf of IL&FS, there are certain conditions in
the MFA – [clauses 2 (cc) and 2 (dd)] which define “security” and “security
interest”. Read along with clause 8.1 and Schedule III, these would lead one to
infer those receivables or rents that which IL&FS is entitled to, form the security
for the advance extended to it by the lender. Nevertheless, as discussed earlier,
these conditions cannot be read in isolation because the MFA itself adverts to
other documents - all of which were executed by the parties contemporaneously.
The condition in the Assignment and Administration agreement which [was also
executed on the same day, i.e. 25.06.2018], clearly indicates that rents payable to
11
2008 (6) SCR 1076
12
1965 (3) SCR 318
16
IL&FS stood unconditionally assigned to HDFC. The use of the expression
“pledge” in this context cannot be made much of. This is because the assignment
is not hedged with any condition; it entitles HDFC to appropriate the proceeds,
to the extent of liability of IL&FS.
29.   The Lease Rental Discounting (LRD) arrangement - a new kind of financial
agreement by which a banker allows credit facilities to a commercial property
owner, has the flexibility of ensuring that the asset owner is given access to credit.
The dominant condition is that a substantial portion or the entire rent or
receivables which the owner would be entitled to are made- sold or assigned,
absolutely to the creditor bank. This is with the intention that the borrower’s
liabilities are discharged automatically from the proceeds payable in respect of
the property. Such amounts virtually are by way of unsecured debts. In other
words, future rent payable is actually an unsecured debt that the owner/borrower
would have been otherwise entitled to claim, but for the assignment or transfer,
to the lender/creditor. Because the owner is a debtor of the bank, the latter
becomes the creditor of the tenant or the lessee as the case may be. This
arrangement has the advantage of virtually ring fencing the creditor from the
eventuality of bankruptcy or an insolvency event, which the borrower might be
exposed to. In fact, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has formulated guidelines
which regulate all banks’ conduct in regard to the LRD facilities and they extends
to a class of borrowers who own commercial properties.
30.   It would also be relevant at this stage to notice that clauses 1 and 4(c) and
(j) of the Assignment Agreement categorically set aside the rents payable to
IL&FS, in favour of the assignee, i.e. the lender bank. Furthermore, the Escrow
Agreement records (through clause 2) that all receivables to which the borrower
would be entitled would be deposited in the escrow account. Furthermore, the
lessees or tenants of the properties owned by the borrower be instructed to pay
such an amount in the escrow account itself. Clause 4(c) of the Escrow Agreement
is more categorical; it authorizes only the lender (i.e., HDFC) to instruct the
17
escrow bank to transfer the amounts and permits the bank to appropriate amounts
towards adjustment arising out of the Facility liability. In the same line, the
General Power of Attorney (GPA) document (especially clauses 2 and 5)
categorically entitles the lender/HDFC to appropriate the proceeds deposited
towards the discharge of the borrower’s liability under the Facility. Clause 5
similarly entitles access to the lease rent. Furthermore, the bank/lender virtually
steps into the shoes of the borrower and by the terms of the GPA is also authorized
to let out the premises in case due to an unforeseen situation an existing lessee or
tenant vacates it or is unable to pay.
31.   The borrower is correct in arguing that the expression LRD is nowhere
used in any of the documents executed at the time. Yet, as discussed earlier in the
judgment, it is the nature and substance of the transaction which is determinative.
An application of the rule that all the contemporaneous documents are to be read
together, to discern the true purport of the contract, it is evident that what the
parties intended was the assignment of the debt, i.e., the rents payable.
32.   It would at this stage, be necessary to consider whether such amounts
payable on a future date are to be considered property and, therefore, capable of
transfer.
Under the Transfer of Property Act, 1882
,
Section 5
states generally that
all manner of property is capable of transfer.
Section 6
lays out what are the kinds
of properties or actions which are not transferable: these are “personal claims”
in the nature of tortious claims and “choices in action” cannot be transferred.
33.   “Actionable claim” is defined by the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
(hereafter “TPA”) in the following manner:
“
Section 3
Interpretation clause….
“actionable claim” means a claim to any debt, other than a debt secured
          by mortgage of immoveable property or by hypothecation or pledge of
          moveable property, or to any beneficial interest in moveable property not
          in the possession, either actual or constructive, of the claimant, which the
          Civil Courts recognise as affording grounds for relief, whether such debt or
          beneficial interest be existent, accuring, conditional or contingent:”
18
Thus, in terms of
Section 3
of the TPA, actionable claim means (a) claim to an
unsecured debt (other than a debt secured by mortgage of immovable property,
hypothecation or pledge (b) beneficial interest in a movable property. Both these
are recognised as enforceable. Other claims, however, do not fall within the
expression “actionable claim”.
34.
Sections 130
,
131
and
132
of TPA, deal with transfer of actionable claims:
“130. Transfer of actionable claim—
              (1) The transfer of an actionable claim [whether with or without
              consideration] shall be effected only by the execution of an instrument in
              writing signed by the transferor or his duly authorised agent, shall be
              complete and effectual upon the execution of such instruments, and
              thereupon all the rights and remedies of the transferor, whether by way of
              damages or otherwise, shall vest in the transferee, whether such notice of
              the transfer as is hereinafter provided be given or not: Provided that every
              dealing with the debt or other actionable claim by the debtor or other
              person from or against whom the transferor would, but for such instrument
              of transfer as aforesaid, have been entitled to recover or enforce such debt
              or other actionable claim, shall (save where the debtor or other person is a
              party to the transfer or has received express notice thereof as hereinafter
              provided) be valid as against such transfer.
(2) The transferee of an actionable claim may, upon the execution of such
              instrument of transfer as aforesaid, sue or institute proceedings for the same
              in his own name without obtaining the transferor’s consent to such suit or
              proceeding and without making him a party thereto.
Exception —Nothing in this section applies to the transfer of a marine or
              fire policy of insurance or affects the provisions of
section 38
of the
              Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938). Illustrations
(i) A owes money to B, who transfers the debt to C. B then demands the
              debt from A, who, not having received notice of the transfer, as prescribed
              in
section 131
, pays B. The payment is valid, and C cannot sue A for the
              debt.
(ii) A effects a policy on his own life with an Insurance Company and
              assigns it to a Bank for securing the payment of an existing or future debt.
              If A dies, the Bank is entitled to receive the amount of the policy and to sue
              on it without the concurrence of A’s executor, subject to the proviso in sub-
              section (1) of
section 130
and to provisions of
section 132
.
Section 131
. Notice to be in writing signed- Every notice of transfer of an
              actionable claim shall be in writing, signed by the transferor or his agent
              duly authorized in this behalf, or, in case the transferor refuses to sign, by
              the transferee or his agent, and shall state the name and address of the
              transferee.”
35.
In
Mewa Lal and Ors. vs. Tara Rani13
it was held that:
13
AIR 1973 All 165
19
“Actionable claim can be transferred only by execution of an instrument in
              writing signed by the transferor or his duly authorised agent, whereas under
Section 54
of the Transfer of Property Act, "Sale" is a transfer of ownership
              in exchange for a price paid or promised or part-paid and part-promised.
              This payment of price, in full or in part or promised is by the purchaser to
              the seller. The sale of a property of a value of more than Rs. 100/- has to be
              compulsorily registered, whereas, an actionable claim of any amount can
              be had only by execution of an instrument. Thus, the sale of a property and
              sale of an actionable claim are two different things and one has no relation
              with the other. As the transfer of an actionable claim is not done by a
              registered deed…”
36.       This court has ruled, in
Sunrise Associates vs Govt. Of NCT of Delhi14
that:
“Distinct elements are deducible from the definition of 'actionable claim' in
Section 3
of the Transfer of Property Act. An actionable claim is of course
              as its nomenclature suggests, only a claim. A claim might connote a
              demand, but in the context of the definition it is a right, albeit an incorporeal
              one. Every claim is not an actionable claim. It must be a claim either to a
              debt or to a beneficial interest in movable property. The beneficial interest
              is not the movable property itself, and may be existent, accruing,
              conditional or contingent. The movable property in which such beneficial
              interest is claimed, must not be in the possession of the claimant. An
              actionable claim is therefore an incorporeal right.
******
              An actionable claim would include a right to recover insurance money or a
              partner's right to sue for an account of a dissolved partnership or the right
              to claim the benefit of a contract not coupled with any liability (see
Union
              of India v. Sarada Mills
(1973 SCR (2) 484).. A claim for arrears of rent has
              also been held to be an actionable claim
State of Bihar v Maharajadhiraja
              Sir Kameshwar Singh
1952 SCR 889, 910).
A right to the credit in a
              provident fund account has also been held to an actionable claim (
Official
              Trustee, Bengal v L. Chippendale
AIR 1944 (Cal.)
335;
Bhupathi Mohan
              Das v Phanindra Chandra Chakravarthy & Anr.
AIR 1935 (Cal.) 756).”

The issue involved
in that case
was whether the sale of lottery tickets, amounted
to the sale of goods, attracting a sales tax levy. The court held that the sale did
not involve goods, but the sale of actionable claim:
“The question is, what is this right which the ticket represents? There can
              be no doubt that on purchasing a lottery ticket, the purchaser would have a
              claim to a conditional interest in the prize money which is not in the
              purchaser's possession. The right would fall squarely within the definition
              of an actionable claim and would therefore be excluded from the definition
              of 'goods' under the
Sale of Goods Act
and the sales tax statute [..]”
14
2006 Supp(2) SCR 421
20
The court characterised the rights contained in a lottery ticket, and that they
represented a right in futuro, the sale of which amounted to the sale of an
actionable claim:
“The right to participate being an inseparable part of the chance to win is
              therefore part of an actionable claim. The authorities considered by the
              Court in H.Anraj do not support the sub division of the chance to win into
              a further distinct right to participate. The Court sought to draw the
              distinction between the chance to win and the right to participate by
              describing the former as a right 'in futuro' and the latter as "in praesenti".
              Both the rights are in fact 'in futuro'. In any event the distinction is
              immaterial to the question as to whether the subject matter of the transfer
              is an actionable claim, since an actionable claim may be existent, accruing,
              conditional or contingent.”
37.
In another decision,
Noor & Ors. v G.S. Ibrahim (Dead) by LRs15
it was
held that:
“If right to recover the arrears is assigned, then the transferee/landlord can
              recover those arrears as rent and if not paid maintain a petition for eviction
              under the rent laws for those arrears as well.”
38.
In another decision,
ICICI Bank v Official Liquidator of APS Star
Industries Ltd16
this court held that:
“rights under a contract are always assignable unless the contract is
              personal in its nature or unless the rights are incapable of assignment,
              either under the law or under an agreement between the parties. A benefit
              under the contract can always be assigned. That, there is, in law, a clear
              distinction between assignment of rights under a contract by a party who
              has performed his obligation thereunder and an assignment of a claim for
              compensation which one party has against the other for breach of contract.
19. In the case of Camdex International Bank Ltd v Bank of Zambia
              reported in (1998) Q.B. 22 (CA) the following observation which is relevant
              to the present case needs to be quoted:
"The assignment of a debt will not be contrary to public policy solely on the
              grounds that the assignee has purchased the debt for a considerably
              discounted price or because that price is only payable after a period of
              credit. Nor will the assignment be contrary to public policy simply because
              the assignee may make a profit on the transaction at the end of the day. If
              there was no prospect of a profit, Hobhouse LJ observed, commercial
              entities would never purchase debts."
20. Similarly, the following proposition in Chitty on Contracts, 27th edn.
              (1994) at para 19.027 is relevant to be noted.
"It is also well established that a claim to a simple debt is assignable even
              if the debtor has refused to pay. The practice of assigning or `selling' debts
15
2003 Supp (2) SCR 204
16
2010 (12) SCR 644
21
to debt collecting agencies and credit factors could hardly be carried on if
           the law were otherwise. "
21. In view of the above exposition of law, we find that under the impugned
           Deed of Assignment only the Account Receivables in the books of ICICI
           Bank Ltd. has been transferred to Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. The
           obligations of ICICI Bank Ltd. towards its borrower(s) (customer) under
           the loan agreement secured by deed of hypothecation/mortgage have not
           been assigned by ICICI Bank Ltd. to the assignee bank, namely, Kotak
           Mahindra Bank Ltd. Hence, it cannot be said that the impugned Deed of
           Assignment is unsustainable in law. The obligations referred to in the
           impugned Deed of Assignment are the obligations, if any, of ICICI Bank
           Ltd. towards Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. (assignee) in the matter of transfer
           of NPAs.”
39.     The earlier discussion in this judgment, about the true nature of the
transaction in this case led this court to hold that it is an assignment and not a
pledge. The reference to pledge, in some places in the documents, did not
undermine the fact that the rents payable to and receivable by the lender (IL&FS)
stood absolutely assigned to HDFC. The provisions of the TPA and the discussion
of the various authorities support the conclusion that there can be a transfer of
debts, which are defined as actionable claims. In the present case, the rents
payable by IL&FS tenants, lessees and licensees are debts, which stood
transferred to the creditor, i.e. HDFC Bank. Therefore, the NCLAT’s conclusions
are unexceptionable; the challenge to its correctness, therefore fails.
40.     For the foregoing reasons, this court holds that there is no merit in the
appeal. It is accordingly dismissed, there shall be no order on costs. Pending
application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed of.
…..................................................J.
                                                        [S. RAVINDRA BHAT]



                                                        …..................................................J.
                                                        [DIPANKAR DATTA]
      NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 19, 2023.