[Cites
21
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Tottempudi Salalith vs State Bank Of India on 18 October, 2023
Author:
Aniruddha Bose
Bench:
Vikram Nath
,
Aniruddha Bose
2023 INSC 923                                                         REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.2348 OF 2021


             TOTTEMPUDI SALALITH                                 …APPELLANT


                                                VERSUS


             STATE BANK OF INDIA & ORS.                          …RESPONDENTS


                                              JUDGMENT
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J.
The appellant before us has described himself as the

             managing director of the Respondent No.2, Totem Infrastructures

             Limited (corporate debtor) against whom proceedings have been

             initiated on account of default in repaying financial facilities

             extended to them by several banks in the form of loans and bank

             guarantees. The total claim on account of default as made before
Signature Not Verified
the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) was for a sum of
Digitally signed by
NIRMALA NEGI
Date: 2023.10.18
17:00:33 IST
Reason:
Rs.613,27,01,598.23/­.          Several   banks   had   extended   these
1
facilities, being (i) Union Bank of India, (ii) IDBI, (iii) Oriental

Bank of Commerce, (iv) Bank of Baroda, (v) Karnataka Bank,
(vi) Syndicate Bank and (vii) Punjab National Bank as also the

State Bank of India, who is the first respondent in this appeal.
The State Bank of Hyderabad, State Bank of Mysore, State Bank

of Travancore, State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur and State Bank

of Patiala, had also extended such facilities, but they had merged

with the State Bank of India on 01.04.2017. Hence, the State

Bank of India is now prosecuting the composite claims of these

banks.   In the proceeding before the NCLT, out of which this

appeal arises, it was the State Bank of India who had filed the

application as financial creditor under Section 7 of the Insolvency

and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (IBC).
2.   Prior to bringing the action under the IBC, notice under
Section 13(2)
of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of

Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002

(SARFAESI) was issued to the corporate debtor and recovery

proceedings were instituted against them before the Debt

Recovery Tribunal (DRT). Three applications were filed by the

exposed lending banks, two before the DRT, Hyderabad being OA

No.154 of 2014 and OA No.221 of 2014, the former having been
2
renumbered as OA No.1653 of 2017. The third application was

filed before the DRT, Bengaluru which was registered as OA

No.1930 of 2014. Three recovery certificates were issued by the

respective Tribunals covering the claims of the lending banks.
Two recovery certificates by the Hyderabad Tribunal were issued

on    08.09.2015     and     17.10.2017     for    a    sum     of

Rs.14,50,06,349.23/­ and Rs.1408,03,14,857.40/­ respectively.
In the case registered as OA No.221 of 2014, the State Bank of

Hyderabad was the applicant bank. In OA No. 154 of 2014, all

these banks filed a composite application. In OA No.1930 of

2014, the proceeding brought by State Bank of Bikaner and

Jaipur, recovery certificate was issued on 04.08.2017 for a sum

of Rs.5,22,21,750/­. In respect of the recovery certificate issued

on 17.10.2017, the State Bank of India claimed to be entitled to

Rs.368,22,13,348.59/­.
3.   The State Bank of India’s application under
Section 7
of the

IBC was filed on 06.09.2019 before the NCLT, founded on all the

three recovery certificates in which the first respondent had

substantial stake.    In its order passed on 12.01.2021, the

adjudicating authority admitted the application and declared

moratorium in terms of
Section 14
of the IBC. By this order, one
3
G. Satyanarayana Murty was appointed as Interim Resolution

Professional (IRP). The appellant, who was the managing director

of the corporate debtor, appealed against the said decision of the

NCLT admitting the application and declaring moratorium

primarily on the ground of limitation.       Before the National

Company Law Appellate Tribunal (the Appellate Tribunal), a point

was urged, apart from the issue of limitation, that the application

had been initiated as per the Reserve Bank of India circular dated

12.02.2018 which was held to be ultra vires the provision of
Section 35AA
of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 by this Court

in the case of Dharani Sugars and Chemicals Ltd. ­vs­ Union of

India and Others [(2019) 5 SCC 480]. This circular essentially

laid down norms for, inter­alia, invoking IBC in relation to

stressed assets. The NCLT had taken into consideration a letter

issued by the corporate debtor on 29.01.2020 addressed to the

Union Bank and the State Bank of India, agreeing in principle to

repay the amount due to the financial creditors. The same letter

requested the banks to support the corporate debtor during the

financial crises being faced by them and sought waiver of penal

interest levied. A request for one time settlement was also made

in this communication. The NCLT treated this letter to be an
4
acknowledgement of debt. In its decision taken on 12.01.2021

while admitting the application, it was, inter­alia, observed:­

        “….We, are therefore, of the view that by accepting liability
        vide their letter dated 29.01.2020, agreeing to repay the
        debt, the Corporate Debtor now cannot take a stand that
        the debt is barred by limitation. Acknowledgement of debt
        and agreeing to repay the same amounts to liability and it
        automatically extends the limitation period.”



The Appellate Tribunal broadly agreed with the reasoning of the

NCLT and sustained the decision delivered on 12.01.2021.
4.   The pleas of the appellant before the Appellate Tribunal

were mainly on procedural grounds. Apart from the question of

limitation, arguments were advanced that the application before

the NCLT was barred under the doctrine of election, the borrower

having chosen the SARFAESI mechanism first and having applied

before the DRT. Point of limitation was also reiterated. On the

issue involving the RBI Circular dated 12.02.2018 the case of the

appellant was that the banks had approached the forum under

the IBC, on the basis of the aforesaid circular. The said circular

was, however, quashed in the case of Dharani Sugars and

Chemicals Ltd. (supra). On this ground, the appellant argued

that the application was not maintainable. The Appellate

Tribunal held, inter­alia:­
5
“56. In regard to the plea of the Appellant that the
Adjudicating Authority in the impugned order even though
at paragraph 12 had mentioned that the Corporate Debtor
had raised two fold contention (1) that the petition is
barred by limitation (2) the petition has been initiated as
by the RBI Circular 12.02.2018 which was held ultra virus
of section 35 AA of the Banking Regulation Act by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court, this Tribunal ongoing through the
impugned order is of the considered view that the
Adjudicating Authority had not adverted to the same and
the said order in this regard has not spelt out reasons.
Therefore, this Tribunal is of the earnest opinion that it is
desirable that an ‘Adjudicating Authority’ is to disclose its
mind in future so that the compulsion of disclosure,
guarantees consideration apart from the fact, that the duty
to assign reasons introduces clarity and minimizes
arbitrariness. Also, it will enable the superior authority to
evaluate the order so passed on legal plane. However, this
Tribunal being an ‘Appellate Authority’ over the
Adjudicating Authority in the present Appeal has dealt
with the aspect of limitation concerning the
section 7
application and the aspect of RBI circular dated
12.02.2018 and answered the same at the relevant of this
Judgment. As such, the Appellant cannot be an aggrieved
person in this regard, in the considered opinion of this
Tribunal.
57. It is to be pointed out that in our ‘Justice Delivery
System’,     ‘Law’      is    to     be      decided      with
reasons     which      carry    convictions      within     the
Codes/Tribunals/Lawyers/Stakeholders and Litigants to
make it, stable, predictable and consistent with a view to
have certainty and clarity to the benefit of one and all. It
cannot be gainsaid that the judgment/order of a Tribunal
is to be written only after deep travail and positive vein.
Also that, the procedure for developing the law has to be
one of evolution. In this connection it is significant to point
out that the exception to rule of ‘Stare decisis’ is that a
Court/Tribunal is not bound to follow the decision(s)
reached ‘per incuriam’.
58. As matter of fact, in the instant case when once the
Company has/had defaulted and after the initiation of
legal proceedings as available to the Lender on that date
(Before the Debt Recovery Tribunal) and when the
Financial Creditor/Lender had obtained the order(s) in the
‘Original Applications’ and later recovery certificates were
issued, and when the Original Applications filed before the
6
Debt Recovery Tribunal(s) had attained finality, thereafter
it is for the Lender/Financial Creditor/Decree Holder as
matter of ‘Election’ to pursue the recovery mechanism for
his/its personal benefits before a ‘competent forum’ or to
initiate Insolvency Proceedings for the benefit of
‘stakeholders’ and ‘one and all’. In the event of the Decree
Holder/Lender/Financial Creditor has/had resorted to the
initiation of Insolvency Proceedings under relevant section
of the I & B Code (after coming into force of the Code) he/it
cannot be found fault with, since there is no fetter in
‘Law’, in this regard.
59. It is pointed out that the decisions cited on behalf of
the Appellant before this Tribunal, in the instant case are
not applicable to the facts and the circumstances of the
present case, hence they are neither considered, nor
discussed.
60. Be that as it may, in view of the detailed upshot, this
Tribunal taking note of the respective contentions projected
by the Learned Counsels appearing for the parties,
considering the facts and circumstances of the present
case in a proper perspective, comes to a resultant
conclusion that the instant case there is a ‘Financial Debt’
which is due and payable by the ‘Corporate Debtor’.
Moreover, as against the Corporate Debtor/Totem
Infrastructure Limited, orders were passed by the Debt
Recovery Tribunal(s) and the three ‘Recovery Certificates’
dated 17.10.2017, 04.08.2017 and 08.09.2015 clearly
establish the factum of Financial Debt, due and payable,
and that default being committed by the ‘Corporate
Debtor’. To put precisely, the onus of proving the ‘debt’
and ‘default’ on the part of the First Respondent/Bank in
the instant case, has been duly discharged. Looking at
from any angle, the ‘admission order’ of the
section 7
application as against the ‘Corporate Debtor’ by the
Adjudicating Authority, (‘National Company Law Tribunal’,
Hyderabad Bench in an application filed by the First
Respondent/Bank)           as    Financial      creditor    on
12.01.2021 in CP (IB) No. 625/7/HDB/2019 does not
suffer from any material irregularities and patent
illegalities in the eye of Law. Resultantly, the Appeal fails.
CONCLUSION: In fine, the Comp App (AT)(CH)(Ins)
No. 04/2021 is dismissed. No costs. The I A No. 09/2021
and 10/2021 are closed.”
7
5.   In the case of Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited ­vs­ A.

Balakrishnan and Another [(2022) 9 SCC 186], a three Judge

Bench of this Court had examined the question of limitation from

the perspective of issue of recovery certificates in terms of

provision of the Recovery of Debts and Bankruptcy Act, 1993

(1993 Act). We shall refer to this judgment henceforth as Kotak

Mahindra I. It was opined by this Court in this judgment:­


        “28. It could thus be seen that this Court in
Dena
        Bank [Dena Bank v. C. Shivakumar Reddy
, (2021) 10 SCC
        330] in SCC paras 136 and 141, has in unequivocal terms
        held that once a claim fructifies into a final judgment and
        order/decree, upon adjudication, and a certificate of
        recovery is also issued authorising the creditor to realise
        its decretal dues, a fresh right accrues to the creditor to
        recover the amount of the final judgment and/or
        order/decree and/or the amount specified in the recovery
        certificate. It has further been held that issuance of a
        certificate of recovery in favour of the financial creditor
        would give rise to a fresh cause of action to the financial
        creditor, to initiate proceedings under
Section 7
IBC for
        initiation of the CIRP, within three years from the date of
        the judgment and/or decree or within three years from the
        date of issuance of the certificate of recovery, if the dues of
        the corporate debtor to the financial debtor, under the
        judgment and/or decree and/or in terms of the certificate
        of recovery, or any part thereof remained unpaid.
xxx    xxx    xxx
56. Insofar as the contention of the respondents with
        regard to clause (a) of sub­section (1) of
Section 14
IBC is
        concerned, we do not find that the words used in clause
(a) of sub­section (1) of
Section 14
IBC could be read to
        mean that the decree­holder is not entitled to invoke the
        provisions of the IBC for initiation of CIRP. A plain reading
        of the said Section would clearly provide that once CIRP is
        initiated, there shall be prohibition for institution of suits or
        continuation of pending suits or proceedings against the
8
corporate debtor including execution of any judgment,
        decree or order in any court of law, tribunal, arbitration
        panel or other authority. The prohibition to institution of
        suit or continuation of pending suits or proceedings
        including execution of decree would not mean that a
        decree­holder is also prohibited from initiating CIRP, if he
        is otherwise entitled to in law. The effect would be that the
        applicant, who is a decree­holder, would himself be
        prohibited from executing the decree in his favour.
xxx   xxx    xxx
71. We have already hereinabove, done the exercise of
        considering the relevant provisions of the IBC afresh and
        come to a conclusion that a liability in respect of a claim
        arising out of a recovery certificate would be a “financial
        debt” within the meaning of clause (8) of
Section 5
IBC and
        a holder of the recovery certificate would be a “financial
        creditor” within the meaning of clause (7) of
Section 5
IBC.
        We have also held that a person would be entitled to
        initiate CIRP within a period of three years from the date
        on which the recovery certificate is issued. We are of the
        considered view that the view taken by the two­Judge
        Bench of this Court in
Dena Bank [Dena Bank v. C.
        Shivakumar Reddy
, (2021) 10 SCC 330] is correct in law
        and we affirm the same.
xxx   xxx    xxx
86. To conclude, we hold that a liability in respect of a
        claim arising out of a recovery certificate would be a
        “financial debt” within the meaning of clause (8) of
Section
        5
IBC. Consequently, the holder of the recovery certificate
        would be a financial creditor within the meaning of clause
        (7) of
Section 5
IBC. As such, the holder of such certificate
        would be entitled to initiate CIRP, if initiated within a
        period of three years from the date of issuance of the
        recovery certificate.”
6.   The Appellate Tribunal, in the impugned order had also

treated the letter of the corporate debtor which was issued on

29.01.2020 to be acknowledgement of debt and on that basis

proceeded to compute the limitation period. In our opinion, this
9
reasoning was procedurally wrong. The appellant’s stand on this

position is founded on
Section 18
of the Limitation Act, 1963 and

he contends that any acknowledgment beyond the period of

limitation would not revive the right to sue. Learned counsel for

the appellant has relied upon a judgment of this Court in the case

of Jignesh Shah and Another ­vs­ Union of India and Another

[(2019) 10 SCC 750] in which it has been held that the limitation

period provided in the
Limitation Act
would apply to the

applications under the IBC as well. Section 238A of the IBC itself

(introduced by way of an amendment to the Code made with

effect from 06.06.2018) stipulates application of the statute of

Limitation on IBC.
Section 18
of the Limitation Act stipulates: ­

        “18. Effect of acknowledgment in writing.—(1) Where,
        before the expiration of the prescribed period for a suit or
        application in respect of any property or right, an
        acknowledgment of liability in respect of such property or
        right has been made in writing signed by the party against
        whom such property or right is claimed, or by any person
        through whom he derives his title or liability, a fresh
        period of limitation shall be computed from the time when
        the acknowledgment was so signed.
(2) Where the writing containing the acknowledgment is
        undated, oral evidence may be given of the time when it
        was signed; but subject to the provisions of the
Indian
        Evidence Act, 1872
(1 of 1872), oral evidence of its
        contents shall not be received.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) an acknowledgment may be sufficient though it omits
        to specify the exact nature of the property or right, or avers
        that the time for payment, delivery, performance or
10
enjoyment has not yet come or is accompanied by a
        refusal to pay, deliver, perform or permit to enjoy, or is
        coupled with a claim to set­off, or is addressed to a person
        other than a person entitled to the property or right,
(b) the word “signed” means signed either personally or by
        an agent duly authorised in this behalf, and
(c) an application for the execution of a decree or order
        shall not be deemed to be an application in respect of any
        property or right.”


Section 238­A of the IBC stipulates: ­
        “Limitation. ­­The provisions of the
Limitation Act, 1963
(36 of 1963) shall, as far as may be, apply to the
        proceedings or appeals before the Adjudicating Authority,
        the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal, the Debt
        Recovery Tribunal or the Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal,
        as the case may be.”
7.   So far as the present proceeding is concerned, if we proceed

on the basis that the date of initial default is the starting point of

limitation, then lapse of three years from that date would have

extinguished the bank’s right to initiate action under the IBC.
Secondly, even if the said letter dated 29.01.2020 is treated to be

acknowledgement of debt, the same was made after institution of

the proceeding under
Section 7
of the IBC. In the application thus,

there could be no reference to such acknowledgement. In absence

of amendment of pleadings, the Appellate Tribunal could not have

taken such purported acknowledgement of debt for the purpose of

extending the limitation period. Requirement of specific pleading
11
on facts constituting acknowledgement or admission of claim has

been recognised in the judgment of this Court in the case of

Reliance Asset Reconstruction Company Limited ­vs­ Hotel

Poonja International Private Limited [(2021) 7 SCC 352].
Broadly a similar view has been taken by this Court in the case of

Babulal Vardharji Gurjar ­vs­ Veer Gurjar Aluminium Industries

Private Limited and Another [(2020) 15 SCC 1]. In this judgment

also, the necessity of averments to overcome the limitation

question has been emphasised by this Court. The argument of the

appellant on the basis of
Section 25 (3)
of the Contract Act, 1872 is

anchored on the letter dated 29.01.2020. This letter reads:­

        “To

        The Assistant General Manager
        Union Bank of India,
        Industrial Finance Branch,
        6­3­1090/B/4/101, 1st Floor,
        “The Grand" Raj Bhavan Road,
        Somajiguda, Hyderabad­500 082.
Mail­
[email protected]
(Through to the Lead Bank)

        Dear Sir,
        Sub:­ Request for OTS with Consortium Banks
        Ref:­ Totem Infrastructure Limited

        We thank you very much for the support that has
        been extended by your bank throughout my business
        operations with your branch. With reference to your
        letter/Notice from your branch, we have taken note of
12
it and we have discussed about this elaborately with
our business partners.
In principle, we have agreed among ourselves to
repay the amount due to your bank. As you are
aware, we are undergoing through rough phase in
our business activities along with financial crisis. At
this juncture we require your bank support to come
out of these problems and to repay the amounts due
to your bank.
In this regard, we request you to inform us to the
exact outstanding amount payable to your bank as
on the date of our account became Non Performing
Asset (NPA) in your bank. We also request you to
waive off all the penal interests levied by your bank
on the Loan outstanding amount from the date of
account became irregular to till date of your
notification to us
It would be of great relief to us, if you can waive off
all the penal interests and penalties and other
charges levied on our account and inform us to enable
us to plan for repayments.
So in this regard we further request you to consider
this as One Time Settlement (OTS) option extended to
us. We also request you to allow us to repay the said
amount in at least 4 to 6 Instalments spread over a
period of one year.
We are highly indebted to your bank in supporting us
in all our tough times and believing us.
We are always committed for repayment of your
outstanding dues. Finally we request you not to issue
any public notifications or such actions which will
spoil our reputation as well as closes all options for
us to raise funds or to make alternative arrangements
to repay the loan outstanding amounts.
Kindly organise Consortium meeting or joint Lenders
Meeting at the earliest, preferably before 07 th
February 2020 to discuss and to come to an
understanding.
We hope that you will consider our humble request.
Kindly do the needful and oblige.
Looking forward to your favourable response.
Thanking you,
13
Yours Faithfully

        (Salalith Tottempudi)
        Managing Director”
8.   An argument based on
Section 25(3)
of the Contract Act,

1872 was examined by this court in Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd.
­vs­ Kew Precision Parts Private Limited and Others [(2022) 9

SCC 364]. We shall refer to this judgment henceforth as Kotak

Mahindra II. Analysing the provision of
Section 25 (3)
of the

Contract Act, 1872 this Court has held in this judgment:­

        “33. There is a distinction between acknowledgment
        under
Section 18
of the Limitation Act, 1963 and a
        promise within the meaning of
Section 25
of the
        Contract Act. Both promise and acknowledgment in
        writing, signed by a party or its agent authorised in
        that behalf, have the effect of creating a fresh starting
        of    limitation.  The     difference    is    that    an
        acknowledgment under
Section 18
of the Limitation
        Act has to be made within the period of limitation and
        need not be accompanied by any promise to pay. If
        an acknowledgment shows existence of jural
        relationship, it may extend limitation even though
        there may be a denial to pay. On the other hand,
Section 25(3)
is only attracted when there is an
        express promise to pay a debt that is time­barred or
        any part thereof. Promise to pay can be inferred on
        scrutinising the document. Only the promise should
        be clear and unconditional.”
9.   We accept the submission of the appellant that this letter was

a request to consider a one­time settlement. But again, in absence

of averments or pleading, after initiation of insolvency proceeding,
14
any promise made to pay the debt cannot be treated to have cured

the fault of limitation in a pre­existing action. A promise of this

nature would constitute an independent cause of action.
10. We shall now return to the point argued by the appellant that

the date of default should go back to the date on which the loan

account of the corporate debtor was declared as non­performing

asset. In the cases of B.K. Educational Services Private Limited

­vs­ Parag Gupta & Associates [(2019) 11 SCC 633] and Babulal

(supra), date of default has been treated to be the date on which

the limitation period starts ticking.   In Gaurav Hargovindbhai

Dave ­vs­ Asset Reconstruction Company (India) Limited and

Another [(2019) 10 SCC 572], the provision of
Article 137
to the
Limitation Act
was applied for computing the period of limitation.
But these authorities do not lay down a proposition of law which is

contrary to that laid down by the three­Judge Bench judgment of

this Court in the case of Kotak Mahindra I (supra). This Court, in

the case of Vashdeo R. Bhojwani ­vs­ Abhyudaya Co­operative

Bank Limited and Another [(2019) 9 SCC 158], on considering

the facts involved in that case, came to the finding that when the

recovery certificate was issued, the said certificate injured
15
effectively and completely the appellant's rights, as a result of

which limitation would have begun ticking. The recovery certificate

there was issued on 24.12.2001 and the financial creditor filed an

application under
Section 7
of the IBC before the NCLT on

21.07.2017. But in the said judgment also the date of recovery

certificate was treated to be the date on which the time of

limitation began to tick.
11. On behalf of the appellant, submissions have been made that

the banks having approached the DRT, were barred under the

doctrine of election from approaching the NCLT for recovery of

same set of debts.     This is a doctrine embodied in the law of

evidence, which bars prosecution of the same right in two different

fora based on the same cause of action. But so far as the present

appeal is concerned, the recovery proceedings before the DRT had

commenced in the year 2014. At that point of time, the IBC had

not come into existence. Moreover, it has been held by this Court

in Kotak Mahindra I (supra) that the recovery certificate itself

would give rise to a fresh cause of action entitling a financial

creditor to initiate Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP).
By this judgment, the right of the financial creditor to invoke the

mechanism under the IBC after issue of recovery certificate stood
16
acknowledged as a valid legal course. This Court, in that case also

dealt with the question of instituting a CIRP on the strength of

recovery certificate. Needless to add, such recovery certificate arose

out of a proceeding from the DRT. The enforcement mechanism for

a recovery certificate is an independent course, which a financial

creditor may opt for realisation of its dues crystalised under the

1993 Act, instead of chasing the mechanism under the 1993 Act.
The IBC itself is not really a debt recovery mechanism but a

mechanism for revival of a company fallen in debt, but the

procedure envisaged in the IBC substantially relates to ensuring

recovery of debts in the process of applying such mechanism. The

question of election between the fora for enforcement of debt under

the 1993 Act and initiation of CIRP under the IBC arises only after

a recovery certificate is issued. The reliefs under the two statutes

are different and once CIRP results in declaration of moratorium,

the enforcement mechanism under the 1993 Act or the
SARFAESI

Act
gets suspended. In such circumstances, after issue of recovery

certificate, the financial creditor ought to have option for enforcing

recovery through a new forum instead of sticking on to the

mechanism through which recovery certificate was issued. In the

case of Transcore ­vs­ Union of India and Another [(2008) 1 SCC
17
125], application of SARFAESI mechanism was held permissible

even though the subject­proceeding was instituted under the 1993

Act. Thus, the doctrine of election cannot be applied to prevent

the financial creditors from approaching the NCLT for initiation of

CIRP.
12. One factor which has come to our notice in course of hearing

is that one of the recovery certificates was issued on 08.09.2015.
We have already held that the letter dated 29.01.2020 cannot by

itself revive the debt though it could create an independent cause

of action. A question that arises now is as to whether the debts in

connection with the recovery certificate issued in the year 2015

could form subject matter of an application under
Section 7
of the

IBC filed on 06.09.2019. In the case of Kotak Mahindra I (supra),

it was held that CIRP could be brought within three years from the

date of issue of recovery certificate.
13.     What has been filed before the NCLT is a composite

application based on three recovery certificates, two of which have

been instituted within the three­year period as postulated in
Article 137
of the
Limitation Act
. The third recovery certificate was

issued in the year 2015. Thus, there is more than three years gap

between the date of issue thereof and the date of filing of the
18
application before the NCLT. But a recovery certificate under the

1993 Act is also clothed with the character of a deemed decree.
The provisions of
Section 19 (22A)
of the 1993 Act specifies :­

        “
Section 19
Application to the Tribunal: ­
        ………..
(22A) Any recovery certificate issued by the Presiding
        Officer under sub­section (22) shall be deemed to be
        decree or order of the Court for the purposes of
        initiation of winding up proceedings against a
        company registered under the
Companies Act, 2013
(18 of 2013) or Limited Liability Partnership
        registered under the
Limited Liability Partnership Act,
        2008
(6 of 2009) or insolvency proceedings against
        any individual or partnership firm under any law for
        the time being in force, as the case may be.]”



Life of a decree is twelve years for enforcement as per
Article 136
of

the schedule of
Limitation Act
. The said provision stipulates:­


      “Description        of   Period     of   Time from which period
      application              limitation      begins to run
136. For the execution    Twelve years. [When] the decree or
         of any decree                       order          becomes
         (other   than    a                  enforceable or where
         decree granting a                   the decree or any
         mandatory                           subsequent        order
         injunction)     or                  directs any payment of
         order of any civil                  money or the delivery
         court.                              of any property to be
                                             made at a certain date
                                             or at recurring periods,
                                             when      default     in
                                             making the payment or
                                             delivery in respect of
                                             which    execution    is
                                             sought, takes place:
Provided    that   an
19
application   for    the
                                               enforcement           or
                                               execution of a decree
                                               granting a perpetual
                                               injunction shall not be
                                               subject to any period of
                                               limitation.”
14. There is authority for the proposition that the time for

computing limitation period for filing an application under
Section

7
of the IBC would be guided by
Article 137
of the
Limitation Act
.
That is the ratio of this Court in the case of Kotak Mahindra I

(supra). The same authority has also analysed the position of a

recovery certificate as a deemed decree. It has been, inter­alia,

held in this judgment:­

        “79. From the plain and simple interpretation of the words
        used in sub­section (22­A) of Section 19 of the Debts
        Recovery Act, it would be amply clear that the legislature
        provided that for the purposes of winding­up proceedings
        against a company, etc. a recovery certificate issued by
        the Presiding Officer under sub­section (22) of Section 19
        of the Debts Recovery Act shall be deemed to be a decree
        or order of the Court. It is thus clear that once a recovery
        certificate is issued by the Presiding Officer under sub­
        section (22) of Section 19 of the Debts Recovery Act, in
        view of sub­section (22­A) of Section 19 of the Debts
        Recovery Act it will be deemed to be a decree or order of
        the Court for the purposes of initiation of winding­up
        proceedings of a company, etc. However, there is nothing
        in sub­section (22­A) of Section 19 of the Debts Recovery
        Act to imply that the legislature intended to restrict the use
        of the recovery certificate limited for the purpose of
        winding­up      proceedings.    The    contention     of   the
        respondents, if accepted, would be to provide something
20
which is not there in sub­section (22­A) of Section 19 of the
        Debts Recovery Act.
80. In any case, when the legislature itself has provided
        that any recovery certificate issued under sub­section (22)
        of Section 19 of the Debts Recovery Act will be deemed to
        be a decree or order of the court for initiation of winding­up
        proceedings, which proceedings are much severe in
        nature, it will be difficult to accept that the legislature
        intended that such a recovery certificate could not be used
        for initiation of CIRP, which would enable the corporate
        debtor to continue as an on­going concern and, at the
        same time, pay the dues of the creditors to the maximum.
        We, therefore, find no substance in the said submission.”
15. We have already referred to the provision of
Section 19(22A)
of

the 1993 Act. This Court has construed the purpose of the said

provision to include bringing an action under the IBC on the

strength of
Section 19(22)
and (22A) of the 1993 Act. In the said

provision, however, so far as bringing a winding­up action is

concerned,   the    right    of   a   recovery     certificate­holder    as   a

deemed­decree holder has been confined to companies registered

under the
Companies Act, 2013
and certain other entities with

which we are not concerned here. But in relation to initiating

proceeding under the IBC or making a claim under the said Code,

the restriction does not remain confined to the
Companies Act,

2013
. The corporate debtor in this proceeding was incorporated

under the
Companies Act, 1956
. In the case of Kotak Mahindra I

(supra), credit facilities were extended to the borrower entities in
21
the years 1993­94. It is obvious that the three corporate entities

involved in that case were incorporated under the
Companies Act
that prevailed prior to coming into operation of 2013 Act. The

position of law to guide the subject proceeding should be the same.
In the event a financial creditor wants to pursue a recovery

certificate as a deemed decree, he would get twelve years’ time. We

are of this view as the extent of operation of a recovery certificate

has been construed by this Court in Kotak Mahindra I (supra) to

go beyond filing of winding­up petition alone. It would retain the

character of a decree to lodge a claim in an IBC proceeding. But

this point has not been examined by the Appellate Tribunal. We

have already expressed our opinion on the reasons that weighed

with the Appellate Tribunal as also the NCLT in entertaining the

application. But since the first two fora did not test the legality of

the 2015 certificate as a deemed decree, we are of the opinion that

this question also ought to be addressed by the Appellate Tribunal.
We are otherwise not satisfied with the argument of the appellant

about maintainability of the application out of which this appeal

arises on the ground of the application being barred under

limitation. The application with respect to the two recovery

certificates issued in the year 2017 is maintainable. In the event
22
the Appellate Tribunal is of opinion that the CIRP could not lie so

far as the recovery certificate of 2015 is concerned, as the decree

would be still alive, the claim based on the said recovery certificate

could be segregated from the composite claim and the Committee

of Creditors shall, in that event, treat the sum reflected in the said

recovery certificate as part of the claims made in pursuance of the

public announcement. This direction we are issuing in exercise of

our jurisdiction under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India.
16. With these observations and directions, the appeal is

dismissed. Interim orders, if any, shall stand dissolved.
17. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
18. There shall be no order as to costs.
.................................J.
                                            (ANIRUDDHA BOSE)




                                             ...............................J.
                                            (VIKRAM NATH)

NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 18, 2023
23