[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Iffco Tokyo General Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Geeta Devi And Ors. on 30 October, 2023
Author:
Sanjay Kumar
Bench:
Sanjay Kumar
,
C.T. Ravikumar
2023 INSC 954                                                               Reportable


                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                           SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) No. 19992 OF 2023



          IFFCO Tokio General Insurance Co. Ltd.                       … Petitioner


                                                 Versus


          Geeta Devi and others.                                       … Respondents



                                               ORDER
SANJAY KUMAR, J
1.             IFFCO Tokio General Insurance Co. Ltd. seeks to assail the order

          dated 11.05.2023 of the Delhi High Court in MAC. APP. No. 914 of 2019.

          Thereby, the High Court reversed the Award dated 06.07.2018 passed by

          the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Rohini Courts, Delhi, in MAC Petition

          No. 4415 of 2016, to the extent it granted the right of recovery to the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NIRMALA NEGI
Date: 2023.10.30
petitioner-insurance company. Aggrieved by the denial of such right of
13:23:06 IST
Reason:
recovery, the petitioner-insurance company is before this Court.
1
2.      Facts, to the extent germane, may be noted: One Dharambir

suffered fatal injuries on 09.05.2010, when the Tempo vehicle bearing

Registration No. HR69D-0246, driven in a rash and negligent manner, hit

his motorcycle. His dependents, viz., his parents, widow and children,

approached the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Rohini Courts, Delhi,

under
Sections 140
and
166
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for brevity,

‘the Act of 1988’), seeking compensation. Ujay Pal, the driver of the Tempo

vehicle; Netra Pal Singh, the owner of the vehicle, who died during the

pendency of the case and was represented by his legal representatives,

viz., his mother, widow and minor son; and the petitioner-insurance

company were arrayed as the respondents in their claim petition. By Award

dated 06.07.2018, the Tribunal held in their favour and awarded them a

sum of ₹13,70,000/- as compensation with interest. However, the Tribunal

found that the driver of the Tempo had a fake driving licence and opined

that the petitioner-insurance company would not be liable to pay the

compensation. The Tribunal, therefore, directed the petitioner-insurance

company to deposit the awarded amount with liberty to recover the same

from the present owners of the Tempo. Aggrieved by this finding, the

owners of the vehicle filed an appeal in MAC. APP. No. 914 of 2019 before

the Delhi High Court, resulting in the impugned order dated 11.05.2023.
2
3.       The record reflects that Ujay Pal, the driver of the vehicle, had

produced a driving licence issued at Mathura at the time of his employment

and it was only after the accident that it came to light that the said licence

was not a genuine one. The widow of Netra Pal Singh, the deceased

vehicle owner, stated before the Tribunal that her husband had told her he

had taken a driving skill test after seeing the driving licence produced by

Ujay Pal, before employing him as a driver. However, the Record Clerk

from the ARTO, Mathura, testified that, as per their record, the licence

produced by Ujay Pal was fake as that licence number related to some

other person. In view of this evidence, the Tribunal held that the

petitioner-insurance company would not be liable, owing to a breach of the

terms and conditions of the insurance policy by the vehicle owner, and

granted the right of recovery to the petitioner-insurance company. However,

in appeal, the High Court opined that the petitioner-insurance company had

neither pleaded nor proved that the deceased vehicle owner did not take

adequate steps to verify the genuineness of the driving licence and in the

absence of such a plea on its part, the Tribunal could not have concluded

that there was a breach of the terms and conditions of the insurance policy.

The High Court, therefore, held that the petitioner-insurance company did

not have the right to recover the compensation from the vehicle owners.
3
4.       It would be apposite at this stage to note the statutory milieu

pertinent to this case.
Section 149
of the Act of 1988, to the extent relevant,

reads as under: -
‘149. Duty of insurers to satisfy judgments and awards against
            persons insured in respect of third party risks. -
(1) …..
(2) No sum shall be payable by an insurer under sub-section (1)
              in respect of any judgment or award unless, before the
              commencement of the proceedings in which the judgment or
              award is given the insurer had notice through the Court or, as
              the case may be, the Claims Tribunal of the bringing of the
              proceedings,……; and an insurer to whom notice of the bringing
              of any such proceedings is so given shall be entitled to be made
              a party thereto and to defend the action on any of the following
              grounds, namely:-
(a) that there has been a breach of a specified condition of
                 the policy, being one of the following conditions, namely: -
(i) …...; or
(ii) a condition excluding driving by a named person or
                    persons or by any person who is not duly licensed, or by
                    any person who has been disqualified for holding or
                    obtaining      a   driving       licence   during   the   period   of
                    disqualification; or………….’
5.       On behalf of the petitioner-insurance company, it was argued that

the hearsay evidence of the widow of the vehicle owner was accepted as

the biblical truth by the High Court without any corroboration thereof. This

argument was advanced in the context of the deceased vehicle owner
4
having taken a driving skill test of Ujay Pal prior to his employment as a

driver. It is pointed out that his widow admitted that she had not seen any

such test being taken and that her late husband had merely told her so

and, further, the inescapable fact also remains that the driving licence of

Ujay Pal, the driver of the vehicle, was a fake one.
6.       The argument with respect to the driving skill test does not merit

acceptance as the insurance policy in question admittedly did not postulate

that a driving skill test should compulsorily be taken before employing a

chauffeur to drive the insured vehicle. The relevant condition in the

insurance policy, titled ‘Driver Clause’, reads as follows:
‘Any person including insured: provided that the person
            driving holds an effective driving licence at the time of the
            accident and is not disqualified from holding or obtaining
            such a licence.’

      There is, thus, no mandate in the statutory provision or the above

clause that a driving skill test should be undertaken without fail before

employing a driver. Therefore, it is not open to the petitioner-insurance

company to cite the same as a breach of the terms and conditions of the

policy. In fact, there was no such term or condition in the policy.
7.        As regards the contention that the driver of the vehicle was not

duly licensed as he possessed a fake license, it may be noted that neither
Section 149(2)(a)(ii)
of the Act of 1988 nor the ‘Driver Clause’ in the subject
5
insurance policy provide that the owner of the insured vehicle must, as a

rule, get the driving licence of the person employed as a driver for the said

vehicle verified and checked with the concerned transport authorities.

Generally, and as a matter of course, no person employing a driver would

undertake such a verification exercise and would be satisfied with the

production of a licence issued by a seemingly competent authority, the

validity of which has not expired. It would be wholly impracticable for every

person employing a driver to expect the transport authority concerned to

verify and confirm whether the driving licence produced by that driver is a

valid and genuine one, subject to just exceptions. In fact, no such

mandatory condition is provided in any car insurance policy and it is not

open to the petitioner-insurance company, which also did not prescribe

such a stringent condition, to cite the failure of the deceased vehicle owner

to get Ujay Pal’s driving licence checked with the RTO as a reason to

disclaim liability under the insurance policy.
8.       In effect and in consequence, the petitioner-insurance company

cannot blithely claim that the deceased vehicle owner did not conduct due

diligence while employing Ujay Pal as a driver, by now insisting upon a

condition which was neither prescribed in the statute nor in the insurance

policy. More so, an unrealistic condition that every person employing a
6
driver must get the driving licence of such driver verified and confirmed by

the RTO concerned, irrespective of the actual necessity to do so.
9.         Useful reference in this regard may be made to
Skandia

Insurance Co. Ltd. vs. Kokilaben Chandravadan and others
1, wherein

this Court, in the context of
Section 96(2)(b)(ii)
of the Motor Vehicles Act,

1939, which is in pari materia with
Section 149(2)(a)(ii)
of the Act of 1988,

observed as under: -
‘14.
Section 96(2)(b)(ii)
extends immunity to the insurance
             company if a breach is committed of the condition excluding
             driving by a named person or persons or by any person who is not
             duly licensed, or by any person who has been disqualified from
             holding or obtaining a driving licence during the period of
             disqualification. The expression ‘breach’ is of great significance.
             The dictionary meaning of ‘breach’ is ‘infringement or violation of a
             promise or obligation’ (see Collins English Dictionary). It is
             therefore abundantly clear that the insurer will have to establish
             that the insured is guilty of an infringement or violation of a
             promise that a person who is duly licensed will have to be in
             charge of the vehicle. The very concept of infringement or violation
             of the promise that the expression ‘breach’ carries within itself
             induces an inference that the violation or infringement on the part
             of the promisor must be a wilful infringement or violation. If the
             insured is not at all at fault and has not done anything he should
             not have done or is not amiss in any respect how can it be
             conscientiously posited that he has committed a breach? It is only
             when the insured himself places the vehicle in charge of a person
1
(1987) 2 SCC 654
7
who does not hold a driving licence, that it can be said that he is
            ‘guilty’ of the breach of the promise that the vehicle will be driven
            by a licensed Driver. It must be established by the insurance
            company that the breach was on the part of the insured and that it
            was the insured who was guilty of violating the promise or
            infringement of the contract. Unless the insured is at fault and is
            guilty of a breach the insurer cannot escape from the obligation to
            indemnify the insured and successfully contend that he is
            exonerated having regard to the fact that the promisor (the
            insured) committed a breach of his promise. Not when some
            mishap occurs by some mischance. When the insured has done
            everything within his power inasmuch as he has engaged a
            licensed Driver and has placed the vehicle in charge of a licensed
            Driver, with the express or implied mandate to drive himself, it
            cannot be said that the insured is guilty of any breach.’
10.       The correctness of the aforesaid decision was considered by a

3-Judge Bench of this Court in
Sohan Lal Passi vs. P. Sesh Reddy
and

others2 and it was duly approved, with the following observations: -
‘In other words, once there has been a contravention of the
            condition prescribed in sub-section (2)(b)(ii) of
Section 96
, the
            person insured shall not be entitled to the benefit of sub-section
            (1) of
Section 96
. According to us,
Section 96(2)(b)(ii)
should not
            be interpreted in a technical manner. Sub-section (2) of
Section 96
only enables the insurance company to defend itself in respect of
            the liability to pay compensation on any of the grounds mentioned
            in sub-section (2) including that there has been a contravention of
            the condition excluding the vehicle being driven by any person
2
(1996) 5 SCC 21
8
who is not duly licensed. This bar on the face of it operates on the
            person insured. If the person who has got the vehicle insured has
            allowed the vehicle to be driven by a person who is not duly
            licensed then only that clause shall be attracted. In a case where
            the person who has got insured the vehicle with the insurance
            company, has appointed a duly licensed Driver and if the accident
            takes place when the vehicle is being driven by a person not duly
            licensed on the basis of the authority of the Driver duly authorised
            to drive the vehicle whether the insurance company in that event
            shall be absolved from its liability? The expression ‘breach’
            occurring in
Section 96(2)(b)
means infringement or violation of a
            promise or obligation. As such the insurance company will have to
            establish that the insured was guilty of an infringement or violation
            of a promise. The insurer has also to satisfy the Tribunal or the
            court that such violation or infringement on the part of the insured
            was wilful. If the insured has taken all precautions by appointing a
            duly licensed Driver to drive the vehicle in question and it has not
            been established that it was the insured who allowed the vehicle to
            be driven by a person not duly licensed, then the insurance
            company cannot repudiate its statutory liability under sub-section
            (1) of
Section 96
.’
11.       Thereafter, in
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs. Swaran Singh
and others3, a 3-Judge Bench of this Court dealt with the interpretation of
Section 149
of the Act of 1988. The cases before the Bench involved,

amongst others, instances where the driving licence produced by the driver

or owner of the vehicle was a fake one. The Bench noted that
Section
3
(2004)
3
SCC 297
9
149(2)(a) opened with the words: ‘that there has been a breach of a

specified condition of the policy’, which would imply that the insurer’s

defence of the action would depend upon the terms of the policy. It was

observed that an insurance company which wished to avoid its liability is

not only required to show that the conditions
laid down in
Section 149 (2)(a)
or (b) are satisfied but is further required to establish that there has been a

breach on the part of the insured. Such a breach on the part of the insured

must be established by the insurer to show that the insured used or caused

or permitted to be used the insured vehicle in breach of the provisions. The

Bench went on to state that where the insurer, relying upon the violation of

law by the assured, takes exception to pay the assured or a third party, it

must prove a willful violation of the law by the assured. Noting that the

proposition of law is no longer res integra that the person who alleges

breach must prove the same, the Bench observed that an insurance

company would be required to establish the said breach by cogent

evidence and in the event an insurance company fails to prove that there

has been breach of the conditions of the policy on the part of the insured,

such an insurance company cannot be absolved of its liability.
12.      Further, in the context of cases where the driver’s licence was

found to be fake, the Bench observed that the question would be whether
10
the insurer could prove that the owner was guilty of willful breach of the

conditions of the insurance policy. It was pointed out that the defence to the

effect that the licence held by the person driving the vehicle was a fake one

would be available to the insurance company but whether, despite the

same, the plea of default on the part of the owner has been established or

not would be a question which would have to be determined in each case.

The earlier decision in
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. vs. Lehru
and

others4 was considered and the Bench observed that the ratio therein must

not be read to mean that an owner of a vehicle can, under no

circumstances, have any duty to make an inquiry with regard to the

genuineness of the driving licence and the same would again be a question

which would arise for consideration in each individual case.
The argument

that the decision in
Lehru
(supra) meant that, for all intent and purport, the

right of the insurer to raise a defence that the licence was fake was taken

away was, however, rejected as not being correct and it was held that such

a defence can certainly be raised, but it will be for the insurer to prove that

the insured did not take adequate care and caution to verify the

genuineness or otherwise of the licence held by the driver. The findings

summed up by the Bench, to the extent presently relevant, are as under:
4
(2003) 3 SCC 338
11
‘(iii) The breach of policy condition e.g. disqualification of the driver
or invalid driving licence of the driver, as contained in sub-section
(2)(a)(ii) of
Section 149
, has to be proved to have been committed
by the insured for avoiding liability by the insurer. Mere absence,
fake or invalid driving licence or disqualification of the driver for
driving at the relevant time, are not in themselves defences
available to the insurer against either the insured or the third
parties. To avoid its liability towards the insured, the insurer has to
prove that the insured was guilty of negligence and failed to
exercise reasonable care in the matter of fulfilling the condition of
the policy regarding use of vehicles by a duly licensed driver or
one who was not disqualified to drive at the relevant time.
(iv) Insurance companies, however, with a view to avoid their
liability must not only establish the available defence(s) raised in
the said proceedings but must also establish “breach” on the part
of the owner of the vehicle; the burden of proof wherefor would be
on them.
(v) The court cannot lay down any criteria as to how the said
burden would be discharged, inasmuch as the same would
depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
(vi) Even where the insurer is able to prove breach on the part of
the insured concerning the policy condition regarding holding of a
valid licence by the driver or his qualification to drive during the
relevant period, the insurer would not be allowed to avoid its
liability towards the insured unless the said breach or breaches on
the condition of driving licence is/are so fundamental as are found
to have contributed to the cause of the accident. The Tribunals in
interpreting the policy conditions would apply “the rule of main
purpose” and the concept of “fundamental breach” to allow
defences available to the insurer under
Section 149(2)
of the Act.
12
(vii) The question, as to whether the owner has taken reasonable
            care to find out as to whether the driving licence produced by the
            driver (a fake one or otherwise), does not fulfil the requirements of
            law or not will have to be determined in each case.’
13.       More recently, in
Ram Chandra Singh vs. Rajaram and others
5,

the issue before this Court was whether an insurance company could be

absolved of liability on the ground that the insured vehicle was being driven

by a person who did not have a valid driving licence at the time of the

accident. This Court found that no attempt was made to ascertain whether

the owner was aware of the fake driving licence possessed by the driver

and held that it is only if the owner was aware of the fact that the licence

was fake but still permitted such driver to drive the vehicle that the insurer

would stand absolved. It was unequivocally held that the mere fact that the

driving licence was fake, per se, would not absolve the insurer.
14.       Applying the aforestated edicts to the case on hand, it may be

noted that the petitioner-insurance company did not even raise the plea

that the owner of the vehicle allowed Ujay Pal to drive the vehicle knowing

that his licence was fake. Its stand was that the accident had occurred due

to the negligence of the victim himself. Further, the insurance policy did not

require the vehicle owner to undertake verification of the driving licence of
5
(2018) 8 SCC 799
13
the driver of the vehicle by getting the same confirmed with the RTO.

Therefore, the claim of the petitioner-insurance company that it has the

right to recover the compensation from the owners of the vehicle, owing to

a willful breach of the condition of the insurance policy, viz., to ensure that

the vehicle was driven by a licenced driver, is without pleading and proof.
15.      As already pointed out supra, once a seemingly valid driving

licence is produced by a person employed to drive a vehicle, unless such

licence is demonstrably fake on the face of it, warranting any sensible

employer to make inquiries as to its genuineness, or when the period of the

licence has already expired, or there is some other reason to entertain a

genuine doubt as to its validity, the burden is upon the insurance company

to prove that there was a failure on the part of the vehicle owner in carrying

out due diligence apropos such driving licence before employing that

person to drive the vehicle. Presently, no evidence has been placed on

record whereby an inference could be drawn that the deceased vehicle

owner ought to have gotten verified Ujay Pal’s driving licence. Therefore, it

was for the petitioner-insurance company to prove willful breach on the part

of the said vehicle owner. As no such exercise was undertaken, the

petitioner-insurance company would have no right to recover the

compensation amount from the present owners of the vehicle. The
14
impugned order passed by the Delhi High Court holding to that effect,

therefore, does not brook interference either on facts or in law.
16.      These legal propositions being so well settled, it is indeed

shocking that insurance companies deem it appropriate to raise such pleas

as a matter of course, without reference to the facts of the given case

and/or the evidence available therein, and also consider it necessary to

carry such matters in appeal till the last forum, unmindful of the wastage of

valuable curial time and effort!

         The special leave petition is accordingly dismissed.
………………………..,J
                                                        (C.T. RAVIKUMAR)



                                                      ………………………..,J
                                                        (SANJAY KUMAR)
October 30, 2023;
New Delhi.
15