[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sudhir Singh vs State Of U.P. on 30 October, 2023
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
1

                                                                      REPORTABLE
                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CIVIL APPEAL No.          OF 2023
                      (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.12441 OF 2022)


                SUDHIR SINGH AND OTHERS                            … APPELLANTS
                                 A2: Ashok Kumar Tiwari
                                 A3: Raj Kumar Yadav
                                             VERSUS
                STATE OF U.P. AND OTHERS                           … RESPONDENTS

                                R2: Commissioner Rural Development, Lucknow
                                R3: District Development Officer, Badaun
                                R4: District Development Officer, Balrampur
                                R5: Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Service
                                Selection Commission through its Secretary
                                R6: Union of India, Ministry of Defence
                                R7: Directorate General of Resettlement
                                through its Secretary


                                       J U D G M E N T
AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
GEETA AHUJA
Date: 2023.10.30
18:50:52 IST
2.   Leave granted.
Reason:
2
3.    This appeal arises out of the Judgment and Order

passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad

(hereinafter      referred    to      as   the     “High   Court”)    in

Civil Misc. Writ (A) Petition No.4817 of 2020 dated

05.03.2022 (hereinafter referred to as the “Impugned

Judgment”) filed by the appellants by which their

claims     for    recruitment        on    the    posts    of   Village

Development Officers have been rejected.


THE FACTUAL PRISM:
4.    The appellants were serving in the Armed Forces

in various capacities, at the relevant time, when an

advertisement         was   issued        by     the   Uttar    Pradesh

Subordinate Service Selection Commission (hereinafter

referred to as the “Commission”) for recruitment to

the   post       of    Village       Development        Officer.     The

registration for applications commenced on 18.01.2016

and the last date of submission of the application

forms was 10.02.2016. The appellants applied in the

category     of       Ex-Servicemen        after       obtaining     No-
Objection Certificate(s) (hereinafter referred to as
3
“NOC”) from the employer(s). Initially, their result

    was withheld for various reasons but ultimately, they

    were        issued           appointment                letters         on     29.05.2019

    (appellants            no.1        &     2)     &     on     27.05.2019        (appellant

    no.3) respectively, on temporary basis. Worthwhile to

    note is that this was after the appellants were asked

    to appear before the Commission on 26.12.2018 with

    necessary documents pertaining to their qualification

    and more so with regard having equivalence to the

    Course of Computer Concept (hereinafter referred to

    as    the       “C.C.C.          Certificate”).                    However,    Show-Cause

    Notice       was       issued          by     the      respondent        no.3/District

    Development Officer, Badaun to the appellants no.1

    and     2      on      19.02.2020              and        to       appellant        no.3   on

    12.02.2020, as to why, their appointment be not held

    to be a nullity as on the last date of submission of

    application form, they were employed with the Armed

    Forces and could not be treated as Ex-Servicemen and

    further          that        they         did        not       possess        the     C.C.C.

    Certificate issued by the DOEACC1, now NIELIT2.
1
Department of Electronics and Accreditation of Computer Courses.
2
National Institute of Electronics & Information Technology.
4
5.     Subsequently, on 05.05.2020 (appellants no.1 &
2)     and   28.04.2020    (appellant      no.3)      respectively,

orders declaring the appellants’ appointments to be

null and void were issued for the afore-mentioned

reasons, as indicated in the Show-Cause Notice.


SUBMISSIONS BY THE APPELLANTS:
6.     Learned   counsel    for     the   appellants        submitted

that on both the grounds, the Show-Cause Notice was

erroneous. It was submitted that the conduct of the

authorities,      while    giving       them   time    to     produce

documents and the same having been accepted, shows

that     they    possessed        the     basic    and       relevant

qualification for appointment to the concerned posts.
7.     Learned counsel submitted that the date on which

the appellants can be deemed to be appointed is the

date on which the appointment letters were issued and

taking that into consideration in the present case,

when the appointment letters were actually issued in

May, 2019, prior thereto, the appellant no.1 stood
5
released    on    31.07.2016,     the   appellant    no.2     stood

released on 30.11.2016 and the appellant no.3 also

stood released on 29.02.2016, from the Armed Forces.

As far as non-possession of the C.C.C. Certificate is

concerned, the stand taken was that the appellants

having higher qualification than what was required as

also    already    having    an   equivalent     qualification,

their case(s) were recommended by the Commission for

appointment.
SUBMISSIONS BY THE STATE & ITS FUNCTIONARIES:
8.     Per contra, learned counsel for the State has

taken the stand of the appellants being ineligible

for appointment as they did not possess the requisite

qualification, the reason being that they were not

Ex-Servicemen as on the relevant date, when the post

was advertised.
9.     Further,   it   was   contended    that    none   of    the

appellants had the C.C.C. Certificate on the date of

the    advertisement,    which     they   had    concealed,     and
6
which       was    an     essential        qualification         for     being

appointed to the post advertised.
10.    Learned          counsel     submitted       that        not    having

disclosed the factual position at the time of filling

up the form amounted to grave misconduct. Moreover,

it was contended that even when the appellants were

directed to produce the educational testimonials and

documents         on    26.12.2018       to     demonstrate       that      they

possessed         equivalent        qualification         to    the    C.C.C.

Certificate,           they   could       not    produce       the    same    as

admittedly, the certificates produced by them were

not equivalent to C.C.C. Certificate.
11.    It    was       further     urged   that    the     stance      of    the

appellants for consideration as Ex-Servicemen on the

date    of    appointment          is    clearly     in    teeth       of    the

settled      principle        of    law    where    the        advertisement

itself was very clear that only Ex-Servicemen were

eligible to even apply.
7
12.    Learned counsel indicated that even in the NOC

issued to the appellant no.1, it was mentioned that

he     was    eligible       to    civil          appointment       after          the

particular date specified which was beyond the last

date for submission of application forms, and further

that the NOC also mentioned that the Office/Employer

had     no     objection          to       the      registration          of       the

appellant’s name with the Employment Exchange, which,

in    no     way,    could      confer        on       him    a   right       to   be

considered under the category of Ex-Servicemen. Thus,

learned counsel contended that the appellants, in any

view of the matter, could not have taken any civil

employment          unless       they        were       actually        relieved,

superannuated or retired, which ultimately would be a

decision       to    be    taken        by       the    employer        and    mere

indication in the certificate ipso facto would not

mean       that     on     the         date      indicated         they        would

automatically            come     within         the         category     of       Ex-

Servicemen.
8
13.    Learned counsel went to the extent of arguing

that    the     appellants’          conduct      indicates           a    fraud

committed       by     them.     It       was     advanced       that          the

appellants      had,    in     fact,      attempted       to    take       posts

which were meant for Ex-Servicemen who were actually

without    employment,         and       not    for    persons       who       were

still employed in the Armed Forces.
ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:
14.    Having        bestowed             anxious         thought               and

consideration to the rival submissions at the Bar

combined with a careful perusal of the record, we are

unable to find any error in the Impugned Judgment

passed by the High Court, much less any illegality,

warranting our interference. It is well-settled that

the    basic     question        on       eligibility          has        to    be

determined on the basis of the cut-off date/point of

time   which    stands       crystalized         by    the     date       of   the

advertisement        itself,         being       the     last        date        of

submission of application forms, unless extended by

the    authority     concerned.          In     the    present       scenario,
9
none of the appellants can be said to have been Ex-

Servicemen     at   the   time       of   the       advertisement       in

question,     as,   undisputedly,            they     were     still    in

service. This Court has also examined the relevant

rules   and     even      the        clarification(s)           to     the

advertisement.      We    are       afraid     that     they     do    not

indicate     that   the   appellants          can     be     deemed    Ex-

Servicemen from a prospective date, despite being in

actual service on the relevant date. As such, in the

case at hand at least, there is no concept of serving

personnel being deemed Ex-Servicemen. It would not be

proper for this Court to hold or interpret otherwise.

Arguendo, if we were to venture down such a path, it

would be unjust to a large number of others similarly

placed as the appellants, who were not Ex-Servicemen

as on the date of advertisement but came under the

category later, but did not apply at the relevant

time. This concern has not emanated for the first

time.
In
Rakesh Kumar Sharma v State (NCT of Delhi
),

(2013) 11 SCC 58, this Court observed:
10
‘22. It also needs to be noted that like
        the present appellant there could be large
        number of candidates who were not eligible
        as     per      the      requirement     of
        rules/advertisement since they did not
        possess the required eligibility on the
        last date of submission of the application
        forms.   Granting   any   benefit   to  the
        appellant would be violative of the
        doctrine of equality, a backbone of the
        fundamental rights under our Constitution.
        A large number of such candidates may not
        have applied considering themselves to be
        ineligible adhering to the statutory rules
        and the terms of the advertisement.’
                                (emphasis supplied)
15.    This     Court     would        pause         to    state       that        the

position      discussed         in     the      preceding        paragraph          is

logical       on   the      simple        premise         that      even      if     a

certification        is     given         to    a    person      indicating          a

prospective date till when he would be in employment,

circumstances        could      intercede           between      the     date       of

such    certificate            and        the       prospective        date         of

retirement/resignation/relieving                      indicated         therein.

Illustratively,           if     for       any       reason      there      is       a

proceeding/charge              pending          against       the      person(s)

concerned and/or there are circumstances for which

the    person      cannot      be    relieved         from    his    post      till
11
conclusion       of   such     proceedings       or   otherwise,     such

date indicated in the certificate cannot be taken as

the date of being finally and actually relieved from

service. However, in the instant situation, such date

is also prospective and much later to the date on

which the applications were invited and even till the

last date of submission of the application forms.

Thus, on this count alone, the appellants’ claim of a

right     to     consideration          under     the     Ex-Servicemen

category fails.
16.
In
Rakesh Kumar Sharma
(supra), this Court, after

noticing, inter alia,
Dr M V Nair v Union of India
,

(1993)    2     SCC     429;
Uttar    Pradesh        Public    Service

Commission v Alpana
, (1994) 2 SCC 723;
Bhupinderpal

Singh v State of Punjab
, (2000) 5 SCC 262, and;
State

of Gujarat v Arvindkumar T Tiwari
, (2012) 9 SCC 545

reiterated that basic qualification is to be adjudged

as   on   the    last    date    of   submission        of   application

forms, subject to any extension of such date by the

concerned       authority.
In
Rekha     Chaturvedi       (Smt.)   v
12
University of Rajasthan
, 1993 Supp (3) SCC 1683, the

       proposition was enunciated as under:
‘10. The contention that the required
                     qualifications of the candidates should be
                     examined with reference to the date of
                     selection and not with reference to the
                     last date for making applications has only
                     to be stated to be rejected. The date of
                     selection is invariably uncertain. In the
                     absence of knowledge of such date the
                     candidates who apply for the posts would
                     be unable to state whether they are
                     qualified for the posts in question or
                     not, if they are yet to acquire the
                     qualifications. Unless the advertisement
                     mentions a fixed date with reference to
                     which the qualifications are to be judged,
                     whether the said date is of selection or
                     otherwise, it would not be possible for
                     the candidates who do not possess the
                     requisite qualifications in praesenti even
                     to make applications for the posts. The
                     uncertainty of the date may also lead to a
                     contrary consequence, viz., even those
                     candidates    who   do    not    have    the
                     qualifications in praesenti and are likely
                     to acquire them at an uncertain future
                     date, may apply for the posts thus
                     swelling the number of applications. But a
                     still worse consequence may follow, in
                     that it may leave open a scope for
                     malpractices. The date of selection may be
                     so fixed or manipulated as to entertain
                     some   applicants   and    reject    others,
                     arbitrarily. Hence, in the absence of a
                     fixed     date     indicated      in     the
                     advertisement/notification          inviting
3
The Court though, opted not to disturb the appointments therein, on the ground that over 8 years of service had
been put in by the concerned appointees.
13
applications with reference to which the
       requisite qualifications should be judged,
       the only certain date for the scrutiny of
       the qualifications will be the last date
       for making the applications. …’
                              (emphasis supplied)
17. The Court, vide its judgment in
State of Bihar v

Madhu Kant Ranjan
, 2021 SCC OnLine SC 1262, also took

the view that ' As per the settled proposition of law,

a   candidate/applicant            has    to    comply     with    all   the

conditions/eligibility                  criteria      as        per      the

advertisement      before          the     cut-off       date     mentioned

therein unless extended by the recruiting authority.
18. In the above analysis, though the Court is not

required   to     go    into       the    question       of     equivalence

apropos the C.C.C. Certificate, but since contentions

thereon    were    argued,         we     may    reiterate        that   the

advertisement          clearly          specified        the      essential

qualification          was     a        C.C.C.      Certificate.         The

appellants despite opportunity to appear to show such

equivalence, having failed to do so, nothing survives

on this count.
14
19.   Having   considered     the    matter   in   toto,    the

appeal, being devoid of merit, stands dismissed. The

Impugned Judgment is upheld.
20.   However, any payments made to the appellants for

the   period   they   have   actually    worked    as   Village

Development Officers, shall not be recovered. If any

such recoveries have already been effected, the same

be returned to the appellants forthwith.
21. No order as to costs.
........................J.
                                               [VIKRAM NATH]




                                  ........................J.
                                      [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]

NEW DELHI
OCTOBER 30, 2023.