[Cites
17
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Mohamed Ibrahim vs The Chairman And Managing Director on 16 October, 2023
Author:
S. Ravindra Bhat
Bench:
Aravind Kumar
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
1


2023 INSC 914                                                                      REPORTABLE
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 6785 OF 2023
                            [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO(S). 12671 OF 2022]



             MOHAMED IBRAHIM                                                    …APPELLANT(S)


                                                        VERSUS


             THE CHAIRMAN & MANAGING
             DIRECTOR & ORS.                                                  …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                      JUDGMENT
S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.
1.              Leave granted. With consent the appeal was heard finally. The appellant
             is aggrieved by a judgment of the Madras High Court 1, which dismissed his
             petition, claiming arbitrariness in the declining of his candidature as Assistant
             Engineer (hereafter “AE”) (Electrical) by the Tamil Nadu Generation and
             Distribution Corporation Limited- (hereafter referred to as TANGEDCO or
             “Corporation” or “employer” variously), on the ground that he was colour
             blind. It is undeniable that he had completed the graduate degree course in
             electrical engineering, had also qualified in the recruitment process, and was
             selected for the post of AE.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2023.10.20
15:26:30 IST
Reason:
1 WA (MD) No. 1506/2021 dt. 30.7.2021.
2
2.      The brief facts of this case are that the appellant was appointed as
Assistant Engineer (Electrical) by the Superintendent’s Office, Karur in
20152and he joined the services on 31.3.20173. The corporation informed4 the
appellant about his selection and asked him to report to office of the
Superintendent, Karur on 15.04.2017.                    Later, he was asked to produce a
Physical Fitness Certificate from the Senior Civil Surgeon Government
Hospital, Kumbakonam after medical examination. After the examination, the
appellant was informed that he had colour defective vision (colour blindness).
By outpatient receipt (dated 15.04.2017) he was referred to Assistant Surgeon,
Govt. Hospital, Musiri, Trichy District. The Asst. Surgeon confirmed that he
had colour blindness and referred him to the Medical Board/ Ophthalmology
department of MGM Trichy. The Superintendent’s Office at Karur wrote letter
dated 31.10.2017 to the Medical Board, Thanjavur Medical College Hospital,
requesting the appellant’s medical examination and a report based on that
examination. The Regional Medical Board (hereafter “RMB”) asked the
appellant to appear for medical examination; he was told by the medical officer
that the report would be forwarded to the corporation. A report dated
23.02.20185, from RMB, Thanjavur was sent to the respondent, stating that: " ....
Fitness cannot be given for the patient since norms regarding colour vision not
provided by the employer (TNEB)".
3.      Aggrieved, appellant approached the Madras High Court, which by order
dated 11.03.20196 directed the employer to decide the case in accordance with
the RMB Report. The Medical Board, Thanjavur issued Report dated
05.07.2019 for the persons with Disabilities in consideration of the appellant’s
case. Subsequently, the corporation’s office sent a letter, cancelling the
2 A notification No. 01/15 dated 28.12.2015 was published for direct recruitment to the posts of Assistant
Engineer (Electrical), Assistant Engineer (Mechanical) and Assistant Engineer (Civil) in the Respondent
Corporation.
3 vide Memo No. 02972I360IAdm.I./A1/ F. Appt. order/2017-7 dated 31.03.2017 by the Superintendent Office,
Karur.
4 vide letter of selection bearing No. 024396/ 108/G.55/G.551/2015 dated 30.03.2017.
5 bearing No. 13278/MB/2017.
6 In WP(MD)No. 2255/2019.
3
appellant’s selection, pursuant to the medical report dated 5.12.2019. The
appellant’s services were terminated with effect from 14.05.2020.
4.     Aggrieved, the appellant approached the Madras High Court7 through
appropriate proceedings under
Article 226.
The High court by order dated
17.03.2021 allowed the petition and directed appointment of the appellant to the
post of AE (Electrical), with effect from 31.03.2017 (the date of his original
appointment) and observed:
“7. The Superintending Engineer, in his letter dated 15.04.2017, has assumed
       that the petitioner had '"colour blindness"' which, was not backed with any
       medical report. Likewise, the Chief Engineer (Personal), in the impugned
       order of rejection has also termed the petitioner's eye condition as "colour
       blindness". On the contrary, the medical experts attached to the
       Ophthalmological Department of the two Hospitals referred above, were
       clearly of the view that there was only a 'defective colour vision' and not
       "colour blindness". There is a huge difference between '"colour blindness"'
       and 'defective colour vision'. In the case of defective colour vision, the person
       with such defect could perform his normal routine life, if the defectiveness is
       minimal and probably, if the defectiveness was to be maximum, may be such
       candidate may have some inconvenience in his routine vision.
8. Admittedly, such norms have not been prescribed in the notification dated
       28.12.2015 calling for applications to the post of Assistant Engineer
       (Electrical), nor does the recruitment regulations of TANGEDCO prescribe
       these norms. While the medical experts have not certified the fitness of the
       petitioner's colour vision, the respondents seem to have unilaterally come to a
       conclusion that the defectiveness in 'colour vision’ opined by the medical
       expert, would be to such a percentage as to hamper the regular duties of an
       Assistant Engineer (Electrical). Such a decision is not based on intelligible
       differentia. No reliance has been placed on expert reports or any other
       material for the respondents to arrive at such a conclusion. "
9. The impugned order seems to place much reliance on the duties,
       responsibilities and functions for the post of an Assistant Engineer
       (Electrical). In order to ascertain as to whether a candidate holding the post
       would be disentitled or unfit to perform such duties, functions or
       responsibilities, the determination requires to be made on the basis of some
       materials supported by the reports of medical experts. In the absence of such
       materials or medical report and merely relying upon the duties, functions and
       responsibilities for the post of Assistant Engineer (Electrical), would be
       illogical and baseless and hence, such reasoning rendering the petitioner
       'unfit', could be termed as 'arbitrary'.”
7 W.P.(MD) No.15115 of 2020.
4
5.      Aggrieved by the above single judge order of the High Court, the
employer- TANGEDCO, preferred writ appeal8 before the Division Bench of
the High Court. The bench was of the opinion that employer had taken all
relevant facts into consideration and having regard to the nature of the duties to
be discharged in relation to the post i.e., AE by the appellant and observed:
“7. All that TANGEDCO communicated to the petitioner was that the special
        committee constituted to look into the petitioner's case had opined that the
        petitioner would not be fit to discharge the duties involved in such post. There
        is always a presumption that a statutory body or an authority answering to
        that description under
Article 12
of the Constitution would have acted in a
        reasonable manner and would have taken relevant considerations into
        account before passing an order or arriving at a decision. While such
        presumption may be rebuttable, the writ petitioner does not indicate any
        manifest arbitrariness in the impugned decision of TANGEDCO for the Court
        to perceive the same to be grossly disproportionate to the condition that the
        writ petitioner suffers from or the handicap that accompanies such
        condition.”
6.      Aggrieved, the appellant approached this court under
Article 136
and
argued that the initial notification9 for the post did not specify any qualifying
criteria with regard to vision or colour blindness. Therefore, it was submitted
that the absence of any specific qualifying criteria in the notification,
TANGEDCO’s action preventing the appellant from joining his duties is
arbitrary and illegal. It was further argued that, following the High Court order
dated 11.03.201910, the appellant was examined by the RMB, Thanjavur and in
its report, the expert opined that the appellant had defective colour vision; its
report was not specific about whether the condition could affect his duties as
there were no specified visual norms for colour vision. In fact, the RMB also
noted that the employer had not set out the required norms and it was hence not
possible to opine whether the appellant could or could not perform his duties.
The appellant relied upon the report of Aravind Eye Hospital and Post-Graduate
8 W.A.(MD) No.506 of 2021.
9 No. 1/2015 dated 28.12.2015
10 In W.P.(MD)No. 2255/2019.
5
Institute of Ophthalmology, Chennai which stated that he could identify red as
orange colour and green and blue as lighter shades of those colures.
7.    This court, by its order dated 24.1.2023, requested TANGEDCO to
explore the feasibility of accommodating the appellant. TANGEDCO, in its
additional affidavit, submitted that such accommodation was not possible since
the appellant was selected for a particular post which requires him to be in the
field for at least 10 years of his career. This role involved visual inspection of
machinery with specific colour coding. TANGEDCO further submitted that the
AE’s post is a technical position which involve colour coded cables and gadgets
that require awareness of colours. The lack of their awareness could pose a risk
to the appellant’s safety and that of general public.
8.    TANGEDCO, in its additional affidavit, urged that the appellant had not
joined its services, nor worked for a day. His colour blindness came to light
before he was permitted to join duty and hence, the provisions of Disabilities
Act would not be applicable. This court, by order dated 5.4.2023, directed an
independent ophthalmologist to facilitate the visual examination of the appellant
and give its report in sealed colour. The report was received, after which
TANGEDCO reiterated its original position, declining to accommodate the
appellant in any position- administrative, planning, or other general department.
The appeal was heard, in these circumstances.
9.    TANGEDCO admits that there are no norms fixed by it as eligibility
conditions for selection to the post of AE, vis-à-vis colour vision norms.
However, it argued that as a public employer, the fitness of a selected candidate
to discharge the functions required of the post, advertised, and for which a
candidature is held out by an eligible applicant, having proper colour vision, is a
necessary criterion. It was highlighted that an AE holds a fairly responsible
position, inasmuch as initially the holder of the post, has to carry out routine
inspections, to verify the work done by Linemen, Technical assistants, who are
then supervised by Junior Engineers-II. Counsel for TANGEDCO, after
6
obtaining instructions, on the previous date of hearing, stated that the appellant
can be accommodated as Junior Assistant, in view of his being an engineering
graduate, as holder of a degree, and that “the promotional avenues for the post
of Junior Assistant/Administration are Assistant/Administration, Administrative
Supervisor, Assistant Administrative Officer, Administrative Officer and Senior
Administrative officer and all these posts does not have any Technical, colour
related, electrical live environment nature of work.”

Contentions
10.     TANGEDCO relies upon two single judge decisions of the Gujarat High
Court (
Tusharkumar Karsanbhai Vinzuda v. State of Gujarat11
and
Bhavesh
Khimabhai Pandit v. State of Gujarat12
) and a Division Bench judgment in
Tushar Karsanbhai Vinzubhai v. Paschim Gujarat Vij Co. Ltd.
13. In these three
judgments, Gujarat High Court dealt with colour blindness of candidates, who
had applied for the post of Technical Assistants, in electrical utilities [much like
TANGEDCO] and after considering the report of the experts upheld the
rejection of application for recruitment on the ground that the post required its
holder to “deal with live wires, especially during installation where the colour
of the wires is of prime importance”.
Reliance was also placed on Sutton Et Al.
v. United Air Lines, Inc.14 where the claimants had possessed poor visual acuity
(20/200 on one eye and 20/400 in another eye). The appellants had sought
employment as commercial airlines pilots which were declined based upon
federal aviation administration certification qualifications. The standard
prescribed was a vision of 20/100. The US Supreme Court, upon an
interpretation of the term “disability” under the relevant law 15 held that it was a
condition which was a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits
11 SCA No.8611/2020, decided on 08.02.2022.
12 SCA 2916/2022, decided on 11.02.2022.
13 C/LPA 331/2022, decided on 23.09.2022.
14 527 US 471 (1999).
15 42 U. S. C. § 12102(2)(A).
7
one or more of the life activities of such individual, was held that the claim was
not established. The Court held that:
“To be substantially limited in the major life activity of working, then, one
      must be precluded from more than one type of job, a specialized job, or a
      particular job of choice. If jobs utilizing an individual’s skills (but perhaps not
      his or her unique talents) are available, one is not precluded from a
      substantial class of jobs. Similarly, if a host of different types of jobs are
      available, one is not precluded from a broad range of jobs.”
11.   TANGEDCO, in its additional affidavit states that its Chief Engineer
(Personnel), by her additional affidavit disclosed its stated position that
appellant’s colour blindness came to light before he was permitted to join duties
and further that:
“6.     I humbly state that the Petitioner applied for the post of Assistant
      Engineer and the same is a technical position which will involve cables and
      other gadgets having colour coding. I state that being so it is extremely
      essential to be aware of the colours, lack of which, would result in risk to the
      petitioner’s own safety and that of the general public and also the equipments
      installed for Generation and Distribution of supply to the public.
7.      I humbly submit that the Assistant Engineers/Electrical (Trainee) has
      to work both in the field and in the offices to complete their training period.
      An Assistant Engineer cannot be utilized completely for office works for
      almost ten years or more and thereafter in the promoted post of Assistant
      Executive Engineer also. The colour defectiveness will certainly impair the
      petitioner’s ability to perform the duties and responsibilities of Assistant
      Engineer/Electrical (Trainee). The petitioner herein with the qualification of a
      Bachelor of Engineering in Electrical and Electronics Engineering and
      having colour defectiveness cannot be considered to be accommodated in the
      same post i.e. Assistant Engineer/Electrical (Trainee) in TANGEDCO.”
12.   During the course of hearing, Mr. Mehmood Umar Faruqui, an AOR who
was present in the courtroom offered his assistance. He had collected
considerable case laws and literature on this subject. The court expresses its
gratitude for his valuable contribution and efforts.
13.   On behalf of the appellant, Mr. A. Velan, learned Advocate had appeared.
It was argued that the report of the Sankara Nethralaya Hospital which was
8
sought, dated 26.05.2023 used the reputed “Ishihara Pseudo Isochromatic
Plates” based test. The material portion of the test revealed that he had mild
colour vision deficiency. The conclusions of the Sankara Nethralaya Eye
Hospital were as follows:
“3.     On the above tests, he was diagnosed to have mild colour vision
      deficiency.
a)      With Ishihara colour vision screening test except for the demo plate,
      he did not provide correct response to other plates.
b)     With AO - HRR test, he was able to identify the demo plates and with
      the
      diagnostic plates, he responded for two of the milder form protan plates.
c)      In FM 100 hue test, he was able to perform without any delay and he
      reconfirmed that
      he understood the test.
d)     He was able to perform the wire matching test with fluency (Figure 1).
e)     On signal test, he was making errors and confused it with yellow.
4.      He was then taken to the "on the field test" for observing his
      capabilities at work station. The test was conducted at the work station of
      TANGEDCO situated at 141, Anna Salai, Chennai-600 002). He was asked to
      read out the colours of the display panels appeared on the monitor of the
      computer system. He was making errors when the colour comes closer to
      yellow. He was misreading that colour as lighter shade of green which is
      actually yellow.
5.      On the control panel large display unit, he was asked to read out
      signals and also the numbers written in various colours. He was able to read
      the numbers and text without any difficulty. He was also able to identify the
      coloured arrow marks. (We are unable to provide picture as we were not
      allowed to take photo quoting confidentiality).
6.     At the Chennai Distribution Control Unit, he was asked to identify the
      colours on the distribution line charts. He was able to identify majority of the
      colours but made errors with colours yellow and green closely placed.
7.      He was also made to identify wires in the control room station. He
      identified majority of the colours but made errors with brown and orange
      coloured wires and also with green and yellow coloured wires.
8.    After the field visit, dilated fundus examination was performed. Retina,
      macula and optic nerve head appeared to be normal for both eyes.”

      OBSERVATION:
1. With the above findings observed during the examination conducted and
9
considering his job profile, we conclude that he could encounter errors while
       reading the distribution line charts which is crucial for the job profile of AE's
       to make judgment on the running of the lines.
2.     He also has confusion when it comes to lighter shades of colours of
       green and red.”
14.    The appellant also relies upon Nandkumar Narayanrao Ghodmare v.
State of Maharashtra16         where the court had to deal with an aspirant to the
position of Agriculture Officer. He was assessed to colour blindness. The court
directed that the disorder or so-called defect should not constitute a bar to
appointment and that he should be provided employment, commensurate with
the organisation’s other requirements. The court was of the view that except
some posts, there were other positions in the cadre that needed no perfect colour
vision and that persons with colour blindness would also be accommodated. The
court therefore directed the State to grant employment. Reliance also was placed
upon the more recent judgment in
Pranay Kumar Poder v. State of Tripura17
where the Court highlighted the features of the Ishihara colour vision test. It was
emphasized that colour vision deficiency is neither impairment of vision and in
that sense falling within the disability spectrum calling for treatment under the
Rights of Persons with
Disabilities Act, 2016
nor is it of such condition as to bar
sufficiently qualified persons’ entitlement to be employed in an organization
that can accommodate her educational attainments and talents.
Learned counsel
also relied upon
Ashutosh Kumar v. Film and Television Institute of India
18
where like in the present case, the expert body which is the All India Institute of
Medical Sciences (AIIMS) reported that the petitioner suffered from colour
vision deficiency. The FTII had refused him admission. The court referred to the
technical experts’ report, and stated that the overall emphasis of the course- the
admission of which was sought placed emphasis on appreciation of art and

16 1995 (Supp 4) SCR 565.
17 2017 (2) SCR 797.
18 [2022] 16 S.C.R 1094.
10
culture, of innovation, intuitiveness unrestricted by impediments which can be
overcome by assistance. The court was therefore of the opinion that that despite
the colour vision deficiency, the applicant should be granted admission.
15.   It is further pointed out that in the hierarchy of posts, the junior most
would be a lineman; the next in line would be a Technical Assistant, who is a
diploma holder; above whom would be the Junior Engineer (Grade-II). It was
emphasized that the Junior Engineer (Grade-II) would thus supervise and
oversee the work of Technical Assistants and Lineman who would be the
individuals or employees responsible to actually visit the site. The AE would be
in a position therefore, fourth in the hierarchy above the Lineman, Technical
Assistant and Junior Engineer (Grade-II). It was highlighted -based upon the
organizational division of the corporation that there are several branches where
Assistant Engineers are accommodated. For instance, the AE who functions as a
Section Officer, can also be asked to participate as AE (Substation
Maintenance). In other words, these posts are inter-changeable. Likewise, the
AE (Shift Engineer) is inter-changeable with Substation Maintenance
Department AEs. The AEs are also expected to work in the office of the
Superintending Engineer (SE). They can be deployed to work as AE (Material
Management) or AE (CAUP) in the office of the Executive Engineer or even as
AE (General) in the office of the SE office only. The AE (General) in the office
of the SE can interchangeably use for AE (Lines) in the Substation.
16.   It was argued that there are sufficient safeguards to ensure that a person
like the appellant can be posted in a position in not merely in one department
but several departments or units which may not require actual field
participation. It is also emphasized that the mandate of accommodation or
reasonable accommodation requires the employer to ensure that every person’s
talent is utilized to the utmost, within the limitations that she or he is placed in,
11
inadvertently. Therefore, the employer in the present case, was clearly under a
duty to accommodate the appellant and continue with his employment.
Analysis and Conclusions
17.   As noticed earlier, TANGEDCO, has nowhere indicated in express terms,
that colour vision deficiency, in any form or degree, is a bar to employment for
AE. Its broad argument that a candidate’s level of medical fitness necessary for
the discharge of functions and responsibilities, required of the post, is
unexceptionable. Yet, that broad formulation is not sufficient ground for it to
deny the possibility of any form of accommodation. The need- nay, the
entitlement of the appellant to some form of accommodation, in this case, is
undeniable, because he is a graduate in electrical engineering. This implies that
he has more than basic or essential knowledge of the subject; he has awareness
and experience in respect of identification of functions of various kinds of
electrical equipment and appliances.         A precondition for successfully
completing a course in electrical engineering, is practical experience during the
course, about the functions of such equipment and appliances, the possible
defects and solutions for their breakdown. The facts of this case instruct us that
there is nothing on record to suggest that whatever condition the appellant had,
was without his awareness; his academic performance, skill and proficiency,
during the course of his education nowhere appears to have highlighted the
colour vision deficiency, which appears to have been discovered after his
selection. As a condition for his selection, he cleared the public examination
successfully, and appears to have also participated in the viva voce or interview,
successfully.
18.   The provisions of the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities Act, 2016
(hereafter “the Act”) were preceded by the previous law, the Persons with
Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights, and Full Participations)
Act, 1995. The previous law, was enacted by Parliament pursuant to our country
12
becoming a signatory to the Proclamation on the Full Participation and Equality
of the People with Disabilities in the Asian and Pacific Region 19. The earlier
Act, as well as the Act have set out provisions to enable participation, and
empowerment of persons with disability (PWD), including affirmative action
for their admission to educational institutions, entry level reservations in
established controlled by the state or its agencies, and general provisions to
enable physical access to institutions; it also mandates provisioning of existing
institutions, to accommodate PWDs, in physical infrastructure, and at all points
to enhance full participation and functioning of such individuals. Its provisions
defining “disability” and persons with disabilities20, are fairly elaborate;
interestingly these concepts are defined in an inclusive manner, lead to
potentialities for their use. However, at the same time, the actual benefits in the
form of affirmative action are defined by a specific category of PWDs
(orthopaedical, visual, hearing, mental, etc.) and tied to the context of
“benchmark” disabilities21, which entitles those PWDs who qualify with a
certain threshold of disability (40 per cent or more) to the affirmative action and
other similar benefits22. The nature of inclusion of specified categories only to

19 A Meeting held to to Launch the Asian and Pacific Decade of Disabled Persons 1993-2002 convened by the
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and Pacific held at Beijing on 1st to 5th December,1992, adopted the
Proclamation on the Full Participation and Equality of People with Disabilities in the Asian and Pacific Region.
20
Section 2 (s)
defines as follows: ‘“person with disability” means a person with long term physical, mental,
intellectual or sensory impairment which, in interaction with barriers, hinders his full and effective
participation in society equally with others;’
21 Which is defined by
Section 2 (r)
: ““person with benchmark disability” means a person with not less than
forty per cent. of a specified disability where specified disability has not been defined in measurable terms and
includes a person with disability where specified disability has been defined in measurable terms, as certified by
the certifying authority;”
22
Section 33
of the Act reads as follows: Identification of posts for reservation-
The appropriate Government shall—
(i) identify posts in the establishments which can be held by respective category of persons with
benchmark disabilities in respect of the vacancies reserved in accordance with the provisions of
section 34
;
(ii) constitute an expert committee with representation of persons with benchmark disabilities for
identification of such posts; and
(iii) undertake periodic review of the identified posts at an interval not exceeding three years.
34. Reservation. — (1) Every appropriate Government shall appoint in every Government
establishment, not less than four per cent. of the total number of vacancies in the cadre strength in each group
of posts meant to be filled with persons with benchmark disabilities of which, one per cent. each shall be
reserved for persons with benchmark disabilities under clauses (a), (b) and (c) and one per cent. for persons
with benchmark disabilities under clauses (d) and (e), namely:—
(a) blindness and low vision;
(b) deaf and hard of hearing;
13
the exclusion of other categories of disabilities, on the one hand, and the
eligibility of a threshold, in the opinion of this court, constitute barriers.
19.
The Act
contains a general non-discriminatory provision:
“3. Equality and non-discrimination.
(1) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the persons with
        disabilities enjoy the right to equality, life with dignity and respect for his or
        her integrity equally with others. (2) The appropriate Government shall take
        steps to utilise the capacity of persons with disabilities by providing
        appropriate environment.
(3) No person with disability shall be discriminated on the ground of
        disability, unless it is shown that the impugned act or omission is a
        proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim.
(4) No person shall be deprived of his or her personal liberty only on the
        ground of disability.
(5) The appropriate Government shall take necessary steps to ensure
        reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities.”
20.     The twin conditions of falling within defined categories, and also a
threshold condition of a minimum percentage, of such disabilities, in fact are a
barrier. The facts of this case demonstrate that the appellant is fit, in all senses
of the term, to discharge the duties attached to the post he applied and was
selected for. Yet, he is denied the position, for being “disabled” as he is colour
blind. At the same time, he does not fit the category of PWD under the lexicon
of the universe contained within the Act. These challenges traditional
understandings of what constitute “disabilities”. The court has to, therefore,
travel beyond the provisions of the Act and discern a principle which can be
rationally applied.
(c) locomotor disability including cerebral palsy, leprosy cured, dwarfism, acid attack victims and
muscular dystrophy;
(d) autism, intellectual disability, specific learning disability and mental illness;
(e) multiple disabilities from amongst persons under clauses (a) to (d) including deaf-blindness in the
posts identified for each disabilities:
Provided that the reservation in promotion shall be in accordance with such instructions as are issued
by the appropriate Government from time to time:
Provided further that the appropriate Government, in consultation with the Chief Commissioner or the
State Commissioner, as the case may be, may, having regard to the type of work carried out in any Government
establishment, by notification and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in such notifications
exempt any Government establishment from the provisions of this section.
14
21.
In
Jeeja Ghosh v. Union of India23
this court observed:
“40. In international human rights law, equality is founded upon two
       complementary principles: non-discrimination and reasonable differentiation.
       The principle of non-discrimination seeks to ensure that all persons can
       equally enjoy and exercise all their rights and freedoms. Discrimination
       occurs due to arbitrary denial of opportunities for equal participation. For
       example, when public facilities and services are set on standards out of the
       reach of persons with disabilities, it leads to exclusion and denial of
       rights. Equality not only implies preventing discrimination (example, the
       protection of individuals against unfavourable treatment by introducing anti-
       discrimination laws), but goes beyond in remedying discrimination against
       groups suffering systematic discrimination in society. In concrete terms, it
       means embracing the notion of positive rights, affirmative action and
       reasonable accommodation.”
22.
Ravinder Kumar Dhariwal v. Union of India24
highlighted on the right to
equality and underlined the two aspects: formal equality and substantive
equality.
It stated that substantive equality aims at producing equality of
outcomes, and in the context of the case, observed that the “principle of
reasonable accommodation is one of the means for achieving substantive
equality, pursuant to which disabled individuals must be reasonably
accommodated           based   on   their    individual     capacities.”      The      court
recollected
Vikash Kumar v. Union Public Service Commission25
, which held as
follows “The principle of reasonable accommodation acknowledges that if
disability” should be remedied and opportunities are “to be affirmatively
created for facilitating the development of the disabled. Reasonable
accommodation is founded in the norm of inclusion. Exclusion results in the
negation of individual dignity and worth or they can choose the route of
reasonable accommodation, where each individual's dignity and worth is
respected.”
23.    It was also noted that provisions of Chapters VII and VIII of the Act are
in furtherance of the principle of reasonable accommodation which is a
23 [2016] 4 SCR 638.
24 2021 (13) SCR 823
25 2021 (12) SCR 311
15
component of the guarantee of equality. This has been recognised by a line of
precedent. This court, in multiple cases has held that the principle of reasonable
differentiation, recognising the different needs of persons with disabilities is a
facet of the principle of equality.
24.   The significant impact of
Vikash Kumar
(supra) is that the case dealt with
a person with a chronic neurological condition resulting in Writer’s Cramp,
experiencing extreme difficulty in writing. He was denied a scribe for the civil
services exam by the UPSC, because he did not come within the definition of
person with benchmark disability (40% or more of a specified disability). This
court, rejected this stand, and held him to be a person with disability. It was also
stated that the provision of scribe to him fell within the scope of reasonable
accommodation. The Court said:
“… the accommodation which the law mandates is ‘reasonable’ because it
      has to be tailored to the requirements of each condition of disability. The
      expectations which every disabled person has are unique to the nature of the
      disability and the character of the impediments which are encountered as its
      consequence…”
25.   The appellant is, for all purposes, treated as a person with disability, but
does not fall within the categories defined in the Act, nor does he possess the
requisite benchmark eligibility condition. The objective material on the record
shows that the colour vision impairment is mild. Yet, TANGEDCO’s concerns
cannot be characterised as unreasonable. However, TANGEDCO is under an
obligation to work under the framework of “reasonable accommodation”, which
is defined by
Section 2 (y)
as follows:
“(y) “reasonable accommodation” means necessary and appropriate
      modification and adjustments, without imposing a disproportionate or undue
      burden in a particular case, to ensure to persons with disabilities the
      enjoyment or exercise of rights equally with others;..”
26.   Reasonable accommodation thus, is “appropriate modification and
adjustments” that should be taken by the employer, in the present case, without
that duty being imposed with “disproportionate or undue burden”.
16
TANGEDCO- the employer expresses its willingness to accommodate the
appellant. Yet the position it offers, is highly inadequate: that it is belated, is
beside the point. In the considered view of this court, the post offered, i.e.,
Junior Assistant, is inconsistent with the appellant’s qualification which cannot
be offered to him; the offer is a mere palliative gesture, which he justifiably
rejected.
27.   TANGEDCO, during the hearing was unable to show how it employing
the appellant in one of the many departments or units [as AE (Material
Management) or AE (CAUP) in the office of the Executive Engineer or even as
AE (General) in the office of the SE or as AE (General)] is not possible. The
hierarchy of posts further indicates that the primary inspection responsibilities
of technical nature are upon Junior Engineers, who oversee the work of
Technical Assistants, and that of Linemen. It is evident that the AE works at a
position of overseeing supervisory work of Junior Engineers. This could
involve, at the field stage, satisfaction after visual inspection. Sufficient
safeguards (whenever the appellant’s services in that regard are absolutely
essential, and he is deployed on some occasions) can be taken, to ensure that he
is accompanied by those without any colour vision deficiencies or impairments.
TANGEDCO’s units and organizational structure, in this court’s opinion, have
sufficient possibility for accommodating the appellant in a unit or department
which may not require utilization of skills that involve intense engagement with
colour. As stated earlier, these are AE (General) in SE office, AE (CAUP) in EE
office; AE (Material Management). The TANGEDCO, is under an obligation to
ensure that the appellant is therefore, suitably accommodated in any such
general department or establishment.
28.   In view of the foregoing discussion, the impugned judgment cannot
stand; it is set aside. TANGEDCO, the respondent corporation, is directed to
appoint and continue the appellant in its service, as AE (Electrical) at the
appropriate stage of the grade of pay, from the date he was terminated from
17
service, or his appointment was cancelled, and accommodate him in a suitable
department, where he can be given appropriate responsibilities. The appellant
shall also be entitled to 50% of full arrears of salary, and all allowances, and his
service shall be reckoned from the original date of appointment, (which was
later cancelled), with full continuity.    The appeal is allowed in these terms,
without order on costs.
...............................................J.
                                                   [S. RAVINDRA BHAT]




                                                    ..............................................J.
                                                    [ARAVIND KUMAR]


NEW DELHI,
OCTOBER 16, 2023.