[Cites
78
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Mumtaz Yarud Dowla Wakf vs M/S Badam Balakrishna Hotel Pvt. Ltd. on 20 October, 2023
Author:
M. M. Sundresh
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
,
M. M. Sundresh
2023 INSC 949                                                                              REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.                     OF 2023
                                      [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 997 of 2022]


          MUMTAZ YARUD DOWLA WAKF                                                  … APPELLANT(S)

                                                          VERSUS

          M/S BADAM BALAKRISHNA
          HOTEL PVT. LTD. & ORS.                                                   … RESPONDENT(S)


                                                        JUDGMENT
M. M. Sundresh, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. A legal journey adopted by the appellant with periodical stoppages orchestrated in

          the process at behest of respondent no(s). 1 and 2 brought the lis back to the place

          where it started, forcing it to undertake a fresh guard by the impugned order.
3. This case is a classic example of the unfortunate situation taken note of and lamented

          by Right Honorable Sir James Colvilbe in General Manager of the Raj

          Durbhunga v. Maharajah Coomar Ramaput Sing, 1872 SCC OnLine PC 16,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
POOJA SHARMA
Date: 2023.10.20
17:42:32 IST
Reason:                  “These proceedings certainly illustrate what was said by Mr. Doyne, and what
                         has been often stated before, that the difficulties of a litigant in India begin when
                         he has obtained a Decree…”
1
The situation not only continues but has become more prevalent.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
4. The appellant being the undisputed owner of the suit property executed a registered

   lease deed in favour of respondent no. 2. Respondent no. 1 concern is being

   represented by a person who is the son of the individual (since deceased) who

   represented respondent no. 2. The period of lease was for 33 years. The suit premises

   was sublet without permission by respondent no(s). 1 and 2.
5. After the expiry of the lease by efflux of time, the appellant issued a legal notice

   requiring respondent no. 2 to hand over the vacant possession. A reply was given

   stating that the possession having been handed over only on 25.11.1966, the lease

   subsists till 24.11.1999. On receipt of the said reply-notice by respondent no. 2 dated

   05.06.1999, a second notice was issued by the appellant to which a different response

   came; that the said registered lease was extended orally for another 33 years. A

   reference was also made to the arbitration clause available under the original lease

   deed.
6. The appellant promptly filed a suit in O.S. No. 132 of 1999 before the Wakf Tribunal

   seeking a decree for ejectment and recovery of possession, along with arrears of rent

   and damages. After a prolonged litigation and delaying tactics employed at the hands

   of respondent no(s). 1 and 2, a decree was passed at last on 13.11.2002. The suit was
2
dismissed against defendant no(s). 3, 4, 5, and 7, while defendant no. 6 was set ex-
parte. No plea with respect to the jurisdiction of the Wakf Tribunal was raised, while

   the aborted attempt to raise a defense of oral lease was rightly repelled.
7. Not being satisfied with the decree passed, respondents no(s). 1 and 2 filed a revision

   petition before the High Court being C.R.P. No. 5863 of 2002. It was dismissed inter

   alia holding that there is no legal basis to continue in occupation after the expiry of

   the lease.
8. The dilatory tactics adopted by respondent no(s). 1 and 2 continued even thereafter,

   to the extent that the appellant had to file an execution petition in E.P. No. 29 of

   2014 on 18.10.2014. Even during the execution proceedings, respondent no. 2 did

   not raise the plea of maintainability of the suit. However, after four years during

   which time also the Court was successfully prevented through a series of

   applications/objections, obviously at the instance of the respondents, an additional

   counter was filed raising the plea that the suit as laid and decreed ought not to have

   been entertained in view of the dictum rendered by this Court in Faseela M. v.
Munnerul Islam Madrasa Committee and Another, (2014) 16 SCC 38 which in

   turn relied upon the decision rendered in Ramesh Gobindram (Dead) through

   LRs. v. Sugra Humayun Mirza Wakf, (2010) 8 SCC 726. The objection raised

   was not found to be tenable by the Executing Court by dismissing the application

   filed under
Section 47
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to
3
as “the Code”). On a revision, the High Court of Telangana reversed the decision of

   the Executing Court by placing reliance upon the decision of this Court in Ramesh

   Gobindram (Supra). The said order passed is under challenge in this appeal.
SUBMISSIONS
9. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi and Shri Huzefa Ahmadi, learned senior counsel

   appearing for the appellant, fervently submitted that there was absolutely no

   objection raised by the contesting respondents till the stage of the execution petition.
The decision rendered in Ramesh Gobindram (Supra) has been considered and

   explained by this Court in
Rashid Wali Beg v. Farid Pindari and Others
, (2022)

   4 SCC 414. Such an exercise was also undertaken by this Court even on the earlier

   occasions.
By the amendment brought in under the Act 27 of 2013, the basis of the

   decision in Ramesh Gobindram (Supra) has been removed. Even assuming that

   the impugned order is correct, the resultant situation would be that the appellant will

   have to file a suit before the Wakf Tribunal once again.
10. Supplementing the said submission, Shri K. Parameshwar, learned counsel

   appearing for respondent no. 8, the Wakf Board, submitted that even prior to the

   decision rendered in Ramesh Gobindram (Supra), there was ample jurisdiction to

   try all suits pertaining to a Wakf and Wakf property, a fact correctly taken note of in
Rashid Wali Beg
(Supra).
Section 83
read with
Section 85
of the Wakf Act, 1995
4
being distinct and independent provisions clothed the Wakf Tribunal with adequate

   jurisdiction.
11. Shri Shyam Divan, learned senior counsel appearing for the contesting respondents

   submitted that a plea of nullity can be taken at any stage. As held in Ramesh

   Gobindram (Supra),
Sections 6
and
7
of the Act 43 of 1995 do not confer the

   requisite jurisdiction on the Wakf Tribunal in deciding an issue qua an eviction of

   an individual from a Wakf property. As the impugned order was passed noting the

   dictum laid by this Court in Ramesh Gobindram (Supra), there is no need for

   interference.
12. In support of the rival contentions, the learned counsel placed reliance upon the

   following decisions:
   Ramesh Gobindram (Dead) through
LRs v. Sugra Humayun Mirza Wakf
,

          (2010) 8 SCC 726

      
Punjab Wakf Board v. Pritpal Singh & Anr.
, (2013) SCC Online SC 1345 :
Civil Appeal No.8194 of 2013

Faseela M. v. Muneerul Islam Madrasa Committee and Another
, (2014) 16

          SCC 38

      
Punjab Wakf Board v. Sham Singh Harike & and Another
, (2019) 4 SCC 698

      
Telangana State Wakf Board & Anr. V. Mohamed Muzafar
, (2021) 9 SCC
179
5

Kiran Devi v. Bihar State Sunni Wakf Board and Others
, (2021) 15 SCC 15

       
Rashid Wali Beg v. Farid Pindari and Others
, (2022) 4 SCC 414

          Kiran Singh and Others.
v. Chaman Paswan and Others, 1955 (1) SCR 117 :

           AIR 1954 SC 340

       
Chandrika Misir and Another v. Bhaiya Lal
, (1973) 2 SCC 474

       
Sushil Kumar Mehta v. Gobind Ram Bohra (Dead
) through His LRs, (1990)

           1 SCC 193

          Chiranjilal Shrilal Goenka (Deceased) through LRs.
v. Jasjit Singh and

           Others, (1993) 2 SCC 507

       
Sarwan Kumar and Another v. Madan Lal Aggarwal
, (2003) 4 SCC 147

       
Ashok Leyland Ltd. v. State of T.N. and Another
, (2004) 3 SCC 1

       
Hindustan Zinc Ltd. (HZL) v. Ajmer Vidyut Vitran Nigam Ltd.
, (2019) 17

           SCC

       
P.V Nidhish & Ors. v. Kerala State Wakf Board & Anr.
, (2023) SCC OnLine

           SC 519 : 2023 (7) SCALE 130.
13. Before dwelling into the merits of this case, we shall first go into the issues of law

   governing the submissions made.
EXECUTING COURT CANNOT GO BEYOND THE DECREE
14. The legal principle that an Executing Court cannot go beyond the decree stands

   fortified, subject to the rigor of
Section 47
read with Order XXI of the Code. As a
6
matter of course, an Executing Court is enjoined with the duty to give effect to the

   decree. Any interference, including on a question involving jurisdiction, should be

   undertaken very sparsely as a matter of exception. The onus lies heavily on the

   judgment-debtor to convince the Court that a decree is inexecutable. When an

   exercise is likely to involve a factual adjudication, it should better be avoided.
15. The conduct of a party assumes significance. If a party is likely to have an undue

   advantage, despite the availability of an opportunity to raise a plea of lack of

   jurisdiction at an earlier point of time, it should not be permitted to do so during the

   execution proceedings. In other words, a plaintiff shall not be made to suffer by the

   passive act of the defendant in submitting to the jurisdiction. One has to see the

   consequence while taking note of the huge pendency of the cases before various

   Courts in the country. There is no gainsaying that but for the adverse decree suffered,

   a judgment-debtor would not have ventured to raise such a plea.
It is clearly a case

   of an afterthought to suit his convenience. He cannot be allowed to approbate and

   reprobate. Though we are conscious about the earlier precedents dealing with the

   stage at which such a plea can be raised, much water has flown under the bridge in

   terms of the ground reality.
Union of India and Others v. N. Murugesan and

   Others
, (2022) 2 SCC 25,

           “Approbate and reprobate
26. These phrases are borrowed from the Scots law. They would only mean that
           no party can be allowed to accept and reject the same thing, and thus one cannot
           blow hot and cold. The principle behind the doctrine of election is inbuilt in the
7
concept of approbate and reprobate. Once again, it is a principle of equity coming
under the contours of common law. Therefore, he who knows that if he objects to
an instrument, he will not get the benefit he wants cannot be allowed to do so
while enjoying the fruits. One cannot take advantage of one part while rejecting
the rest. A person cannot be allowed to have the benefit of an instrument while
questioning the same. Such a party either has to affirm or disaffirm the
transaction. This principle has to be applied with more vigour as a common law
principle, if such a party actually enjoys the one part fully and on near completion
of the said enjoyment, thereafter questions the other part. An element of fair play
is inbuilt in this principle. It is also a species of estoppel dealing with the conduct
of a party. We have already dealt with the provisions of the
Contract Act
concerning the conduct of a party, and his presumption of knowledge while
confirming an offer through his acceptance unconditionally.
27. We would like to quote the following judgments for better appreciation and
understanding of the said principle:
27.1.Nagubai Ammal v. B. Shama Rao [Nagubai Ammal
v. B. Shama Rao, 1956 SCR
451 : AIR 1956 SC 593] : (AIR pp. 601-02, para 23)

    “23. But it is argued by Sri Krishnaswami Ayyangar that as the proceedings
    in OS. No. 92 of 1938-39 are relied on as barring the plea that the decree and
    sale in OS. No. 100 of 1919-20 are not collusive, not on the ground of res
    judicata or estoppel but on the principle that a person cannot both approbate
    and reprobate.
It is immaterial that the present appellants were not parties
    thereto, and the decision in Verschures Creameries Ltd. v. Hull &
    Netherlands Steamship Co. Ltd. [(1921) 2 KB 608 (CA)], and in particular,
    the observations of Scrutton, LJ., at p. 611 were quoted in support of this
    position. There, the facts were that an agent delivered goods to the customer
    contrary to the instructions of the principal, who thereafter filed a suit against
    the purchaser for price of goods and obtained a decree.
Not having obtained satisfaction, the principal next filed a suit against the
    agent for damages on the ground of negligence and breach of duty. It was held
    that such an action was barred. The ground of the decision is that when on the
    same facts, a person has the right to claim one of two reliefs and with full
    knowledge he elects to claim one and obtains it, it is not open to him thereafter
    to go back on his election and claim the alternative relief. The principle was
    thus stated by Bankes, L.J. : (Verschures Creameries Ltd. case [(1921) 2 KB
    608 (CA)] , KB p. 611)
    ‘… Having elected to treat the delivery to him as an authorised delivery
    they cannot treat the same act as a misdelivery. To do so would be to
    approbate and reprobate the same act.’

The observations of Scrutton, L.J. on which the appellants rely are as follows :
(Verschures Creameries Ltd. case [(1921) 2 KB 608 (CA)], KB pp. 611-12)
8
‘… A plaintiff is not permitted to “approbate and reprobate”. The phrase is
    apparently borrowed from the Scotch law, where it is used to express the
    principle embodied in our doctrine of election — namely, that no party can
    accept and reject the same instrument : Ker v. Wauchope [(1819) 1 Bligh PC
    1 at p. 21 : 4 ER 1 at p. 8] : Douglas-Menzies v. Umphelby [1908 AC 224 at
    p. 232 (PC)] . The doctrine of election is not however confined to instruments.
A person cannot say at one time that a transaction is valid and thereby obtain
    some advantage, to which he could only be entitled on the footing that it is
    valid, and then turn round and say it is void for the purpose of securing some
    other advantage. That is to approbate and reprobate the transaction.’

It is clear from the above observations that the maxim that a person cannot “approbate
and reprobate” is only one application of the doctrine of election, and that its operation
must be confined to reliefs claimed in respect of the same transaction and to the
persons who are parties thereto. The law is thus stated in Halsbury's Laws of England,
Vol. XIII, p. 464, para 512:
‘On the principle that a person may not approbate and reprobate, a species of
    estoppel has arisen which seems to be intermediate between estoppel by
    record and estoppel in pais, and may conveniently be referred to here. Thus a
    party cannot, after taking advantage under an order (e.g. payment of costs),
    be heard to say that it is invalid and ask to set it aside, or to set up to the
    prejudice of persons who have relied upon it a case inconsistent with that upon
    which it was founded; nor will he be allowed to go behind an order made in
    ignorance of the true facts to the prejudice of third parties who have acted on
    it.’
27.2.State of Punjab v. Dhanjit Singh Sandhu
[(2014) 15 SCC 144] : (SCC pp. 153-
54, paras 22-23 & 25-26)

    “22. The doctrine of “approbate and reprobate” is only a species of estoppel,
    it implies only to the conduct of parties. As in the case of estoppel it cannot
    operate against the provisions of a statute. (
Vide CIT v. MR. P. Firm Muar
[AIR 1965 SC 1216] .)
23. It is settled proposition of law that once an order has been passed, it is
    complied with, accepted by the other party and derived the benefit out of it,
    he cannot challenge it on any ground. (
Vide Maharashtra SRTC v. Balwant
    Regular Motor Service
[AIR 1969 SC 329]).
In
R.N. Gosain v. Yashpal Dhir
[(1992) 4 SCC 683] this Court has observed as under : (
R.N. Gosain
case
    [(1992) 4 SCC 683] , SCC pp. 687-88, para 10)

      ‘10. Law does not permit a person to both approbate and reprobate. This
      principle is based on the doctrine of election which postulates that no
      party can accept and reject the same instrument and that ‘a person cannot
      say at one time that a transaction is valid and thereby obtain some
9
advantage, to which he could only be entitled on the footing that it is
     valid, and then turn round and say it is void for the purpose of securing
     some other advantage’.’
                                     ***
25. The Supreme Court in
Rajasthan State Industrial Development &
   Investment Corpn. v. Diamond & Gem Development Corpn. Ltd.
[(2013) 5
   SCC 470 : (2013) 3 SCC (Civ) 153] , made an observation that a party cannot
   be permitted to “blow hot and cold”, “fast and loose” or “approbate and
   reprobate”. Where one knowingly accepts the benefits of a contract or
   conveyance or an order, is estopped to deny the validity or binding effect on
   him of such contract or conveyance or order. This rule is applied to do equity,
   however, it must not be applied in a manner as to violate the principles of
   right and good conscience.
26. It is evident that the doctrine of election is based on the rule of estoppel,
   the principle that one cannot approbate and reprobate is inherent in it. The
   doctrine of estoppel by election is one among the species of estoppel in pais
   (or equitable estoppel), which is a rule of equity. By this law, a person may
   be precluded, by way of his actions, or conduct, or silence when he has to
   speak, from asserting a right which he would have otherwise had.”
27.3.Rajasthan State Industrial Development & Investment Corpn. v. Diamond &
Gem Development Corpn. Ltd.
[(2013) 5 SCC 470 : (2013) 3 SCC (Civ) 153] : (SCC
pp. 480-81, paras 15-16)

   “I. Approbate and reprobate
15. A party cannot be permitted to “blow hot-blow cold”, “fast and loose” or
   “approbate and reprobate”. Where one knowingly accepts the benefits of a
   contract, or conveyance, or of an order, he is estopped from denying the
   validity of, or the binding effect of such contract, or conveyance, or order
   upon himself. This rule is applied to ensure equity, however, it must not be
   applied in such a manner so as to violate the principles of what is right and of
   good conscience. [
Vide Nagubai Ammal v. B. Shama Rao
[1956 SCR 451 :
AIR 1956 SC 593] , CIT v. V. MR. P. Firm Muar
[
AIR 1965 SC 1216] ,
   Ramesh Chandra Sankla v. Vikram Cement
[(2008) 14 SCC 58 : (
2009) 1
   SCC (L&S) 706] , Pradeep Oil Corpn. v. MCD
[(2011) 5 SCC 270 : (
2011)
   2 SCC (Civ) 712] , Cauvery Coffee Traders v. Hornor Resources
   (International) Co. Ltd.
[(2011) 10 SCC 420 : (2012) 3 SCC (Civ) 685] and
   V. Chandrasekaran v. Administrative Officer [(2012) 12 SCC 133 : (2013) 2
   SCC (Civ) 136 : (2013) 4 SCC (Cri) 587 : (2013) 3 SCC (L&S) 416].
16. Thus, it is evident that the doctrine of election is based on the rule of
   estoppel—the principle that one cannot approbate and reprobate is inherent
   in it. The doctrine of estoppel by election is one among the species of estoppel
   in pais (or equitable estoppel), which is a rule of equity. By this law, a person
10
may be precluded, by way of his actions, or conduct, or silence when it is his
               duty to speak, from asserting a right which he would have otherwise had.”

                                                                        (emphasis supplied)
16. There is a subtle difference when we deal with a case involving coram non-judice.
The principle governing lack of jurisdiction to a forum may differ from a case where

   two or more forums deal with the same issue along with the rights and liabilities of

   the parties. To make the position clear, one has to see as to whether there is any

   change in the rights and liabilities of the parties by choosing one forum as against

   the other. As an example, we can take the case of eviction of a tenant. If he is to be

   evicted only under the
Rent Control Act
which extends a certain right to the tenant,

   who cannot be evicted otherwise than under the provisions contained therein, a

   common law remedy cannot be invoked by way of a suit as against a proceeding

   before the Rent Controller. In that view of the matter, certainly the question of

   prejudice would arise. However, in a case involving same rights and liabilities but

   the question is only with respect to the forum being judicial or quasi-judicial, the

   issue of jurisdiction would pale into insignificance when it is sought to be raised as

   a last straw at a very belated stage. Therefore, when the process becomes the same

   for both parties who undertake the said route willingly, the question of jurisdiction

   cannot be put against each other after it has attained finality, unless it is demonstrated

   that the rights of the party who suffered the decree are obliterated.
11
CHANGE OF FORUM
17. We shall now come to the issue of retrospective application and change of forum.
As discussed, when a statute is amended on an issue pertaining to a forum for

   adjudication, it being procedural takes effect retrospectively. A party to a lis does

   not have any vested right of forum as against action. In the absence of any

   substantive right being subsumed by a particular forum, one has to give retrospective

   application.
New India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Smt. Shanti Misra, Adult
, (1975) 2

   SCC 840,

           “5. On the plain language of Sections 110A and 110F there should be no difficulty in
           taking the view that the change in law was merely a change of forum i.e. a change of
           adjectival or procedural law and not of substantive law. It is a well-established
           proposition that such a change of law operates retrospectively and the person has
           to go to the new forum even if his cause of action or right of action accrued prior
           to the change of forum. He will have a vested right of action but not a vested right
           of forum. If by express words the new forum is made available only to causes of
           action arising after the creation of the forum, then the retrospective operation of
           the law is taken away. Otherwise the general rule is to make it retrospective. The
           expressions “arising out of an accident” occurring in sub-section (1) and “over the area
           in which the accident occurred”, mentioned in sub-section (2) clearly show that the
           change of forum was meant to be operative retrospectively irrespective of the fact as
           to when the accident occurred. To that extent there was no difficulty in giving the
           answer in a simple way. But the provision of limitation of 60 days contained in sub-
           section (3) created an obstacle in the straight application of the well-established
           principle of law. If the accident had occurred within 60 days prior to the constitution
           of the tribunal then the bar of limitation provided in sub-section (3) was not an
           impediment. An application to the tribunal could be said to be the only remedy. If such
           an application, due to one reason or the other, could not be made within 60 days then
           the tribunal had the power to condone the delay under the proviso. But if the accident
           occurred more than 60 days before the constitution of the tribunal then the bar of
           limitation provided in sub-section (3) of Section 110A on its face was attracted. This
           difficulty of limitation led most of the High Courts to fall back upon the proviso and
           say that such a case will be a fit one where the tribunal would be able to condone the
           delay under the proviso to sub-section (3), and led others to say that the tribunal will
           have no jurisdiction to entertain such an application and the remedy of going to the
           civil court in such a situation was not barred under
Section 110F
of the Act. While
12
taking the latter view the High Court failed to notice that primarily the law engrafted
          in Sections 110A and 110F was a law relating to the change of forum.”
                                                                             (emphasis supplied)
18.
Hitendra Vishnu Thakur and Others v. State of Maharashtra and Another
,

   (1994) 4 SCC 602,

          “26. The Designated Court has held that the amendment would operate retrospectively
          and would apply to the pending cases in which investigation was not complete on the
          date on which the Amendment Act came into force and the challan had not till then
          been filed in the court. From the law settled by this Court in various cases the
          illustrative though not exhaustive principles which emerge with regard to the ambit
          and scope of an
Amending Act
and its retrospective operation may be culled out as
          follows:
(i) A statute which affects substantive rights is presumed to be
              prospective in operation unless made retrospective, either expressly or
              by necessary intendment, whereas a statute which merely affects
              procedure, unless such a construction is textually impossible, is
              presumed to be retrospective in its application, should not be given an
              extended meaning and should be strictly confined to its clearly defined
              limits.
(ii) Law relating to forum and limitation is procedural in nature, whereas
              law relating to right of action and right of appeal even though remedial
              is substantive in nature.
(iii) Every litigant has a vested right in substantive law but no such right
              exists in procedural law.
(iv) A procedural statute should not generally speaking be applied
              retrospectively where the result would be to create new disabilities or
              obligations or to impose new duties in respect of transactions already
              accomplished.
(v) A statute which not only changes the procedure but also creates new
              rights and liabilities shall be construed to be prospective in operation,
              unless otherwise provided, either expressly or by necessary implication.”

                                                                           (emphasis supplied)
19.
Neena Aneja and Another v. Jai Prakash Associates Ltd.
, (2022) 2 SCC 161,

          “58. SEBI argued before this Court that a change of the forum for trial was a matter of
          mere procedure and would, therefore, be retrospective, there being no express or
          implied intent either in the 2002 and 2014 Amendments that the amendments were
          intended to be of prospective effect.
J.S. Khehar, J. speaking for the two-Judge Bench
          of this Court adverted to the decisions inter alia in
New India Assurance [New India
          Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Shanti Misra
, (1975) 2 SCC 840] , Ramesh Kumar Soni [Ramesh
13
Kumar Soni v. State of M.P., (2013) 14 SCC 696 : (
2014) 4 SCC (Cri) 340] and
Hitendra Vishnu Thakur [Hitendra Vishnu Thakur v. State of Maharashtra
, (1994) 4
SCC 602 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 1087] , and observed in that context : (Classic Credit case
[
SEBI v. Classic Credit Ltd.
, (2018) 13 SCC 1 : (2019) 1 SCC (Cri) 431] , SCC pp.
67-68, para 49)

    “49.
… In our considered view, the legal position expounded by this Court in
    a large number of judgments including
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v.
    Shanti Misra
[(1975) 2 SCC 840] ;
SEBI v. Ajay Agarwal
[(2010) 3 SCC 765
    : (2010) 2 SCC (Cri) 491] and Ramesh Kumar Soni v. State of M.P. [(2013)
    14 SCC 696 : (2014) 4 SCC (Cri) 340] , is clear and unambiguous, namely,
    that procedural amendments are presumed to be retrospective in nature,
    unless the amending statute expressly or impliedly provides otherwise. And
    also, that generally change of “forum” of trial is procedural, and normally
    following the above proposition, it is presumed to be retrospective in nature
    unless the amending statute provides otherwise.
This determination emerges
    from the decision of this Court in
Hitendra Vishnu Thakur v. State of
    Maharashtra
[(1994) 4 SCC 602 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 1087] ;
Ranbir Yadav v.
    State of Bihar
[(1995) 4 SCC 392 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 728] and Kamlesh Kumar
    v. State of Jharkhand [(2013) 15 SCC 460 : (2014) 6 SCC (Cri) 489] , as well
    as, a number of further judgments noted above.”
59. The above observations indicate the clear view of this Court that:
59.1. In the absence of a contrary intent express or implied, procedural
amendments are presumed to be retrospective.
59.2. A change in the forum of a trial is a procedural matter.
59.3. Since a change of forum is procedural, a statute which brings about the
change is presumed to be retrospective in the absence of a contrary intent.
xxxxx

C.23. Conclusion on the position of law
72. In considering the myriad precedents that have interpreted the impact of a
change in forum on pending proceedings and retrospectivity—a clear position of
law has emerged : a change in forum lies in the realm of procedure. Accordingly,
in compliance with the tenets of statutory interpretation applicable to procedural
law, amendments on matters of procedure are retrospective, unless a contrary
intention emerges from the statute. This position emerges from the decisions in
New India Assurance [New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Shanti Misra
, (
1975) 2 SCC
840] , Maria Cristina [Maria Cristina De Souza Sodder v. Amria Zurana Pereira
Pinto
, (
1979) 1 SCC 92] , Hitendra Vishnu Thakur [Hitendra Vishnu Thakur v.
State of Maharashtra
, (1994) 4 SCC 602 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 1087] , Ramesh Kumar
Soni [Ramesh Kumar Soni v. State of M.P., (2013) 14 SCC 696 : (
2014) 4 SCC (Cri)
14
340] and Sudhir G. Angur [Sudhir G. Angur v. M. Sanjeev
, (2006) 1 SCC 141] .
More recently, this position has been noted in a three-Judge Bench decision of
       this Court in
Manish Kumar v. Union of India
[(2021) 5 SCC 1 : (2021) 3 SCC
       (Civ) 50] .
However, there was a deviation by a two-Judge Bench decision of this
       Court in
Dhadi Sahu [CIT v. Dhadi Sahu
, 1994 Supp (1) SCC 257] , which
       overlooked the decision of a larger three-Judge Bench in
New India Assurance
       [New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Shanti Misra
, (1975) 2 SCC 840] and of a
       coordinate two-Judge Bench in
Maria Cristina [Maria Cristina De Souza Sodder
       v. Amria Zurana Pereira Pinto
, (1979) 1 SCC 92] .
The decision in
Dhadi Sahu [CIT
       v. Dhadi Sahu
, 1994 Supp (1) SCC 257] propounded a position that : (
Dhadi Sahu
case [
CIT v. Dhadi Sahu
, 1994 Supp (1) SCC 257] , SCC p. 262, para 21)

           “21. … no litigant has any vested right in the matter of procedural law but
           where the question is of change of forum it ceases to be a question of
           procedure only. The forum of appeal or proceedings is a vested right as
           opposed to pure procedure to be followed before a particular forum. The right
           becomes vested when the proceedings are initiated in the tribunal.”

                                                                       (emphasis supplied)

       In taking this view, the two-Judge Bench did not consider binding decisions.
Dhadi
       Sahu [CIT v. Dhadi Sahu
, 1994 Supp (1) SCC 257] failed to consider that the saving
       of pending proceedings in
Mohd. Idris [Mohd. Idris v. Sat Narain
, (1966) 3 SCR 15 :
AIR 1966 SC 1499] and Manujendra Dutt [Manujendra Dutt v. Purnedu Prosad Roy
       Chowdhury
, (1967) 1 SCR 475 : AIR 1967 SC 1419] was a saving of vested rights of
       the litigants that were being impacted by the repealing Acts therein, and not because a
       right to forum is accrued once proceedings have been initiated.
Thereafter, a line of
       decisions followed
Dhadi Sahu [CIT v. Dhadi Sahu
, 1994 Supp (1) SCC 257] , to hold
       that a litigant has a crystallised right to a forum once proceedings have been initiated.
       A litigant's vested rights (including the right to an appeal) prior to the amendment or
       repeal are undoubtedly saved, in addition to substantive rights envisaged under
Section
       6
of the General Clauses Act. This protection does not extend to pure matters of
       procedure. Repeals or amendments that effect changes in forum would ordinarily
       affect pending proceedings, unless a contrary intention appears from the repealing or
       amending statute.”
COURT MUST SATISFY ITSELF AS TO THE EXISTENCE OF
JURISDICTION
Section 9
of the Code
       “9. Courts to try all civil suits unless barred.—The Courts shall (subject to the
       provisions herein contained) have jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature excepting
       suits of which their cognisance is either expressly or impliedly barred.
15
Explanation I.—A suit in which the right to property or to an office is contested is a
           suit of a civil nature, notwithstanding that such right may depend entirely on the
           decision of questions as to religious rites or ceremonies.
Explanation II.—For the purposes of this section, it is immaterial whether or not any
           fees are attached to the office referred to in Explanation I or whether or not such office
           is attached to a particular place.”
20. On a proper construction of
Section 9
of the Code, it is clear that the court has to

   prima facie satisfy itself as to the existence of the jurisdiction. Such an exercise will

   avoid putting the parties to unnecessary risk and difficulty.
Vankamamidi Venkata

   Subba Rao v. Chatlapalli Seetharamaratna Ranganayakamma
, (1997) 5 SCC

   460,

           “15.
This Court in
Vatticherukuru Village Panchayat v. Nori Venkatarama
           Deekshithulu
[1991 Supp (2) SCC 288] after considering the entire case-law, had held
           that the civil court has no jurisdiction to go into the correctness of the patta granted by
           the Settlement Authorities. Under
Section 9
CPC, the courts shall, subject to the
           provisions contained therein, have jurisdiction to try all suits of civil nature excepting
           suits cognizance of which is either expressly or impliedly barred. When a legal right
           is infringed, a suit would lie unless there is a bar against entertainment of such civil
           suit and the civil courts would take cognizance of it. Therefore, the normal rule of law
           is that civil courts have jurisdiction to try all suits of civil nature except those of which
           cognizance is either expressly or by necessary implication excluded. The rule of
           construction being that every presumption would be made in favour of the existence
           of a right and remedy in a democratic set-up governed by rule of law and jurisdiction
           of the civil courts is assumed. The exclusion would, therefore, normally be an
           exception. Courts generally construe the provisions strictly when jurisdiction of the
           civil courts is claimed to be excluded. However, in the development of civil
           adjudication of civil disputes, due to pendency of adjudication and abnormal
           delay at hierarchical stages, statutes intervene and provide alternative mode of
           resolution of disputes with less expensive but expeditious disposal. It is settled
           legal position that if a tribunal with limited jurisdiction cannot assume
           jurisdiction and decide for itself the dispute conclusively, in such a situation, it is
           the court that is required to decide whether the tribunal with limited jurisdiction
           has correctly assumed jurisdiction and decided the dispute within its limits. It is
           also equally settled that when jurisdiction is conferred on a tribunal, the courts
           examine whether the essential principles of jurisdiction have been followed and
           decided by the tribunals leaving the decision on merits to the tribunal. It is also
           an equally settled legal position that where a statute gives finality to the orders of
           the special tribunal, the civil court's jurisdiction must be held to be excluded, if
16
there is adequate remedy to do what the civil court would normally do in a suit.
Such a provision, however, does not exclude those cases where the provisions of
           the particular Act have not been complied with or the statutory tribunal has not
           acted in conformity with the fundamental principles of judicial procedure. Where
           there is an express bar of jurisdiction of the court, an examination of the scheme
           of the particular Act to find the adequacy or the sufficiency of the remedies
           provided may be relevant but is not decisive to sustain the jurisdiction of the civil
           court. Where there is no express exclusion, the examination of the remedies and
           the scheme of the particular Act to find out the intendment becomes necessary
           and the result of the enquiry may be decisive. In the latter case, it is necessary
           that the statute creates a special right or liability and provides procedure for the
           determination of the right or liability and further lays down that all questions
           about the said right or liability shall be determined by the tribunal so constituted
           and whether remedies are normally associated with the action in civil courts or
           prescribed by the statutes or not. Therefore, each case requires examination
           whether the statute provides right and remedies and whether the scheme of the
           Act is that the procedure provided will be conclusive and thereby excludes the
           jurisdiction of the civil court in respect thereof. After the advent of independence,
           land reforms was one of the policies of the Government abolishing feudal system of
           land tenures and conferment of the ryotwari patta on the tiller of the soil. Thereby, the
           land reform laws extinguish pre-existing rights and create new rights under the Act.
The Act
confers jurisdiction on the tribunals in matters relating thereto and hierarchy
           of appeals/revisions are provided thereunder giving finality to the orders passed
           thereunder. Thereby, by necessary implication, the jurisdiction of the civil court to take
           cognizance of the suits of civil nature covered under the land reform laws stands
           excluded giving not only finality to the decisions of the tribunal but also ensuring
           expeditious, inexpensive and simple procedure for disposal of the matters by the
           tribunal and make the ryotwari patta granted to the tiller of the soil conclusive. Under
           the normal course of civil procedure, the jurisdiction of the trial of the civil suits in
           relation to the matters covered under the Acts being time-consuming and tardy the lack
           of financial support or otherwise incapacity in defending or working the rights in the
           civil courts and by hierarchy of appeals defeat justice. Obviously, therefore, the civil
           suits by necessary implication stand excluded unless the fundamental principles of
           procedure are not followed by the tribunals constituted under the land reform laws. In
           this case, the Act concerned extinguishes the pre-existing right, creates new rights
           under the Act and requires tribunals to enquire into the rival claims and a form of
           appeal has been provided against the order of the primary authority. Thereby the right
           and remedy made conclusive under the Act are given finality by the orders passed
           under the Act. Thereby, by necessary implication, the jurisdiction of the civil court
           stands excluded.”

                                                                           (emphasis supplied)
21. Every case is a journey towards truth. A procedural law, as repeatedly settled by this

   Court, is a handmaid of justice. There is an inherent sense of equity and fair play in
17
the proceedings of the Court. When a lis is entertained it is the paramount duty of

   the Court to check on itself and satisfy the existence of jurisdiction, despite being

   not raised by the parties. Such an exercise would not only prevent injustice but will

   also take care of a party taking advantage of its own wrong. It has to apply the

   principle of nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propria (no man can take

   advantage of his own wrong) in order to prevent any miscarriage of justice. When

   the court is satisfied that one party to the dispute is manipulating the process to

   perpetuate illegality and to the detriment of the other, it should go beyond the

   procedural entrapment by rendering correct justice.
Ashok Kapil v. Sana Ullah
,

   (1996) 6 SCC 342,

          “7. If the crucial date is the date of allotment order, the structure was not a building as
          defined in the Act. But can the respondent be assisted by a court of law to take
          advantage of the mischief committed by him? The maxim “Nullus commodum
          capere potest de injuria sua propria” (No man can take advantage of his own
          wrong) is one of the salient tenets of equity. Hence, in the normal course, the
          respondent cannot secure the assistance of a court of law for enjoying the fruit of
          his own wrong.”
                                                                                 (emphasis supplied)
22.
Eureka Forbes Ltd. v. Allahabad Bank
, (2010) 6 SCC 193,

          “66. The maxim nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propria has a clear
          mandate of law that, a person who by manipulation of a process frustrates the
          legal rights of others, should not be permitted to take advantage of his wrong or
          manipulations. In the present case Respondents 2 and 3 and the appellant have acted
          together while disposing off the hypothecated goods, and now, they cannot be
          permitted to turn back to argue, that since the goods have been sold, liability cannot
          be fastened upon Respondents 2 and 3 and in any case on the appellant.
The Bench of
          this Court in
Ashok Kapil v. Sana Ullah
[(1996) 6 SCC 342] referred to rule of mischief
          and while explaining the word “building”, held as under: (SCC p. 346, para 11)

              “11. Stroud's Judicial Dictionary (Vol. I of the 5th Edn.) states that ‘what is
              a building must always be a question of degree and circumstances’.
Quoting
18
from Victoria City Corpn. v. Bishop of Vancouver Island [(1921) 2 AC 384
               (PC)] (AC at p. 390), the celebrated lexicographer commented that ‘the
               ordinary and natural meaning of the word “building” includes the fabric and
               the ground on which it stands’. In Black's Law Dictionary (5th Edn.) the
               meaning of ‘building’ is given as ‘A structure or edifice enclosing a space
               within its walls, and usually, but not necessarily, covered with a roof’.
               (emphasis in original). The said description is a recognition of the fact that
               roof is not a necessary and indispensable adjunct for a building because there
               can be roofless buildings. So a building, even after losing the roof, can
               continue to be a building in its general meaning. Taking recourse to such
               general meaning in the present context would help to prevent a mischief.”

                                                                           (emphasis supplied)
23. The mandatory duty of the Court in confirming its own jurisdiction has been taken

   note of and dealt with succinctly by Griffith, C.J. in Federated Engine Drivers and

   Firemen’s Association of Australasia v Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd., (1911)

   12 CLR 398,

           “If they exist, it is quite immaterial to inquire by what route the President arrived at a
           right conclusion. If they do not, it is equally unimportant to inquire how he fell into
           error. In such a matter this Court is not a Court of Appeal from him.
But the first duty of every judicial officer is to satisfy himself that he has
           jurisdiction, if only to avoid putting the parties to unnecessary risk and expense.
           In this respect a grave responsibility rests upon the President, whose jurisdiction is
           limited both by the
Constitution and the Act
. This responsibility is not diminished by
           tbe possibility that he may be misled by imperfect or erroneous information. The mode
           of satisfying himself may vary in different cases. In most cases that come before an
           ordinary Court of law it is not necessary to make any inquiry.”

                                                                                (emphasis supplied)
24. The aforesaid principle of law has been quoted with approval by the New South

   Wales Court of Appeal (Australia) in Zhang v. Zemin (2010) 79 NSWLR 513,

           “37. A further, alternative, reason for rejecting the appellant’s contentions is that
           there is a long line of authority that a court must satisfy itself that it has
           jurisdiction, whether or not a jurisdictional issue is raised by a party.
19
38. As Mr H Burmester QC, who appeared for the Attorney, submitted, the Court
would have had to address this issue even if the Attorney had not intervened and even
without the application for default judgment.
39. The determination of whether or not it has jurisdiction has been described as
the “first duty” of a court. (See Federated Engine Drivers and Firemen’s
Association of Australasia v Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd (1911) 12 CLR 398 at 415
per Griffith CJ.) That case involved a legislative scheme providing for a
jurisdictional fact. As Isaacs J said in that context at 454:
“What [the court] has to do at the outset is to satisfy its mind that it is
    not overstepping the bounds which Parliament has laid down for it.”
40. To similar effect are the observations of Barton J when he said at 428:
“Where the jurisdiction is disputed, adequate and careful inquiry is still
    the duty of the superior Court. On the other hand, where the jurisdiction
    is not contested by the party defending, very slight inquiry may be
    adequate, and many cases will to the mind of the tribunal be so plainly
    within its competence that it will rightly forego inquiry unless the
    objection is taken, and the objector tenders proof of facts in its support.”
41. The observations of Griffith CJ and Barton J in Federated Engine Drivers
supra, were applied by Fullagar J in The King v Blakeley; Ex parte The
Association of Architects, Engineers, Surveyors and Draughtsmen of Australia
(1950) 82 CLR 54 at 90-91, where his Honour accepted of the language of “duty”.
42. In Cockle v Isaksen (1957) 99 CLR 155, neither party wished to challenge the
jurisdiction of the High Court to hear a particular appeal. However, the Court
permitted the Commonwealth to intervene to argue the issue of validity, without,
in that case, becoming a party…”
                                         xxxxx
44. The observations of Barton J in Federated Engine Drivers, quoted at [40]
above, indicate that it is not essential for an issue of jurisdiction to be raised by a
party to proceedings. That matter had earlier been determined by the High Court
in the course of a preliminary application in Federated Amalgamated Government
Railway and Tramway Service Association v The NSW Railway Traffic Employees’
Association (1906) 4 CLR 488. Objection had been taken to a point being raised
by an intervenor concerning the validity of the statute, on the basis that such a
point should not be raised except in litigation between parties, where it is
necessary to determine the issue of validity. Griffith CJ, with whom Barton and
O’Connor JJ agreed, said at 495:
“A point of jurisdiction, when it is seriously raised or, if it suggests itself
     to the Court without being taken by a party, cannot properly be
     disregarded.”
                                                                    (emphasis supplied)
20
25. Having dealt with the aforesaid principle and making it applicable to the Courts in

   India, we are inclined to hold that any failure on the part of the Court to do so would

   draw the legal maxim “actus curiae neminem gravabit’ (no one shall be prejudiced

   by an act of Court). As a consequence, in a case where a Court has failed to check

   its jurisdiction and a plea has been raised subsequently and that too after receiving

   an adverse verdict, the forum shall not be declared as the one having lack of

   jurisdiction, especially when there is no apparent injury otherwise to the rights

   conferred under a particular statute. Indore Development Authority v.
Manoharlal and Others, (2020) 8 SCC 129,

           “320. The maxim actus curiae neminem gravabit is founded upon the principle due to
           court proceedings or acts of court, no party should suffer. If any interim orders are
           made during the pendency of the litigation, they are subject to the final decision in the
           matter. In case the matter is dismissed as without merit, the interim order is
           automatically dissolved. In case the matter has been filed without any merit, the maxim
           is attracted commodum ex injuria sua nemo habere debet, that is, convenience cannot
           accrue to a party from his own wrong. No person ought to have the advantage of his
           own wrong. In case litigation has been filed frivolously or without any basis,
           iniquitously in order to delay and by that it is delayed, there is no equity in favour of
           such a person. Such cases are required to be decided on merits. In Mrutunjay
           Pani v. Narmada Bala Sasmal [AIR 1961 SC 1353] , this Court observed that : (AIR
           p. 1355, para 5)

                “5. … The same principle is comprised in the Latin maxim commodum ex
                injuria sua nemo habere debet, that is, convenience cannot accrue to a party
                from his own wrong. To put it in other words, no one can be allowed to benefit
                from his own wrongful act.”
                                                   xxxxx
324.
In
Mahadeo Savlaram Shelke v. Pune Municipal Corpn.
[(1995) 3 SCC 33] , it
           has been observed that the Court can under its inherent jurisdiction ex debito
           justitiae has a duty to mitigate the damage suffered by the defendants by the act of the
           court. Such action is necessary to put a check on abuse of process of the court.
In
Amarjeet Singh v. Devi Ratan
[(2010) 1 SCC 417 : (2010) 1 SCC (L&S) 1108],
           and Ram Krishna Verma [Ram Krishna Verma v. State of U.P., (1992) 2 SCC 620] ,
           it was observed that no person can suffer from the act of court and unfair advantage of
21
the interim order must be neutralised.
In
Amarjeet Singh [Amarjeet Singh v. Devi
Ratan
, (2010) 1 SCC 417 : (2010) 1 SCC (L&S) 1108] , this Court observed : (SCC
pp. 422-23, paras 17-18)

    “17. No litigant can derive any benefit from mere pendency of the case in a
    court of law, as the interim order always merges in the final order to be passed
    in the case, and if the writ petition is ultimately dismissed, the interim order
    stands nullified automatically. A party cannot be allowed to take any benefit
    of its own wrongs by getting an interim order and thereafter blame the court.
    The fact that the writ is found, ultimately, devoid of any merit, shows that a
    frivolous writ petition had been filed. The maxim actus curiae neminem
    gravabit, which means that the act of the court shall prejudice no one,
    becomes applicable in such a case. In such a fact situation, the court is under
    an obligation to undo the wrong done to a party by the act of the court. Thus,
    any undeserved or unfair advantage gained by a party invoking the
    jurisdiction of the court must be neutralised, as the institution of litigation
    cannot be permitted to confer any advantage on a suitor from delayed action
    by the act of the court.
(
Vide Shiv Shankar v. U.P. SRTC
[1995 Supp (2) SCC
    726 : 1995 SCC (L&S) 1018] , GTC Industries Ltd. v. Union of India [(
1998)
    3 SCC 376] and Jaipur Municipal Corpn. v. C.L. Mishra
[(2005) 8 SCC
    423]).
18.
In
Ram Krishna Verma v. State of U.P.
[(1992) 2 SCC 620] , this Court
    examined a similar issue while placing reliance upon its earlier judgment
    in
Grindlays Bank Ltd. v. CIT
[(1980) 2 SCC 191 : 1980 SCC (Tax) 230] and
    held that no person can suffer from the act of the court and in case an interim
    order has been passed, and the petitioner takes advantage thereof, and
    ultimately the petition is found to be without any merit and is dismissed, the
    interest of justice requires that any undeserved or unfair advantage gained by
    a party invoking the jurisdiction of the court must be neutralised.”
325. In Karnataka Rare Earth v. Deptt. of Mines & Geology [(2004) 2 SCC 783] , this
Court observed that maxim actus curiae neminem gravabit requires that the party
should be placed in the same position but for the court's order which is ultimately
found to be not sustainable which has resulted in one party gaining advantage which
otherwise would not have earned and the other party has suffered but for the orders of
the court. The successful party can demand the delivery of benefit earned by the other
party, or make restitution for what it has lost. This Court observed : (SCC pp. 790-91,
paras 10-11)

    “10. In … the doctrine of actus curiae neminem gravabit and held that the
    doctrine was not confined in its application only to such acts of the court
    which were erroneous; the doctrine is applicable to all such acts as to which
    it can be held that the court would not have so acted had it been correctly
    apprised of the facts and the law. It is the principle of restitution that is
    attracted. When on account of an act of the party, persuading the court to pass
22
an order, which at the end is held as not sustainable, has resulted in one party
    gaining advantage which it would not have otherwise earned, or the other
    party has suffered an impoverishment which it would not have suffered, but
    for the order of the court and the act of such party, then the successful party
    finally held entitled to a relief, assessable in terms of money at the end of the
    litigation, is entitled to be compensated in the same manner in which the
    parties would have been if the interim order of the court would not have been
    passed. The successful party can demand : (a) the delivery of benefit earned
    by the opposite party under the interim order of the court, or (b) to make
    restitution for what it has lost.
11.
In the facts of this case, in spite of the judgment [
Karnataka Rare
    Earth v. Department of Mines & Geology, WPs No..
4030-4031 of 1997,
    order dated 1-12-1998 (KAR)] of the High Court, if the appellants would not
    have persuaded this Court to pass the interim orders, they would not have
    been entitled to operate the mining leases and to raise and remove and dispose
    of the minerals extracted. But for the interim orders passed by this Court,
    there is no difference between the appellants and any person raising, without
    any lawful authority, any mineral from any land, attracting applicability of
    sub-section (5) of
Section 21
. As the appellants have lost from the Court, they
    cannot be allowed to retain the benefit earned by them under the interim
    orders of the Court. The High Court has rightly held the appellants liable to
    be placed in the same position in which they would have been if this Court
    would not have protected them by issuing interim orders. All that the State
    Government is demanding from the appellants is the price of the minor
    minerals. Rent, royalty or tax has already been recovered by the State
    Government and, therefore, there is no demand under that head. No penal
    proceedings, much less any criminal proceedings, have been initiated against
    the appellants. It is absolutely incorrect to contend that the appellants are
    being asked to pay any penalty or are being subjected to any penal action. It
    is not the case of the appellants that they are being asked to pay the price more
    than what they have realised from the exports or that the price appointed by
    the respondent State is in any manner arbitrary or unreasonable.”
                                                                  (emphasis in the original)
326.
In
A.R. Antulay [A.R. Antulay v. R.S. Nayak
, (1988) 2 SCC 602 : 1988 SCC (Cri)
372] , this Court observed that it is a settled principle that an act of the court shall
prejudice no man. This maxim actus curiae neminem gravabit is founded upon justice
and good sense and affords a safe and certain guide for the administration of the law.
No man can be denied his rights. In India, a delay occurs due to procedural wrangles.
In
A.R. Antulay [A.R. Antulay v. R.S. Nayak
, (1988) 2 SCC 602 : 1988 SCC (Cri) 372],
this Court observed : (SCC p. 687, para 102)

    “102. This being the apex court, no litigant has any opportunity of
    approaching any higher forum to question its decisions.
Lord Buckmaster
    in Montreal Street Railway Co. v. Normandin [1917 AC 170 (PC)] (sic)
    stated:
23
‘All rules of court are nothing but provisions intended to secure the
                 proper administration of justice. It is, therefore, essential that they should
                 be made to serve and be subordinate to that purpose.’

               This Court in
State of Gujarat v. Ramprakash P. Puri
[(1969) 3 SCC 156 :
1970 SCC (Cri) 29] , reiterated the position by saying : (SCC p. 159, para 5)

                 ‘5. … Procedure has been described to be a handmaid and not a mistress
                 of law, intended to subserve and facilitate the cause of justice and not to
                 govern or obstruct it. Like all rules of procedure, this rule demands a
                 construction which would promote this cause.’

               Once judicial satisfaction is reached that the direction was not open to be
               made and it is accepted as a mistake of the court, it is not only appropriate but
               also the duty of the court to rectify the mistake by exercising inherent powers.
               Judicial opinion heavily leans in favour of this view that a mistake of the court
               can be corrected by the court itself without any fetters. This is on principle,
               as indicated in Alexander Rodger case [Alexander Rodger v. Comptoir
               D'Escompte De Paris, (1969-71) LR 3 PC 465 : 17 ER 120] . I am of the view
               that in the present situation, the court's inherent powers can be exercised to
               remedy the mistake.
Mahajan, J. speaking for a four-Judge Bench
               in
Keshardeo Chamria v. Radha Kissen Chamria
[(1952) 2 SCC 329 : 1953
               SCR 136 : AIR 1953 SC 23] , SCR p. 153 stated : (AIR p. 28, para 21)

                 ‘21. … The Judge had jurisdiction to correct his own error without
                 entering into a discussion of the grounds taken by the decree-holder or
                 the objections raised by the judgment-debtors.’ ”
                                                      xxxxx
328. Reliance was placed on
Neeraj Kumar Sainy v. State of U.P.
[(2017) 14 SCC 136
           : 8 SCEC 454] There, this Court observed that no one should suffer any prejudice
           because of the act of the court; the legal maxim cannot operate in a vacuum. It has to
           get the sustenance from the facts. As the appellants resigned to their fate and woke up
           to have control over the events forgetting that the law does not assist the non-vigilant.
One cannot indulge in the luxury of lethargy, possibly nurturing the feeling that
           forgetting is a virtue. If such is the conduct, it is not permissible to take shelter under
           the maxim actus curiae neminem gravabit. There is no dispute with the aforesaid
           principle. Party has to be vigilant about the right, but the ratio cannot be applied. In
           the opinion, the ratio in the decision cannot be applied for the purpose of interpretation
           of
Section 24(2)
.”
26. When a specialized forum is made available under a statute, a civil court should

   normally entertain a dispute which would otherwise not be amenable before the said
24
forum. Therefore, rights and liabilities of the parties arising from an enactment ought

   to be adjudicated upon in tune with the mechanism provided thereunder. The reason

   being that the provisions of the enactment ought to be given effect to through such

   forums and therefore to the exclusion of a civil court whose jurisdiction is otherwise

   to be inferred. J. Willes in Wolverhampton New Waterworks Co. v.
Hawkesford [1859] 6 C.B. (NS) 336,


           “One is where there was a liability existing at common law, and that liability is
           affirmed by a Statute which gives a special and peculiar form of remedy different from
           the remedy which existed at common law: there, unless the Statute contains words
           which expressly or by necessary implication exclude the common law remedy the
           party suing has his election to pursue either that or the statutory remedy. The
           second class of cases is, where the Statute gives the right to sue merely, but provides,
           no particular form of remedy: there, the party can only proceed by action at common
           law. But there is a third class, viz., where a liability not existing at common law is
           created by a Statute which at the same time gives a special and particular remedy
           for enforcing it ........ The remedy provided by the Statute must be followed and it
           is not competent to the party to pursue the course applicable to cases of the
           second class.”

                                                                              (emphasis supplied)
27. As a principle of law, the powers of the civil court, being plenary in nature, the onus

   lies on the party who contends that it lacks jurisdiction. However, this does not take

   away the duty of the civil court to check its own jurisdiction, more so when a

   specialized forum has come into being as a creature of a statute. Of course, there

   may be certain exceptions when fundamental principles governing common law,

   including the one pertaining to the principle of natural justice, stand violated. To

   deal with the said issue one has to take into consideration the objective behind the
25
enactment, along with the provisions contained thereunder. Dhulabhai etc. v. State

of Madhya Pradesh and Another, (1968) 3 SCR 662 : AIR 1969 SC 78,

       “32. Neither of the two cases of Firm of Illuri Subayya, 1964-1 SCR 752 = (AIR 1964
       SC 322) or Kamla Mills, 1966 1 SCR 64 = (AIR 1965 SC 1942) can be said to run
       counter to the series of cases earlier noticed. The result of this inquiry into the diverse
       views expressed in this Court may be stated as follows:
(1) Where the statute gives a finality to the orders of the special tribunals
           the civil courts' jurisdiction must be held to be excluded if there is
           adequate remedy to do what the civil courts would normally do in a suit.
Such provision, however, does not exclude those cases where the
           provisions of the particular Act have not been complied with or the
           statutory tribunal has not acted in conformity with the fundamental
           principles of judicial procedure.
(2) Where there is an express bar of the jurisdiction of the court, an
           examination of the scheme of the particular Act to find the adequacy or
           the sufficiency of the remedies provided may be relevant but is not
           decisive to sustain the jurisdiction of the civil court.
Where there is no express exclusion the examination of the remedies and
           the scheme of the particular Act to find out the intendment becomes
           necessary and the result of the inquiry may be decisive. In the latter case
           it is necessary to see if the statute creates a special right or a liability and
           provides for the determination of the right or liability and further lays
           down that all questions about the said right and liability shall be
           determined by the tribunals so constituted, and whether remedies
           normally associated with actions in civil courts are prescribed by the said
           statute or not.
xxxxx
           (7) An exclusion of the jurisdiction of the civil court is not readily to be
           inferred unless the conditions above set down apply.”
                                                                           (emphasis supplied)

The aforesaid decision of the Constitution Bench of this Court is also followed in a

catena of judgments including the one in
M. Hariharasudhan v. R. Karmegam
,

(2019) 10 SCC 94.
26
EFFECT OF REMOVING THE BASIS OF JUDGMENT
28. On the question of the effect of removal of the basis of the judgment, once again,

   the distinction between a procedural and substantial law has to be kept in mind. An

   adjudicating forum being a product of a procedural right has to come under

   retrospective operation when an amendment is introduced to cure a defect which

   paved the way for a decision of the Court in holding otherwise.
Madras Bar

   Association v. Union of India and Another
, (2022) 12 SCC 455,

           “50. The permissibility of a legislative override in this country should be in
           accordance with the principles
laid down by
this Court in the aforementioned as
           well as other judgments, which have been culled out as under:
50.1. The effect of the judgments of the Court can be nullified by a legislative act
           removing the basis of the judgment. Such law can be retrospective. Retrospective
           amendment should be reasonable and not arbitrary and must not be violative of
           the fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution. (Lohia Machines Ltd.
v.
Union of India [Lohia Machines Ltd. v. Union of India
, (1985) 2 SCC 197 : 1985
           SCC (Tax) 245] ).
50.2. The test for determining the validity of a validating legislation is that the
           judgment pointing out the defect would not have been passed, if the altered
           position as sought to be brought in by the validating statute existed before the
           Court at the time of rendering its judgment. In other words, the defect pointed
           out should have been cured such that the basis of the judgment pointing out the
           defect is removed.
50.3. Nullification of mandamus by an enactment would be impermissible legislative
           exercise (see
S.R. Bhagwat v. State of Mysore
[(1995) 6 SCC 16 : 1995 SCC (L&S)
           1334] ).
Even interim directions cannot be reversed by a legislative veto (see Cauvery
           Water Disputes Tribunal [Cauvery Water Disputes Tribunal, In re, 1993 Supp (1) SCC
           96 (2)] ) and Medical Council of India v. State of Kerala [(2019) 13 SCC 185] .
50.4. Transgression of constitutional limitations and intrusion into the judicial power
           by the legislature is violative of the principle of separation of powers, the rule of law
           and of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.”
                                                                                (emphasis supplied)
27
RASHID WALI BEG
(SUPRA)
29. This Court has taken note of the earlier decision rendered in
Ramesh Gobindram
(Supra) and held that after the amendment made by the Act 27 of 2013, the basis of
the said decision
is correctly removed. It was further held that there are sufficient

   provisions even otherwise to maintain a suit for eviction over a Wakf property.
While giving our imprimatur to the decision in
Rashid Wali Beg
(Supra), which in

   fact took into consideration the decisions subsequent to
Ramesh Gobindram
(Supra), we do not wish to elaborate much except quoting the following paragraphs,

          “45.
Interestingly, the basis of the decision in
Ramesh Gobindram [Ramesh
          Gobindram v. Sugra Humayun Mirza Wakf
, (2010) 8 SCC 726 : (2010) 3 SCC
          (Civ) 553] was removed through an amendment under Act 27 of 2013.
As we have
          stated elsewhere,
Ramesh Gobindram
(Supra) sought to address the question
          whether a Waqf Tribunal was competent to entertain and adjudicate upon
          disputes regarding eviction of persons in occupation of what are admittedly waqf
          properties. Since this Court answered the question in the negative,
Section 83(1)
was amended by Act 27 of 2013 to include the words, “eviction of tenant or
          determination of rights and obligations of the lessor and lessee of such property”.
xxxxx
47. The upshot of the above discussion is that the basis of
Ramesh Gobindram
          [Ramesh Gobindram v. Sugra Humayun Mirza Wakf
, (2010) 8 SCC 726 : (2010) 3
          SCC (Civ) 553] now stands removed through Amendment Act 27 of 2013.
In fact,
          when
Ramesh Gobindram [Ramesh Gobindram v. Sugra Humayun Mirza Wakf
,
          (2010) 8 SCC 726 : (2010) 3 SCC (Civ) 553] was decided,
Sections 6(1)
and
7(1)
enabled only three categories of persons to approach the Waqf Tribunal for relief. They
          are, (i) the Board; (ii) the mutawalli of the waqf; or (iii) any person interested therein.
          However, the Explanation under
Section 6(1)
clarified that the expression “any person
          interested therein” shall include every person, who, though not interested in the waqf,
          is interested in the property. But by Act 27 of 2013 the words, “any person interested”
          were substituted by the words, “any person aggrieved”, meaning thereby that even a
          non-Muslim is entitled to invoke the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. Due to the
          substitution of the words “any person aggrieved”, Act 27 of 2013 has deleted the
          Explanation under 6(1).
This amendment has also addressed the concern expressed in
Ramesh Gobindram [Ramesh Gobindram v. Sugra Humayun Mirza Wakf
, (2010) 8
          SCC 726 : (2010) 3 SCC (Civ) 553] (in para 21 of the SCC report) whether a non-
          Muslim could be put to jeopardy by the bar of jurisdiction, merely because the property
          is included in the list of waqfs.
We must point out at this stage that the Explanation
28
under sub-section (1) of
Section 6
, as it stood at the time when
Ramesh Gobindram
           [Ramesh Gobindram v. Sugra Humayun Mirza Wakf
, (2010) 8 SCC 726 : (2010) 3
           SCC (Civ) 553] was decided, already took care of this contingency, but was omitted
           to be brought to the notice of this Court.
xxxxx
64. We have already seen that it is not as though there was no provision in the
Waqf Act
conferring jurisdiction upon the Tribunal in respect of the waqf
           property. We can break the first part of
Section 83
into two limbs, the first
           concerning the determination of any dispute, question or other matter relating to
           a waqf and the second, concerning the determination of any dispute, question or
           other matter relating to a waqf property. After Amendment Act 27 of 2013, even
           the eviction of a tenant or determination of the rights and obligation of the lessor
           and lessee of such property, come within the purview of the Tribunal. Though the
           proceedings out of which the present appeal arises, were instituted before the
           Amendment Act, the words “any dispute, question or other matter relating to a
           waqf or waqf property” are sufficient to cover any dispute, question or other
           matter relating to a waqf property. This is why
Ramesh Gobindram [Ramesh
           Gobindram v. Sugra Humayun Mirza Wakf
, (2010) 8 SCC 726 : (2010) 3 SCC (Civ)
           553] was sought to be distinguished both in
Anis Fatma Begum [W.B. Wakf Board
           v. Anis Fatma Begum
, (2010) 14 SCC 588 : (2012) 1 SCC (Civ) 773] and Pritpal
           Singh [Punjab Wakf Board v. Pritpal Singh, 2013 SCC OnLine SC 1345] and such
           distinction was taken note of in
Akkode Jumayath Palli Paripalana Committee
           [Akkode Jumayath Palli Paripalana Committee v. P.V. Ibrahim Haji
, (2014) 16
           SCC 65 : (2015) 3 SCC (Civ) 446] .
Additionally, this Court in
Kiran Devi [Kiran
           Devi v. Bihar State Sunni Wakf Board
, (2021) 15 SCC 15 : 2021 SCC OnLine SC
           280] , refused to apply the ratio of
Ramesh Gobindram [Ramesh Gobindram v.
           Sugra Humayun Mirza Wakf
, (2010) 8 SCC 726 : (2010) 3 SCC (Civ) 553] , on the
           ground that the suit was originally instituted before the civil court, but was later
           transferred to the Waqf Tribunal and that after allowing the order of transfer to
           attain finality, it was not open to them to resurrect the issue through
Ramesh
           Gobindram [Ramesh Gobindram v. Sugra Humayun Mirza Wakf
, (2010) 8 SCC
           726 : (2010) 3 SCC (Civ) 553].
65. It is well settled that the court cannot do violence to the express language of
           the statute.
Section 83(1)
even as it stood before the amendment, provided for the
           determination by the Tribunal, of any dispute, question or other matter (i)
           relating to a waqf; and (ii) relating to a waqf property. Therefore to say that the
           Tribunal will have jurisdiction only if the subject property is disputed to be a
           waqf property and not if it is admitted to be a waqf property, is indigestible in
           the teeth of
Section 83(1)
.”
                                                                            (emphasis supplied)
30. On a proper analysis of
the said decision
, we have no hesitation in holding that the

   Wakf Tribunal has got sufficient jurisdiction to try every suit pertaining to either a
29
Wakf or a Wakf property, notwithstanding the nature of relief concerned, except as

   mandated under the statute.
31. We would like to consider one more issue by drawing a distinction between

   institution and adjudication. Institution of a suit before a forum where an

   adjudication process is the same as the other, insofar as the rights and liabilities are

   concerned, has got no relevancy when subsequently either an act or amendment has

   been brought forth conferring the jurisdiction to some other forum. In other words,

   the issue for consideration is the forum to adjudicate. This principle is subject to the

   rider that it may not have an application when there is already a decree where a party

   has not raised the issue of jurisdiction at any point before.
ON FACTS
32. The High Court while passing the impugned order, unfortunately did not have the

   benefit of the decision rendered in
Rashid Wali Beg
(Supra). Even otherwise, as

   per the amendment by way of the Act 27 of 2013, the jurisdiction now lies with the

   Wakf Tribunal. Respondent no(s). 1 and 2 have continuously put spokes on the

   wheels of justice as protracted proceedings have helped them to be in possession for

   over two decades, notwithstanding the expiry of the lease way back in the year 1999.
We do not wish to say much on the conduct of respondents no(s). 1 and 2 as the facts

   narrated speak for themselves.
The Act
27 of 2013 is certainly a procedural

   amendment and therefore, has to be applied retrospectively in the context of change
30
of forum and jurisdictional provisions. As stated, we are in respectful agreement

with the decision rendered in
Rashid Wali Beg
(Supra).
The amendment has been

brought forth in order to get over the interpretation given in
Ramesh Gobindram
(Supra). Therefore, we have no hesitation in setting aside the order impugned passed

by the High Court in C.R.P. No. 1264 of 2021 dated 23.11.2021, by restoring the

one passed by the Executing Court, i.e. the Court of the III-Additional Chief Judge,

City Civil Court at Hyderabad in E.P. No. 29 of 2014 dated 10.08.2021. The appeal

stands allowed. No costs.
………………………………..J.
                                                 (M. M. SUNDRESH)



                                                …………………………………..J.
                                               (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)
NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 20, 2023
31