[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Meenal Bhargava vs Naveen Sharma on 16 May, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
NON­REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            INHERENT JURISDICTION

                              CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NOS. 340­342 OF 2022

                                                           IN

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1341­1343 OF 2019


                         Meenal Bhargava                                 … Petitioner


                                                         versus


                         Naveen Sharma & Ors.                         ... Respondents


                                                    J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
1.   By judgment and order dated 16 th January 2023, we
                         held the respondent no.1 (contemnor) guilty of contempt.
                         We have recorded detailed findings in the said judgment
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
and order.       Before we passed the said Order, the learned
Date: 2023.05.16
17:54:21 IST
counsel for the contemnor was fully heard and in fact, the
Reason:
Contempt Petition (C) Nos.340-342/2022                               Page 1 of 9
contemnor was also present through video conferencing.
We postponed the sentencing part only with the object of
      giving last opportunity to the contemnor to make amends.
      However, we find that the contemnor has not shown any
      signs of remorse. On the contrary, the submissions made
      on his behalf clearly show that the contemnor has scant
      respect for the Orders of this Court.
2.      We are not reproducing all the findings recorded in the
      earlier order.           In terms of the undertaking given by the
      contemnor and the orders of this Court passed from time to
      time, he was under an obligation to bring back the child to
      India on 1st July 2022. We also noted the conduct of the
      contemnor in paragraph 12, which shows that he never had
      any intention of bringing the child back to India.
3.      The learned counsel for the contemnor invited our
      attention to the proceedings of the Circuit Court of Cook
      County, Illinois (for short “the Circuit Court”) of 24 th
      January 2023. He pointed out that the said proceedings
      record that one Mr Wasko has been appointed as the
      Guardian Ad Litem by the said Court in the USA.               He
      submitted that as the child was subjected to sexual abuse
      while he was staying with the petitioner in India, a forensic
Contempt Petition (C) Nos.340-342/2022                                Page 2 of 9
investigation is in progress in the United States of America
      (USA), and therefore, the child cannot be brought back to
      India unless the investigation is over. Learned counsel
      pointed out the submissions made by Mr. Wasko before the
      said Court. He submitted that the contemnor has acted in
      the best interests of the minor child and that he has acted
      in a bonafide manner to protect the interests of the minor
      child. He submitted that now that Guardian Ad Litem has
      been appointed, the contemnor cannot bring back the child
      to India so long as the appointment continues to exist.
4.          Learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner
      has invited our attention to the various aspects of the
      conduct of the contemnor and pointed out that, in fact, he
      is guilty of even criminal contempt.
5.          Following factual aspects indicate the extent of the
      contumacious conduct of the contemnor:­
(i)      A finding has been recorded in our earlier order that
                    the contemnor never intended to bring back the
                    child to India;
(ii)     The child holds a USA passport.      The contemnor
                    has not even applied for renewal of the passport
                    though the passport expired long back. In one of
Contempt Petition (C) Nos.340-342/2022                                  Page 3 of 9
the earlier hearings, he pleaded that since an
                  investigation is pending in USA about the sexual
                  abuse of the child, he could not apply for renewal of
                  his passport. However, he has not placed on record
                  any constraint put on him either under any law of
                  USA or an order of the competent Court which
                  prevented          him   from   applying   for   renewal    or
                  extension of the passport of the minor;
(iii)   The contemnor never applied to this Court for a
                  grant of extension of time to bring back the child.
                  For the first time, by filing a counter affidavit to the
                  contempt petition, he tried to seek an extension of
                  time without giving any justification;
(iv)    The      contemnor       always   acted    contrary   to   the
                  statement made by him on more than one occasion
                  that he has subjected himself to the jurisdiction of
                  this Court. He pleaded in the Courts in USA that
                  he has not subjected himself to the jurisdiction of
                  this Court; and
(v)     Even after the expiry of three months from the date
                  of the order holding him guilty of contempt, he has
                  not shown any remorse in any manner.
Contempt Petition (C) Nos.340-342/2022                                         Page 4 of 9
6.      Now we deal with the claim of the contemnor that he
      acted in the best interests of the minor. The proceedings of
      the Circuit Court dated 24th January 2023 are relevant for
      the purpose.             The Court noted that the minor son was
      talking about his ancestral house being sold.         The Court
      observed that it was a gross error on the part of the
      contemnor to talk to the child about pending litigations
      either in India or Canada. The Judge of the Circuit Court
      directed the contemnor that he was “truly and utterly”
      prohibited from discussing the litigations in India, USA and
      Canada with his minor son. We have also noted that the
      child talked about the sale of the property of his
      grandmother when in one of the video conference hearings,
      the child appeared with the contemnor. It is obvious that it
      is the contemnor who must have apprised the child about
      the litigation.
7.      The property of the contemnor’s mother was required
      to be sold due to the gross default committed by the
      contemnor. The contemnor is least bothered about the fact
      that his mother lost her property due to his default.
      However, apart from committing impropriety by informing
      the child about the details of the pending litigations, he
      tried to prejudice the minor’s mind by telling him that his
Contempt Petition (C) Nos.340-342/2022                              Page 5 of 9
ancestral property is being sold at the instance of the
      mother.
8.      The contemnor has shown scant respect to the judicial
      proceedings pending in this Court.                          He has defied
      assurance given to this Court that he has submitted himself
      to the jurisdiction of this Court. As noted in paragraph 15
      of the earlier order, the contemnor went to the extent of
      opposing the request for mirroring the order of this Court,
      which resulted in the denial of the said request by the
      concerned            Foreign         Court.    In   fact,        due   to   the
      misrepresentation made by the contemnor, the Foreign
      Court has not honoured the principle of comity of Courts.
      The act of denying the fact that he voluntarily submitted to
      the jurisdiction of this Court and his conduct of opposing
      the request for the grant of mirroring order amounts to
      interference          with         the   administration     of    justice   and
      obstructing the administration of justice.
9.      Another disturbing feature of the conduct of the
      contemnor has been noted on page 41 of the proceedings
      dated 24th January 2023 of the Circuit Court.                               The
      contemnor submitted before the Circuit Court that the said
      Court should make sure that there is an order passed that
Contempt Petition (C) Nos.340-342/2022                                              Page 6 of 9
the questions and answers in the proceedings should not be
      used in any proceedings in India. In fact, he tried to warn
      Mr. Wasko, who was appointed as Guardian ad litem, that
      based on the proceedings, he can be summoned by Indian
      Courts.         The contemnor reiterated that he wants to be
      careful as the proceedings have been used in Indian Courts.
      The contemnor knows that his conduct of defying the orders
      of this Court and showing disrespect to the orders of this
      Court can be established from the proceedings in the
      Circuit Court. His attempt before the Circuit Court was to
      ensure that his contumacious conduct, as reflected in the
      Circuit Court’s proceedings, should not be made available
      to this Court. In short, his attempt was to suppress the
      proceedings.
10. The acts and omissions of the contemnor, as reflected
      in what we have discussed above, amount to both civil and
      criminal contempt. This calls for a strict action against him.
11. This Court in the case of In Re : Perry Kansagra1,
      while relying upon decisions of this Court in the case of
Pallav Sheth v. Custodian2 and Re
: Vijay Kurle and



      1 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1516
      2 (2001) 7 SCC 549
Contempt Petition (C) Nos.340-342/2022                             Page 7 of 9
Others3 held that in view of
Article 129
of the Constitution
      of India, the power of this Court to punish a person for
      contempt is not constrained by the provisions of the
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971
.                In fact, this Court has
      observed that the power of this Court to punish a person for
      contempt is unrestricted by the
Contempt of Courts Act,
      1971
.
12. Considering his contumacious conduct, we propose to
      direct the contemnor to pay a fine of Rs. 25 lakhs and to
      undergo simple imprisonment for a period of six months for
      committing civil and criminal contempt.                In default of
      payment of the fine, he will have to undergo a further
      sentence of simple imprisonment for two months.
13. Accordingly, we issue the following directions:
i) The        contemnor         is sentenced to   undergo simple
              imprisonment for six months. He shall pay a fine of
              Rs. 25 lakhs within a period of six months from today.
The fine amount shall be deposited with the Registry of
              this Court. On the failure of the contemnor to pay the
              fine within the stipulated time, he shall undergo a


      3 2020 SCC OnLine SC 407
Contempt Petition (C) Nos.340-342/2022                                   Page 8 of 9
further sentence of simple imprisonment for two
              months.
ii) After the fine amount is deposited in this Court, the
              same shall be released to the petitioner, who will be
              under an obligation to use the said amount only for
              the welfare and benefit of the minor son.
iii) We direct the Government of India as well as the
              Central Bureau of Investigation to take all possible
              and permissible steps to secure the presence of the
              contemnor in India with a view to ensure that he
              undergoes the sentence and pays the fine.
14. For reporting compliance, the case shall be listed in
      the first week of August, 2023.
..……....….……………J.
                                              (Sanjay Kishan Kaul)



                                              ......………….…………J.
                                              (Abhay S. Oka)
      New Delhi;
May 16, 2023.
Contempt Petition (C) Nos.340-342/2022                            Page 9 of 9