[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sanket Kumar Agarwal vs Apg Logistics Private Limited on 1 May, 2023
Author:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Bench:
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
1

                                                                                               REPORTABLE
2023 INSC 727




                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO 748 OF 2023




           Sanket Kumar Agarwal & Anr                                                        … Appellants

                                                               Versus

           APG Logistics Private Limited                                                     … Respondent



                                                           JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI
1.                  Admit.
2.                  This appeal arises under Section 62 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code

           20161 from a judgment dated 9 January 2023 of the National Company Law Appellate

           Tribunal.2 The NCLAT dismissed the appeal against the order of the National Company

           Law Tribunal3 on the ground of limitation.
3.                  The appellant instituted an application under Section 7 of the IBC in June 2021

           seeking the initiation of the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process against the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
respondent. The application was dismissed by the NCLT by an order dated 26 August
      Date: 2023.05.08
      18:59:57 IST
      Reason:
1
“IBC”
2
“NCLAT”
3
“NCLT”
2
2022. On 2 September 2022, the appellant filed an application for obtaining a certified

copy of the order which was pronounced by the NCLT. The application was received by

the Registry of NCLT on 5 September 2022. On 15 September 2022, the order was

uploaded on the website of the NCLT and a certified copy was provided to the appellant

on the same day. The appellant lodged an appeal before the NCLAT on 10 October

2022 in the e-filing mode along with an Interlocutory Application 4 seeking condonation

of delay of five days. A physical copy of the appeal was filed on 31 October 2022.
4
“IA”
3
4.    The appellant submitted that the appeal had been filed within the period of

limitation from the date the order was made available in the public domain i.e., 15

September 2022. However, as a matter of abundant precaution, the appellant had

considered 26 August 2022 to be the date from which limitation would commence. The

appellant stated that the prescribed time period of 30 days for filing the appeal ended

on 5 October 2022, after accounting for the exclusion of 10 days (from 5 September

2022 to 15 September 2022 on account of the time taken to provide a certified copy).

The appellant submitted that the inadvertent delay of 5 days in filing the appeal had

been caused due to the additional time needed to obtain legal advice, collate

documents and connect with counsel during the festive season.
5.    In the background of the above sequence of events, the issue before NCLAT was

whether the appeal was instituted within limitation. In its impugned order, NCLAT

observed that the appeal was lodged through the e-portal on 10 October 2022, which

was the 46th day after the order of the NCLT. It observed that while Section 61(2) of the

IBC prescribes a 30-day deadline for preferring an appeal against an order of the

adjudicating authority, the appellate tribunal can condone a delay of upto 15 days, if

sufficient cause is shown. Furthermore, it held that the ingredients of Section 61 of the

IBC do not visualize that an aggrieved person has to wait till he is in receipt of a

certified copy of the impugned order before preferring an appeal. The tribunal held:
“31. It cannot be gainsaid, that the `Expiry of 30 days’, after
             the `Pronouncement of the impugned order’, dated
             26.08.2022, was on 24.09.2022. The 30 days period in
             preferring the `Appeal’, by any `Person Aggrieved’, in respect of
             an `Order’, passed by the `Adjudicating Authority’, is the
             `deadline’ prescribed as per Section 61 (2) of the Insolvency and
             Bankruptcy Code, 2016. If an `Appellate Tribunal’ (`NCLA T’), is
             satisfied on `sufficient cause’, being shown to its `subjective
             satisfaction’, in regard to the preferring of an `Appeal’ (after the
             `Expiry of 30 days period’), then, `such period, shall not exceed
4
15 days’, as per Section 61 (2) of the Code. Admittedly, the
                    `completion of 45 days’ (30 + 15 days), was on 09.10.2022. In
                    effect, the maximum 45 days being the outer limit (30 + 15 =
                    45 days), beyond which, the `Appellate Tribunal’ (`NCLAT),
                    is `bereft’ of any power, to `condone the delay’, in the teeth of
                    the mandate, prescribed under the I & B Code, 2016, as opined
                    by this `Tribunal’.”
                                                              (emphasis supplied)
6.         The NCLAT held that even according to the version of the appellants, the period

of 30 days would end on 4 October 2022 while the appeal was filed on 10 October

2022. It noted that 10 days (from 26 August 2022 to 4 September 2022) were spent

prior to the application for a certified copy and between 15 September 2022 and 4

October 2022 another period of 20 days elapsed.
7.         The NCLAT concluded that the appeal was barred by limitation on the ground

that it was instituted on the 46 th day following the order of the NCLT, exceeding the

outer limit of 45 days that was permissible under Section 61 of the IBC.
8.         The appellant questions the order of the NCLAT on limitation.
9.         The following submissions have been urged by Mr Bhanu Gupta, counsel

appearing on behalf of the appellant:
i.   The NCLAT ought to have excluded the period from 5 September 2022, when an

           application for obtaining a certified copy was filed till 15 September 2022, when

           the certified copy was received, while computing the period of limitation;
ii.   The NCLAT has erroneously taken the entire period between 26 August 2022

           and 10 October 2022 by failing to exclude the date on which the order was

           pronounced, namely, 26 August 2022 in terms of
Section 12(2)
of the Limitation

           Act 1963 and Rule 3 of the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal Rules

           20165;
iii.   The NCLAT has disregarded judicial precedents including the judgment of this
5
“NCLAT Rules 2016”
5
Court in
V Nagarajan v. SKS Ispat and Power Limited & Ors6
; and

    iv.    Since the order of the NCLT was uploaded on the website on 15 September

           2022 on which day the certified copy was also made available, it was impossible

           for the appellant to draft an appeal prior to 15 September 2022 based merely on

           the pronouncement of the order without knowledge of the grounds for dismissal.
10.        On the other hand, Ms Rashi Bansal, counsel appearing on behalf of the

respondent urged that:
i.   The appeal was filed on 10 October 2022 in the electronic mode;
ii.   On 3 January 2021, a circular was issued by the NCLAT notifying a Standard

           Operating Procedure7 for e-filing in terms of which physical copies were required

           to be filed as per the procedure prescribed under the NCLAT Rules 2016 along

           with the e-filing receipt;
iii.   On 21 October 2022, a further order was issued by the Registrar of NCLAT

           clarifying that the period of limitation shall be computed from the date of the

           presentation of the appeal as per Rule 22 of the NCLAT Rules 2016, the effect of

           which was that the period of limitation would cease to run only after a physical

           copy was presented;
iv.    By an order of 24 December 2022, notified by the Registrar of the NCLAT, the

           earlier order dated 21 October 2022 was withdrawn and it was notified for the

           first time that limitation shall be computed with reference to the date of e-filing;
and

     v.    Even the e-filing of the appeal on 10 October 2022 would not result in limitation

           ceasing to operate and it was only when a hard copy was filed that limitation

           would stop running.
6
(2022) 2 SCC 244 (“V Nagarajan”)
7
“SOP”
6
11.   The dispute in the appeal arises over the period of limitation applicable for filing

an appeal against an order of the NCLT under the IBC. The IBC is a complete code.

Section 238 of the IBC provides that the Code shall have effect notwithstanding

anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or

any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law. Relevant provisions of the IBC,

Limitation Act 1963, NCLAT Rules 2016 and administrative orders are extracted below

and are referred to, in turn.
12.   Section 61(1) of the IBC stipulates that notwithstanding anything to the contrary

contained in the
Companies Act
2013, any person aggrieved by the order of the

adjudicating authority “under this Part” may prefer an appeal to NCLAT. Sub-Section (2)

of Section 61 provides for a period of limitation in the following terms:
“61. Appeals and Appellate Authority—
              (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained under the
Companies Act, 2013
, any person aggrieved by the order of the
              Adjudicating Authority under this part may prefer an appeal to the
              National Company Law Appellate Tribunal.
(2) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within thirty
              days before the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal:
Provided that the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal may
              allow an appeal to be filed after the expiry of the said period of
              thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not
              filing the appeal but such period shall not exceed fifteen days.
              […]”


Sub-Section (2) of Section 61 provides for a limitation period of thirty days. The proviso

to Section 61(2) provides that NLCAT may allow an appeal to be filed beyond a period

of thirty days by a maximum of fifteen days on the demonstration of sufficient cause for

the delay.
13.   Section 238A, inserted in the IBC by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code
7
(Second Amendment) Act 2018,8 contains a specific provision in regard to the
Limitation

Act
1963. Section 238A provides that the
Limitation Act
would inter alia apply “as far as

may be” to appeals before the NCLAT:
“238A. Limitation — The provisions of the
Limitation Act
1963,
             shall, as far as may be, apply to the proceedings or appeals
             before the Adjudicating Authority, the National Company Law
             Appellate Tribunal, the Debt Recovery Tribunal or the Debt
             Recovery Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.”
14.   The Central Government, in exercise of the powers conferred by
Section 469
of

the Companies Act 2013, has formulated the NCLAT Rules 2016. Rule 3 of the NCLAT

Rules 2016 stipulates that for computation of a time period as provided, the day from

which the said period is to be reckoned shall be excluded. Rule 3 provides as follows:
“3. Computation of time period—Where a period is prescribed
             by the Act and these rules or under any other law or is fixed by
             the Appellate Tribunal for doing any act, in computing the time,
             the day from which the said period is to be reckoned shall be
             excluded, and if the last day expires on a day when the office of
             the Appellate Tribunal is closed, that day and any succeeding
             day on which the Appellate Tribunal remains closed shall also be
             excluded.”
15.   Part III of the NCLAT Rules 2016 deals with the procedure for the institution of

appeals. Rule 22 provides that an appeal has to be presented at the filing counter of the

Appellate Tribunal, and should be accompanied by a certified copy of the order under

challenge. Rule 22 provides that:
“22. Presentation of appeal—
             (1) Every appeal shall be presented in Form NCLAT-1 in
             triplicate by the appellant or petitioner or applicant or respondent,
             as the case may be, in person or by his duly authorised
             representative duly appointed in this behalf in the prescribed
             form with stipulated fee at the filing counter and non-compliance
             of this may constitute a valid ground to refuse to entertain the
             same.
(2)      Every appeal shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
8
The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Second Amendment) Act
2018, Act No. 26 of 2018
8
the impugned order.
(3)     All documents filed in the Appellate Tribunal shall be
             accompanied by an index in triplicate containing their details and
             the amount of fee paid thereon.
(4)     Sufficient number of copies of the appeal or petition or
             application shall also be filed for service on the opposite party as
             prescribed.
(5)     In the pending matters, all other applications shall be
             presented after serving copies thereof in advance on the
             opposite side or his advocate or authorised representative.
             (6)     The processing fee prescribed by the rules, with required
             number of envelopes of sufficient size and notice forms as
             prescribed shall be filled along with memorandum of appeal.”
16.   In terms of Rule 103, the Appellate Tribunal may allow the filing of an appeal or

proceedings through electronic mode. Rule 103 provides that:
“103. Filling through electronic media— The Appellate
             Tribunal may allow filing of appeal or proceedings through
             electronic mode such as online filing and provide for rectification
             of defects by e-mail or internet and in such filing, these rules
             shall be adopted as nearly as possible on and form a date to be
             notified separately and the Central Government may issue
             instructions in this behalf from time to time.”
17.   On 3 January 2021, NCLAT notified a Revised SOP for the hearing of cases

through the virtual mode, using its e-filing portal. The SOP notices that an e-filing facility

was available for filing of appeals and related documents, and exhorts “all concerned”

to “avail the same through NCLAT e-filing portal”. The circular provides as follows:
“It may be noted that it is mandatory that Ld. Advocates/
             Authorised Representatives/ Parties-in-Person shall file the
             Appeal/Interlocutory Application/Reply/ Rejoinder etc. in hard
             copy also as per the procedure prescribed in NCLAT Rules,
             2016 along with the e-filing receipt. The online filing & hard
             copies must match with proper pagination. The Court Fee shall
             be paid through Bharat Kosh (https://bharatkosh.gov.in) and the
             payment receipt should be attached.”
18.   Subsequently, on 21 October 2022, the Registrar of NCLAT issued another

order9 with regard to computing limitation for the purpose of filing an appeal before the
9
NCLAT, F.No. 10/37/2018-NCLAT, dt. 21 October 2022
9
Appellate Tribunal. The order notices that while Rule 22 of the NCLAT Rules 2016

provides for the presentation of an appeal at the filing counter of the NCLAT, Rule 103

permits the filing of appeals or proceedings through the electronic mode. After adverting

to the SOP dated 3 January 2021, the order indicates as follows:
“The SOPs and directions issued by the Appellate Tribunal do
             not contain any direction with regard to computation of limitation
             as to whether limitation is to be computed from the date of e-
             filing of the Appeals or from the date when Appeals are
             presented before the Appellate Tribunal as per Rule 22 of the
             NCLAT Rules, 2016. The Competent Authority has, therefore,
             decided to issue directions in exercise of power conferred by
             Rule 104 of the NCLAT Rules, 2016 with regard to computation
             of limitation for the purposes of filing an Appeal in the Appellate
             Tribunal.
Hence, with regard to computation of limitation in Appeals,
             following directions are hereby issued by the Competent
             Authority: -
(1) The period of limitation shall be computed from the date of
             presentation of Appeal as per Rule 22 of the NCLAT Rules,
             2016.
(2) The requirement of filing Appeals by electronic mode shall
             continue along with mandatory filing of the Appeals as per Rule
             22 of the NCLAT Rules, 2016.
(3) This order will be effective with effect from 1st November,
             2022.”

             All concerned shall ensure that Appeals are presented as per
             Rule 22 of the NCLAT Rules, 2016 within the period of limitation
             at the filing counter.”
19.   The above order dated 21 October 2022 indicates that the SOPs and directions

which were issued by the NCLAT did not contain any provision for the computation of

limitation, more specifically on whether limitation has to be computed with reference to

the date of e-filing or from the date on which the appeal is presented before the NCLAT,

in terms of Rule 22. Hence, in exercise of the power conferred by Rule 104, it was
10
notified that the period of limitation would be computed with reference to the date of the

presentation of the appeal in terms of Rule 22. Moreover, the requirement of filing

appeals by the electronic mode was directed to continue together with the mandatory

filing of appeals under Rule 22. The order dated 21 October 2022 was to be effective

from 1 November 2022.
20.   Eventually, on 24 December 2022, another order was issued by the Registrar of

NCLAT in the following terms:
“It is seen that appeals are e-filed from different parts of the
             country where the appellant in some cases is located in far away
             places and time is taken to file physical copy. It is further seen
             that physical copy is filed within seven days of e-filing.
Hence, with regard to computation of limitation in Appeals,
             following directions are hereby issued by the Competent
             Authority: -
(1) The order F.No.10/37/2018-NCLAT dated 21.10.2022 is
             hereby withdrawn and superseded by this order.
(2) Limitation shall be computed from the date of e-filing. The
             hard copy has to be filed within 7 days of e-filing. However, the
             competent authority is at liberty to notify to extend the period of
             filing hard copy in case of any unforeseen exigency. In a case
             where hard copy is filed after 7 days, the appeal will be placed
             before the Tribunal for appropriate order.
(3) The requirement of filing Appeals by electronic mode shall
             continue along with mandatory filing of the Appeals as per Rule
             22 of the NCLAT Rules, 2016.
(4) This order will be effective with immediate effect.
All concerned shall ensure that Appeals are presented as per
             Rule 22 of the NCLAT Rules, 2016 within the period of limitation
             at the filing counter.”
21.   Hence, by the order dated 24 December 2022, it was clarified that limitation shall

be computed with reference to the date of e-filing while the physical copy would have to

be filed within seven days of e-filing. The order clarifies that the requirement of filing
11
appeals by the electronic mode shall continue together with the mandatory filing of

appeals in terms of Rule 22 of the NCLAT Rules 2016.
22.   Having regard to the above sequence of Rules and administrative orders, it is

evident that on the one hand, Rule 22 of the NCLAT Rules 2016 requires the

presentation of an appeal at the filing counter in the prescribed mode, but on the other,

NCLAT also envisages e-filing of appeals. This is made evident in the SOP dated 3

January 2021 which mandates the filing of a physical copy of an appeal as per the

procedure prescribed in the NCLAT Rules 2016, while referring to the procedure for the

hearing of cases through the virtual mode, using the e-filing portal. The subsequent

order dated 21 October 2022 acknowledges that there was an absence of clarity in

regard to the period with reference to which limitation would commence. Hence, the

order purported to state that the period of limitation shall be computed from the date of

the presentation of an appeal under Rule 22. Significantly, the above order was to be

effective from 1 November 2022. In the present case, admittedly, the appeal was e-filed

on 10 October 2022 and even a physical copy was lodged on 31 October 2022 prior to

the date on which the order of the Registrar dated 21 October 2022 was to come into

effect. The order dated 21 October 2022 was subsequently withdrawn on 24 December

2022. The order dated 24 December 2022 now clarifies that limitation would be

computed with effect from the date of e-filing but a physical copy would have to be filed

within seven days of e-filing.
23.   In the present case, the order was pronounced by the NCLT on 26 August 2022.

Rule 3 of the NCLAT Rules 2016 stipulates that the date from which the period of

limitation has to be reckoned (i.e., the date of the pronouncement of the order) would

have to be excluded. Hence, the date on which the order was pronounced by the NCLT,

namely 26 August 2022 would have to be excluded from the computation of limitation.
12
This is in line with
Section 12(1)
of the Limitation Act 1963. As noted earlier, the

provisions of the
Limitation Act
1963 are made applicable, inter alia, to appeals before

the NCLAT by virtue of Section 238A of the IBC.
Section 12(1)
of the Limitation Act

1963 provides as follows:
“12. Exclusion of time in legal proceedings—
             (1) In computing the period of limitation for any suit, appeal or
             application, the day from which such period is to be reckoned,
             shall be excluded.
[…]”
24.   Between 26 August 2022, when the order was pronounced by the NCLT, and 10

October 2022, when the appeal was e-filed, a period of 45 days elapsed after excluding

the date on which the order was pronounced. The NCLAT has erroneously proceeded

on the basis that the appeal was lodged on the 46 th day whereas correctly computed,

the appeal was lodged on the 45th day. This is evident from the following table:
S. No.                       Period                         Days
                        1       Between 26 August to 31 August              05 days
                        2       Between 1 September to 30 September         30 days
                        3       Between 1 October to 10 October             10 days
                                     TOTAL (5+30+10)                        45 days
25.   The power of condoning a delay of up to 15 days beyond the original period of 30

days lies within the discretionary power of the NCLAT. The appeal was instituted within

the outer limit of 45 days.
26.   Furthermore, in terms of
Section 12(2)
of the Limitation Act 1963, the time

requisite for obtaining a copy of the order appealed from has to be excluded while

computing the period of limitation. The Explanation to
Section 12
clarifies that the time

taken by the court to prepare an order before an application for a copy thereof is made

shall not be excluded. The relevant part of
Section 12
provides as follows:
13
“12. Exclusion of time in legal proceedings.—
             (1) ….
(2) In computing the period of limitation for an appeal or an
             application for leave to appeal or for revision or for review of a
             judgment, the day on which the judgment complained of was
             pronounced and the time requisite for obtaining a copy of the
             decree, sentence or order appealed from or sought to be revised
             or reviewed shall be excluded.
(3) ….
(4) ….
Explanation.— In computing under this section the time requisite
             for obtaining a copy of a decree or an order, any time taken by
             the court to prepare the decree or order before an application for
             a copy thereof is made shall not be excluded.”
27.
In
V Nagarajan
(supra), a three judge Bench of this Court observed that Rule

22(2) of the NCLAT Rules 2016 mandates that an appeal has to be filed with a certified

copy of the impugned order. The Court held that limitation commences once the order

was pronounced and the time taken by the court to provide the appellant with a certified

copy would be excluded, as clarified in
Section 12(2)
of the Limitation Act 1963, if the

appellant had applied for a certified copy within the prescribed period of limitation under

Section 61(2) of the IBC. In the facts of the case, this Court held that the appeal was

barred by limitation as the appellant demonstrated no effort to secure a certified copy

and only relied on the date of the uploading of the order of the website. This Court held

that:
29. On the question of a certified copy for filing an appeal against
             an order passed by NCLT under IBC, Rule 22(2) of
             the NCLAT Rules mandates that an appeal has to be filed
             with a certified copy of the “impugned order” […] Therefore,
             it cannot be said that the parties can automatically dispense with
             their obligation to apply for and obtain a certified copy for filing an
             appeal. Any delay in receipt of a certified copy, once an
             application has been filed, has been envisaged by the
             legislature and duly excluded to not cause any prejudice to
             a litigant's right to appeal.
30. […]
31. The import of
Section 12
of the Limitation Act and its
14
Explanation is to assign the responsibility of applying for a
             certified copy of the order on a party. A person wishing to file
             an appeal is expected to file an application for a certified
             copy before the expiry of the limitation period, upon which
             the “time requisite” for obtaining a copy is to be excluded.
However, the time taken by the court to prepare the decree or
             order before an application for a copy is made cannot be
             excluded. If no application for a certified copy has been made, no
             exclusion can ensue. In fact, the Explanation to the provision is a
             clear indicator of the legal position that the time which is taken by
             the court to prepare the decree or order cannot be excluded
             before the application to obtain a copy is made. It cannot be said
             that the right to receive a free copy under
Section 420(3)
of the
             Companies Act obviated the obligation on the appellant to seek a
             certified copy through an application. The appellant has urged
             that Rule 14 of the NCLAT Rules empowers NCLAT to exempt
             parties from compliance with the requirement of any of the rules
             in the interests of substantial justice, which has been typically
             exercised in favour of allowing a downloaded copy in lieu of a
             certified copy. While it may well be true that waivers on filing
             an appeal with a certified copy are often granted for the
             purposes of judicial determination, they do not confer an
             automatic right on an applicant to dispense with compliance
             and render Rule 22(2) of the NCLAT Rules nugatory [….]
                                                             (emphasis supplied)
28.   In the present case, the application for a certified copy was sent from Delhi to

Chennai on 2 September 2022, which was received on 5 September 2022, within the

period of limitation of 30 days specified in Section 61(2). This aspect lies in contrast to

the facts as they obtained before this Court in the judgment in
V Nagarajan
(supra)

where even the application for obtaining the certified copy was not filed. In the present

case, the appellant exercised due diligence and applied for a certified copy upon

pronouncement of the order in terms of Rule 22(2) of the NLCAT Rules 2016. The

certified copy was provided to the appellant on 15 September 2022. Hence, the period

of 10 days between 5 September 2022 and 15 September 2022 taken by the court to

provide a certified copy of the order ought to be excluded when determining the period

of limitation under Section 61(2) of the IBC.
29.   In view of the above discussion, we have come to the conclusion that the NCLAT
15
was in error in dismissing the appeal on the ground of limitation. The explanation which

was advanced by the appellant for condoning the period of 5 days (beyond the period of

30 days stipulated for the filing of an appeal) was, in our view, sufficient and the delay

should have been condoned within the four corners of the statute.
30.   Before concluding, we cannot but fail to notice the flip-flops on the part of the

NCLAT in providing administrative guidance on whether limitation would commence

from the date of e-filing or from the presentation of the appeal at the filing counter. With

technological advances, the country’s judiciary and tribunals must move towards e-

filing. This process has already commenced and is irreversible. The Union Government

must have a fresh look at the rules to encourage e-filing across tribunals. Perhaps one

way forward would be to constitute a Working Group to make a comprehensive

assessment of the position across tribunals and suggest regulatory changes. Moreover,

it is utterly incomprehensible why NCLAT should insist on physical filing in addition to e-

filing. This unnecessarily burdens litigants and the Bar and is a disincentive for e-filing.

A lawyer or litigant who is compelled to file physical copies in addition to e-filed

documents will have no cogent reason to resort to e-filing. This duplication of effort is

time consuming. It adds to expense. It leaves behind a carbon footprint which is difficult

to efface. The judicial process has traditionally been guzzling paper. This model is not

environmentally sustainable. If some judges are uncomfortable with e-files, the answer

is to provide training to them and not to continue with old and outmoded ways of

working. The judiciary has to modernize and adapt to technology. The tribunals can be

no exception. This can no longer be a matter of choice. The IBC is a significant prong in

economic reforms. It has radically reshaped the law relating to insolvency and

bankruptcy. The manner in which the law is administered will have to keep pace with

technology. Both the Union government in its rule making capacity and the
16
administrative heads of tribunals must ensure a seamless transition to working in the

electronic mode.
31.      A copy of this judgment shall be forwarded to the Chairperson of the NCLAT and

to the Secretaries to the Union Government respectively in the Ministries of (i) Finance;
(ii) Corporate Affairs; and (iii) Law and Justice for ensuring compliance and remedial

steps.
32.      We accordingly allow the appeal and set aside the order of the NCLAT dated 9

January 2023.
33.      The appeal shall accordingly be restored to the file of the NCLAT for disposal on

merits.
34.      Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
……...…...….......……………….CJI.
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]



                                                       …...…...….......………………....…..J.
                                                       [J B Pardiwala]

New Delhi;
May 01, 2023
17
ITEM NO.37                    COURT NO.1                    SECTION XVII

                  S U P R E M E C O U R T O F         I N D I A
                          RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Civil Appeal      No(s).   748/2023
SANKET KUMAR AGARWAL & ANR.                                  Appellant(s)

                                       VERSUS

APG LOGISTICS PRIVATE LIMITED                                Respondent(s)
(FOR ADMISSION and IA No.23481/2023-PERMISSION TO FILE ADDITIONAL
DOCUMENTS/FACTS/ANNEXURES)


Date : 01-05-2023 These matters were called on for hearing today.
CORAM :    HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
           HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.B. PARDIWALA


For Appellant(s)      Ms. Mayuri Raghuvanshi, AOR
                      Mr. Vp Singh, Adv.
                      Mr. Akshat Singh, Adv.
                      Ms. Dacchita Shahi, Adv.
                      Mr. Vyom Raghuvanshi, Adv.
                      Mr. Bhanu Gupta, Adv.


For Respondent(s)       Ms. Rashi Bansal, AOR
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                                 O R D E R


1    Admit.
2    The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed reportable judgment. Operative

     part of the judgment reads as under :
“29 In view of the above discussion, we have come to the
                conclusion that the NCLAT was in error in dismissing the
18
appeal on the ground of limitation. The explanation which
     was advanced by the appellant for condoning the period of 5
     days (beyond the period of 30 days stipulated for the filing of
     an appeal) was, in our view, sufficient and the delay should
     have been condoned within the four corners of the statute.
30    Before concluding, we cannot but fail to notice the flip-flops
      on the part of the NCLAT in providing administrative
      guidance on whether limitation would commence from the
      date of e-filing or from the presentation of the appeal at the
      filing counter. With technological advances, the country’s
      judiciary and tribunals must move towards e-filing. This
      process has already commenced and is irreversible. The
      Union Government must have a fresh look at the rules to
      encourage e-filing across tribunals. Perhaps one way
      forward would be to constitute a Working Group to make a
      comprehensive assessment of the position across tribunals
      and suggest regulatory changes. Moreover, it is utterly
      incomprehensible why NCLAT should insist on physical
      filing in addition to e-filing. This unnecessarily burdens
      litigants and the Bar and is a disincentive for e-filing. A
      lawyer or litigant who is compelled to file physical copies in
      addition to e-filed documents will have no cogent reason to
      resort to e-filing. This duplication of effort is time
      consuming. It adds to expense. It leaves behind a carbon
      footprint which is difficult to efface. The judicial process has
      traditionally been guzzling paper. This model is not
      environmentally sustainable. If some judges are
      uncomfortable with e-files, the answer is to provide training
      to them and not to continue with old and outmoded ways of
      working. The judiciary has to modernize and adapt to
      technology. The tribunals can be no exception. This can no
      longer be a matter of choice. The IBC is a significant prong
      in economic reforms. It has radically reshaped the law
      relating to insolvency and bankruptcy. The manner in which
      the law is administered will have to keep pace with
      technology. Both the Union government in its rule making
      capacity and the administrative heads of tribunals must
      ensure a seamless transition to working in the electronic
      mode.
31    A copy of this judgment shall be forwarded to the
      Chairperson of the NCLAT and to the Secretaries to the
      Union Government respectively in the Ministries of (i)
      Finance; (ii) Corporate Affairs; and (iii) Law and Justice for
      ensuring compliance and remedial steps.
32    We accordingly allow the appeal and set aside the order of
      the NCLAT dated 9 January 2023.
33    The appeal shall accordingly be restored to the file of the
      NCLAT for disposal on merits.
34    Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.”
19
(GULSHAN KUMAR ARORA)                    (SAROJ KUMARI GAUR)
      AR-CUM-PS                          ASSISTANT REGISTRAR
(Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)