[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Tarak Nath Keshari vs The State Of West Bengal on 10 May, 2023
Author:
Rajesh Bindal
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
,
Rajesh Bindal
Criminal Appeal No. 1444 of 2023



                                                                      [NON-REPORTABLE]

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                Criminal Appeal No.1444 of 2023
                         (Arising out of SLP (Crl) D No. 28476 of 2018)


     Tarak Nath Keshari                                                          …Appellant


                                                Versus


     State of West Bengal                                                        …Respondent
                                           JUDGMENT
Rajesh Bindal, J.
Delay condoned. Leave granted.
1.                    The   present   appeal   has      been    filed   challenging       the

     judgment of the High Court at Calcutta passed in CRA No. 327 of

     1986 dated 4.7.2017. Vide aforesaid judgment, the judgment of the

     Trial Court dated 29.7.1986 was upheld.
2.                    The appellant was tried and convicted under Section 7(1)
(a)(ii) of the
Essential Commodities Act, 1955
(hereinafter referred to

     as “the
EC Act
”) for violation of para 3(1) of the West Bengal Pulses,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2023.05.11
Edible Oil (Dealers Licensing) Order, 1978. It was on account of the
11:36:49 IST
Reason:
fact that at the time of inspection of his grocery shop on 20.8.1985,
Page 1 of 7
Criminal Appeal No. 1444 of 2023



mustard oil and vegetable oil were found to be more than the

permissible limit.
3.          The Trial Court sentenced the appellant to undergo rigorous

imprisonment for a period of six months and imposed a fine of

Rs.500/-.   The sale proceeds of the seized oil were forfeited to the

State.    In appeal, the High Court upheld the conviction, however,

reduced the sentence from rigorous imprisonment of six months to

rigorous imprisonment of three months.          However, the fine was

upheld.     Notice in the appeal was issued on 7.9.2018 restricted to

the question of imposition of fine in lieu of or in addition to sentence.
4.          The short argument raised by the learned counsel for the

appellant is that it is a case where the incident had taken place way

back in the year 1985 when the inspection of the grocery shop of the

appellant was carried out. More than 37 years have gone by. Though

the trial was concluded in less than a year, however, thereafter the

matter remained pending in the High Court for a period of more than

31 years.    The appellant was on bail throughout.        Considering the

aforesaid fact, the sentence of imprisonment awarded to him may be

set aside and in case this Court finds appropriate, in lieu of sentence,

fine may be imposed.
Page 2 of 7
Criminal Appeal No. 1444 of 2023
5.         On the other hand, learned counsel for the State submitted

that no doubt the incident had taken place more than 37 years back,

however, still two courts have found that the offence against the

appellant was made out.      Under
Section 7(1)(a)(ii)
of the EC Act,

minimum punishment of three months has been provided. However,

Ms. Madhumita Bhattacharjee, learned counsel for the State, did not

dispute the fact that the proviso of the aforesaid provision clearly

stipulates that the sentence less than the minimum prescribed can be

awarded for ‘special’ and ‘adequate’ reasons to be recorded.
6.         Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the

paper book.    The fact that inspection of the shop of the appellant

was carried out on 20.8.1985, hence the incident had taken place

more than 37 years back. As was pointed out at the time of hearing,

the appellant throughout remained on bail.
Section 7(1)(a)(ii)
of the

EC Act under which the appellant has been convicted, provides as

under: -
“7. Penalties – (1) If any person contravenes any order
           made under
Section 3
, -
(a) he shall be punishable, -
(i)  ….
(ii) in the case of any other order, with
                    imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
                    than three months but which may extend to
                    seven years and shall also be liable to fine:
Page 3 of 7
Criminal Appeal No. 1444 of 2023



             Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special
             reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a
             sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three
             months;”
7.           A perusal of the aforesaid Section shows that the Court

may, for adequate and special reasons, impose punishment less than

the minimum prescribed in the Section. However, the fact remains

that the offence in the case in hand was committed on 20.8.1985 and

in   terms     of   the
Essential   Commodities   (Special     Provisions)

Amendment Act, 1981
, the proviso was not in force on that date.
8.           As far as the case of the appellant on merits is concerned,

we do not find that any case is made out for interference in the

concurrent findings of the facts recorded by all the courts below. It

was found that the stock of mustard oil and vegetable oil found at the

shop of the appellant was more than the permissible limit, hence, this

was violative of para 3(1) of the West Bengal Pulses, Edible Oil

(Dealers Licensing) Order, 1978.
9.           However, still we find that a case is made out for grant of

benefit of probation to the appellant for the reason that the offence

was committed more than 37 years back and it was not pointed out

at the time of hearing that the appellant was involved in any other

offence.     Before all the courts below, the appellant remained on bail.
Page 4 of 7
Criminal Appeal No. 1444 of 2023



While entertaining his appeal, even this Court had granted him

exemption from surrendering.
Section 4
of the Probation of Offenders

Act, 1958 has a non obstante clause. The same is extracted below:
“4.     Power of court to release certain offenders on
       probation of good conduct.—(1) When any person is
       found   guilty   of having    committed    an    offence not
       punishable with death or imprisonment for life and the
       court by which the person is found guilty is of opinion
       that, having regard to the circumstances of the case
       including the nature of the offence and the character of
       the offender, it is expedient to release him on probation
       of    good   conduct,   then,     notwithstanding      anything
       contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
       court may, instead of sentencing him at once to any
       punishment direct that he be released on his entering into
       a bond, with or without sureties, to appear and receive
       sentence when called upon during such period, not
       exceeding three years, as the court may direct, and in the
       meantime to keep the peace and be of good behaviour:
Provided that the court shall not direct such release of an
       offender unless it is satisfied that the offender or his
       surety, if any, has a fixed place of abode or regular
       occupation in the place over which the court exercises
       jurisdiction or in which the offender is likely to live during
       the period for which he enters into the bond.
Page 5 of 7
Criminal Appeal No. 1444 of 2023



(2)    Before making any order under sub-section (1),
the court shall take into consideration the report, if any,
of the probation officer concerned in relation to the case.
(3)    When an order under sub-section (1) is made, the
court may, if it is of opinion that in the interests of the
offender and of the public it is expedient so to do, in
addition pass a supervision order directing that the
offender shall remain under the supervision of a probation
officer named in the order during such period, not being
less than one year, as may be specified therein, and may
in such supervision order impose such conditions as it
deems necessary for the due supervision of the offender.
(4)     The court making a supervision order under sub-
section (3) shall require the offender, before he is
released, to enter into a bond, with or without sureties, to
observe the conditions specified in such order and such
additional   conditions   with       respect    to     residence,
abstention from intoxicants or any other matter as the
court may, having regard to the particular circumstances,
consider fit to impose for preventing a repetition of the
same offence or a commission of other offences by the
offender.
(5)    The court making a supervision order under sub-
section (3) shall explain to the offender the terms and
conditions of the order and shall forthwith furnish one
copy of the supervision order to each of the offenders, the
sureties, if any, and the probation officer concerned.”
Page 6 of 7
Criminal Appeal No. 1444 of 2023
10.            Even if there is minimum sentence provided in
Section 7
of

the EC Act, in our opinion, the appellant is entitled to the benefit of

probation, the
EC Act
, being of the year 1955 and the
Probation of

Offenders Act, 1958
being later.           Even if minimum sentence is

provided in the
EC Act, 1955
the same will not be a hurdle for

invoking the applicability of provisions of the
Probation of Offenders

Act, 1958
.       Reference can be made to a judgment of this Court in
Lakhvir Singh v. The State of Punjab & Ors1
.
11.            The appeal is accordingly disposed of.     The appellant is

directed to be released on probation under
Section 4
of the Probation

of Offenders Act, 1958 on entering into bond and two sureties each to

ensure that he will maintain peace and good behaviour for the

remaining part of his sentence, failing which he can be called upon to

serve the sentence.
_____________, J.
(Abhay S. Oka)



                                                              ____________, J.
(Rajesh Bindal)
New Delhi
May 10, 2023
// NR, SS //


1 (2021) 2 SCC 763
Page 7 of 7