[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Essemm Logistics vs Darcl Logistics Limited on 1 May, 2023
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
V. Ramasubramanian
NON-REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.             OF 2023
                                  (Arising out of SLP (C) No.24340 of 2019)

          ESSEMM LOGISTICS                                                 …APPELLANT

                                                   VERSUS


          DARCL LOGISTICS LIMITED & ANR.                                  …RESPONDENTS


                                             JUDGMENT
PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.              Leave granted.
2.              Heard Mr. Anand Sanjay M. Nuli, learned advocate appearing

                         for the appellant and Mr. Manu Beri, learned Advocate

                         appearing for the first respondent.
3.              The appellant (ESSEMM Logistics), who was the first defendant

                         in the suit, has preferred this appeal against the rejection of its

                         counter-claim in exercise of power available under Order VII
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NIRMALA NEGI
Date: 2023.05.01
Rule 11 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 (in short “
CPC
”) by
16:23:18 IST
Reason:
1
the Court of first instance which order has been upheld by the

     High Court.
4.   The first respondent (DARCL Logistics Limited) was the plaintiff

     who instituted original suit No.79 of 2013 (DARCL Logistics

     Limited Vs. ESSEMM Logistics & Anr.) for a recovery of sum of

     Rs.4,09,53,847/- with interest at the rate of 18% till its

     realisation, since the first defendant – appellant failed to make

     payments due as per 530 bills raised during the period

     14.11.2011 to 31.01.2012.
5.   In the said suit, the first defendant – the appellant herein

     entered appearance and filed its written statement with

     counter-claim of Rs.13,04,00,000/- with interest at the rate of

     24% on the said amount till its realization. The said counter-

     claim was set up as under:
1.     Loss of Business Opportunity Rs.3,50,00,000/-
due to diversification of the
             Cargo from Gangavaram Port to
             Paradeep Port
2.     Loss of Reputation                Rs.7,50,00,000/-
3.     Loss on account of Idling of Rs.2,04,00,000/-
Men, Machine & Overheads
2
Total                     Rs.13,04,00,000/-
6.   It may be noted that the plaintiff-first respondent is a common

     carrier and is governed by the Carriage by
Road Act, 2007
(new

     Act) which came into force with effect from 20.07.2010 repealing

     the
Carriers Act, 1865
.
7.
The Carriers Act, 1865
vide
Section 10
provided that no suit

     shall be instituted against the common carrier for the loss of, or

     injury to, goods including containers, pallets or similar articles

     of transport entrusted for carriage, unless a notice in writing for

     such loss of injury is given before the institution of the suit

     within six months of the loss coming to the knowledge of the

     plaintiff.
8.   The above
Section 10
of the Carriers Act, 1865 for convenience

     sake is reproduced hereinbelow:
“No suit shall be instituted against a common carrier
         for the loss of, or injury to, goods [including containers,
         pallets or similar articles of transport used to
         consolidate goods] entrusted to him for carriage, unless
         notice in writing of the loss or injury has been given to
         him before the institution of the suit and within six
         months of the time when the loss or injury first came to
         the knowledge of the plaintiff.”
3
9.   The above
Section 10
of the Carriers Act, 1865 bars the

     institution of a suit only against a common carrier for the loss

     of, or injury to, goods entrusted to the common carriage for the

     purposes of carriage without giving a notice in writing of the

     alleged loss within six months of the loss or injury first coming

     to the knowledge of the plaintiff. In other words, only a suit for

     recovering damages for the loss of or injury to the goods

     entrusted to the common carrier for carriage is barred without

     a legal notice, as aforesaid but not suits of other nature or for

     recovery of any amount other than due loss or injury to the

     goods entrusted for carriage.
10. The Carriage by
Road Act, 2007
(new) which replaced the earlier

     Act vide Section 16 provides as under:
“No suit or other legal proceeding shall be instituted
        against a common carrier for any loss of, or damage to,
        the consignment, unless notice in writing of the loss or
        damage to the consignment has been served on the
        common carrier before the institution of the suit or other
        legal proceeding and within one hundred and eighty
        days from the date of booking of the consignment by
        the consignor.”
4
11. The aforesaid Section 16 of the new Act is more or less in pari

     materia with the
Section 10
of the Carriers Act, 1865 which has

     been repealed. It also lays down that no suit or legal proceedings

     shall be instituted against a common carrier for any loss of, or

     damage to, a consignment unless a notice in writing of such loss

     to the consignment has been served upon the carrier before the

     institution of the suit or the legal proceedings within six months

     from the date of booking of the consignment by the consignor.

     A close look to the above provision would reveal that it not only

     bars the suit but also legal proceedings which were not included

     in the earlier provision of
Section 10
of the Carriers Act, 1865.

     The other deviation is by the use of word “consignment” in place

     of “goods entrusted”.     In other words, both the aforesaid

     provisions though
Section 10
of the Carriers Act stands repealed

     and ceased to in force, provides for a notice before instituting

     any suit/legal proceedings against a common carrier for any

     loss or damage to the consignment. The aforesaid provision is

     only in context of the institution of a suit or a legal proceeding

     for the loss of or damage to the consignment and not in respect
5
of any other kind of loss or damage or claim other than to the

     loss or damage to the consignment.
12. It is well recognized that in view of Order VIII Rule 6–A (4)
CPC
,

     a counter-claim is a virtually a plaint and an independent suit.

     It is also a settled proposition of law that a plaint which falls

     within the teeth of the conditions laid down under Rule 11 of
Order VII CPC
is liable to be rejected at the threshold for which

     the plaint allegations alone are required to be considered and

     nothing else.
13. It is in view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the

     plaintiff-first respondent pressed for rejection of the counter-

     claim set up by the appellant- first defendant under
Order VII

     Rule 11 CPC
as it was preferred without issuing the mandatory

     notice as contemplated mistakenly by
Section 10
of the Carriers

     Act, 1865 but in fact by Section 16 of the new Act.
14. The Court of first instance ordered for the rejection of the plaint

     for want of issuance of mandatory notice before presentation of

     the counter-claim which order has been affirmed by the High

     Court.
6
15. In assailing the impugned orders of the courts below, it was

     submitted that the Courts have manifestly erred in not

     appreciating the provisions of Section 16 of the new Act in its

     clear literal sense. The said provision is applicable only where

     the claim is for any loss of, or damage to, the consignment and

     not in respect of any other claim of loss or damage. The counter-

     claim of the appellant was not in respect of either the loss or

     damage to the consignment rather for the loss of business

     opportunity, loss of reputation and loss on account of idling of

     men, machine and overheads etc.
16. A plain reading of Section 16 of the new Act reveals that it is

     applicable only in respect of institution of a suit or legal

     proceeding against a common carrier for any loss of, or damage

     to, the consignment. The use of the word “Consignment” in the

     said provision is very material. It denotes that the suit and legal

     proceedings in connection with the loss or damage to the

     consignment alone are covered by it for which purpose, a notice

     is mandatory. The said provision has no application in reference

     to loss of any other kind or the suit or legal proceedings
7
instituted for recovery of damages in respect of loss of different

     nature.
17. A reading of the counter-claim clearly reveals that the damages

     claimed are in respect of loss set up by the appellant-first

     defendant in connection with the loss of business opportunity,

     loss of reputation and loss on account of idling of men, machine

     and overheads. It had not instituted any suit or legal

     proceedings such as counter-claim for any loss or damage to

     any consignment. The courts below have clearly lost sight of the

     above aspect of the matter and without making any distinction

     between the various kinds of claims otherwise arising other

     than claims for loss or damage to the consignment, illegally

     directed to reject the counter-claim.
18. The provision of Section 16 of the new Act does not come into

     play vis-à-vis the condition of giving a notice in respect of claims

     for damages for the loss of reputation, business opportunity etc.

     as such claims are not in connection with the damage or loss to

     the consignment.
8
19. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we are of the

     opinion that no notice under Section 16 of the new Act was

     necessary for instituting any suit or legal proceedings much less

     counter-claim against the common carrier for recovering the

     loss other than the loss of or damage to the consignment and,

     therefore, the courts below manifestly erred in rejecting the

     counter-claim under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
as barred by

     Section 16 of the new Act.
20. Accordingly,     the   impugned   judgment   and   orders   dated

     07.08.2019 and 21.9.2017 are set aside and the appeal is

     allowed with the direction to the Court of first instance to

     proceed with the suit as well as the counter-claim in accordance

     with the law.
21. There will be no orders as to costs.
……………………………….. J.
(V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN)


                                        ……………………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)
New Delhi;
May 01, 2023.
9