[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Haryana Urban Development Authority vs Jagdeep Singh on 8 May, 2023
Author:
Rajesh Bindal
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
,
Rajesh Bindal
Civil Appeal No.4709/2011


                                                              REPORTABLE


                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                              Civil Appeal No.4709 of 2011


          Haryana Urban Development Authority
          & Anr.                                          … Appellant(s)
                                         Versus

          Jagdeep Singh                                   … Respondent(s)


                                     JUDGMENT
Rajesh Bindal, J.
1.             The Order dated 28.10.2009 passed by the Punjab

          and Haryana High Court in RSA No. 1449 of          2009 has been

          challenged in the present appeal. By the aforesaid order, the

          appeal filed by the Appellants was dismissed and concurrent

          findings of facts recorded by the Trial Court as well as by the

          First Appellate Court were upheld.
2.             The dispute pertains to demand of additional price

          for the allotment of plot to the Respondent.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.05.08
16:19:50 IST
Reason:
Page 1 of 17
Civil Appeal No.4709/2011
3.        The Respondent was allotted plot no.1084 in Sector-

14, (Part), Hisar vide allotment letter dated 21.08.1986 @

₹224.90 per sq. yard.
4.        Notice      was    issued    to     the   Respondent     by    the

Appellants on 15.01.1993 raising demand of additional price as

well as to show cause as to why the plot should not be resumed

on account of non-construction within a period of two years of

allotment.The aforesaid notice was followed by subsequent

notices and the last being dated 28.01.2002.
5.        A   civil   suit   was      filed   by    the   Respondent     on

01.10.2003 challenging the demand raised by the present

Appellants. The same was decreed. Aggrieved by the same,

the present Appellant filed appeal which was dismissed by the

lower Appellate Court.       The Appellants did not succeed even

before the High Court.
6.        The learned Trial Court accepted the plea raised by

the respondent on the ground that in terms of the conditions

contained in the letter of allotment, the demand of additional

price could be raised only in case of enhancement in cost of

land by the competent authority under
Land Acquisition Act
. As
Page 2 of 17
Civil Appeal No.4709/2011
in the case in hand, there is no enhancement in cost of land

awarded by any Court or authority, therefore, no additional

demand could be raised.
7.        The argument raised by learned counsel for the

Appellants is that the land in question was transferred by the

Animal Husbandry Department, Haryana to the Appellants @

₹1,21,000/- per acre. However, later on the rate was revised to

₹3,00,000/- per acre. On failure, the Appellants were not to be

given possession of the land. The allotments had been made by

the Appellants on 21.08.1986 @ ₹ 224.90.        Initially when the

plot was allotted to the Respondent, calculation of price was

made taking the cost of the land at ₹1,21,000/- per acre.

However, later on the cost was increased to ₹3,00,000/- per

acre, an additional price was demanded. The price of the plot

was worked out at ₹301.70 sq. yard and the additional demand

was raised from the Respondent @₹76.80 per sq.yd.             It was

also stated in the notice that though the cost of development

charges has been increased in the last 5 to 6 years, however

still the Appellants will bear the same. As the cost of the land to

the Appellants increased, the same had to be borne by the

allottees. The Appellants being non-profitable Organisation.
Page 3 of 17
Civil Appeal No.4709/2011
8.        It was further stated in the notice that in case the

Respondent is not ready to accept the allotment of plot on

payment of an additional price, he may get his deposit back

alongwith interest @ 10% p.a.
9.        On    the   other    hand,     learned   counsel    for   the

Respondent pleaded that in the case in hand, one of the

condition in the letter of allotment was that the price of the plot

was tentative; the additional price can be demanded only on

account of increase in cost of land awarded by the competent

authority under the
Land Acquisition Act
. It is admitted case of

the Appellant that the land on which the plot in question was

carved out was not acquired rather it was transferred by the

Animal Husbandry Department of the State to the Appellants.

The price thereof was determined at the time of transfer,

however, in case later on different price is determined, the

allottees cannot be made to bear the increased cost.
10.       Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused

the record and relevant documents.
Page 4 of 17
Civil Appeal No.4709/2011
11.       The fact that a plot was allotted to the Respondent

vide allotment letter dated 21.08.1986 at the cost of ₹224.90

per sq. yard, is not in dispute. It is also the admitted case of

the appellant that the land on which the plot was carved out

was initially owned by the Animal Husbandry Department of the

State which was transferred to the appellant. The initial price

was fixed as ₹1,12,000/- per acre.           The cost of plot was

calculated including the cost of development and allotments

were made. It transpires from the record that later on, the rate

at which 275.5 acres of land of Animal Husbandry Department

was transferred to the Appellants was revised to ₹3,00,000/-

per acre. Whether burden of additional cost of the land could

be put on the plot holders, was the issue before the Courts

below.   The relevant clause as contained in the letter of

allotment regarding demand of additional price is extracted

below:
“Clause 9 : The above price is tentative to the
          extend that any enhancement in the cost of land
          awarded by the competent authority under the
Land   Acquisition   Act
shall    also   be   payable
          proportionately as determined by the authority the
          additional price determined shall paid within 30
          days of its demand.”
Page 5 of 17
Civil Appeal No.4709/2011
12.       The aforesaid clause was interpreted by all the courts

below to mean that the additional price can be demanded in

case there is enhancement in cost of the land awarded by the

competent authority under the
Land Acquisition Act
. It is the

admitted case of the Appellants that the land for allotment of

the plot was never acquired.      Hence, there could not be any

enhancement in the cost of the land by any authority or court

under the
Land Acquisition Act
.
13.       From these undisputed facts on record and the terms

and conditions contained in the allotment letter, there is no

illegality committed by the learned court below in setting aside

the demand of the additional price of the plot allotted to the

Respondent.   There is no merit in the present appeal.          The

same deserves to be dismissed. Ordered accordingly.
14.       For filing the present frivolous appeal, in our opinion,

the Appellants deserve to be burdened with heavy cost.         This

Court had deprecated the conduct of the litigants in flooding

this Court with frivolous litigations, which are choking the

dockets as a result of which the matters, which require

consideration are delayed. Observations made in
Dynandeo
Page 6 of 17
Civil Appeal No.4709/2011
Sabaji Naik & Ors. vs. Pradnya Prakash Khadekar & Ors.
1

are extracted below:
“13.          This Court must view with disfavour any
             attempt by a litigant to abuse the process. The
             sanctity of the judicial process will be seriously
             eroded if such attempts are not dealt with firmly.
             A litigant who takes liberties with the truth or with
             the procedures of the Court should be left in no
             doubt about the consequences to follow. Others
             should not venture along the same path in the
             hope or on a misplaced expectation of judicial
             leniency.      Exemplary costs are inevitable, and
             even necessary, in order to ensure that in
             litigation, as in the law which is practised in our
             country, there is no premium on the truth.
14.            Courts across the legal system-this
             Court not being an exception - are choked with
             litigation.     Frivolous    and   groundless     filings
             constitute a serious menace to the administration
             of justice. They consume time and clog the
             infrastructure. Productive resources which should
             be deployed in the handling of genuine causes are
             dissipated in attending to cases filed only to

1 (2017) 5 SCC 496
Page 7 of 17
Civil Appeal No.4709/2011
benefit from delay, by prolonging dead issues and
pursuing worthless causes. No litigant can have a
vested interest in delay. Unfortunately, as the
present   case    exemplifies,    the    process      of
dispensing justice is misused by the unscrupulous
to the detriment of the legitimate. The present
case is an illustration of how a simple issue has
occupied the time of the courts and of how
successive applications have been filed to prolong
the inevitable. The person in whose favour the
balance of justice lies has in the process been left
in the lurch by repeated attempts to revive a stale
issue. This tendency can be curbed only if courts
across the system adopt an institutional approach
which penalizes such behaviour. Liberal access to
justice does not mean access to chaos and
Indiscipline. A strong message must be conveyed
that courts of justice will not be allowed to be
disrupted by litigative strategies designed to profit
from the delays of the law. Unless remedial action
is taken by all courts here and now our society will
breed a legal culture based on evasion instead of
abidance. It is the duty of every court to firmly
deal with such situations. The imposition of
exemplary costs is a necessary instrument which
has to be deployed to weed out, as well as to
prevent the filing of frivolous cases. It is only then
that the courts can set apart time to resolve
Page 8 of 17
Civil Appeal No.4709/2011
genuine causes and answer the concerns of those
             who are in need of justice. Imposition of real time
             costs is also necessary to ensure that access to
             courts     is    available     to    citizens     with   genuine
             grievances. Otherwise, the doors would be shut to
             legitimate       causes       simply     by     the   weight       of
             undeserving cases which flood the system. Such a
             situation cannot be allowed to come to pass.
Hence it is not merely a matter of discretion but a
             duty and obligation cast upon all courts to ensure
             that the legal system is not exploited by those
             who use the forms of the law to defeat or delay
             justice. We commend all courts to deal with
             frivolous filings in the same manner.”
                                                    (emphasis supplied)
15.          The aforesaid judgment was cited with approval in a

later judgment of this Court in
ICOMM Tele Ltd. Vs. Punjab

State Water Supply and Sewerage Board and Ors.
2
16.          Now coming to the facts of the present case which

clearly establish the case in hand to be a frivolous litigation,

filed by the Appellants, where the officers shirk to take

responsibility.
17.          On      merits    also    a    similar    issue       came    up        for

consideration before this Court in
Sanjay Gera vs. Haryana
2 (2019) 4 SCC 401
Page 9 of 17
Civil Appeal No.4709/2011
Urban Development Authority & Anr.3                        In the aforesaid

case, the plot was allotted in same Sector-14 (Part), Hissar.

Additional price was demanded for the same as is projected in

the case in hand.
18.         Though the High Court had not granted relief to the

allotee,    therein however this Court accepted the plea and

quashed the demand of additional price from the allottee,

interpreting the same condition in the letter of allotment as is

in the case in hand.             Paragraphs 2, 5 and 6 thereof are

reproduced hereunder:
“2.   Brief facts which are necessary for
                     disposal of this appeal are that the plaintiff-
                     appellant herein was allotted Plot No.940
                     vide allotment letter bearing No.21548 dated
                     August 20, 1986 and he deposited an amount
                     of Rs.18,600 in compliance of the conditions
                     of the allotment and sent the required
                     documents.         The      defendant-respondents
                     demanded the annual instalment on account
                     of the said plot and the plaintiff-appellant
                     deposited    the   same      vide    receipt    dated
                     August 21, 1987. After deposit of the total
                     amount      demanded         by    the    defendant-
3 (2005) 3 SCC 207
Page 10 of 17
Civil Appeal No.4709/2011
respondents by sending letter No.1300 dated
January 15, 1993 to the plaintiff-appellant
demanding a sum of Rs.38,400/- to be paid
within a period of thirty days from the date of
issue of the letter in respect of the above
said plot.     The plaintiff-appellant challenged
this letter dated January 15, 1993 as illegal,
void and against the principles of natural
justice and on various other counts.                   The
grievance of the plaintiff-appellant was that
the   demand          raised     by    the     defendant-
respondents is not valid as the said demand
is not on account of any award given by the
competent           Authority        under     the
Land
Acquisition         Act
and       the      defendant-
respondents cannot revoke the allotment
made in his favour.             The plaintiff-appellant
made      a     request         to     the     defendant-
respondents         to    revoke      the    letter   dated
January       15,    1993       but    the     defendant-
respondents refused to do so. Therefore, the
plaintiff-appellant was completed to file the
present suit with prayer for a declaration to
the effect that the letter dated January 15,
1993 in respect of Plot No. 940, Sector 14,
Part, Hisar issued by defendant No.2 is illegal,
void and liable to be set aside and he also
prayed for consequential relief for permanent
Page 11 of 17
Civil Appeal No.4709/2011
injunction restraining the defendants from
       revoking,     reviewing        or    cancelling      the
       allotment letter issued by the defendants
       vide Memo No. 21548 dated August 20, 1986
       and from taking any action on the basis of
       the aforesaid letter.         The plaintiff-appellant
       also sought for temporary injunction directing
       the defendant-respondents to deliver the
       possession of the plot.
5.   We have heard learned counsel for the
       parties and perused the records. There is no
       gainsaying that as per condition No.9 of the
       allotment order the price in question was
       only tentative. But the condition is qualified
       that in case any award is given by the Land
       Acquisition     Officer       the    price    can     be
       enhanced. Condition No.9 reads as under:
“The above price is tentative to the extent
       that any enhancement in the cost of land
       awarded by the competent authority
       under the
Land Acquisition Act
shall be
       payable proportionately as determined by
       the authority.     The additional price
       determined shall be paid within thirty days
       of its demand.”


As per this condition enhancement could be made
on the cost of the land as per the award by the
competent authority under the
Land Acquisition
Act
.   But no such award was given by the Land
Page 12 of 17
Civil Appeal No.4709/2011
Acquisition authority. In a suit a duty is cast on
the defendants to lead evidence to show that
increase on the cost of the land is necessitated
because of enhancement of paying higher rate of
compensation         to      the       Animal        Husbandry
Department. But no such evidence was led in the
suit. D.W.1 nowhere stated that this enhancement
was      warranted    because           Animal       Husbandry
Department had to be paid compensation at
higher rate for acquisition of this land. It may be
that because of decision given by the Punjab and
Haryana High Court, it enabled the defendants to
claim higher price for allotted plot. In a civil suit
all facts have to be pleaded and proved. But in
the   present    case,      there      is    no   evidence      to
substantiate the allegation. It was incumbent on
the part of the Haryana Urban Development
Authority to substantiate the same by leading
proper    evidence        that   the        enhancement      was
effected on account of increase in the price of
acquisition of land.        But the statement of DW-1,
the only evidence which has been led by the
defendant/respondent is significantly silent on this
issue.    In civil matters, the rights of the parties
cannot be determined just on the basis of any
other judgment on questions of fact. It is the duty
of the defendants to specifically plead and prove
their case by leading proper evidence in the
Page 13 of 17
Civil Appeal No.4709/2011
matter.    As    per   the     evidence   led    by   the
defendant/respondent         i.e.   the   documentary
evidence as well as the oral evidence, the
allegations made by the defendants are not
substantiated.   So far as condition no.9 of the
allotment letter is concerned, there is no dispute
that the defendants can demand additional price
as the price at the time of allotment was tentative.
But in order to justify the enhancement of the
price as per condition No. 9 of the allotment letter,
the defendants had to lead proper evidence to
substantiate the allegation. There is no such
evidence produced by the defendants. Therefore,
the trial court has rightly approached in the matter
and this is a case of total misreading of the
evidence by the learned Additional 'District Judge
as well as by learned Single Judge of the High
Court.
6. In the result of our above discussion, we
     are of the opinion that the order passed by
     the trial court is justified and the view taken
     by the Additional District Judge as well as
     learned Single Judge of the High Court in the
     facts and circumstances of this case does not
     appear to be justified. Hence, we allow this
     appeal and set aside the order passed by the
     learned Single Judge of the High Court as well
     as the order passed by the Additional District
Page 14 of 17
Civil Appeal No.4709/2011
Judge, Hisar and confirm the order dated
               March 27, 1996 passed by the trial court. No
               order as to costs.”
19.       The issue sought to be raised before this Court was

referring to the letter dated 01/12/1992 which according to the

Appellants   shows the amount required to be paid by the

Appellants to the Animal Husbandry Department for the land

transferred to Sector -14, (Part), Hisar. The idea to show the

letter was that in fact the amount required to be paid for

transfer of land was ₹3,00,000 instead of ₹1,21,000/- per acre.

The fact remains that the aforesaid document has been

referred to and considered by this Court in Sanjay Gera’s

case (supra) and no merit was found in the arguments raised.
20.       In the case in hand, the civil suit was filed on

1.10.2003 by the Respondent challenging the demand of

additional price. Judgment of this Court in Sanjay Gera’s case

was delivered on 22.02.2005.         Despite this fact being in

knowledge of the Appellants, the suit was contested and the

same was decreed on 19.08.2008.           The matter did not end

here, appeal was preferred by the appellant before the First
Page 15 of 17
Civil Appeal No.4709/2011
Appellate Court and on failure even before the High Court and

thereafter before this Court.           For the aforesaid reasons and

wasting the time of the Courts at different levels, we deem it

appropriate to burden the Appellants with cost of ₹1,00,000/- to

be deposited with the Supreme Court Mediation Centre.
21.       In addition, the Respondent having been dragged in

unnecessary litigation upto this Court deserves to be awarded

cost of ₹50,000/-.
22.       The aforesaid amount shall be recovered by the

Appellants from the guilty officers/officials who opined the case

to be fit for filing appeal at different levels despite being

covered by judgment of this Court.
23.       The additional amount sought to be recovered from

the   Respondent     was   ₹26,880/- to         which      there   was     no

justification even at the stage of issuance of notice. The suit

was decreed on 19.08.2008.              The amount spent on litigation

would be much more.              It is because of impersonal and

irresponsible   attitude   of     the    officers,   who    want     to   put

everything to Court and shirk to take decisions. However, still

the Appellants had not only filed appeals, resulting in addition

to the pendency of cases and also must have spent huge
Page 16 of 17
Civil Appeal No.4709/2011
amount on litigation in the form of fee of the counsels and

allied expenses.      Besides that, number of officer(s)/official(s)

must have visited the counsel engaged either at Chandigarh,

when the matter was taken up in the High Court and thereafter

to this Court, when the order was challenged before this Court.

Even that amount also needs to be calculated and recovered

from the guilty officers who, despite there being judgment of

this Court, dealing with the same issue opined the case to be fit

for filing appeals.
24.         For the aforesaid reasons, the appeal is dismissed.

The amount of cost be deposited in Supreme Court Mediation

Centre and paid to the respondent within two months from

today and regarding cost of litigation, needful shall be done

within six months.      Affidavit of compliance to be filed in this

Court.
……………….., J.
(Abhay S. Oka)


                                                    ……………….., J.
(Rajesh Bindal)
New Delhi
May 8, 2023.
//jk-pm//
Page 17 of 17