[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Anil Kumar vs The State Of Haryana on 24 March, 2023
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
M.R. Shah
,
C.T. Ravikumar
REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
                               WRIT PETITION (CRL.) NO. 46 OF 2022

          Anil Kumar                                                   ...Petitioner(s)

                                                Versus


          State of Haryana & Ors.                                    …Respondent(s)


                                             JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.             By way of this writ petition filed under
Article 32
of the

                         Constitution of India, the petitioner – convict in the State

                         of Haryana has prayed for order or direction of quashing

                         and setting aside the decision of the High-Powered

                         Committee dated 09.05.2021 constituted as per this

                         Court’s order dated 23.03.2020 passed in Suo-Moto W.P.

                         (C) No. 1/2020, in so far as it states that the period of

                         release on interim parole shall not be counted towards the
Signature Not Verified
total period of the sentence of the convict prisoner.
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2023.03.24
16:35:11 IST
Reason:
1
2.   Ms. Ritu Kumar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

     the petitioner has vehemently submitted that the petitioner

     was released on emergency parole pursuant to the decision

     taken by the High-Powered Committee constituted as per

     the directions issued by this Court in SWM (C) No.

     1/2020. It is submitted that this Court as such directed in

     the subsequent orders that those convicts who were

     released on emergency parole earlier pursuant to the

     decision of the High-Powered Committee shall not be asked

     to surrender until further orders.     It is submitted that

     therefore, the petitioner was released pursuant to the

     decision of the High-Powered Committee and not on any

     application made by the petitioner and/or under
Section

     3(3)
of the Haryana Good Conduct Prisoners (Temporary

     Release) Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the Act,

     1988). It is submitted that therefore, subsequently in its

     meeting held on 09.05.2021, the High-Powered Committee

     could not have taken the decision that the period of release

     on interim/special parole shall not be counted towards the

     total period of the sentence of the prisoner/convict.
2
2.1   It is submitted that so far as some of other States are

      concerned, the period of release on interim parole has been

      directed to be counted towards the total period of sentence

      of the convict/prisoner.
2.2   It is further submitted by learned counsel appearing on

      behalf of the petitioner that if the petitioner would not have

      been released on interim parole and would have undergone

      the sentence in that case after certain period of sentence

      he would have been entitled to the remission. It is further

      submitted that as the petitioner was released on interim

      parole and if the said period is not counted towards the

      total period of sentence in that case his right to claim the

      remission would further be extended which may be

      detrimental to the interest of the petitioner.


2.3   Making the above submissions, it is prayed to issue the

      writ for which it is prayed for.
3.    Present writ petition is vehemently opposed by Ms.

      Bansuri Swaraj, learned AAG appearing on behalf of the

      State.
3
3.1   It is vehemently submitted by learned counsel appearing

      on behalf of the State that in the present case the

      petitioner – convict has been convicted for the offences

      under
Sections 302
/
34
of IPC and sentenced to undergo

      life imprisonment. It is submitted that the conviction and

      sentence awarded by the learned Trial Court has been

      upheld up to this Court and the SLP has been dismissed.

      It is submitted that therefore, the petitioner has to

      undergo the life imprisonment in accordance with law and

      the sentence imposed by the learned Trial Court.


3.2   It is submitted that thereafter, the petitioner has been

      released on emergency parole/temporary parole pursuant

      to the decision of the High-Powered Committee constituted

      as per the directions issued by this Court in SWM (C) No.

      1/2020, due to the Covid-19 pandemic. It is submitted

      that while granting the temporary parole/emergency parole

      initially the High-Powered Committee in the minutes of the

      meeting held on 12.11.2020 specifically observed in

      paragraph 4 that no specific directions for not counting

      period of special parole towards sentence are required to
4
be made in view of statutory provisions and authorities are

directed to decide the said issue in accordance with

statutory provisions. It is submitted that as per
Section

3(3)
of   the    Act,     1988,     the   period      of   temporary

release/parole shall not be counted towards the total

period of sentence of a prisoner. It is submitted that

thereafter when the emergency parole/temporary parole

has been further extended pursuant to the subsequent

directions    issued       by   this    Court,     the   High-Powered

Committee has specifically provided as per note in the

minutes of the meeting that the period of release on

interim parole shall not be counted towards the total

period of sentence of the convict – prisoner which as such

in     consonance     with      the    statutory   provisions.    It   is

submitted that therefore, the decision of the High-Powered

Committee in its meeting held on 09.05.2021 on the period

of release on interim parole shall not be counted towards

the total period of the sentence of the prisoner/convict is

neither illegal and nor contrary to the statutory provisions.
5
3.3   It is further submitted that the issue whether the period of

      parole is to be counted towards the total period of the

      sentence of the convict – prisoner is now not res-integra in

      view of the recent decision of this Court in the case of

      Rohan Dhungat Etc. Vs. The State of Goa & Ors. Etc.

      (Special Leave Petition (Crl) Nos. 12574-77/2022):
(2023 SCC OnLine SC 16). It is submitted that after

      considering     the   law   on    the   point   and    taking   into

      consideration     the   earlier   decisions,    this   Court    has

      specifically observed and held that period during which a

      convict is released on parole shall not be counted while

      considering the actual imprisonment. It is submitted that

      in the case of
Avtar Singh Vs. State of Haryana
(2002) 3

      SCC 18, this Court considered the constitutional validity

      of
Section 3(3)
of the Act, 1988 and while holding the

      constitutional validity, it is observed by this Court that by

      a valid legislative act the period of temporary release on

      parole can be denied while counting the actual sentence

      undergone by the convict – prisoner.
It is submitted that

      subsequently in the case of
State of Haryana & Ors. Vs.

      Mohinder Singh
(2000) 3 SCC 394, this Court has
6
specifically observed and held that the period of parole

      should not be counted towards the total period of sentence

      as when a prisoner is on parole his period of release does

      not count towards the total period of sentence.

3.4   Making the above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss the

      present writ petition.
4.    The short question which is posed for the consideration of

      this Court is whether a convict/prisoner who has been

      released on temporary parole/emergency parole, pursuant

      to the decision of the High-Powered Committee constituted

      as per the orders passed by this Court in SWM (C) No.

      1/2020, such parole period shall be counted towards the

      total period of sentence of the convict – prisoner?
4.1   At the outset, it is required to be noted that so far as the

      State of Haryana is concerned as such the temporary

      release on parole is governed by the statutory provisions of

      the
Haryana Good Conduct Prisoners (Temporary Release)

      Act, 1988
.
Section 3(3)
of the Act, 1988, which specifically

      provides that the period of temporary release shall not be

      counted towards the total period of the sentence of a
7
prisoner.    Thereafter,   the   High-Powered      Committee

     constituted pursuant to the directions issued by this Court

     directed    the   convicts/prisoners   to   be   released   on

     temporary parole/emergency parole in the minutes of the

     meeting held on 12.11.2020 specifically observed that no

     specific directions for not counting period of special parole

     towards sentence are required to be made in view of the

     statutory provisions and the authorities are directed to

     decide the issue in accordance with statutory provisions.

     That thereafter, when the emergency parole has been

     further extended pursuant to the subsequent orders

     passed by this Court, the minutes/note of the meeting

     specifically provides that the period of release pursuant to

     the decision of the High-Powered Committee shall not be

     counted towards the total period of sentence of the

     prisoner/convict. As such the said note is absolutely in

     consonance with the statutory provision, namely,
Section

     3(3)
of the Act, 1988.
5.   At this stage, it is required to be noted that vires of
Section

     3(3)
of the Act, 1988 was challenged before this Court and
8
by judgment and order passed in
Avtar Singh
(supra), this

      Court has upheld the vires of
Section 3(3)
of the Act, 1988.
5.1   Subsequently, in the case of
Mohinder Singh
(supra), this

      Court has specifically observed and held that the period of

      parole shall not be counted towards the total period of

      sentence. It is observed and held that when a prisoner is

      on parole his period of release does not count towards the

      total period of sentence.
5.2   In the recent decision of this Court in the case of Rohan

      Dhungat (supra), this Court had an occasion to consider

      the   similar    issue/question      and    after   taking      into

      consideration the object and purpose of parole, it is

      observed and held by this Court that period of release on

      parole shall not be counted for the purpose of considering

      the actual imprisonment and the said period of parole has

      to be excluded. In the case of Rohan Dhungat (supra),

      this Court has observed in paragraph 10 as under: -
“10. If the submission on behalf of the prisoners that
                 the period of parole is to be included while
                 considering 14 years of actual imprisonment is
                 accepted, in that case, any prisoner who may be
                 influential may get the parole for number of times
                 as there is no restrictions and it can be granted
9
number of times and if the submission on behalf of
              the prisoners is accepted, it may defeat the very
              object and purpose of actual imprisonment. We are
              of the firm view that for the purpose of considering
              actual imprisonment, the period of parole is to be
              excluded. We are in complete agreement with the
              view taken by the High Court holding so.”
6.   In view of the above and when the petitioner has been

     convicted for the offences under
Sections 302
/
34
of IPC

     and sentenced to undergo life imprisonment, he has to

     undergo the said sentence actually subject to any

     rule/policy in respect of remission and the period during

     which he is released on emergency/interim parole has to

     be excluded for the purpose of actual imprisonment. Under

     the circumstances, the petitioner is not entitled to claim

     any relief prayed in the instant writ petition. Under the

     circumstances, the present petition lacks merits and the

     same    deserves   to   be   dismissed    and    is   accordingly

     dismissed.
………………………………….J.
                                      [M.R. SHAH]




NEW DELHI;                            ………………………………….J.
10
MARCH 24, 2023   [C.T. RAVIKUMAR]
11