[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Vishalakshi Amma vs The State Of Kerala on 17 March, 2023
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
M.R. Shah
,
C.T. Ravikumar
REPORTABLE
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1720/2023
                                    (@ SLP (C) NO. 15232 / 2020)
         Vishalakshi Amma                                             ...Appellant(s)
                                                Versus
         State of Kerala & Ors.                                     …Respondent(s)


                                           JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 29.05.2020 passed by the

                         Division Bench of the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam

                         in Writ Appeal No. 109/2020, by which, the Division

                         Bench of the High Court has allowed the said appeal

                         preferred by the State of Kerala and others ­ respondent(s)

                         herein and has quashed and set aside the judgment and

                         order passed by the learned Single Judge in Writ Petition

                         No. 4772/2019, by which the learned Single Judge

                         disposed of the said writ petition by directing the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
appellants herein to consider the declaration made by the
Date: 2023.03.17
14:30:31 IST
Reason:
original writ petitioner under Rule 11 of the Declaration of
1
Wild Life Stock Rules, 2003 (hereinafter referred to as the

      Rules, 2003) by relaxing the time to file such a declaration

      in case the time is relaxed in any other case, the original

      writ petitioner has preferred the present appeal.
2.    The facts leading to the present appeal in a nutshell are as

      under: ­

2.1   Under
Section 40
of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972

      (hereinafter referred to as the Act, 1972), every person

      having at the commencement of this Act the control,

      custody or possession of any captive animal specified in

      Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II or animal article…... or

      the musk of a musk deer or the horn of a rhinoceros, shall,

      within thirty days from the commencement of this Act,

      declare to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised

      officer the number and description of the animal, or article

      of the foregoing description under his control, custody or

      possession and the place where such animal or article is

      kept. As per sub­section (2) of
Section 40
, no person shall,

      after the commencement of this Act, 1972, acquire,

      receive, keep in his control, custody or possession, the

      animal specified in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II or
2
any animal article including the deer horn, except with the

      previous permission in writing of the Chief Wild Life

      Warden or the authorised officer. However,
Section 40A
of

      the Act, 1972, is an exception and gives immunity in

      certain   cases.   As   per
Section   40A
,   notwithstanding

      anything contained in sub­sections (2) and (4) of
Section

      40
of   this   Act,   the   Central   Government   may,   by

      notification, require any person to declare to the Chief Wild

      Life Warden or the authorised officer, any captive animal,

      animal article….. in his control, custody or possession, in

      respect of which no declaration had been made under sub­

      section (1) or sub­section (4) of
Section 40
, in such form,

      in such manner and within such time as may be

      prescribed. Sub­section (2) of
Section 40
, provides that any

      action taken or purported to be taken for violation of
Section 40
of the Act, 1972 at any time before the

      commencement of the
Wild Life (Protection) Amendment

      Act, 2002
shall not be proceeded with and all pending

      proceedings shall stand abated.
2.2   In exercise of the powers conferred under Section 40A read

      with
Section 63
of the Act, 1972, the Central Government
3
had made “the Declaration of Wild Life Stock Rules, 2003.”

Rule 3 to 14 read as under: ­

         “3. Publicity of intent of notification and
   Assistance in making application.—(1) The Chief
   Wild Life Warden or the officer authorised by the State
   Government in this regard shall cause to give wide
   publicity to the intent of this notification in the
   regional language through electronic or print media or
   such other means.
(2) The Chief Wild Life Warden or the officer
   authorised by the State Government in this regard
   shall take necessary action to assist the local
   communities and individuals especially the poor and
   illiterate in the declaration of their possession, filling
   up the specified form and any other matter connected
   therewith and shall make every attempt to ensure that
   no individual or community associated with animals is
   deprived of this opportunity.
4. Procedure for filing applications.—(1) An
   application to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the officer
   authorised by the State Government in this regard
   shall be presented in the Form annexed to these rules
   by the applicant either in person or by an agent or by
   duly authorised legal practitioner or sent by registered
   post addressed to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the
   officer authorised by the State Government in this
   regard of the concerned State or the Union Territory.
(2) The application under sub­rule (1) shall be
   presented in four complete sets within a period of one
   hundred and eighty days from the date of publication
   of these rules.
(3) The applicant may attach to and present with
   his application an acknowledgement slip as is given in
   the Form which shall be signed by the official receiving
   the application on behalf of the Chief Wild Life Warden
   or the officer authorised by the State Government in
   this regard in acknowledgement of the receipt of the
   application.
5. Presentation and scrutiny of applications.
   —(1) The Chief Wild Life Warden or the officer
   authorised by the State Government in this regard
   shall endorse on every application the date on which it
4
is presented or deemed to have been presented under
that rule and shall sign the endorsement.
(2) If on scrutiny, the application is found to be
in order, it shall be duly registered and given serial
number.
(3) If the application, on scrutiny, is found to be
defective, the same shall be returned to the applicant
within fifteen days for rectifying the defects and
resubmitting the corrected application within fifteen
days from the date of its receipt.
(4) If the applicant fails to rectify the defect
within the time allowed under sub­rule (3), the Chief
Wild Life Warden or the officer authorised by the State
Government in this regard may, by order and for the
reasons to be recorded in writing, decline to register
the application.
6. Place of filing application.—The applicant
shall file application with the Chief Wild Life Warden
or the officer authorised by the State Government in
this regard.
7. Date and place of hearing to be notified.—
The Chief Wild Life Warden or the officer authorised by
the State Government in this regard shall notify to the
parties the date, place and time of hearing of each
application, if required.
8. Decision on applications.—(1) The Chief
Wild Life Warden or the officer authorised by the State
Government in this regard shall verify the facts
mentioned in the application and make such inquiry
as may be required.
(2) The Chief Wild Life Warden shall, as far as
possible, decide the application within six months of
the date of its presentation and communicate the
same to the applicant in writing under his own
signature by registered post.
9. Hearing on application ex parte.—Where on
the date fixed for hearing the application, the applicant
fails to appear without intimation, the Chief Wild Life
Warden or the officer authorised by the State
Government in this regard may at their discretion
adjourn or decide the application ex parte.
10. Inquiry by the Chief Wild Life Warden or
Authorised Officer.—(1) The Chief Wild Life Warden
5
or the officer authorised by the State Government in
          this regard shall conduct a detailed inquiry and take
          all actions as provided in
Section 41
of the Act.
(2) A copy of the report pertaining to sub­rule (1)
          of this rule, shall be provided to the applicant.
11. Certificate of ownership.—(1) The Chief
          Wild Life Warden shall provide a certificate of
          ownership to the applicant whose claim is found valid.
(2) The certificate of ownership shall be provided
          as per the provisions of
Section 42
of the Act.
(3) The certificate of ownership shall contain the
          facsimile of the identification mark and in case of live
          animals the identification number of the transponder
          (microchip) implanted shall be mentioned in the
          certificate.
12. Dealing with declared objects.—Any
          captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured
          trophy declared under sub­section (1) of Section 40­A
          and in respect of which certificate of ownership has
          not been granted or obtained, shall be treated as
          government property.
13. Order to be signed and dated.—Every
          order of the Chief Wild Life Warden shall be in writing
          and shall be signed and dated by the Chief Wild Life
          Warden.
14. Communication of order to parties.—
          Every order passed on the application shall be
          communicated to the applicant either in person or by
          registered post free of cost.”


          Therefore, as per Rule 4(2), the application to the Chief

      Wild Life Warden for such declaration, shall have to be

      presented in the prescribed format within a period of 180

      days from the date of publication of these rules.

2.3   In the present case, the aforesaid Rules, 2003 came to be

      published on 18.04.2003. Therefore, 180 days to file the
6
application/declaration        expired     on    18.10.2003.     The

appellant     herein   filed   the    application/declaration     on

25.05.2011      that   was     beyond      the   prescribed    period

provided under Rule 4(2) of the Rules, 2003. The

authorised authority refused to issue ownership certificate

in respect of the deer horn found from her house and

which was in custody and possession of the appellant on

the ground that the application/declaration was made

beyond the prescribed period provided under Rule 4(2) of

the Rules, 2003. The appellant herein preferred writ

petition before the learned Single Judge. The learned

Single Judge disposed of the said writ petition by directing

the Chief Wild Life Warden to consider whether time has

been relaxed in any case for the purpose of granting the

certificate   of   ownership         and    if   so,   under    what

circumstances, and if it is found that time has been

relaxed in any case, consider the representation made on

behalf of the appellant also in that background. The order

passed by the learned Single Judge was the subject matter

of the present writ appeal before the Division Bench of the

High Court.
7
2.4   By the impugned judgment and order the Division Bench

      of the High Court has allowed the said appeal by observing

      that the time limit prescribed under Rule 4(2) of the Rules,

      2003 cannot be relaxed and/or the period cannot be

      extended. Consequently, the Division Bench of the High

      Court has set aside the order passed by the learned Single

      Judge which has given rise to the present appeal.
3.    Shri Lakshmeesh S. Kamath, learned counsel appearing

      on behalf of the appellant has vehemently submitted that

      the time prescribed under Rule 4(2) of the Rules, 2003 is

      not mandatory and can be relaxed in a given case. It is

      submitted that in the present case, the deer horn was

      found from the first floor of the house which is an old

      house and the appellant came to know about that in the

      year 2011.
3.1   It is submitted that even after the application is made for

      ownership     certificate/declaration,   the     appropriate

      authority/Chief Wild Life Warden is required to hold an

      enquiry and only thereafter, the ownership certificate can

      be issued. It is submitted that therefore, no prejudice shall
8
be   caused     if    the   application     for    ownership

      certificate/declaration is made beyond the prescribed

      period provided under Rule 4(2) of the Rules, 2003.

3.2   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has

      vehemently relied upon the decision of the Madras High

      Court in the case of
C.D. Gopinath Vs. State of Tamil

      Nadu and Ors.
(2010 SCC Online Mad 2851).
4.    Shri Abraham C. Mathew, learned counsel appearing on

      behalf of the respondent(s) while taking us to the relevant

      provisions   of the   Act, 1972 and       Rules,   2003 has

      vehemently submitted that the time limit prescribed under

      Rule 4(2) is mandatory. It is submitted that as per Section

      40A under which the Rules are framed under which a

      person in control, custody or possession of the wildlife

      animal or wildlife article etc., can apply for ownership

      certificate by making a declaration. It is submitted that

      looking to the object and purpose of Section 40 and 40A

      and the Rules, 2003 and when the specific time limit has

      been prescribed to submit an application for ownership

      certification/declaration, the same has to be adhered to as

      observed and held by the High Court by the impugned
9
judgment and order. It is submitted that any other view

     shall frustrate the object and purpose of Section 40 and

     40A and the Rules framed in exercise of powers under
Section 40A
of the Act, 1972.
5.   We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

     respective parties at length and have gone through the

     relevant provisions of the Act, 1972 and Rules, 2003. On

     and after coming into force of the Act, 1972, there is

     bar/restriction on keeping in custody or in possession of

     the captive animal specified in Schedule I or Part II of

     Schedule II or animal article etc., including the musk of a

     musk deer or the horn of a rhinoceros. However, Section

     40A grants immunity in certain cases. As per Section 40A,

     notwithstanding anything contained in sub­sections (2)

     and (4) of
Section 40
of the Act, 1972, the Central

     Government may, by notification, require any person to

     declare to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised

     officer, any captive animal, animal article, etc., in his

     control, custody or possession, in respect of which no

     declaration had been made under sub­section (1) or sub­

     section (4) of Section 40 and in exercise of powers
10
conferred under Section 40A, the Central Government has

      framed    the   Rules,    2003.    As    per   Rule    4(2),

      application/declaration under sub­rule (1) of Rule 4 for

      ownership certificate has to be made within a period of 180

      days from the date of commencement of the Rules, 2003.

      Looking to the object and purpose of Sections 40 and 40A

      and the object and purpose for which Rules, 2003 has

      been enacted the period of 180 days prescribed under Rule

      4(2) has to be construed and considered as mandatory,

      otherwise the object and purpose of the Act, 1972 and the

      Rules, 2003 shall be frustrated.
5.1   At this stage, it is required to be noted that as per Rule 3

      of the Rules, 2003, the Chief Wild Life Warden or the

      officer authorised by the State Government was duty

      bound to give wide publicity to the intent of this

      notification in the regional language through electronic or

      print media or such other means. The sub­rule (2) of Rule

      3 cast duty upon such officer to take necessary action to

      assist the local communities and individuals especially the

      poor and illiterate in the declaration of their possession,

      filling up the specified form and any other requirement
11
prescribed under Rule 4(1). Thus, nobody can plead any

     ignorance and/or nobody can plead that he had no

     knowledge to make such declaration and/or application for

     ownership certificate and that too, within a period of 180

     days as per Rule 4(2) of the Rules, 2003. Therefore, once a

     person in control, custody or possession of any wildlife

     animal or wildlife animal article, fails to file such

     declaration and/or fails to make any application within the

     stipulated time mentioned in Rule 4(2) then the bar/rigour

     under Section 40 shall be applicable and the ownership of

     such wildlife animal article of which the declaration is not

     made shall vest in the Government/forest department.
6.   In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the

     Division Bench of the High Court has rightly observed that

     the application submitted by the appellant herein which

     was made beyond the period prescribed under Rule 4(2)

     was liable to be rejected and was rightly rejected by the

     appropriate authority/Chief Wild Life Warden. We are in

     complete agreement with the view taken by the Division

     Bench of the High Court.
12
6.1   Now so far as the reliance placed upon the decision of the

      Madras High Court in the case of
C.D. Gopinath
(supra)

      relied upon by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      appellant is concerned, as such on facts
the said decision
shall not be applicable to the facts of the case on hand.

      Even otherwise, in view of the discussions hereinabove, we

      are not in agreement with the view taken by the learned

      Single Judge that the period prescribed under Rule 4(2) of

      the Rules, 2003 is directory.
7.    In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, we

      see no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment

      and order passed by the High Court. Consequently, the

      present appeal fails and the same deserves to be dismissed

      and is accordingly dismissed.
………………………………….J.
                                      [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                            ………………………………….J.
MARCH 17, 2023                        [MANOJ MISRA]
13