[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shankar vs The State Of Maharashtra on 15 March, 2023
Author:
C.T. Ravikumar
Bench:
A.S. Bopanna
,
C.T. Ravikumar
1

                                                                                           Reportable

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      Criminal Appeal No. 954 of 2011

     Shankar
                                                                                      …Appellant (s)
                                                         Versus

     The State of Maharashtra                                                          …Respondents

                                                          With


                                       Criminal Appeal No.955 of 2011


                                                  J U D G M E N T
C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J.
1.                  The captioned appeals, by lifers, are directed against the

     self-same judgment and order dated 12.08.2009 passed by the High

     Court of Judicature at Bombay, Bench at Nagpur in Criminal Appeal

     No.7 of 2004.                The former appeal was filed by the second and third

     appellants therein who were accused Nos.2 and 3 in Sessions Trial

     No.80 of 2002 on the file of Additional Sessions Judge, Bhandara.

     The sole appellant in the latter appeal was the first appellant in

     Criminal                Appeal   No.7   of   2004    and     he   was   the   first   accused   in

     Sessions Trial No.80 of 2002.                         During the pendency of the trial,

     the fourth accused breathed his last and the first appellant in the

     former appeal viz., Sri Hiralal died during its pendency.                                 Hence,
Signature Not Verified
qua him the former appeal stands abated.                                As per the judgment of
Digitally signed by
Nisha Khulbey
Date: 2023.03.15
17:25:11 IST
Reason:
the Trial Court the appellants were convicted under Sections 302

     read with
Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter,
2
‘the
IPC
’) for having committed murder of one Rahul Pundlik Meshram

(hereafter referred to as ‘the deceased’). They were sentenced to

suffer imprisonment for life besides imposing a fine of Rs.500/-

and in default of payment of fine they are to suffer rigorous

imprisonment for one month each.           As per the impugned judgment the

conviction    and   sentences    thus   imposed      by    the    Trial    Court    were

confirmed.     Hence, these appeals.
2.     The prosecution case, in nutshell, is as follows: -
On 12.12.2001 at about 5.00 pm, the deceased along with a

friend went to Indira Gandhi Ward at Bandhara where the house of

Chintaman Giddu Gatey (PW-8) situates.                    After parking his Luna

Moped the deceased went inside of the house of Chintaman Giddu

Gatey (PW-8), leaving his friend near the vehicle.                        Deceased and

Chintaman Giddu Gatey (PW-8) smoked ganja and while so the deceased

accused No.4 (Raju Pande), Hiralal, the first appellant in the

former appeal who is no more and accused Nos.1 and 3, who are the

surviving convicts (hereinafter referred to as ‘the appellants’),

came there on two motorcycles and they too, went inside the house

of Chintaman Giddu Gatey (PW-8).               All of them smoked ganja. While

so, appellant in the latter appeal viz., accused No.1 questioned

the deceased as to why he along with his friend Parag Sukhdeve

assaulted his brother.         It is worthy to note at this juncture that

according to the prosecution, on 29.09.2001, the deceased along

with    his   friend   Parag    Sukhdeve       assaulted    the    brother     of   the

appellant in the latter appeal. Though, the deceased denied assault

on his brother, the appellant in the latter appeal (the first
3
accused) continued to say that the deceased did dishonesty and

assaulted his brother.              Though, the friend of the deceased who was

waiting outside came inside and asked him to come out the deceased

remained there and thereupon his friend left the place.                                      Later, the

first accused invited the deceased for drinks and all of them,

including the deceased, left the house of Chintaman Giddu Gatey

(PW-8) on two motorcycles by about 6 p.m.                                  After about an hour,

the dead body of the deceased was found by one Manoj Goswami, a

resident of Paladi.               The case is that upon being informed by the

villagers, Manoj Goswami (PW1) went to the spot and on finding the

dead body he went to Bhandara Police Station and lodged a report.
As per the prosecution, the deceased was taken by the accused on

one    of    the     motorcycles        through          National         Highway       No.6    towards

Lakhani town. To the north of the said National Highway and at a

distance of about 10 kilometers from Bhandara there was another

road   leading       to    village       Paladi      and       on    the        side    of     the   said

Bhandara-Paladi           road,    at    about    by         one    kilometer          from    National

Highway No.6, they stopped their motorcycles and started assaulting

the deceased using sharp weapons. The deceased sustained 22 ante-
mortem      injuries,      all    over    his     body        and    met        with    instantaneous

death.
3.          Admittedly, there was no eye-witness in this case.                                 Based on

the circumstantial evidence, the Trial Court found the appellants

guilty      and    convicted       and    sentenced           them,        as    mentioned        above.

Aggrieved by the conviction and consequent sentence, the surviving

accused      viz.,    accused      Nos.    1    to       3   in     the    said        Sessions      Trial

preferred appeal before the High Court.                               After considering the
4
circumstances           relied      on     by   the       Trial       Court    and     despite     its

reservation against some of the procedures followed the High Court

confirmed the conviction and sentence imposed on appellants by the

Trial Court holding that certain proven circumstances are material

circumstances and would complete the requisite chain.
4.      The appellants in the captioned appeals challenge the findings

of    conviction        and    consequential          imposition          of    sentence     raising

various grounds. But, before considering the contentions against

the concurrent findings raised by the appellants, we find it only

appropriate to refer to the following decisions on the law relating

circumstantial evidence.
5.
In the decision in
Sarbir Singh v. State of Punjab1
, this Court

observed and held thus: -
“5.     …But    in    a     case    based         on    circumstantial        evidence
        neither the accused nor the manner of occurrence is known
        to    the      persons      connected        with       the     victim.      The   first
        information report is lodged only disclosing the offence,
        leaving        to    the    investigating              agency    to    find    out   the
        offender.
6. It is said that men lie but circumstances do not. Under
        the circumstances prevailing in the society today, it is
        not true in many cases. Sometimes the circumstances which
        are sought to be proved against the accused for purpose of
        establishing          the    charge      are       planted       by    the    elements
        hostile to the accused who find out witnesses to fill up
        the    gaps     in    the    chain      of    circumstances.            In    countries
        having sophisticated modes of investigation, every trace
        left behind by the culprit can be followed and pursued
        immediately. Unfortunately it is not available in many
        parts of this country. That is why courts have insisted
1 1993 SCC (Cri) 860
5
(i) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt
        is to be drawn should in the first instance be fully
        established; (ii) all the facts so established should be
        consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilty of the
        accused and should be such as to exclude every hypothesis
        but the one sought to be proved; (iii) the circumstances
        should be of a conclusive nature; and (iv) the chain of
        evidence          should   not   have    any   reasonable        ground    for   a
        conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused.
6.      Further it was held therein as under:-
7.   …It has been impressed that suspicion and conjecture
        should not take the place of legal proof. It is true that
        the chain of events proved by the prosecution must show
        that within all human probability the offence has been
        committed by the accused, but the court is expected to
        consider the total cumulative effect of all the proved
        facts along with the motive suggested by the prosecution
        which induced the accused to follow a particular path. The
        existence of a motive is often an enlightening factor in a
        process of presumptive reasoning in cases depending on
        circumstantial evidence.
7.
In
Brijlal Prasad Sinha v. State of Bihar2
, this Court held

thus:
“In a case of circumstantial evidence the prosecution is
        bound      to      establish     the    circumstances        from   which    the
        conclusion           is    drawn       must    be      fully     proved;      the
        circumstances         should     be    conclusive      in    nature;   all   the
        circumstances         so   established        should    be     consistent    only
        with the hypothesis of guilt and inconsistent with the
        innocence; and lastly the circumstances should to a great
        certainty exclude the possibility of guilt of any person
        other than the accused. The law relating to circumstantial
        evidence no longer remains res integra and it has been
2 (1998) SCC (Cri) 1382
6
held      by   catena      of    decisions      of   this     Court   that   the
       circumstances proved should lead to no other inference
       except that of the guilt of the accused so that, the
       accused can be convicted of the offences charged. It may
       be stated as a rule of caution that before the court
       records        conviction        on     the     basis    of     circumstantial
       evidence, it must satisfy itself that the circumstances
       from which inference of guilt could be drawn have been
       established          by         unimpeachable         evidence        and    the
       circumstances unerringly point to the guilt of the accused
       and     further,     all    the    circumstances        taken    together    are
       incapable of any explanation on any reasonable hypothesis
       save the guilt of the accused.”
8.
In the decision in
Prakash v. State of Rajasthan3
, this Court

took note of the following principles laid down regarding the law

relating circumstantial evidence in
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v.

State of Maharashtra4
: -
“153. A close analysis of this decision would show that
       the following conditions must be fulfilled before a case
       against an accused can be said to be fully established:
(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt
       is to be drawn should be fully established. It may be
       noted         here   that        this       Court    indicated        that   the
       circumstances concerned 'must or should' and not 'may be'
       established. There is not only a grammatical but a legal
       distinction between 'may be proved' and 'must be or should
       be proved' as was held by this Court in
Shivaji Sahabrao
       Bobade v. State of Maharashtra
[(1973) 2 SCC 793] where
       the following observations were made:
19.     …"Certainly,        it    is    a   primary     principle     that   the
       accused must be and not merely may be guilty before a
       court can convict and the mental distance between 'may be'

3 (2013) 4 SCC 668
4 (1984) 4 SCC 116
7
and 'must be' is long and divides vague conjectures from
       sure conclusions."
(2) The facts so established should be consistent only
       with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is
       to   say,      they       should   not     be    explainable     on   any   other
       hypothesis except that the accused is guilty,
       (3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and
       tendency,
       (4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except
       the one to be proved, and
       (5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not
       to     leave     any       reasonable       ground    for      the    conclusion
       consistent with the innocence of the accused and must show
       that in all human probability the act must have been done
       by the accused.
154.    These    five       golden   principles,       if   we    may    say   so,
       constitute the panchsheel of the proof of a case based on
       circumstantial evidence.”
9.     After noting the above five golden principles, it was held in

Prakash’s case (supra), that they would constitute the Panchsheel

of    the   proof     of     a    case    based    on    circumstantial        evidence     and

conviction could be sustained on the basis of last seen, motive and

recovery of incriminating articles in pursuance of the information

given by the accused if those five golden principles of the proof

of a case based on circumstantial evidence are satisfied.
10.    Virtually, the law laid down relating circumstantial evidence

in those decisions are unfailingly followed by this Court while

dealing with the cases where conviction is rested on circumstantial

evidence.
11.    We are also fully aware of the position that normally in an

appeal by special leave under
Article 136
of the Constitution of
8
India     when      concurrent        findings         of       conviction     and     sentence      are

against the appellants / convicts there would be no scope for

interference except in exceptional circumstances.
In the decision

in
Tomaso Bruno & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh5
, a Three Judge

Bench of this Court held:-
“42. By and large, this Court will not interfere with the
       concurrent             findings     recorded         by    the    courts      below.    But
       where        the       evidence     has   not       been    properly         appreciated,
       material aspects have been ignored and the findings are
       perverse under
Article 136
of the Constitution, this Court
       would certainly interfere with the findings of the courts
       below though concurrent. In a case based on circumstantial
       evidence, circumstances from which inference of guilt is
       sought        to       be   drawn    should         be    fully    proved       and    such
       circumstances must be of conclusive nature pointing to the
       guilt of accused. There shall be no gap in such chain of
       circumstances….”
12.    Heard, Mr. Sanjay Jain and Mr. Sunil Kumar Verma, learned

counsel for the appellant and Mr. Sachin Patil, learned counsel for

the respondent-State.
13.    In view of the law relating circumstantial evidence exposited

under      the      decisions        referred        hereinbefore             and    the     scope   of

interference             in    exercise     of    power          under
Article      136
of    the

Constitution of India in respect of cases where concurrent findings

are recorded by the Lower Courts, we are of the considered view if

doubt lingers with respect to the probability or conclusiveness of

any circumstance relied on by the prosecution, forming a link in

the    chain        of    circumstances          pointing         to    the   guilt     of    convict,

despite the existence of concurrent findings, the evidence has to
5 (2015)7 SCC 178
9
be scrutinized by this Court so as to ensure that the totality of

the evidence and circumstances relied on, did constitute a complete

chain and it points to the guilt of the convict and it did not

brook any hypothesis other than the guilt of the convict.                              Upon

hearing      the   learned     counsel     on   both     sides       and    on    careful

consideration of the evidence and materials on record, we are of

the considered view that the case at hand is a befitting case where

such    an   exercise    is    required.        Before    we    undertake        such     an

exercise, it is only proper to look into the questions whether the

death of Rahul Pundlik Meshram is homicidal in nature.                      As a matter

of fact, there is not much dispute on this aspect.
14.     The evidence of PW-13 with Exhibit-54 postmortem report made

the Courts below to concurrently come to the conclusion that death

of Rahul Pundlik Meshram is homicidal in nature.                        The postmortem

report would reveal the presence of 22 ante-mortem injuries on the

body of the deceased.            It would also reveal that out of the 22

ante-mortem injuries, except 7 of these are incised wounds.                              The

said 7 injuries are serious stab injuries inflicted on different

parts of the body.            It is taking into account the nature of all

those   injuries     that     PW-13   opined    that     the    cause      of    death   of

deceased     was   due   to    multiple    injuries      on    the   chest       and   back

involving the vital organs such as heart and lungs.                               We have

absolutely no hesitation to hold in the said circumstances that the

Courts below have rightly arrived at the conclusion, in the light

of the evidence that death of Rahul Pundlik Meshram is homicidal in

nature.
15.     Admittedly, the conviction of the appellants is rested on
10
circumstantial      evidence       only.         As      per    the    Trial      Court,    the

following    circumstances         were   relied         upon   by    the    prosecution     to

establish    the   guilt      of   the    accused,         including        the   appellants,

before it: -
“1.    Visit     of   the    deceased         Rahul      Meshram      to    the   house   of
      Chintaman Gatey (P.W.8).
2. While the deceased was at the house of Chintaman, the accused
        nos. 1 to 3 and deceased accused Raju Pande arrived at the
     house of Chintaman Gatey.
3. The motive altercation had taken place between the accused on
        one side and the deceased on the other side.
4.    That, the accused persons, under the pretext of consuming
        liquor persuaded the deceased to accompany them.
5.    That, the deceased and the accused nos. 1 to 3 and deceased
        accused Raju Pande, left the house of                         Chintaman Gatey, on
        two motor-cycles.
6.    That, immediately, there after i.e. after the deceased left
        the house of Chintaman Gatey with accused persons, he was
        found met with homicidal death.
7.    Recovery of the weapon from the accused No.1 with the                             blood
        stains of Group 'A' which was of the deceased.
8.    The Opinion of the Dr. Sau. Manjusha Rangari that by the said
        weapon, the injuries which were found on the dead body of the
        deceased, could be caused.
9.    The discovery of the fact of burning clothes stained with
        blood by the accused No. 1 and those clothes were belonged to
      accused nos. 1 and 2.
10. The full pant belonged               to    accused        No.1    was    stained     with
        blood, of blood group "A" which was of the deceased.”
16.    After considering the said relied on circumstances, the Trial

Court held that the prosecution had succeeded in establishing eight

circumstances, as under: -
“1.       The visit of deceased Rahul Meshram at the house of
        Chintaman Gatey.
2.    Arrival    of   the    accused     No.       1    to    3,    alongwith     the
11
deceased accused, at the house of Chintman Gatey.
3.   That, the accused No.1 to 3 and deceased accused
      succeeded in persuading the deceased to join them for
      consuming liquor.
4.   That, the accused           No.1    to    3,   deceased       accused     Raju
      Pande, and deceased Rahul Meshram left the house of
      Chintaman Gatey, on two motor cycles.
5.   That immediately after the deceased and the accused
      persons left the house of Chintaman Gatey, the deceased
      was found murdered.
6.   At the instance of            the    accused      No.1       weapon   having
      handle at one end and the other end sharp and edged
      one, was recovered, which was found stained with blood,
      of Group "A" which was of the deceased.
7.   Doctor opined that by the said weapon, the injuries
      could be caused, which were found on the dead-body of
      the deceased.
8.   The accused No.1 burnt the clothes at place near the
      water tank in M.S.E.B, Colony, Bhandara.”
17.   Consequently, the Trial Court considered the question whether

the culled-out circumstances would form a complete chain unerringly

pointing to the guilt of the accused and that accused alone and

obviously,     the    conviction    was    entered     into     upon     answering     that

question in the affirmative.              According to the Trial Court, the

following three proven circumstances are sufficient to constitute

circumstantial evidence unerringly connecting the accused with the

homicidal death: -
“1. That, while the deceased was at the house of Chintaman
      Gatey,     deceased    accused       Raju      Pande    along      with    the
      accused Nos.1 to 3.            came to the house of Chintaman
      Gatey     and    succeeded    in    persuading         the    deceased      to
      accompany them, for consuming liquor.
2.    That the deceased in the company of the accused Nos.1
      to   3   and     deceased    accused      Raju    left       the   house    of
      Chintaman Gatey, on two moto cycles.
12
3.    That,       soon    thereafter,    the      deceased    was     found
        murdered.”
18.    There can be no doubt with respect to the fact that in a case

where the conviction is based on circumstantial evidence, motive

assumes great significance.            A Three Judge Bench of this Court in
Nandu Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh
(now Chhattisgarh) 6 by its

judgment dated 25.02.2022, after observing thus, held as under:-
“It is not as if motive alone becomes the crucial link in

       the case to be established by the prosecution and in its

       absence the case of prosecution must be discarded. But, at

       the     same    time,   complete   absence    of   motive      assumes   a

       different complexion and such absence definitely weighs in

       favour of the accused.”

       We may add here that just like complete absence of motive

failure to establish motive after attributing one, should also give

a different complexion in a case based on circumstantial evidence

and it will certainly enfeeble the case of prosecution.
19.
In the decision in Nandu Singh’s case an earlier decision of

this Court in
Anwar Ali & Anr. v. State of Himachal Pradesh
7, was

quoted with agreement, thus: -
“24. Now so far as the submission on behalf of the accused
       that in the present case the prosecution has failed to
       establish and prove the motive and therefore the accused
       deserves       acquittal   is   concerned,    it   is   true    that   the
       absence of proving the motive cannot be a ground to reject
       the prosecution case. It is also true and as held by this
       Court in
Suresh Chandra Bahri v. State of Bihar
(1995 Supp

6 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1454
7 (2020) 10 SCC 166
13
(1) SCC 80) that if motive is proved that would supply a
link   in    the   chain      of     circumstantial              evidence       but   the
absence      thereof       cannot     be        a    ground        to    reject       the
prosecution case.
However, at the same time, as observed
by this Court in Babu (
Babu v. State of Kerala
, (2010) 9
SCC    189),    absence      of     motive          in    a     case    depending      on
circumstantial evidence is a factor that weighs in favour
of the accused.
In paras 25 and 26, it is observed and
held as under: (
Babu
case, SCC pp. 200-01).
“25. In State of U.P. v. Kishanpal (2008) 16 SCC
73), this Court examined the importance of motive in
       cases of circumstantial evidence and observed: (SCC
       pp. 87-88, paras 38-39)
       ‘38. … the motive is a thing which is primarily known
       to the accused themselves and it is not possible for
       the prosecution to explain what actually promoted or
       excited them to commit the particular crime.
39. The motive may be considered as a circumstance
       which is relevant for assessing the evidence but if
       the     evidence      is    clear        and       unambiguous          and    the
       circumstances prove the guilt of the accused, the
       same is not weakened even if the motive is not a very
       strong one. It is also settled law that the motive
       loses    all    its    importance            in    a     case    where    direct
       evidence of eyewitnesses is available, because even
       if there may be a very strong motive for the accused
       persons to commit a particular crime, they cannot be
       convicted      if    the    evidence          of       eyewitnesses      is    not
       convincing. In the same way, even if there may not be
       an    apparent       motive     but      if        the     evidence      of    the
       eyewitnesses is clear and reliable, the absence or
       inadequacy      of    motive     cannot            stand    in    the    way    of
     conviction.’
26. This Court has also held that the absence of motive in
a case depending on circumstantial evidence is a factor
that weighs in favour of the accused. (Vide Pannayar v.
14
State of T.N. (2009) 9 SCC 152)”.
20.
In     the    decision         in
Shivaji        Chintappa    Patil    v.     State        of

Maharashtra8
, after referring to the decision in Anwar Ali’s case

(supra), this Court observed thus: -
“27. Though in a case of direct evidence, motive would
        not be relevant, in a case of circumstantial evidence,
        motive plays an important link to complete the chain of
        circumstances.”
21.    In     the    case    on       hand,    the    prosecution          alleged    a     motive.

According to the prosecution on 29.09.2001, the deceased along with

his friend Parag Sukhdeve assaulted the brother of appellant in the

latter appeal (the first accused in the Sessions Trial).                                         It is

also the case of the prosecution that after the accused persons

entered       the    house       of    PW-8,    Chintaman          Giddu    Gatey     the        first

accused/the appellant in the latter appeal hurled abuses on the

deceased and asked him why he along with his friend Parag Sukhdeve

assaulted his brother.                     It is also the case of the prosecution

that     though      the    deceased       denied     any    such     occurrence,          the    said

appellant continued to say that the deceased had done dishonesty

and    assaulted       his       brother.        After       alleging       motive    as     above,

prosecution had failed to establish the same.                           In this context, it

is to be noted that the Trial Court made a positive finding that

the    prosecution         had    miserably      failed       to    establish        the    alleged

motive.        Despite the said finding of the Trial Court and despite

that issue was pointedly raised before the High Court, obviously

the High Court in the impugned judgment did not consider the said
8 (2021) 5 SCC 626
15
aspect at all.         This failure on the part of the High Court is a

ground specifically taken in this appeal.                           In the light of the

decision in Anwar Ali’s case (supra) and Shivaji Chintappa Patil’s

case (supra), and also based on what we held in respect of the

impact of failure to establish the alleged motive in a case based

on    circumstantial      evidence    it   can     only    be      held   that   the     said

failure had weakened the case of the prosecution.                           This aspect

should have been given proper weight by the courts below.
22.    Now, we will proceed to consider the other circumstance(s)

relied    on    and   whether    they      would    make       a     complete    chain    of

circumstances and dispel the hypothesis of the innocence of the

appellant.       In that context, it is only appropriate to refer to

the circumstance mainly, relied on and held as proved by the High

Court for confirming the conviction of the appellants viz., that

the deceased was ‘lastly seen’ in the company of the appellants

just prior to the finding of his dead body.                        Having observed thus,

the High Court held that the proof thereof would depend upon the

quality   and    nature    of   the   testimonies         of    Chintaman       (PW-8)    and

Dhanraj (PW-10).
23.    Paragraph 14 of the impugned judgment would reveal that after

referring to evidence based on ‘last seen theory’, recovery of

weapons and seizure of clothes the High Court observed that the

following twin material circumstances would complete the requisite

chain, namely: -
“(a) On the day of incident, at about 4.00 p.m., deceased
      Rahul and all the appellants were present at the house of
      Chintaman (PW-8).
(b) Deceased Rahul left the house of Chintaman at about
16
5.00 p.m., on the day of incident along with the appellants
      and within two hours, the dead body of Rahul with multiple
      incise and stab wounds was found lying by the side of the
      road, 10 kms. away from Bhandara city. There is nothing on
      record to show that deceased Rahul had enmity with anybody
      other   than    the     appellants     and    in    absence    thereof,     the
      possibility      of   somebody       else    committed     assault     on   the
      deceased and would have caused so many multiple injuries is
      completely ruled out.”
24.   With respect to the material circumstance referred to as (a)

in the impugned judgment, as extracted above, what is stated by the

High Court is totally against the weight of evidence.                       The evidence

of PW-8 when juxtaposed to that of PW-10 would reveal the said

position.     It is stated therein that on the day of incident, at

about 04.00 pm, the deceased Rahul Pundlik Meshram and all the

appellants were present at the house of Chintaman (PW-8).                            In a

case rested on circumstantial evidence and ‘last seen’ theory is

relied on as a link in the chain of circumstances, the evidence

relating the time at which the deceased was lastly seen with the

accused has to be proved conclusively as when it is proximate with

the time of finding the dead body the burden to establish the

innocence would be that of the accused.                   Indisputably, in contrast

to the aforesaid statement therein what is deposed by Chintaman

(PW-8) is that on the day of the incident at about 05.00 pm, the

deceased came to his house and then asked for a glass of water and

thereafter, Raju Pande (the deceased accused No.4) along with three

other    persons       with      respect     to    whom     he     got     only   nodding

acquaintance,        came   to    the   house.       He    would    also    depose      that

thereafter Raju Pande started hurling abuses on the deceased.                           Both
17
the    Trial    Court           and       the     High   Court    noted      the    case     of   the

prosecution         that    Raju          Pande    hurled     abuses    on    the   deceased       for

having assaulted the brother of accused No. 1, along with his

friend    Sri       Parag       Sukhdeve.            However,     a    scanning     of     the    oral

testimony of PW-8 would show that he did not depose that Raju Pande

hurled abuses on the deceased on the ground of assault on the

brother of accused No. 1. Naturally, he did not mention the name

Parag Sukhdeve as well.                     So also, it would go to show that he had

stoutly denied involvement in the sale of ganja, or availability of

ganja in his house.               According to him Raju Pande and accused No. 1

alone had come to the chappari of his house and the remaining two

accused were standing in the courtyard of his house.                                     That apart,

as per PW-8 it was about 06:00 PM that accused Raju Pande and the

deceased left his house.                    Thus, it is obvious that the statement in

the material circumstance mentioned as ‘a’ in paragraph 14 of the

impugned judgment is based on the oral testimony of Dhanraj (PW-
10).     It is true that PW-10, deposed that at about 04.00 pm he was

returning home from S.T. Stand and then he found two motorcycles

parked at the house of Chintaman (PW-8), that at the house of

Chintaman,      4    to     5    persons          were   then    sitting     and    at    that    time

accused    Nos.       2    and        3    viz.,    deceased      first      appellant      and   the

surviving appellant in the former appeal, whom he knew by face and

one Pande were present.                   It is pertinent to note that PW-10 did not

depose about the presence of the deceased in the house of Chintaman

when himself, Pande and the other accused persons were there in the

said house.          Naturally, in his oral testimony he had not deposed

anything about the hurling of abuses by Pande on the deceased.
18
Another aspect of his oral testimony is that he deposed about the

query made by Pande about the identity of a pregnant girl who

resides behind the house of Chintaman.          According to him, Chintaman

told Pande that he did not know anything about that girl and then

Pande asked him about her.           On being told that he did not know

anything about her, Pande asked him to leave that place, going by

the deposition of PW-10.        At this juncture, it is to be noted that

PW-10 did not make any mention about this aspect in his evidence.

It is true that the Trial Court found that this is an improved

version    by   PW-10.     Anyway,    the    fact    revealed    from      the   oral

testimony of PW-10 is that he saw the accused persons, including

Raju Pande and the appellants herein, at the house of Chintaman

(PW-08) immediately after 04:00 PM on the day of occurrence and he

did not speak about the presence of the deceased in the house of

PW-8.     That apart, according to him, Raju Pande was enquiring with

him and PW-8 about a pregnant girl who was residing behind the

house of PW-8.      It is also relevant to note that the evidence on

record would further go to show that PW-8 had not mentioned about

the alleged hurling of abuses by deceased accused Raju Pande on the

deceased in his statement under
Section 161
of Cr.P.C.                    Above all,

PW-8 did not mention the presence of PW-10 at his residence anytime

during the period from 04:00 PM to 06:00 PM on that fateful day.
25. When the above being the factual position obtained from the

oral testimonies of PW-8 and PW-10, the Hon’ble High Court which

observed    that   the   circumstance   of   ‘last    seen’     is   an    important

circumstance in the case on hand and its proof would depend upon

the quality and nature of the testimonies of PW-8 and PW-10 should
19
have bestowed a threadbare, serious consideration to answer the

question whether the evidence of PW-10 would lend corroboration to

the evidence of PW-8.               So also, the courts below in the overall

circumstances,        ought    to    have    carefully        considered         the    question

whether the solitary oral evidence of PW-8 would conclusively prove

the    factum    of   the    deceased       lastly     seen   in     the    company      of   the

deceased.       On our careful scrutiny of the evidence of PW-8 and PW-

10 as above we are constrained to hold that both the Trial Court

and the High Court have failed to make a proper exercise of that

task taking into account the fact that the prosecution relies only

on circumstantial evidence to establish the guilt of the accused.

According to us, the discussion as above would go to show that

virtually       the    evidence       of     PW-10      not    only        failed      to     lend

corroboration to the evidence of PW-8 but also puts it under a

shadow of doubt.            Hence, according to us, the Hon’ble High Court

went    wrong    in   holding       that    as   relates      the    said       circumstantial

evidence of ‘last seen’ the evidence of PW-8 gets corroboration

from the evidence of PW-10 and in that view of the matter, in

agreeing    with      the     conclusion         of    the    Trial        Court       that   the

prosecution has succeeded in proving that the deceased was lastly

seen with the accused, conclusively.
26. The above-mentioned situation                      constrained         us    to    scan   the

evidence    of    PW-8      scrupulously         to    find    out    whether          his    sole

testimony is unimpeachable and impeccable to conclusively establish

the joining up of the deceased and the accused/convicts at the

house of PW-8 at the relevant point of time as alleged by the

prosecution.          In    this    context,      it    is    to     be    noted       that   the
20
prosecution case would suggest that the house of PW-8 is a hub of

ganja   smokers.     But   then,   PW-8   stoutly    denied   of   any   kind   of

involvement with ganja business.               Hence, the question is why it

still attracts and allures persons?             If the prosecution case is to

be believed then what made all those persons viz., the deceased,

the accused/convicts and PW-10, visit the house of PW-8 at that

time?    Obviously, there is no indicatory material on that count.

It is to be noted that it is not the case of the prosecution that

the accused persons, including the appellants, reached there on

coming to the know about the presence of the deceased.                   Going by

the case of the prosecution the deceased reached the home of PW-8

on his Luna Moped along with his friend and he went inside after

leaving the friend near the parked vehicle.             PW-8 did not say that

he had friendship with the deceased and he deposed only to the

effect that he knew the deceased and the deceased on occupying a

seat asked for a glass of water.          Soon, thereafter, Raju Pande and

the three others with whom he had only nodding acquaintances came

to his house.      PW-8 would further depose that thereupon Raju Pande

hurled abuse on the deceased and then the deceased pleaded that he

did no wrong.      As noted earlier, it has come out in evidence that

the act of hurling of abuse by Raju Pande on the deceased was not

recorded in the previous statement of PW-8 recorded under
Section

161
, Cr.P.C.    Above all, PW-8 in his testimony before the court did

not depose anything even to suggest that hurling of abuse by Raju

Pande was because of the assault on his brother by the deceased and

his friend Parag Sukhdeve.          Then, how and for what reason this

incident was alleged as the motive for the murder of the deceased
21
Rahul?   Who introduced this story as part of the prosecution case

before the court.    Certainly, it cannot be said that it was PW-10

who spoke to that effect as his testimony would reveal he had not

even spoken about the presence of the deceased at the house of PW-8

when the accused/convicts were seen there.
27. Another aspect revealed from the evidence on record is that as

per PW-10 when he entered the house of PW-8 after 04:00 p.m. on the

day of occurrence, Raju Pande and the others were present there and

Raju Pande asked him about a pregnant girl who was residing behind

the house of PW-8.    According to PW-10, Raju Pande asked the same

to PW-8 as well and both of them revealed their lack of knowledge

about such a girl and then Raju Pande asked PW-10 to leave the

place and thereupon he left the place.   It would suggest, if it was

true that he reached there along with others ahead of the deceased,

in search of such a girl lest why he got infuriated/dejected over

it and asked PW-10 to leave the place.     PW-8 did not speak about

the presence of PW-10 and also about such a query made by Raju

Pande.
28. For all the above reasons and circumstances, it is unsafe to

rest on the sole testimony of PW-8 to apply the ‘last seen theory’

in this case against the appellants especially, going by PW-8 he

had only nodding acquaintance with them.
29. Thus, in a nutshell the correctness of the last seen version

emanating from PW-8-Chintaman becomes doubtful, especially against

the appellants herein.    As noticed earlier, virtually, the oral

testimonies of PW-8 and PW-10 are at variance about the last seen

and it becomes inconclusive for the reasons mentioned hereinbefore.

We have also found that the prosecution has miserably failed to
22
prove   the   alleged       motive.      In    such    circumstance,       though      the

deceased had met with a homicidal death it cannot be said that the

rest of the circumstantial evidence culled out by the courts below

unerringly    point    to    the   culpability        of     the    appellants    in   the

homicidal death of Rahul Pundlik Meshram.                   Even the recovery of the

weapon and the dress, at the instance of the appellant in the

latter appeal cannot, by itself, be conclusive as admittedly, the

panch   witnesses     for     their    recovery       also    did    not   support     the

prosecution.     In our considered view, the remaining circumstances

relied on by the prosecution and held as proved by the courts below

would not unerringly point to the guilt of the appellants.
30.   Thus, in our view, it is unsafe on the aforesaid circumstances

to maintain the conviction of the appellants; we thus, extend to

them the benefit of doubt.            Accordingly, we order for the acquittal

of the appellants.           The appeals are thus allowed, upsetting the

judgments and orders of the High Court as also that of the court of

Session.       The    bail    bonds     executed       by     the    appellants    stand

discharged.
……………………, J.
(Ajay Rastogi)




                                                                           ……………………, J.
(C.T. Ravikumar)
New Delhi;
March 15, 2023.
23
(FOR JUDGMENT)                                                       (REPORTABLE)
ITEM NO.1501                      COURT NO.12                       SECTION II-A

                 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F                I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

                      Criminal Appeal      No(s).    954/2011

SHANKAR                                                             Appellant(s)

                                         VERSUS

THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                                            Respondent(s)

                                         WITH
Crl.A. No. 955/2011
Date : 15-03-2023 These appeals were called on for pronouncement of
                   reportable judgment today.
For Appellant(s)        Mr. Sanjay Jain, AOR

                        Mr. Sunil Kumar Verma, AOR
                        Mr. Sunil Kumar Verma, Adv.

For Respondent(s)       Mr. Sachin Patil, AOR
                        Mr. Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Adv.
                        Mr. Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, Adv.
                        Mr. Bharat Bagla, Adv.
                        Mr. Sourav Singh, Adv.
                        Mr. Geo Joseph, Adv.
                        Mr. Risvi Muhammed, Adv.
                        Mr. Durgesh Gupta, Adv.


    Hon’ble Mr. Justice.          C.T. Ravikumar pronounced the reportable
judgment of the Bench comprising Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ajay Rastogi

and His Lordship.
“Thus,      in    our   view,    it     is     unsafe     on    the   aforesaid

circumstances    to    maintain    the   conviction     of    the   appellants;    we

thus, extend to them the benefit of doubt.                  Accordingly, we order

for the acquittal of the appellants.              The appeals are thus allowed,

upsetting the judgments and orders of the High Court as also that
24
of the court of Session.   The bail bonds executed by the appellants

stand discharged”.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
(NISHA KHULBEY)                             (DIPTI KHURANA)
SENIOR PERSONAL ASSISTANT                     ASSISTANT REGISTRAR
(signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)