[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Gurjit Singh (Dead) Thr. Lrs. vs Union Territory Of Chandigarh & Ors. on 3 March, 2023
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                              CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4826­4828 OF 2022


         Gurjit Singh (D) Through LRs                               ...Appellant(s)

                                               Versus


         Union Territory, Chandigarh & Ors.                       …Respondent(s)


                                            JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 23.10.2013 passed by the High

                         Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in Letters

                         Patent Appeal Nos. 2130/2011 and 2131/2011 and the

                         subsequent order dated 17.12.2013 passed in CM No.

                         5249/2013 in LPA No. 2130/2011, by which, the Division

                         Bench of the High Court has dismissed the Said Letters

                         Patent Appeals thereby confirming the judgment and order
Signature Not Verified
passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the writ
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2023.03.03
16:50:12 IST
Reason:
petitions, the original writ petitioner has preferred the

                         present appeals.
1
2.    The facts leading to the present appeals in a nutshell are

      as under: ­

2.1   That the appellant became the owner of Shop No. 27

      situated in the Agricultural Produce Market, Chandigarh.

      Respondent No. 5 herein was the tenant of the said shop.

      Both the appellant as well as respondent No. 5 were

      holding the requisite licences to do business in the market

      area.   Ejectment   proceedings     were     initiated     by   the

      appellant against respondent No. 5. The order of ejectment

      came to be confirmed by the High Court. Therefore,

      respondent No. 5 shifted as a tenant to Shop No. 12 in the

      year 2007 and applied for change of address to the new

      shop, however, the same was rejected and respondent No.

      5 was asked to surrender his licence and apply for new

      one.    The   appellant   applied   for    licence   for    selling

      fruits/vegetables and State Agricultural Marketing Board

      issued the same. Since then, the appellant is running the

      business from Shop No. 27 owned by him. Respondent No.

      5 filed a writ petition before the High Court challenging the

      order dated 05.07.2007 by which his application for

      change of address to the new Shop No. 12 was rejected.
2
The order dated 05.07.2007 was stayed. The stay was

continued up to 31.03.2009 i.e., till the validity of licence

of   respondent   No.   5.   That   thereafter,   the   Market

Committee,    Chandigarh     rejected   the   application   of

respondent No. 5 for renewal of licence. The same was the

subject matter of another writ petition before the High

Court being Writ Petition No. 5886/2009. That pursuant

to the order passed by the High Court, respondent No. 5

continued to function as per the old licence. That the

Licence Committee constituted under Licensing of Auction

Platform Rules, 1981 decided that the site in the platform

would be allotted on the basis of “One Site One Shop” and

the name of respondent No. 5 was shown as co­allottee

along with the appellant. Aggrieved with this, the appellant

filed a writ petition before the High Court, being Writ

Petition No. 12684/2009. The High Court by a common

judgment and order dated 26.09.2011 allowed Writ

Petition No. 5886/2009 filed by respondent No. 5 and

directed that the licence of respondent No. 5 be renewed.

The High Court also held that respondent No. 5 is entitled

to use the platform in front of Shop No. 27 till any
3
alternative policy comes by way of amendment in the Act

      or the Rules, pertaining to the issue of rights to use the

      platform. The learned Single Judge also held that right to

      use the platform and to have the licence to do the business

      in the market area both are distinct and different and the

      two rights were not directly linked.
2.2   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the common

      judgment and order passed by the learned Single Judge of

      the High Court the appellant preferred the letters patent

      appeals before the Division Bench of the High Court. By

      the impugned common judgment and order the Division

      Bench of the High Court has dismissed the said letters

      patent appeals and has confirmed the order passed by the

      learned Single Judge holding that right to use the shop

      and/or having a licence and right to use the platform are

      not directly related. The Division Bench of the High court

      also observed that respondent No. 5 is using the platform

      since 1970 i.e., much prior to the appellant getting the

      licence and therefore, being a senior licencee, he gets the

      right to use the platform allotted to him i.e., in front of

      Shop No. 27.
4
2.3   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

      common judgment and order passed by the Division Bench

      of the High Court the original writ petitioner – licence

      holder and owner of Shop No. 27 who is also claiming the

      right to use the platform in front of Shop No. 27 has

      preferred the present appeals.
3.    Shri P.S. Patwalia, learned Senior Advocate, appearing on

      behalf of the appellant(s) has vehemently submitted that

      the learned Single Judge as well as the Division Bench of

      the High Court have materially erred in confirming the

      allotment of the auction platform in question, in favour of

      original respondent No. 5.
3.1   It is submitted that the appellant herein was granted the

      licence in the year 2007, however, so far as respondent No.

      5 is concerned, he applied for a fresh licence/renewal in

      the year 2009 and he was issued a fresh licence in the

      year 2010 and therefore, as per seniority the appellant

      herein was entitled to priority.
3.2   It is further submitted that even at the time of submitting

      the application for fresh licence/renewal in the year 2009,
5
respondent No. 5 submitted an affidavit dated 20.08.2009

      deposing that he will not claim any right over the auction

      platform. That in fact the licence was issued only after the

      said affidavit.
3.3   It is next submitted that the High Court has materially

      erred in observing and holding that carrying on the

      business in the shop and on the auction platform both are

      distinct and separate. That the right to use a particular

      site in the platform is connected with the right to use the

      particular corresponding shop in view of the clear policy of

      the board i.e., “One Site One Shop”.
3.4   It is contended that the appellant herein is doing the

      business, has the licence and he is allotted shop no. 27

      and therefore, he is entitled to the allotment of the auction

      platform adjacent to and/or in front of shop No. 27.

3.5   It is further contended that so far as respondent No. 5 is

      concerned, he is doing business in shop No. 12 therefore,

      not to permit the appellant(s) to do business on the

      auction platform which is adjacent to shop No. 27 and

      allotting auction platform to respondent No. 5 who is doing
6
business in shop no. 12, just adjacent to shop No. 27 is

      unreasonable and arbitrary.
3.6   It   is   next   contended    that   the   appellant(s)   herein

      approached the learned Single Judge challenging the co­

      allotment of the site to respondent No. 5. That in any case

      the appellant(s) do not succeed in such challenge, they

      cannot be worse of compared to the position which they

      were in prior to filing of the writ petition.
4.    Present appeals are vehemently opposed by Shri Vatsal

      Joshi,    learned   counsel   appearing    on   behalf    of   the

      Chandigarh Market Committee. It is vehemently submitted

      that after the interim order dated 05.08.2016 was passed

      by this Court, the representation made by the appellant

      herein has been dealt with and considered by the Market

      Committee and a detailed reasoned order has been passed

      by the Market Committee rejecting the representation of

      the appellant.
4.1   It is further submitted that the allotment of auction

      platform is to be made as per the policy. That it is rightly

      observed and held by the High Court that to do business

      in the shop and on the auction platform are different and
7
distinct. That as such there is no policy and/or rule

      pointed out on behalf of the appellant that a licence holder

      is entitled to carry on the business and/or allotment of the

      auction platform just adjacent to and/or in front of shop

      occupied by him.
4.2   It is next submitted that as respondent No. 5 was found to

      be doing business since 1970 and thereafter, he applied

      for renewal of the licence in the year 2009; he has been

      allotted the platform in front of shop No. 27.

4.3   It is vehemently submitted that the appellant and/or any

      other licence holder doing business in the respective shop

      cannot as a matter of right claim allotment of the auction

      platform at a particular place.
4.4   It is contended that as such, existing sheds in the Market

      Committee collapsed on 10.06.2007 and thereafter, sheds

      were reconstructed in the year 2009. That thereafter, the

      Secretary Agriculture, U.T. Chandigarh laid down the

      principles and guidelines at the first instance, all those

      allottees, who were allotted sheds for working prior to

      collapse of sheds on 10.06.2007 were entitled to be allotted

      shed/space as they existed on the date when the shed
8
collapsed. That the appellant was issued the licence on

      16.07.2007 whereas the sheds collapsed on 10.06.2007,

      therefore, the appellant was not in possession of the shed

      earlier to the collapse on 10.06.2007 and therefore, his

      case is not covered under the aforesaid policy.

4.5   It is further contended that the action of the Market

      Committee    in   allotting   the   sheds   is   absolutely   in

      consonance with the guidelines/policy laid down by the

      Secretary, Agriculture Department, Chandigarh.
5.    While opposing the present appeals, learned counsel

      appearing on behalf of respondent No. 5 has argued that

      as such respondent No. 5 was carrying on business on the

      platform even at the time of the collapse of shed on

      10.06.2007 and was having a valid licence since 1970.

      However, at the time of allotment of newly constructed

      sheds, licence of the firm was not valid due to non­renewal

      and the case for grant of licence was pending for

      consideration in the office of the Committee, and the same

      was finally granted in the month of February, 2010. It is

      submitted that thereafter on constitution of the Committee

      the allotment of the shed was made to respondent No. 5,
9
being a licencee of the Committee and possession holder of

      the shed prior to the collapse of the shed. Making the

      above submissions it is prayed that the present appeals be

      dismissed.
6.    We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      respective parties at length. We have gone through the

      impugned judgment(s) and order(s) passed by the learned

      Single Judge as well as the Division Bench of the High

      Court.
6.1   At the outset, it is required to be noted that the appellant

      is claiming shed/auction platform which is just adjacent to

      and/or in front of shop No. 27 and/or at any other place.

      However, the appellant is unable to establish and/or show

      any specific rules and/or regulations with respect to the

      allotment of the shed/auction platform and that too, just

      adjacent and/or in front of shop in which a particular

      person is carrying on the business. Therefore, in the

      absence of any specific right in his favour, the appellant

      could not have prayed for the allotment of shed/auction

      platform just adjacent to and/or in front of his shop No.
27.
10
6.2   At this stage, it is required to be noted that even other

      persons are allotted the shops/auction platforms at

      different places.      It is also required to be noted that

      number of persons doing business is more than the

      availability of auction platforms.
6.3   At this stage, it is also required to be noted that as such

      pursuant to orders passed by this Court on 06.05.2016

      and     05.08.2016,      petitioner   –   appellant    made   the

      representation. The orders are as under: ­
            “Mr. Patwalia, learned senior counsel states that
            there are certain other platforms which are
            available. If that is so, Respondent Nos. 2 to 4 may
            consider whether one such platform can be allotted
            to the petitioner or not.
Petitioner is entitled to make a representation in
            this behalf within one week.
List the matter in the month of August, 2016.”

                                     xxx

            “It is stated by Mr. P. S. Patwalia, learned senior
            counsel appearing for the petitioner, that platform
            No. 13 is available.
Learned counsel for the respondents submits that
            the matter is pending consideration and shall be
            decided within a period of four weeks.
We hope that the respondents shall consider it
            favourably.
List the petitions after four weeks.”
11
Even the representation was permitted to be made to

      consider on the statement made by learned counsel

      appearing on behalf of the appellant that there are certain

      other platforms which are available and to that, this Court

      observed that if that is so, respondent Nos. 2 to 4 may

      consider whether one such platform can be allotted to the

      appellant or not. That thereafter, a representation was

      made by the appellant which has been dealt with and

      rejected by the Committee by a detailed order which is self­

      explanatory.
6.4   In the representation/order, it is specifically mentioned

      that earlier the shed collapsed on 10.06.2007 and

      thereafter, the shed was reconstructed in the year 2009

      and a policy decision was taken pursuant to the directions

      issued by the Secretary, Agriculture, that at the first

      instance, all those allottees, who were allotted sheds for

      working prior to collapse of sheds on 10.06.2007 were

      entitled to be allotted shed/space as they existed on the

      date when the shed collapsed. Thereafter, the allotment

      has been made as per the principles and guidelines
12
regarding allotment of auction platforms as directed by the

Secretary. The guidelines are as under: ­
   “1.   At the first instance, all those allottees, who
         were allotted sheds for working prior to collapse
         of shed on 10.06.2007 will be allotted
         sheds/spaces as they exited as on the date
         when the shed collapsed.
2.    In case after that, there are more spaces
         available, those spaces shall be advertised and
         fresh applications from the bonafide license
         holders as on the date of inviting the
         applications or those licensees whose licenses
         are due for renewal and are pending for renewal
         with the competent authority as on date of
         calling applications shall be called, after giving
         due notice of at least 20 days. Once that is done
         and in case legally bonafide applications are
         more than the number of available space, draw
         of lots will be held in the presence of Chairman,
         Market Committee, Joint Secretary, Agricultural
         Marketing Board and applicants who desire to
         be present. Based on draw of lots further
         allotment of sites/working spaces shall be
         made.
3.    These directives shall be followed till such time
         the Government makes a new rule under the Act
         and gives new guidelines.
Further keeping in view my finding in this case,
         I am of the considered opinion that any
         allotment which has been made to other than
         the erstwhile allottees who were sitting and
         doing their business as on 10.06.2007 is not
         just and valid and needs to be set aside.
I direct the Market Committee to issue notice for
         cancellation of allotted site/shed to those
         allotees who were not allottees as on 10.06.2007
         and after giving them due opportunity of being
         heard, may pass appropriate orders keeping in
         view the principle which I have laid down in this
         order."
13
6.5   That thereafter, the allotments have been made in

      accordance with the guidelines/principles laid down by the

      Secretary, Agriculture. Under the circumstances, the

      appellant is not entitled to any preferential treatment

      and/or allotment dehors observance of principles and

      guidelines issued by the Secretary regarding allotment of

      the auction platforms. The appellant is to be treated at par

      and equally with other persons doing business in the

      market and on the auction platform.
6.6   Even as rightly observed by the High Court, to do business

      in the shop and to carry on business on the auction

      platform, are both different and distinct. Merely because a

      person is having a licence and doing business in a

      particular shop, he is not entitled to the auction platform

      as a matter of right and that too, in front of and/or

      adjacent to his shop. No such rule and/or regulation

      and/or guideline supporting such a claim has been

      brought to the notice of the High Court or even this Court.
6.7   Now so far as the allotment of the auction platform in

      favour of respondent No. 5 is concerned, it is required to

      be noted that according to the Market Committee and
14
respondent No. 5, respondent No. 5 has been holding the

     licence and doing business since 1970, whereas the

     appellant herein got the licence on 16.07.2007. It appears

     that at the relevant time when the allotment of the newly

     constructed shed was made, the licence of respondent No.

     5 was not renewed and/or not valid due to non­renewal

     and the case for grant of licence was pending for

     consideration in the office of the Committee, which was

     granted in the month of February, 2010. Thereafter, the

     shed has been allotted in favour of respondent No. 5 being

     a licencee of the Market Committee and being in

     possession of the shed prior to collapse of the shed.    All

     these aspects in detail have been considered by the Market

     Committee while deciding the representation.
7.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above and

     in absence of any specific rule/regulation to the contrary

     and when the allotment of the sheds is made as per the

     principles/guidelines   of   the   Secretary,   Agriculture,

     reproduced hereinabove, and in absence of any specific

     rule in favour of appellant(s), right to claim the allotment

     just in front of his shop and/or adjacent to the same and
15
when the allotment in favour of respondent No. 5 is made

     as per the policy and guidelines, both the learned Single

     Judge and Division Bench of the High Court have rightly

     held against the appellant and have rightly dismissed the

     writ   petition(s)   and   appeal(s).   We   are   in   complete

     agreement with the view taken by the High Court.
8.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the

     present appeals lack merit and the same deserve to be

     dismissed and are accordingly dismissed. No costs.
………………………………….J.
                                      [M.R. SHAH]




NEW DELHI;                            ………………………………….J.
MARCH 03, 2023                        [B.V. NAGARATHNA]
16