[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Commissioner Of Central Excise Mumbai 1 vs M/S Morarjee Gokuldas Spg.And Wvg.Co. ... on 24 March, 2023
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
Krishna Murari
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.3039 OF 2011



                         COMMISSIONER OF CENTRAL EXCISE,
                         MUMBAI – 1                                ..APPELLANT(S)


                                                  VERSUS


                         M/S. MORARJEE GOKULDAS
                         SPG. & WVG. CO.LTD.                     .. RESPONDENT(S)



                                               JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                              judgment and order dated 24.09.2008 passed by the

                              High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Central Excise
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2023.03.24
16:35:12 IST
Reason:
Appeal No.186 of 2008 by which the Division Bench of

                              the High Court has dismissed the said appeal preferred
1
by the Revenue and has affirmed the judgment and order

      passed by the Appellate Tribunal by which the Appellate

      Tribunal held that the show cause notice under
Section

      11A
of the Central Excise Act, 1944 is required to be

      issued in case of erroneous refund of the duty, the

      Revenue has preferred the present appeal.
2.    The short question which is posed for consideration

      before this Court is whether the separate notice under
Section 11A
of the Central Excise Act is necessary for the

      recovery of the amount when an erroneous refund is

      granted through the speaking order is reviewed under
Section 35E
of the Act?
2.1   The facts leading to the present appeal in nutshell are as

      under:
2.2   The respondent herein was at the relevant time a

      manufacturer of cotton yarn which it consumed captively

      in its composite mills for weaving of fabric.
In October,

      1980 vide judgment in the case of M/s.
J.K. Cotton
2
Spinning & Weaving Mills Company Ltd. vs. Union of

India
1981 (8) ELT 887, the Delhi High Court held that

removal of yarn which was consumed within the factory

for production did not amount to removal within the

meaning of Rules 9 & 49 of the erstwhile Central Excise

Rules, 1944 and hence set aside the duty demand made

on such captively consumed yarn. That the respondent

company filed a revised classification list wherein, they

declared that no duty was payable on the yarn captively

consumed.     By an order issued in April, 1981 the

classification list was rejected by the Department and the

respondent – company was directed to file a fresh

classification list. The respondent – company filed a writ

petition before the Delhi High Court being Writ Petition

No.1190 of 1981 inter alia challenging the levy and

collection of duty on the said yarn captively consumed by

them. By judgment and order dated 11.01.1983 the High

Court disposed of the said writ petition upholding the

validity of Rules 9 and 49 and holding that the recovery
3
could only be done as per the time limit prescribed in

      Section 11A.    That in the year 1983 the respondent –

      company filed a civil appeal against
the said judgment
before this Court being Civil Appeal No.320 of 1983. The

      Company also files application for stay of the operation of

      the judgment.     On 15.03.1983, this Court passed an

      interim order in the following terms:
"In respect of future payment of Excise Duty there
            will be no stay. In so for as the post dues are
            concerned, 50% of the past dues shall be paid to
            the authority concerned within a period of 3
            months from today. In regard to the balance 50%
            the appellants shall give bank Guarantee to the
            satisfaction of the Registrar of this Court within
            the same period. If the Bank Guarantee have
            already been given in any case in pursuance of
            the directions of the Delhi High Court it will
            continue in operation and shall be kept alive from
            time to time."
2.3   In pursuance to the interim directions granted by this

      Court on 15.03.1983, the bank guarantee given by the

      respondent – company was kept alive from time to time.

      By final judgment and order dated 17.01.1995 this Court

      decided the case and inter alia directed that if notice

      under Section 11A has not been served the Revenue
4
would be entitled to do so within the time limit prescribed

by
Section 11A
of the Act. On the basis of the judgment

and order passed by this Court, the Divisional Assistant

Commissioner issued a show cause notice on 07.04.1995

demanding a duty amounting to Rs.2,96,14,265.05.

Subsequently by passing O-I-O dated 27.03.1996, the

Assistant Commissioner confirmed the demand. Out of

the amount demanded, Rs.1,48,07,132.84 was paid on

different dates between 18.04.1983 to 28.12.1984, as per

the   directions    of   this    Court.        Balance    of

Rs.1,48,07,132.91 was recovered on 28.03.1996 by

encashing bank guarantees executed by the respondent –

company.     Being aggrieved with the decision of the

Assistant   Commissioner        dated     27.03.1996,    the

respondent assessee/company went in appeal before the

Commissioner (Appeals).     The Commissioner (Appeals)

dismissed the said appeal and upheld the decision of the

Assistant Commissioner by order dated 13.06.1996.

Thereafter the respondent – assessee went in appeal
5
before   the   Tribunal   against   the   order   of   the

Commissioner (Appeals).     The Tribunal set aside the

order passed by the Commissioner (Appeals) by order

dated 15.05.2000 on the ground that there was no

demand issued by the Department under
Section 11A
of

the Central Excise Act.    The Revenue challenged the

order passed by the Commissioner (Appeals) dated

15.05.2000 which came to be dismissed by order dated

17.02.2005. In the meantime, since the company filed a

refund claim it was found that the refund claim was not

sustainable. A show cause notice dated 19.09.2000 was

issued for deciding the issue of
Section 11B
of the

Central Excise Act. Notice dated 19.09.2000 came to be

adjudicated by the Deputy Commissioner of Central

Excise who vide his order dated 21.12.2000 set aside the

show cause notice and ordered refund of the entire

amount to the respondent – assessee/company. The said

order held that the amounts were paid under the protest

by the party and therefore the time limit will not apply.
6
The issue of unjust enrichment was not examined in the

      order. That thereafter the Revenue in exercise of powers

      conferred under
Section 35E(2)
of the Central Excise Act,

      preferring an appeal before the Commissioner (Appeals)

      prayed for setting aside the order passed by the Deputy

      Commissioner dated 21.12.2000 sanctioning the refund,

      on the grounds set out therein including that there was

      unjust enrichment and that the refund claimed was time

      barred under
Section 11B
of the Central Excise Act. By

      order dated 13.05.2005 the Commissioner Central Excise

      (Appeals), Mumbai allowed the appeal filed by the

      Revenue by inter alia upholding grounds of unjust

      enrichment and time bar under
Section 11B
of the

      Central Excise Act.
2.4   Being aggrieved, the assessee filed the appeal before the

      Tribunal challenging the points of the merits upheld by

      the Commissioner Central Excise (Appeals) vide order in

      appeal dated 13.05.2005. Pending the said appeal and

      consequent to the order dated 13.05.2005, setting aside
7
the Order-in-Original sanctioning the refund claim of

Rs.2,96,14,264/- and in absence of specific stay against

the said order in appeal, the Revenue proceeded with

recovery of an amount of Rs.20,00,000/- by way of

appropriation of refund claims payable to the assessee

under O-I-O dated 04.01.2007. Therefore, in the pending

appeal on 25.01.2007, the respondent assessee filed an

application seeking directions to the Department to

refund the said sum of Rs.20,00,000/- sanctioned to it

by way of refund. That before the Tribunal, the assessee

filed an application for additional grounds seeking to

amend the appeal against the order in appeal dated

13.05.2005 on the following points of law:
“(i) No notice under
Section 11A
of Central
          Excise Act, 1944 is issued to the applicants
          seeking to recover the refund granted
          pursuant to the Order in Original dated
          19.12.2000.
(ii) The order of the Commissioner of Central
          Excise (Appeals), impugned in the above
          Appeal, without issuing notice under
          Section l1
A of the Act
, is therefore not
          capable of being implemented and liable to
          be set aside on this ground alone.”
8
2.5   That the Tribunal by its Order dated 12.10.2007

      considered and decided only the points of law raised vide

      Misc. Application for additional grounds and vide order

      dated 12.10.2007 allowed the said appeal and set aside

      the order in appeal with consequential relief to the

      assessee. Against the order passed by the Tribunal dated

      12.10.2007, the Revenue preferred the present appeal

      before the High Court. By the impugned judgment and

      order the High Court has dismissed the said appeal

      relying upon the decision of the Division Bench of the

      High Court in the case of
Bajaj Auto Ltd. vs. UOI
, 2003

      (151) ELT-23 (Bom).
At this stage it is required to be

      noted that before the High Court the Revenue strongly

      relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of
Asian

      Paints (India) Ltd. vs. CCE, Bombay
2002 (142) ELT-

      522 (SC)


2.6 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

      judgment and order passed by the High Court, the
9
Revenue has preferred the present appeal.
3.    Ms.      Aishwarya     Bhati,    learned        ASG    and     Ms.

      Ameyavikrama Thanvi, learned counsel have appeared on

      behalf of the appellant and Mr. V. Sridharan, learned

      Senior    Advocate     has   appeared      on    behalf   of   the

      respondent.
4.    Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned ASG appearing on behalf of

      the Revenue has vehemently submitted that in the facts

      and circumstances of the case the High Court has

      materially erred in relying upon the judgment of the

      Bombay High Court in the case of
Bajaj Auto Ltd
(supra)

      which was delivered on 15.02.2002.
4.1   It is submitted that before the High Court the Revenue

      heavily relied upon the decision of this Court in the case

      of
Asian   Paints   (India)   Ltd.
(supra)       which    was

      subsequent to the decision of the Bombay High Court in

      the case of
Bajaj Auto Ltd
(supra).
It is submitted that

      therefore, the decision of this Court in the case of
Asian
10
Paints (India) Ltd.
(supra) was binding on the High

      Court.
It is submitted that as such the impugned order

      passed by the High Court is silent on the reasoning as to

      why the reliance placed by the Revenue on the decision of

      this Court in the case of
Asian Paints (India) Ltd.
(supra) was misplaced.
4.2   It is submitted by Ms. Bhati, learned ASG that in the

      case of
Asian Paints (India) Ltd.
(supra), this Court has

      specifically observed and held that
Sections 35E
and
11A
of the Central Excise Act operate in different fields and

      are invoked for different purposes. It is submitted that it

      is observed that different time limits are, therefore, set

      out therein. It is submitted that in
the said decision
this

      Court has not accepted the submission on behalf of the

      assessee that the recovery of the excise duty cannot be

      made pursuant to an appeal filed after invoking the

      provisions of Section 35E if the time limit provided in

      Section 11A has expired.    It is observed to so read the

      provisions would be to render Section 35E virtually
11
ineffective,   which   would   be   impermissible.
It   is

      submitted that therefore the present case as such is

      clearly covered by the decision of this Court in the case of
Asian Paints (India) Ltd.
(supra).
4.3   It is further submitted by Ms. Bhati, learned ASG that

      even otherwise from the
Scheme of the Central Excise

      Act, 1944
, it is quite apparent that where the proceedings

      under Section 35E are initiated and the appeal is filed

      against the order sanctioning refund, there is no need to

      issue any notice under Section 11A. It is submitted that

      a notice under Section 11A would be meaningless with a

      review under Section 35E, of the order sanctioning the

      refund. It is submitted by the interpretation given by the

      Revenue affirmed by the High Court that without notice

      under Section 11A, amount becoming due to proceeding

      under Section 35E cannot be recovered, renders Section

      35E ineffective and redundant.        It is submitted that

      therefore, the correct position of law has been
laid down

      by
this Court in the case of
Asian Paints (India) Ltd.
12
(supra) which has been subsequently followed by the

      Chennai Bench of the Tribunal in the case of CCE,

      Chennai vs. Sha Harakchand Samanthmal, 2004 (177)

      ELT 990 (T).
4.4   It is further submitted by Ms. Bhati, learned ASG that as

      such the Tribunal has not at all considered the grounds

      on merits against the order passed by the O-I-O that the

      assessee shall be entitled to refund or not.         It is

      submitted that as such number of grounds were raised

      before the Tribunal on the ground that the refund was

      not payable to the assessee including the unjust

      enrichment as envisaged in
Section 11B
of the Central

      Excise Act.    It is submitted that question of unjust

      enrichment has not at all been examined by the Tribunal

      and the Tribunal only considered the grounds set out in

      the   additional   grounds   which    was   by   way    of

      amendment/raising the additional grounds.

4.5   It is further submitted that neither the Tribunal nor even

      the High Court has considered the fact that while
13
claiming the refund the assessee had claimed that the

      initial payment was under protest or while contesting the

      demand    that   the   assessee   took   the   stand    that

      assessment was final and without notice under Section

      11A amount cannot be recovered.      It is submitted that

      however while claiming the refund the assessee claimed

      that payment was under protest so that the refund claim

      was not time barred. It is therefore submitted that the

      assessee is approbating and reprobating the issue

      whether the initial payment of duty was final or not.

4.6   It is submitted that in any case when the Department

      preferred an appeal under Section 35E against the order

      in original sanctioning the refund and when the said

      proceedings under Section 35E terminated in favour of

      the Revenue thereafter the necessary consequences shall

      follow and for recovery of any amount pursuant to the

      order passed under
Section 35E
of the Act there shall not

      be any separate notice issued under Section 11A of the
14
Act as observed and held by the High Court as well as the

     Tribunal.
Making above submissions it is prayed to allow the

     appeal.
5.   While opposing the present appeal learned Senior

     Counsel appearing on behalf of the assessee has

     vehemently submitted that as such the Tribunal heavily

     relied upon the earlier decision in the case of
Collector

     of Central Excise, Bhubaneshwar vs. Re-Rolling Mills
,

     reported in 1997 (94) ELT 8.
It is submitted that in the

     case of
Re-Rolling Mills
(supra) the Tribunal specifically

     observed and held that the time limit of Section 11A

     governs the issue of the demand under that Section and

     that Section alone and therefore if no demand in

     accordance with Section 11A is issued, nothing else can

     take its place.     It is submitted that therefore the

     Tribunal took the view that the demand has to be issued

     for the erroneously refunded money within the time limit
15
prescribed by Section 11A.
5.1    It is submitted that subsequently the same question

      arose before the Bombay High Court in
Bajaj Auto Ltd.
(supra) and after referring to the Board’s Circular No.

      423/56/98-CX, dated 22-9-1998 and the case of
Re-

      Rolling Mills
(supra) it was held that the erroneous

      refund cannot be recovered by mere filing an application

      under
Section 35E(2)
of the Central Excise Act, unless

      the notice under Section 11A is issued within the

      stipulated time.
5.2   It is submitted that therefore in absence of any notice

      under
Section 11A
of the Central Excise Act which was

      required to be issued within six months from the date of

      actual refund, the Tribunal as well as the High Court has

      rightly set aside the demand and passed an order of

      refund. It is submitted that since the time limit for filing

      the appeal under Section 35E(2) is longer than the time

      limit prescribed under Section 11A, the show cause

      notice should precede the proceedings under
Section
16
35E(2).
5.3   It is submitted that therefore the issue of show cause

      notice under
Section 11A
of the Central Excise Act is a

      condition precedent for recovery of the alleged erroneous

      refund within the normal period of limitation prescribed

      under
Section   11A
of   the   Act   notwithstanding

      proceedings under Section 35E being initiated by the

      Revenue against the order granting refund.


      Making above submissions it is prayed to dismiss the

      present appeal.
6.    We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of

      the respective parties at length.
7.    The short question which is posed for consideration

      before this Court is whether Notice under
Section 11A
of

      the Central Excise Act is necessary for the recovery of the

      amount when the refund granted is reviewed under
Section 35E
of the Act and whether a separate notice

      under
Section 11A
of the Act to be issued within the time
17
limit prescribed under Section 11A and before the

      proceedings under
Section 35E
of the Act are initiated

      and/or the notice under
Section 11A
of the Act shall

      precede the proceedings under
Section 35E
of the Act?


7.1   While considering the aforesaid issue it is required to be

      noted that as such in the present case the original

      authority while passing the O-I-O allowed the refund.

      That the order-in-original sanctioning the refund was the

      subject matter of review under
Section 35E
of the Act.

      On merits the Reviewing Authority set aside the order-in-

      original sanctioning the refund.       Therefore, as such

      stricto sensu it can be said to be giving effect to the order

      passed under
Section 35E
of the Act.          As such the

      assessee is claiming the refund on the basis of O-I-O

      sanctioning the refund which as such has been set aside

      in the proceedings under
Section 35E
of the Central

      Excise Act.
7.2   Now so far as the submissions made on behalf of the

      Assessee relying upon the decisions of the Tribunal in the
18
case of
Re-Rolling Mills
(supra) and
Bajaj Auto Ltd
(supra) that for refund of the duty a separate show cause

      notice under
Section 11A
of the Act is reviewed and that

      too within the time limit prescribed under Section 11A

      and that as such notice under Section 11A must precede

      within the time limit prescribed under Section 11A before

      the notice under
Section 35E
of the Act is concerned, as

      such the aforesaid issue is now not res integra in view of

      the direct decision of this Court in the case of
Asian

      Paints (India) Ltd.
(supra).
7.3   In the case of
Asian Paints (India) Ltd.
(supra), the

      decision which has been rendered subsequent to the

      decision of the High Court in the case of
Bajaj Auto Ltd
(supra) it is observed and held as under:
"We have read the judgments of the larger
           Bench of the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control)
           Appellate Tribunal, which are impugned in these
           appeals. We are of the view that the judgments
           viewed
Section 35-E
and
11-A
of the Central
           Excise Act in the proper perspective. The two
           sections operate in different fields and are invoked
           for different purposes. Different time-limits are,
           therefore, set out therein. We do not accept the
19
contention that recovery of excise duty cannot be
           made pursuant to an appeal filed after invoking
           the provisions of Section 35-E, if the timelimit
           provided in Section 11-A has expired. To so read
           the provisions, would be to render Section 35-E
           virtually   ineffective,   which     would     be
           impermissible.”

7.4   Before this Court in the case of Asian Paints (India) Ltd.
(supra) the judgments of the larger Bench of the Tribunal

      were under challenge. The Special Bench of the Tribunal

      took the view that Section 35E and Section 11A operate

      in different fields and are invoked for different purposes

      and different time limits are therefore set out therein.
This Court in the case of
Asian Paints (India) Ltd.
(supra) specifically negated and/or did not accept the

      submission on behalf of the assessee that the recovery of

      excise duty cannot be made pursuant to an appeal filed

      invoking the provisions of Section 35E if the time limit

      under Section 11A has expired.
7.5   The law
laid down by
this Court in the case of
Asian

      Paints (India) Ltd.
(supra) as such was binding on the

      High Court and despite the same was pointed out and
20
pressed into service by the Revenue before the High

     Court, the High Court has without giving any reasons

     how the same is misplaced has ignored to follow the

     decision of this Court in the case of
Asian Paints (India)

     Ltd.
(supra) and rather has followed its earlier decision

     in the case of
Bajaj Auto Ltd
(supra) which admittedly

     was prior to the decision of this Court in the case of
Asian Paints (India) Ltd.
(supra).
8.   As observed hereinabove, once the order in original

     sanctioning the refund came to be set aside in a

     proceeding under
Section 35E
of the Act and the

     proceedings under Section 35E was initiated within the

     time prescribed under
Section 35E
of the Act, thereafter

     there is no question of any further notice under
Section

     11A
of the Central Excise Act as observed by the Tribunal

     affirmed by the High Court on quashing and setting aside

     the order in original sanctioning the refund in exercise of

     powers under
Section 35E
of the Act which otherwise is

     prescribed under the Act within the time stipulated
21
under
Section 35E
of the Act, thereafter necessary

     consequence shall follow and thereafter there is no

     question of any refund pursuant to order in original.
9.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above,

     present appeal succeeds. The impugned judgment and

     order passed by the High Court and that of the Tribunal

     are hereby quashed and set aside and the order passed

     by   the    Commissioner    (Appeals),   Mumbai     dated

     13.05.2005 is hereby restored.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case there

     is no order as to costs.
…………………………………J.
                                  (M. R. SHAH)



                                  …………………………………J.
                                  (KRISHNA MURARI)
     New Delhi,
     March 24, 2023
22