[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shinhan Bank vs Carol Info Services Ltd. on 13 March, 2023
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Arb.Pet.C 1/2019
                                                          1


                                                                                         Reportable



                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                            CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                                       Arbitration Petition (Civil) No 1 of 2019


                      Shinhan Bank                                                  Petitioner


                                                     Versus


                      Carol Info Services Limited                                   Respondent




                                               JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI



                      1   On 5 August 2011, the petitioner entered into a Leave and License

                          agreement with the respondent for the use and occupation of office premises

                          situated on the 4th Floor of the West Wing at Wockhardt Towers, C-2, Block

                          G, Bandra Kurla Complex, Bandra (East), Mumbai 400051 for a period of five

                          years. On the same day, an Amenities agreement was contemporaneously

                          executed with the Leave and Licence agreement. Upon the expiry of the term
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2023.03.20
18:53:43 IST
Reason:
Arb.Pet.C 1/2019
2
of the Leave and License agreement, a fresh Leave and Licence agreement

            was executed between the petitioner and the respondent on 1 July 2016 for

            the continued use and occupation of the premises for a period of two years.


      2     On 25 August 2016, the petitioner entered into an Amenities agreement with

            the respondent.
3     On 22 March 2017, the petitioner issued a notice of termination to the

            respondent stating that the Leave and Licence agreement and the Amenities

            agreement would stand terminated upon the expiry of the lock-in period,

            namely, on 1 July 2017.
4     The respondent replied to the termination notice on 30 March 2017.
Asserting that the termination was not in accordance with the terms of the

            Leave and Licence agreement and the Amenities agreement, the respondent

            declined to refund the security deposits to the petitioner. According to the

            petitioner, vacant and peaceful possession of the licensed premises was

            handed over to the respondent on 13 June 2017.
5     On 3 July 2017, the petitioner served a notice of demand for refund of the

            security deposits together with interest. The claim was denied in a letter

            dated 13 July 2017. By another letter of 13 July 2017, the respondent served

            upon the petitioner a notice claiming an amount of Rs 2,59,85,856 towards

            the balance license fee and amenities charges for the period between 1 July

            2017 and 30 June 2018 and claimed consequential losses amounting to
Arb.Pet.C 1/2019
3
Rs 69,21,408 together with interest after adjusting the amount of the

            security deposits under the 2016 agreement.
6     By an Advocate’s letter dated 29 September 2017, the petitioner sought

            refund of its security deposit in the amount of Rs 1,68,48,000 (which was

            deposited under the Leave and Licence agreement) and Rs 56,16,000 (which

            was deposited under the Amenities agreement) together with interest at the

            rate of 15% per annum. The respondent rejected the claim in its response

            dated 5 October 2017.
7     On 9 October 2017, the petitioner invoked arbitration and proposed the

            appointment of a sole arbitrator. In its response dated 13 October 2017, the

            respondent denied the existence of an arbitration agreement.


      8     An arbitration petition under
Section 11
of the Arbitration and Conciliation

            Act 1996 was instituted before the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, but it

            was    withdrawn   since   the   arbitration   is   an   international   commercial

            arbitration, the petitioner being a banking company incorporated under the

            laws of South Korea.
9     We have heard Mr Abhishek Puri, counsel for the petitioner and Mr Sanjeev

            Kumar Kapoor, counsel for the respondent.
10    Two agreements entered into between the parties. The first is a Leave and

            Licence agreement dated 1 July 2016. The second is an Amenities agreement
Arb.Pet.C 1/2019
4
dated 25 August 2016. The bone of contention is whether there is an

            arbitration agreement between the parties. The contention of the respondent

            is that while the Amenities agreement contains an arbitration agreement, the

            Leave and Licence agreement does not. Hence, it has been submitted that

            the claim of the petitioner invoking arbitration must be rejected. Moreover, it

            has been submitted that the respondent has instituted a suit before the High

            Court of Judicature at Bombay on its Original Side and it would be open to

            the petitioner to move an application under
Section 8
for seeking a reference

            to arbitration. It has been submitted that the claim of the respondent in the

            suit for outstanding license fees has been computed after adjusting the

            security deposit and hence the appropriate course of action for the petitioner

            would be to pursue its remedies under
Section 8
.
11    The Amenities agreement which was entered into between the parties on 25

            August 2016, inter alia, contains the following provision:
“This Agreement is executed contemporaneously with the said
                    Leave and License Agreement and shall be read and construed
                    accordingly. The provision of this Agreement shall be deemed
                    to be and shall constitute an integral part of the said Leave and
                    License Agreement in respect of the License of the Licensed
                    Premise granted by the Licensors to the Licensee. All provisions
                    of the said Leave and License Agreement shall, mutatis
                    mutandis; apply to this Amenities Agreement”
12    The Amenities agreement contains a provision to resolve disputes through

            arbitration. Clause 17 is in the following terms:
Arb.Pet.C 1/2019
5
“17. All disputes, controversies or claims arising out of or
                      relating to this Agreement: including existence or interpretation
                      of any clause hereof, shall be referred to arbitration by a sole
                      arbitrator duly appointed by mutual consent of both the Parties
                      in writing, failing which under the provisions of the
Arbitration
                      and Conciliation Act, 1966
. The cost of theArbitration shall be
                      borne equally. The place of arbitration shall be Mumbai and the
                      arbitration shall be governed by the
Arbitration & Conciliation
                      Act, 1966
as amended from time to time. The language of the
                      arbitration proceedings shall be English. The Award shall be
                      final and conclusive. The Courts in Mumbai shall have exclusive
                      jurisdiction to try and entertain matters arising herefrom.”
13     The submission which has been urged on behalf of the respondent is that in

             terms of
Section 7(5)
, a mere reference to a document would not have the

             effect of making an arbitration clause from that document a part of the

             contract. The submission is based on the decision of this Court in
M R

             Engineers and Contractors Private Limited vs Som Datt Builders

             Limited1
.
14     Clause (1) of the Amenities agreement which has been extracted above

             indicates that (i) the provisions of the Amenities agreement shall be deemed

             to be and shall constitute an integral part of the Leave and Licence

             Agreement in respect of the license granted by the petitioner to the

             respondent; and (ii) all the provisions of the Leave and Licence agreement

             shall mutatis mutandis apply to the Amenities agreement. Clause 17 of the

             Amenities agreement contains an agreement to refer disputes to arbitration.




      1    (2009) 7 SCC 696
Arb.Pet.C 1/2019
6
15    The plain consequence of clause (1) of the Amenities agreement is that all

            the terms of that agreement constitute an integral part of the Leave and

            Licence agreement. The Amenities agreement does not merely contain a

            reference to the Leave and Licence agreement. It incorporates all the terms

            of the Amenities agreement as an integral part of the Leave and Licence

            agreement. By doing so, the parties have intended to make the arbitration

            clause in the Amenities agreement an integral part of the Leave and Licence

            agreement.
16
Section 7(5)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 stipulates that the

            reference in a contract to a document containing an arbitration clause

            constitutes an arbitration agreement if the contract is in writing and the

            reference is such as to make that arbitration clause part of the contract.

            Clause (1) of the Amenities agreement is intended to make the arbitration

            clause which is embodied in the Amenities agreement (Clause 17) an integral

            part of the Leave and Licence agreement.
17    In
M R Engineers and Contractors Private Limited vs Som Datt

            Builders Limited
(supra), this Court held thus:
“We will give a few instances of incorporation and mere
                   reference to explain the position (illustrative and not
                   exhaustive). If a contract refers to a document and provides
                   that the said document shall form part and parcel of the
                   contract, or that all terms and conditions of the said document
                   shall be read or treated as a part of the contract, or that the
                   contract will be governed by the provisions of the said
                   document, or that the terms and conditions of the said
Arb.Pet.C 1/2019
7
document shall be incorporated into the contract, the terms
                   and conditions of the document in entirety will get bodily lifted
                   and incorporated into the contract. When there is such
                   incorporation of the terms and conditions of a document, every
                   term of such document (except to the extent it is inconsistent
                   with any specific provision in the contract) will apply to the
                   contract. If the document so incorporated contains a provision
                   for settlement of disputes by arbitration, the said arbitration
                   clause also will apply to the contract.”
18    The principle which emerges from the provisions of
Section 7(5)
is elucidated

            in paragraph 19 of the judgment, which is extracted below:
“Sub-section (5) of
Section 7
merely reiterates these well-
                   settled principles of construction of contracts. It makes it clear
                   that where there is a reference to a document in a contract,
                   and the reference shows that the document was not intended
                   to be incorporated in entirety, then the reference will not make
                   the arbitration clause in the document, a part of the contract,
                   unless there is a special reference to the arbitration clause so
                   as to make it applicable.”
19    The arbitration agreement which is embodied in clause 17 of the Amenities

            agreement was intended by the parties for all intents and purposes to be a

            part of the Leave and Licence agreement.
20    There is no merit in the submission that the petitioner should be now

            relegated to pursuing the remedy under
Section 8
. In view of the clear terms

            of the contract between the parties, a reference to arbitration would be

            necessitated.
21    The sole Arbitrator who was nominated by the petitioner has since assumed

            the position of Lokayukta of the State of Maharashtra. Hence, we direct that
Arb.Pet.C 1/2019
8
the disputes and differences between the parties arising out of claim of the

            petitioner shall be referred to the sole arbitration of Dr (Mrs) Shalini

            Phansalkar-Joshi, a former Judge of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay.

            The Arbitrator shall decide upon the fees in consultation with the parties and

            the modalities of arbitration.
22    The Registrar (Judicial) shall transmit a copy of this order to the sole

            Arbitrator.
23    The Arbitration Petition is accordingly disposed of.


      24    Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
….....…...….......…………………..CJI.
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                      ..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                      [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha]




                                                      ..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                                      [J B Pardiwala]

      New Delhi;
March 13, 2023
      CKB