[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Arnab Roy vs Consortium Of National Law ... on 17 March, 2023
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
2023 INSC 261

                                                                                               REPORTABLE

                                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                    CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                                 Writ Petition (Civil) No 1109 of 2022


           Arnab Roy                                                                        … Petitioner

                                                                Versus

           Consortium of National Law Universities & Anr                                    … Respondents

                                                                WITH

                                         Miscellaneous Application No          of 2023
                                                                 (Diary No 8493 of 2023)



                                                           JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, CJI


           1                The petitioner who is a lawyer and disability rights activist moved these

                            proceedings under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India for challenging certain

                            conditions which were imposed for the conduct of the Common Law Admission

                            Test 20231. CLAT was scheduled on 18 December 2022. The issue specifically

                            addressed by the petitioner relates to the facilities for candidates who intend to

                            avail of a scribe.
2                The petitioner avers that he was personally aware that at least 13 visually

                            impaired candidates would be denied the assistance of a scribe because of the

                            conditions belatedly imposed by the Consortium of National Law Universities 2
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
Date: 2023.04.25
11:23:45 IST
1
Reason:                  “CLAT”
           2                   “Consortium”
2
less than four weeks before the date of the examination.


3   The petitioner has highlighted certain specific concerns, based on the decision of

    this Court in
Vikash Kumar Vs Union Public Service Commission & Ors
3.

    The first among these concerns is that the Consortium has denied the right to a

    scribe to candidates who do not have a benchmark disability though they have a

    genuine difficulty in writing.   In this context, reliance has been placed on the

    following principle which was
laid down in
the decision in Vikash Kumar, while

    elaborating on the statutory entitlement of Persons with Disabilities 4 under the

    Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act 2016 :
“To confine the facility of a scribe only to those who have
          benchmark disabilities would be to deprive a class of persons of
          their statutorily recognized entitlements. To do so would be
          contrary to the plain terms as well as the object of the statute.”
4   Apart from the above grievance, the petitioner submitted that the Ministry of

    Social Justice and Empowerment of the Union of India had, in its guidelines of 29

    August 2018, prescribed that in case a candidate is allowed to bring his own

    scribe, the qualification should be one step below the qualification of the

    candidate taking the examination. On the other hand, in the present case, the

    Consortium had sought to prohibit scribes if they are (a) above the 11 th grade in

    educational attainment; or (b) affiliated to any test-preparatory organisation or

    examination coaching centre.
5   As a consequence of the above restriction, it was urged that a PwD candidate

    cannot appoint a scribe who is currently enrolled in the 12 th grade. Moreover,

    the exclusion of students enrolled in any examination coaching centre, it was
3   (2021) 5 SCC 370
4   “PwDs”
3
urged, would eliminate nearly every 10 th       and 11th grade student since all

    students are likely to be enrolled in coaching centres for preparation of

    competitive entrance examinations.
6   The third and final grievance is that the Consortium has abdicated its positive

    obligation to provide scribes for those candidates who are unable to engage or

    find a scribe because of financial and other accessibility constraints.


7   Bearing in mind the fact that the CLAT is a nationwide examination and the

    issues which were raised by the petitioner would affect PwD candidates in

    general, this Court entertained the proceedings on 15 December 2022. At that

    stage, the CLAT was scheduled two days thereafter, on 18 December 2022. In

    response to a suggestion of the Court, requesting the Consortium to resolve the

    issues which were raised before the Court, the following formulation was

    submitted on its behalf before the Court :
“1     Pursuant to the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of
                 India in
Vikash Kumar v Union Public Service Commission
                 and Others
(2021) 5 SCC 370, the Consortium of National
                 Law Universities (the “Consortium”) make the following
                 reasonable accommodation for candidates appearing for the
                 CLAT 2023 :
(i)     with a specified disability covered under the
                 definition in Section 2(s) of the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities Act, 2016
(the “Act”) but not covered under the
                 definition under
Section 2(r)
of the Act, i.e., persons having
                 less than 40% specified disability, and
(ii)   who have difficulty in writing.
2      Such candidates as aforesaid who have secured a
                 government      medical    certificate/disability  certificate
                 indicating that they fall within the category described in
                 para 1 above may be permitted the assistance of a scribe to
                 write the CLAT 2023. Any such candidate may apply to the
                 Coordinator having charge over their allotted Test Centre by
4
email.
3     Any scribes must meet the qualification criteria for scribes
                set out in the Consortium’s ‘Guidelines for Persons with
                Benchmark Disabilities (“PwDs”) / Specially Abled Persons
                (“SAPs”) dated November 24, 2022.
4     The Consortium shall also provide appropriate support to
                those candidates with benchmark disabilities and
                candidates described in para 1 above who request such
                facilities, on a case-by-case basis, in order to complete the
                CLAT 2023 successfully. In the event any such candidate
                requires any support in this regard, they may contact the
                Consortium at
[email protected]
.
5     This statement shall be circulated to all candidates
                appearing for the CLAT 2023 at their registered email
                address with immediate effect.”


8   This Court directed that the above statement would guide the conduct of the

    ensuing examination.    The first respondent was directed to ensure that no

    disabled student is denied access to the ensuing examination and that all

    necessary facilities by way of reasonable accommodation are provided, having

    regard to the provisions of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act 2016 and

    the judgment of this Court in
Vikash Kumar
(supra). The first respondent was

    also directed to place an updated status report including the number of disabled

    candidates who applied in the ensuing CLAT and the facilities which were

    extended to them.
9   In pursuance of the above directions, an affidavit has been filed by the

    Consortium. An affidavit has also been filed in these proceedings by the Union of

    India in the Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities 5 of the

    Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment6.
5   “DEPWD”
6   “MSJE”
5
10   Following the decision of this Court in
Vikash Kumar
(supra),          by an Office

     Memorandum dated 10 August 2022, guidelines have been formulated by the

     MSJE. This was in pursuance of an expert committee which was constituted to

     implement the decision in Vikash Kumar.                Paragraph 3 of the Office

     Memorandum is extracted below :
“3.   The Committee accordingly recommended the following guidelines
              for conducting written examination for persons with specified
              disabilities covered under the definition of
Section 2(s)
of the RPwD
              Act, 2016 but not covered under the definition of
Section 2(r)
of the
              said Act, i.e. persons having less than 40% disability and having
              difficulty in writing:-
(a)   These guidelines may be called as Guidelines for
                    conducting written examination for persons with
                    specified disabilities covered under the definition of
Section 2(s)
of the RpwD Act, 2016 but not covered
                    under the definition of
Section 2(r)
of the said Act, i.e.
                    persons having less than 40% disability and having
                    difficulty in writing.
(b)   The facility of scribe and/or compensatory time shall be
                    granted solely to those having difficulty in writing
                    subject to production of a certificate to the effect that
                    person concerned has limitation to write and that scribe
                    is essential to write examination on his/her behalf from
                    the competent medical authority of a Government
                    healthcare institution as per proforma at Appendix-I.
(c)   The medical authority for the purpose of certification as
                    mentioned in point (b) above should be a multi-member
                    authority comprising the following:-
i.     Chief Medical officer/Civil Surgeon/Chief District
                           Medical Officer.....Chairperson
                    ii.    Orthopedic/PMR specialist
                    iii.   Neurologist, if available*
                    iv.    Clinical Psychologist/Rehabilitation Psychologist/
                           Psychiatrist/Special Educator
                    v.     Occupational therapist, if available*
                    vi.    Any other expert based on the condition of the
                           candidate as may be nominated by the
                           Chairperson.
(* the Chief Medical Officer/Civil Surgeon/Chief
6
District Medical Officer may make full efforts for
          inclusion of neurologists, occupational therapist
          from the nearest District or the Medical
          College/Institute, if the same is not available in
          the District)"
(d)   The candidate should have the discretion of opting for
      his own scribe or request the Examination Body for the
      same. The examination body may also identify the
      scribe to make panels at the District/Division/State level
      as per the requirements of the examination. In later
      instances the candidates should be allowed to meet the
      scribe two days before the examination so that the
      candidates get a chance to check and verify whether the
      scribe is suitable or not.
(e)   In case the examination body provides the scribe, it shall
      be ensured that qualification of the scribe should not be
      more than the minimum qualification criteria of the
      examination. However, the qualification of the scribe
      should always be matriculate or above. In case the
      candidate is allowed to bring his own scribe, the
      qualification of the scribe should be one step below the
      qualification of the candidate taking examination. The
      person opting for own scribe should submit details of the
      own scribe as per proforma at Appendix-II.
(f)   There should also be flexibility in accommodating any
      change in scribe in case of emergency. The candidates
      should also be allowed to take different scribe for writing
      different papers especially for languages. However,
      there can be only one scribe per subject.
(g)   The candidate should be allowed to use aids and
      assistive devices such as prosthetics & orthotics, hearing
      aid as mentioned in para 2 of the certificate issued by
      medical authority as per Appendix I.
(h)   Compensatory time not less than 20 minutes per hour of
      the examination should be allowed for persons who are
      eligible for getting scribe. In case the duration of the 3
      examination is less than an hour, then the duration of
      the compensatory time should be allowed on pro-rata
      basis. Compensatory time should not be less than 5
      minutes and should be in the multiple of 5.
(i)   The examination bodies shall modify their application
      forms to incorporate specific needs of this category of
      persons. In case, any incident has been reported after
      filling up the form, the examination bodies shall inform
      the candidates to obtain medical certificate as per these
7
guidelines for facilitating   grant    of   scribe    and/or
                    compensatory time.
(j)   As far as possible the examination for such persons may
                    be held at ground floor. The examination centres should
                    be accessible for persons with disabilities.
(k)   These guidelines are applicable to written examinations
                    conducted by central recruitment agencies as well as
                    academic institutions. The States/UTs may adopt these
                    guidelines or issue similar guidelines to maintain
                    uniformity.
(l)   These guidelines are independent of the Guidelines for
                    conducting written examination for persons with
                    benchmark disabilities issued by the Department of
                    Empowerment      of   Persons with    Disabilities on
                    29.08.2018.
(m) The examining bodies shall ensure strict vigilance to
                  check misuse of facility of scribe.”
11   Paragraph 4 of the Office Memorandum stipulates that all recruitment agencies,

     academic/examination     bodies    under   the   administrative     control   of   each

     Ministry/Department may be advised appropriately to ensure compliance of the

     guidelines.
12   In pursuance of the interim directions of this Court, the Consortium extended

     necessary facilities to PwD candidates in terms of the statement which was

     tendered before this Court.
13   The issue which now survives is with regard to the modalities which would be

     followed for future examinations to be conducted by CLAT.


14   The first aspect which has been drawn to the attention of the Court is that the

     CLAT advertisement was issued on 28 August 2022 and the registration closed

     on 18 November 2022.          The Consortium issued its set of guidelines on 24
8
November 2022 and the entrance test was conducted on 18 December 2022.


15    Mr Nikhil Nayyar, senior counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, submits

      that the above sequence of events would indicate that the guidelines were

      issued over three months after the initial advertisement notifying CLAT. There is

      no reason, it was urged, why the guidelines could not be issued together with the

      advertisement so as to ensure that PwD candidates are not reduced to a state of

      uncertainty in regard to the facilities which should be made available to them

      during the course of the entrance test.
16    There is a considerable degree of merit in the above submission. As a matter of

      fact, we may also note that Mr Siddharth Aggarwal, senior counsel appearing on

      behalf of the Consortium has also fairly submitted that the guidelines could have

      been notified much earlier so as to provide certainty to the students appearing

      for the entrance test.
17.   We accept the submission which has been urged on behalf of the petitioner and

      direct that in future, the guidelines which shall be applicable for the facilities

      which should be extended to PwD candidates are to be notified sufficiently in

      advance and, in any event, together with the advertisement by which the

      schedule for the CLAT is placed in the public domain. This would ensure that

      candidates are not left in a state of uncertainty and know precisely the nature of

      the facilities and reasonable accommodation which has been made available to

      them consistent with the provisions of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act

      2016.
18    During the course of hearing, Mr Nikhil Nayyar, senior counsel has placed certain
9
suggestions on the record.    Mr Nayyar states that some of these suggestions

     have already been incorporated in the interim directions of this Court dated 15

     December 2022 as well as in the guidelines of the Ministry of Social Justice and

     Empowerment dated 10 August 2022.
19   We direct that CLAT shall, in the future, formulate the modalities in a manner

     consistent with its formulation which was placed on the record before this Court

     so as to obviate any inconvenience to PwD candidates. The consortium shall also

     take due steps to ensure that its guidelines are consistent with the Office

     Memorandum dated 10 August 2022 issued by the Ministry of Social Justice and

     Empowerment, Department of Persons with Disabilities.        This Court has been

     apprised of the fact that the consortium also makes arrangements to provide a

     scribe to any candidate with disabilities who is unable to secure a scribe on his

     own so as to ensure that no candidate would unable to appear in the entrance

     test.
20   The guidelines which have been prescribed by the Consortium stipulate that the

     scribe who is engaged by a candidate should not (a) qualified above the 11 th

     standard or (b) affiliated to any test-preparatory organization or examination

     coaching centre. The above guideline is sought to be challenged on the ground

     that the Office Memorandum dated 10 August 2022 issued by the Ministry of

     Social Justice and Empowerment stipulates only that if the examination body

     provides a scribe, it shall be ensured that qualification of the scribe is not more

     than the minimum qualification criteria of the examination. However, the Office

     Memorandum provides that the qualification of the scribe should always be

     matriculate or above.    The Office Memorandum also states that in case the
10
candidates are allowed to bring their own scribe, the qualification of the scribe

     should be one step below the qualification of the candidate taking the

     examination.
21   Mr. Nikhil Nayyar, senior counsel submitted that the restriction which has been

     imposed by the Consortium to the effect that the scribe should not be above the

     11th standard or be affiliated to any test-preparatory organisation or coaching

     centre is irrational.
22   On the other hand, Mr. Siddharth Aggarwal, senior counsel appearing on behalf

     of the consortium, emphasised the circumstances in which such a restriction has

     been imposed. Senior counsel submitted that the entire examination consists of

     Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs).
In this backdrop, it is necessary, in order to maintain the integrity and sanctity of

     the examination, that the scribe does not provide independent answers to the

     MCQs based on their own knowledge or experience and hence the twofold

     restriction has been imposed. Moreover, it has been submitted that in any event,

     if a candidate has any difficult in engaging a scribe, the Consortium is ready and

     willing to provide a scribe so that the candidate is not prevented from appearing

     for the entrance test.
23   The affidavit which has been filed on behalf of the Consortium indicates that at

     the CLAT which was conducted on 18 December 2022, 292 candidates belonged

     to the PwD category. Of these candidates 211 appeared for the under graduate-

     CLAT while 81 candidates appeared for the post graduate-CLAT. 49 candidates

     brought their own scribe.      There were 33 requests for providing additional

     accommodation including 16 requests for the provision of a scribe.               The
11
Consortium provided a scribe in 15 instances whereas one candidate withdrew

     the request for a scribe.
24   In a situation such as the present, the Court must have due regard, undoubtedly

     to the need for reasonable accommodation consistent with the provisions of the

     Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, as interpreted in the decision in
Vikash

     Kumar
(supra).     Equally, it would not be appropriate to ignore the genuine

     concerns which have been set up on behalf of the Consortium bearing on the

     need to maintain the integrity of the entrance test.


25   It is from this perspective that the consortium has, in its guidelines required that

     the candidate should not be above the 11 th standard and in addition should not

     be affiliated with any test-preparatory or examination coaching centre. At the

     highest, a candidate could have a grievance if no such scribe meeting the said

     description is available. But as already noted above, the Consortium has taken

     upon itself the obligation to provide a scribe who meets with the stipulations

     which are contained in the Guidelines.
26   In other words, candidates appearing for the CLAT can either bring their own

     scribe or if it is not possible to do so, request the Consortium to provide a scribe

     who is then made available to the candidate. During the course of the hearing, it

     has been agreed that where the Consortium provides a scribe, at least two days’

     time should be provided so as to enable the candidate to interact with the scribe.

     We are of the view that this is fair and proper. The scribe is required in the case

     of a visually challenged candidate to read out and write the responses to the

     MCQs.   In order to familiarise the scribe and the aspirant candidate, it is but

     proper that sufficient time for interaction of two days should be provided. The
12
guidelines also make a similar stipulation.
27    We, therefore, allow the request of the Consortium to the extent of its assertion

      that the scribe who is selected should not be qualified above the 11 th standard

      and should not be associated with any test-preparatory organisation or

      examination coaching centre.
28    The nature and contents of the Guidelines cannot be frozen for the future. The

      Consortium would be at liberty to modify the Guidelines bearing in mind the

      exigencies of the situation and the constantly evolving nature of the knowledge

      and experience gained in conducting CLAT particularly in the context of the

      rights of PwD candidates.       In the event that any further difficulties are

      encountered by PwD candidates, those may be brought to the notice of the

      Consortium well in advance so that suitable remedial measures can be taken

      consistent with their statutory entitlements.
29    The Writ Petition and the Miscellaneous Application are accordingly disposed of.


30    Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
…...…...….......………………....…CJI.
[Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]



                                                      …...…...….......………………....…..J.
                                                      [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha]



                                                      …...…...….......………………....…..J.
                                                      [J B Pardiwala]
New Delhi;
March 17, 2023
GKA
13
ITEM NO.10                 COURT NO.1                SECTION PIL-W

               S U P R E M E C O U R T O F       I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

             Writ Petition(s)(Civil)    No(s).   1109/2022

ARNAB ROY                                             Petitioner(s)

                                  VERSUS

CONSORTIUM OF NATIONAL LAW UNIVERSITIES & ANR.        Respondent(s)
(FOR ADMISSION and IA No.194884/2022-EX-PARTE STAY)

WITH

Diary No(s). 8493/2023 (XIV-A)

Date : 17-03-2023 These matters were called on for hearing today.

CORAM :   HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.B. PARDIWALA


For Petitioner(s)   Mr. Nikhil Nayyar, Sr. Adv.
Mr. N. Sai Vinod, AOR
                    Mr. Abhinav, Adv.
By Courts Motion, AOR

For Respondent(s)   Mr. Siddharth Aggarwal, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Arun Sri Kumar, Adv.
Ms. Pritha Srikumar, AOR
                    Mr. Anirudh G., Adv.
Ms. Arshiya Ghose, Adv.
Mrs.   Lalita Kaushik, AOR

                    Mrs. Aishwarya Bhati, A.S.G.
                    Mr. Aman Sharma, Adv.
Mr. Yashraj Singh Bundela, Adv.
Mr. Manvinder Singh Rathore, Adv.
Mr. Manvendra Singh Rathore, Adv.
Mr. Shashwat Parihar, Adv.
Mr. Shaswat Parihar, Adv.
14
Mr. Amrish Kumar, AOR

                          Mr. Raj Bahadur Yadav, AOR


         UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                                O R D E R


1      The Writ Petition and the Miscellaneous Application are disposed of in terms of

       the signed reportable judgment.
2      Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
(GULSHAN KUMAR ARORA)                                 (SAROJ KUMARI GAUR)
          AR-CUM-PS                                       ASSISTANT REGISTRAR
(Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)