[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
S. Athilakshmi vs The State Rep. By The Drugs Inspector on 15 March, 2023
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
,
Krishna Murari
1


                                                                       REPORTABLE


                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.        OF 2023
                         (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) No.9978 OF 2022)




                         S. ATHILAKSHMI                            ……Appellant(s)

                                                    Versus


                         THE STATE REP. BY THE DRUGS               ..…Respondent(s)
                         INSPECTOR



                                                JUDGMENT
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.
Leave granted.
2.              The Appellant before this Court is a registered medical

          practitioner who is presently working as an Associate Professor

          and the Head of Dermatology Department, in the Government

          Omandurar Medical College, Chennai. In the past, she has held

          the post of Assistant Professor and Civil Surgeon at Royapettah
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NIRMALA NEGI
Date: 2023.03.15
16:43:51 IST
Medical College.                 It is permissible for her under the law to
Reason:
2
practice medicine when she is not performing her official duties.
The Appellant, in her individual and independent capacity was

carrying on her medical practice at a premises which is No. 87,

Red Hills Road (North), Villivakkam, at Chennai. It is here that

she could be consulted and where she meets and examines her

patients.
3.   An inspection was made on the above premises by the

Drugs Inspector, Villivakkam Range on 16.03.2016. As per

inspection report, the Drugs Inspector found the following

medicines in the inner room of her premises.
S No.       Name of Drug           Quantity    M.R.P (Rs.)
1. Denidol Lotion                1 No.       198.50
            50ml
2.   Salico Lotion 30ml           4 Nos.     75/30 ml.
3.   A­CN Gel 20 gms              1 No.      98/20gms
4.   Tebir Gel 10 gms             9 Nos.    47.90/10gms
5.   Soltop­S.6% Lotion (30ml)    4 Nos.     125/30ml
6.   Mycotin Cream 15 gms         3 Nos.    115/15gms
7.   Mopry 2% Ointment            4 Nos.    75.60/5gms
8.   Momtop­S Ointment            1 No.     145/10gms
            (10gms)
9.   ESM Cream (10gms)            4 Nos.     76/10gms
3
10. Nu­Whitified Ointment         7 Nos.        40/20gms
             (20gms)
11. Momesone Cream (15gms)        3 Nos.        82/15gms
12. Sudif Cream (10gms)           4 Nos.        99/10gms
13. CAP Gel (15gms)               1 No.         156/15gms
14. Kenozole Cream (30gms)        2 Nos.        130/30gms
15. Soltop­S 3% Ointment          1 No.         125/30gms
16. Zylo AC gel 2.5% (20gms)      1 No.        99.74/30gms
17. Ketzi cream (30gms)           1 No.        99.47/30gms
18. Ketoff lotion (60ml)          2 Nos.         150/60ml



The Drugs Inspector also referred to certain sale bills of

medicines which are as follows:
Sr. Bill No. & Date         Name of the Drug           Qty. Sold
     No.
     1   409 dated             Mycotin Cream                1 No.
         24/02/2016            Nufoce Power                 1 No.
                               Certrezol – L tablets        10 Tablets
     2     423 dated 9/03/2016 Certivera Lotion             1 No.
                               ESM Cream                    1 No.
                               ILor or Tablets              10 Tablets
                               Cetrezol L Tablets           10 Tablets
     3     426 dated           Adixied Tablets              2 Strips
           11/03/2016          CAP Gel                      1 No.
                               AFK Lotion                   1 No.
                               CAN Soap                     1 No.
                               Zit care Tablets             2 strips
     4     424 dated 9/03/2016 P Scab Lotion                1 No.
                               1 for Tablets                10 Tablets
                               Loxip Tablets                10 Tablets

     5     428 dated             Cultivera Location         1 No.
           11/03/2016            Momesone Cream             1 No.
                                 Cetrezol – L tablets       10 Tablets
4.   The Drugs Inspector thereafter moved an application for

obtaining sanction from the office of the Director of Drugs
4
Control, Tamil Nadu, Chennai­06 on 22.09.2016 which was given

to him on 23.01.2018. Consequently, the Drugs Inspector filed a

complaint before the Court of X Metropolitan Magistrate, Egmore,

for prosecuting the Appellant under
Section 18(c)
of the Drugs

and Cosmetics Act, 1940 punishable under
Section 27(b)(ii)
of the

Act.
5.     Aggrieved by these proceedings, the Appellant filed an

application under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure,

1973 before the High Court of Madras for quashing the criminal

proceedings. Her petition was dismissed by the Ld. Single Judge

on 21.06.2022. Aggrieved by this, the Appellant has filed Special

Leave Petition before this Court against the order of the Single

Judge.
6.     Under
Section 18
of Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940, a

prohibition has been imposed as to the manufacture, sale etc. of

certain drugs and cosmetics.
Section 18
reads as follows:
18. Prohibition of manufacture and sale of certain drugs
       and cosmetics. —         From such date as may be fixed by the
       State Government by notification in the Official Gazette in this
       behalf, no person shall himself or by any other person on his
       behalf—
(a) …………………………………..
(b) [sell or stock or exhibit or offer for sale,] or distribute
            any drug [or cosmetic] which has been imported or
5
manufactured in contravention of any of the provisions
           of this Act or any rule made thereunder;
(c) [manufacture for sale or for distribution, or sell, or
           stock or exhibit or offer for sale,] or distribute any drug
           [or cosmetic], except under, and in accordance with the
           conditions of, a licence issued for such purpose under
           this Chapter:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the
           manufacture, subject to prescribed conditions, of small
           quantities of any drug for the purpose of examination,
           test or analysis:
Provided further that the [Central Government] may,
           after consultation with the Board, by notification in the
           Official Gazette, permit, subject to any conditions
           specified in the notification, the [manufacture for sale or
           for distribution, sale, stocking or exhibiting or offering
           for sale] or distribution of any drug or class of drugs not
           being of standard quality.
The punishment for contravention of
Section 18(c)
is provided

under
Section 27(b)(ii)
which reads as follows:
27. Penalty for manufacture, sale, etc., of drugs in
      contravention of this Chapter— Whoever, himself or by any
      other person on his behalf, manufactures for sale or for
      distribution, or sells, or stocks or exhibits or offers for sale or
      distributes—
(a) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
(b) any drug –
(i) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
(ii) without a valid licence as required under clause (c) of
section 18
, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
      which shall [not be less than three years but which may
      extend to five years and with fine which shall not be less than
      one lakh rupees or three times the value of the drugs
      confiscated, whichever is more]:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and
      special reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a
      sentence of imprisonment for a term of [less than three years
      and of fine of less than one lakh rupees];
6
7.    As we can see the prohibition under
Section 18(c)
is on the

manufacturing, distribution, stocking or exhibition of medicines

for the purposes of sale. The charge in the present case is that

the Appellant had “stocked” medicines for “sale”. The entire

emphasis is on “sale” of these medicines. This is evident from the

sanction being sought by the Drug Inspector from the office of the

Director, Drugs Control, Tamil Nadu wherein as per the sanction

letter dated 23.01.2018, he had said that the Appellant be

prosecuted for the contravention of:
“
Section 18(c)
of Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940 for having ∙stocked
     drugs for sale and sold the drugs without having a valid drug
     license, which is punishable under
section 27(b)(ii)
of the said Act”.
Thus, as per the prosecution she had stocked the drugs and sold

them. What the Director of Drugs Control and the High Court lost

sight of is the fact that the Appellant is a registered medical

practitioner, her area of specialization being dermatology. She

has an M.D. (DVL) degree in this specialisation. It is not a case

that she had opened a shop in her premises from where she was

selling drugs and cosmetics across the counter! It is possible that

she was distributing these drugs to her patients for emergency

uses and thus she is protected by the Act itself. Schedule (K)
7
which is a part of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 provides

an exemption which we shall examine hereafter.
8.   Under
Section 33
of the Act, the Central Government can

make rules which have to be laid before the Parliament for its

ratification under
Section 38
of the Act. These rules have been

framed which is known as Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1940.
Rule 123 of the rules exempts certain drugs from the provisions

of
Chapter IV of the Act
(which includes both
Section 18
and
Section 27
referred above, which are penal provisions), under

certain conditions Rule 123 reads as under:
“123. The drugs specified in Schedule K shall be exempted from
     the provisions of
Chapter IV of the Act
and the rules made
     thereunder to the extent and subject to the conditions specified in
     that Schedule.”




Entry No. 5 under Schedule (K) are the drugs which are supplied

by a registered medical practitioner with which we are presently

concerned.     The relevant provision of Schedule (K) reads as

under:­

                                 Schedule K
                               (See Rule 123)

     Class of Drugs                         Extent and Conditions          of
                                            Exemptions
1.xxxxxxxxxxxx                         xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
8
2. xxxxxxxxxxx                           xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
3. xxxxxxxxxxx                           xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
4. xxxxxxxxxxx                           xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
5. Drugs supplied by a registered        All the provisions of Chapter
medical practitioner to his own          IV of the Act and the Rules
patient or any drug specified in         made thereunder, subject to
Schedule C supplied by a registered      the following conditions:
medical practitioner at the request of      [1. The drugs shall be
another such practitioner if it is       purchased only from a dealer
specially prepared with reference to     or a manufacturer licensed
the condition and for the use of an      under      these   rules,   and
individual patient provided the          records of such purchases
registered medical practitioner is not   showing the names and
(a) keeping an open shop or (b)          quantities of such drugs,
selling across the counter or (c)        together with their batch
engaged     in    the     importation,   numbers and names and
manufacture, distribution or sale of     addresses          of        the
drugs in India to a degree which         manufacturers       shall     be
render him liable to the provisions of   maintained. Such records
Chapter IV of the Act
and the rules      shall be open to inspection by
thereunder.                              an Inspector appointed under
                                         the    Act,    who     may,    if
                                         necessary, make enquiries
                                         about purchases of the drugs
                                         and may also take samples
                                         for test.]
2. In the case of medicine
                                         containing       a    substance
                                         specified in [Schedule G, H or
                                         X] of the following additional
                                         conditions shall be complied
                                         with:­

                                         a. the medicine shall be
                                         labelled with the
                                         name and address of the
                                         registered         medical
                                         practitioner by whom it is
                                         supplied;
b. if the medicine is for
                                         external application, it shall
                                         be labelled with the words
                                         [***] ― “For external use only”
                                         or, if it is for internal use with
                                         the dose;
c. the name of the medicine or
9
ingredients of the preparation
                                       and the quantities thereof,
                                       the dose prescribed, the name
                                       of the patient & the date of
                                       supply and the name of the
                                       person     who     gave    the
                                       prescription shall be entered
                                       at the time of supply in
                                       register to be maintained for
                                       the purpose;
d. the entry in the register
                                       shall be given a number and
                                       that number shall be entered
                                       on the label of the container;
e. the register and the
                                       prescription, if any, on which
                                       the medicines are issued shall
                                       be preserved for not less than
                                       two years from the date of the
                                       last entry in the register or
                                       the date of the prescription,
                                       as the case may be.
3. The drug will be stored
                                       under      proper     storage
                                       conditions as directed on the
                                       label.]
4. No drug shall be supplied
                                       or dispensed after the date of
                                       expiration of potency recorded
                                       on its container, label or
                                       wrapper or in violation of any
                                       statement      or     direction
                                       recorded on such container,
                                       label or wrapper.]


                                                (emphasis supplied)


It is not the case of the prosecution that the Appellant was selling

drugs from an open shop across the counter. She is a senior
10
doctor who is engaged as an Associate Professor and Head of

Department, Dermatology in a Government Medical College, and

being a medical practitioner, under certain conditions, she is also

protected under the law which has been referred to above.
9.   Considering the small quantity of medicines, most of which

are in the category of lotions and ointments, it cannot be said by

any stretch of imagination that such medicines could be ‘stocked’

for sale and would come in the category of stocking of medicines

for the purpose of sale.   When small quantity of medicine has

been found in the premises of a registered medical practitioner, it

would not amount to selling their medicines across the counter

in an open shop. In fact, this is not even the allegation against

the Appellant. Undoubtedly, the provisions of
Section 18
and
27
are relevant provisions under the law, which have a social

purpose, which is to protect ordinary citizens from being

exploited inter alia, by unethical medical practitioners, and for

this reason the punishment under
Section 27
can extend up to 5

years under the law, and has a minimum punishment of 3 years.

But given the facts and circumstances of the case and

considering   that   the   Appellant   is   a   registered   medical
11
practitioner, along with the fact that the quantity of medicines

which have been seized is extremely small, a quantity which can

be easily found in the house or a consultation room of a doctor,

in our considered view no offence is made out in the present

case. In fact, an exception has been created under Schedule ‘K’

read with Rule 123 to the rules, the appellant ought to have been

given the benefit of these provisions and such a registered

medical practitioner should not have been allowed to face a trial

where in all likelihood the prosecution would have failed to prove

its case beyond reasonable doubt. The learned single judge while

dismissing the application under
Section 482
Cr.P.C of the

appellant has relied upon a decision of this Court:
"9. It is too late in the day to seek reference to any authority for
      the proposition that while invoking the power under
Section
      482
Cr.P.C. for quashing a complaint or a charge, the Court
      should not embark upon an enquiry into the validity of the
      evidence available. All that the Court should see is as to
      whether there are allegations in the complaint which form the
      basis for the ingredients that constitute certain offences
      complained of The Court may also be entitled to see {i) whether
      the preconditions requisite for taking cognizance have been
      complied with or not; and {ii) whether the allegations contained
      in the complaint, even if accepted in entirety, would not
      constitute the offence alleged
      …….
13. A look at the complaint filed by the appellant would show
      that the appellant had incorporated the ingredients necessary
      for prosecuting the respondents for the offences alleged. The
      question whether the appellant will be able to prove the
12
allegations in a manner known to law would arise only at a
      later stage ... ... ........ ..... "
10.   But what the High Court failed to consider, however, is the

provisions contained in Rule 123 read with Schedule ‘K’ to the

1945 Rules and when admittedly it is not the case of the

prosecution that the drugs which were seized were being sold in

an open shop across the counter. Since this was not being done

as visualized above, and an exception is created under the law in

favour of the medical practitioner where the drugs given in

Schedule ‘K’ would be exempted from the purview of Chapter 4 of

the Act, we are of the considered view that prosecution against

the Appellant is unwarranted.
11.   The backbone of the Respondent’s case is the sales bills

with the list of 18 drugs seized from the premises of the

Appellant. However, the details of the sales bills and seized drugs

in the Show Cause Notice issued by the Respondent it is seen

that the sales bills are not even for the medicines which have

been seized by the Respondent.
12.   On the contrary, upon being served with the Show Cause

Notice, the Appellant was directed, under
Section 18
­A, to reveal
13
the name and addresses of persons from whom she obtained the

drugs which were seized. In compliance with the same, Appellant

has produced multiple invoices from pharmaceutical shops to

show her bonafides. Further, upon inspection of the drugs by the

Drugs Testing Laboratory, Tamil Nadu they returned a finding

that the drugs were of ‘standard quality’ which indicates it is not

a case where the Appellant was operating a shop to sell spurious

medicines over the counter.
13.   Another factor which must be considered is that the search

was carried out on 16.03.2016 and sanction for prosecution was

sought on 22.09.2016 and the sanction ultimately was given on

23.01.2018. There is no explanation which has been given for

this delay in getting the approval.
In the recently decided case of
Hasmukhlal D. Vohra and Anr. v. State of Tamil Nadu
1,

criminal proceedings were quashed against a Petitioner on the

grounds that the substance in question was not a drug under

Indian Pharmacopoeia. One of the considerations was the delay

in the proceedings against which the following observations were

made,



1 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1732
14
‘25. In the present case, the Respondent
          has provided no explanation for the
          extraordinary delay of more than four
          years between the initial site inspection,
          the show cause notice, and the complaint.
          In fact, the absence of such an explanation
          only prompts the Court to infer some
          sinister motive behind initiating the
          criminal proceedings.
26. While inordinate delay in itself may
          not be ground for quashing of a criminal
          complaint, in such cases, unexplained
          inordinate delay of such length must be
          taken into consideration as a very crucial
          factor as grounds for quashing a criminal
          complaint.
27. While this court does not expect a full­
          blown investigation at the stage of a
          criminal complaint, however, in such cases
          where the accused has been subjected to
          the anxiety of a potential initiation of
          criminal proceedings for such a length of
          time, it is only reasonable for the court to
          expect bare­minimum evidence from the
          Investigating Authorities.’
14.   The sanction for prosecution given in the present case

appears, prima facie, to suffer from the vice of non­application of

mind. There is no reference to any of the documents, evidence or

the submissions submitted by either of the parties, no reasons

assigned or even an explanation pertaining to the delay which

indicates it has been passed in a mechani cal manner. This
15
Court in the case of
Mansukhlal Vithaldas Chauhan v. State

of Gujarat2
, highlighted the importance of a prior sanction

granted under
Section 197
of the Code of Criminal Procedure,

1973 while quashing the criminal proceedings instituted against

a Divisional Accountant engaged with the Medium Irrigation

Project Division, Gujarat. It was observed as follows:
‘19. Since the validity of “sanction”
            depends on the applicability of mind by
            the sanctioning authority to the facts of
            the case as also the material and evidence
            collected    during    investigation,    it
            necessarily follows that the sanctioning
            authority   has    to   apply    its  own
            independent mind for the generation of
            genuine satisfaction whether prosecution
            has to be sanctioned or not.’
15.   The possession of the drugs is not disputed in this case by

either side. However, this Court in the case of
Mohd. Shabir v.

State of Maharashtra3
while allowing an appeal in part and

directing the release of an Appellant who had been prosecuted

under the provision 18(c) of the 1940 Act, this Court observed

that possession simpliciter would not itself be an offence but the

prosecution had to prove the essential ingredient under
Section

2 (1997)
7
SCC 622
3 (1979) 1 SCC 568
16
27 which was that even a ‘stock’ of the medicine was for sale. It

was observed as follows:
‘4. …We, therefore, hold that before a
          person can be liable for prosecution or
          conviction under
Section 27(a)(i)(ii)
read
          with
Section 18(c)
of the Act, it must be
          proved by the prosecution affirmatively
          that he was manufacturing the drugs for
          sale or was selling the same or had
          stocked them or exhibited the articles for
          sale. The possession simpliciter of the
          articles does not appear to be punishable
          under any of the provisions of the Act. If,
          therefore, the essential ingredients of
Section 27
are not satisfied the plea of
          guilty cannot lead the Court to convict the
          appellant.’
16.   The sanctioning authority had not examined at all whether

a practising doctor could be prosecuted under the facts of the

case, considering the small quantity of the drugs and the

exception created in favour of medical practitioner under Rule

123, read with the Schedule “K”. All these factors ought to have

been considered by the sanctioning authority. Under these

circumstances we allow this appeal and set aside the order of

the learned Single Judge of the Madras High Court and quash
17
the criminal proceedings in Criminal Case No. 7315 of 2018 on

the file of X Metropolitan Magistrate, Egmore, Chennai.
…....…...………….………………. J.
(Krishna Murari)




                                …………….....……………………. J.
(Sudhanshu Dhulia)



    New Delhi,
    March 15, 2023.