[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
K.H.Balakrishna vs The State Of Karnataka on 21 March, 2023
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
V. Ramasubramanian
1


                                                                                Non-Reportable

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL No.1006 OF 2011


          K.H. BALAKRISHNA                                                       … APPELLANT

                                                      VERSUS

          THE STATE OF KARNATAKA                                                 … RESPONDENT



                                             J    U   D   G    M    E   N   T



          PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.              The appellant K.H. Balakrishna is the accused who

                         has been convicted under
Sections 366
,
342
and
506
IPC and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for a

                         period of 3 years, 3 months and 2 years respectively

                         in all the above offences separately and all the

                         sentences have been directed to run concurrently and
Signature Not Verified
with   fines   of       Rs.2500/-,        Rs.500/-     and   Rs.2000/-
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2023.03.21
15:10:18 IST
Reason:
respectively and in default to pay the above amounts

                         with a further simple imprisonment for six months,
2
fifteen days and three months respectively for all

     the three offences.
2.   The appellant was charge sheeted after investigation

     pursuant   to    the     First        Information       Report    dated

     29.10.1996      lodged       by       one    B.Y.   Chinnanna.      The

     Presiding Officer, Fast Track Court-VI Bangalore,

     vide judgment and order dated 26.02.2005 held him

     guilty for the above offences and sentenced him as

     aforesaid.    The appeal preferred by the appellant to

     the High Court has been dismissed vide judgment and

     order dated 20.07.2010.
3.   The   appellant        has    thus          preferred   this     appeal

     challenging      the     above         two     judgments    and    his

     conviction.
4.   The story as unfolded in the FIR is that Lakshmi,

     the daughter of the complainant’s brother at around

     10.30 a.m. on 25.10.1996 was going to Kamala Nursing

     Home, when the appellant along with his followers

     came from behind and put some liquid on her nose,

     made her unconscious and kidnapped her.
3
5.   The    aforesaid       Lakshmi     PW2     in    her    statement

     categorically stated that her marriage was arranged

     with one Sundar and the engagement ceremony was

     performed on 10.06.1996.          The marriage was fixed for

     6/7th November, 1996 but before the date of the

     marriage, she was kidnapped on 24.10.1996 while she

     was entering the first block of the Kamala Nursing

     Home, Bangalore where her mother was admitted.                    The

     appellant came in a white ambassador which stopped

     near her.       He pulled her inside the car and put a

     handkerchief with chloroform on her nose.                    In the

     car,    besides   the    driver,    there       was   one   another

     person. She did not know the names of the driver and

     the said person.         They locked the car from inside

     and took her to a farm house on the outskirts of

     Bellary where they stayed for three days.               Then they

     went to Sholapur where she insisted that she should

     be permitted to talk to her mother.              She was allowed

     to telephone her.        She gave the telephone number of

     her    uncle,   that    is   of   the    complainant.       She   was
4
allowed to talk to him whereupon she narrated the

entire incident. She told her uncle that she has been

forcibly taken away by the appellant and that the

appellant wants to marry her but she has refused as

her marriage is already settled.           The appellant

threatened to kidnap her sister also if she refused

to marry him.    At Sholapur, the appellant took her

to the house of her sister Mala and brother-in-law

Shivashankar    Godake,   where   his   mother   was   also

present.   Her marriage was performed with appellant

at Venkateshwara temple Sholapur forcibly in the

presence of all.    After marriage she spent two days

in the said house and then went to Pune where they

stayed for 3/4 days in a lodge.     On her request that

she wants to meet her mother, the appellant brought

her back to Bangalore on the condition that she will

tell everyone that she had married him with her own

free will and consent.        On reaching Bangalore by

overnight train, they stayed in a lodge and while

going to Mahalakshmi Layout in the auto, she saw her
5
brother Raju nearby Anjanaya temple and shouted his

     name whereupon her brother took her home.
6.   In cross-examination she accepted that she knew the

     appellant since 1993.           The appellant had visited her

     house in connection with the proposal of marriage

     but her uncle had not accepted the proposal as he

     was not in a government job.               The appellant used to

     visit     her    house     frequently        but   there    was   no

     inclination of any marriage between the two.                      He

     never used to write letters or telephone her.                     The

     appellant never beat her or troubled her in any way

     while they were together.             He never even touched her

     or forced himself upon her even after the marriage

     was performed at Venkateshwara temple.                 He did not

     trouble her in any manner.                She has not married him

     of her own free will and had not gone with him by

     choice.       She was later married on 5th December, 1996

     with Sundar as arranged.
7.   The above statement of the PW2, the victim reveals

     that    the     incident   of       her   kidnapping   as   alleged
6
happened on 24.10.1996 while she was going to the

     Nursing Home to attend to her mother.                    She had

     remained with the appellant accused for about 20/23

     days and in this period, they had remained at Bellary

     for three days, for 4/5 days at Sholapur, where their

     marriage was performed in a temple in the presence

     of   the        sister   and    mother   of   the      appellant.

     Thereafter, they have stayed in a lodge for 3/4 days

     in Pune before returning to Bangalore and during all

     this period she was not at all maltreated by the

     appellant rather he behaved with her in a most decent

     manner.     He never touched her, beat her or troubled

     her in any manner.
8.   The fact that the appellant had known the PW2 since

     1993 when he first visited her house in context with

     a marriage proposal leaves no doubt that both of them

     were known to each other and used to meet despite

     the fact that their marriage proposal was turned

     down.      The appellant had been visiting her house

     though     he    never   used   to   telephone   her    or   write
7
letters to her.       In short, they were not only known

     to each other, but they had some kind of friendship

     or   liking    for    each   other     to    which    there    was

     apparently     no    objection     from     the    other   family

     members.
9.   It may be worth noting that there is no evidence on

     record to prove that the mother of the PW2 was in

     fact hospitalised in the Nursing Home.               The absence

     of such evidence casts a doubt on the story that PW2

     was kidnapped while going to the Nursing Home.                 Her

     statement compels the court to draw a legitimate

     inference     that   as   she    had   known      appellant,   she

     herself may have managed to elope with him and it is

     for this reason that the appellant never misbehaved

     with her or took advantage of her company, rather

     helped her in getting her connected with her family

     members.      The conduct of the appellant and that PW2

     was known to appellant gives an impression that

     possibly she had managed to elope with the appellant
8
just before her marriage for reasons best known to

    her.
10. Secondly, she was kidnapped on 25.10.1996 and the

    FIR was lodged on 28.10.1996 only after she had

    informed of the incident to her uncle on telephone

    in the presence of the appellant.   None in the family

    thought it proper to lodge a report with police even

    though she had not reached the Nursing Home or had

    not returned home after attending her mother. They

    waited for her phone call and only on her narration

    of the incident that her uncle lodged the FIR.
11. PW2 had been frequently moving with the appellant

    from one place to another either in car or train but

    there is no evidence that she ever tried to escape

    or go back home.    There is no evidence either to

    prove that she resisted the marriage or was not happy

    in the company of the appellant.    On the other hand,

    the appellant kept her well and honoured all her

    request.   He allowed her to call her mother and even

    permitted her to talk to her uncle.     The appellant
9
himself talked to her uncle. All this clearly proves

   that the appellant never forced himself upon her in

   any manner.
12. The defence evidence specially that of DW2, the

   mother of the appellant fortifies the fact that there

   was a marriage proposal of the appellant with PW2

   and that the appellant had gone to her house to see

   her in that connection.       The family of the appellant

   had expressed interest to take PW2 in marriage and

   every one had expressed their willingness for the

   said marriage but the proposal was dropped as the

   appellant was not having a government job.           The

   appellant had come with PW2 to Sholapur and their

   marriage was performed in the temple in the presence

   of many people and that pictures were taken and the

   marriage function was videographed.       Significantly,

   the videography of marriage at Sholapur reveals that

   PW2 was wearing a special dress for the marriage and

   wore a smile. The smiling photographs of the PW2

   cannot be under any compulsion as she was not smiling
10
in one or two pictures but in most of them and as

    such the pictures appear to be natural.
13. The entire evidence on record in no way reflects that

    the appellant had any intention to kidnap PW2 for

    the purpose of marriage.       They appear to have gone

    together to various places and may have married.
14. The impugned judgment and orders of the courts have

    completely failed to take into consideration the

    above aspects of the matter in holding the appellant

    to be guilty of the offences solely on the basis of

    the statement of PW2, which as described above is

    not sufficient to prove the appellant guilty.
15. It is important to note that PW2 is happily married

    since 1996 with Sundar as arranged by her family.

    The appellant has also been married elsewhere, as

    informed by the counsel.       He has already suffered

    the   ordeal   of   the   pendency   of   the   criminal

    prosecution since 1996 and as such, we are not in

    favour of extending his agony any further.
11
16. In the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we are of

    the opinion that conviction and the sentence as

    awarded by the trial court and confirmed by the High

    Court cannot be sustained in law.               Accordingly, the

    judgment     and     order    of      the    trial   court   dated

    26.02.2005     and     that     of    the     High   Court   dated

    20.07.2010    are     set     aside    and    the    appellant   is

    acquitted.    The appeal is allowed and the bail bonds

    are discharged.
………………………………………………J.
                                                [V. Ramasubramanian]



                                                 ………………………………………………J.
                                                [Pankaj Mithal]
New Delhi;
March 21, 2023.