[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Abhishek Singh vs Huhtamaki Ppl Ltd. on 28 March, 2023
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
,
B. R. Gavai
REPORTABLE
                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                              CIVIL APPEAL NO(s).         OF 2023
                          (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No.6452 of 2021)


          ABHISHEK SINGH                                   ...APPELLANT(S)

                                            VERSUS

          HUHTAMAKI PPL LTD. & ANR.                      ...RESPONDENT(S)




                                          JUDGMENT
VIKRAM NATH, J.
Leave granted.
2.             The appellant, a suspended Director of the Corporate

          Debtor1: Manpasand Beverages Ltd. (respondent 2), has

          filed this appeal assailing the correctness of the order dated

          13.04.2021
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
passed   by   the   National   Company   Law
Deepak Singh
Date: 2023.03.28
13:51:49 IST
Reason:
1
In short “CD”
1
Tribunal2, Ahmedabad Bench at Ahmedabad in I.A. No.196

of 2021 arising out of C.P.(I.B.) No.503 of 2019 rejecting the

application of the appellant under section 12A of Insolvency

and Bankruptcy Code, 20163 for withdrawal of the

Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process4.
3.       CD          is   in   the   business     of   manufacturing    and

distribution of fruit beverages. It has approximately 700

employees and a turnover of Rs.984.96 Crores in the

Financial Year 2018-2019. The Operational Creditor5

Huhtamaki PPL Ltd. (respondent No.1) used to supply

packaging material to the CD.
4.       The OCs filed a petition under section 9 of IBC before

the       NCLT,           stating    a   total   outstanding   amount    of

Rs.1,31,00,825/- against the CD. This was registered as CP

(IB) No. 503 of 2019.
2
In short, “NCLT”
3
In short, “IBC”
4
In short, “CIRP”
5
In short “OC”
2
5.       The NCLT by order dated 01.03.2021 passed an order

admitting the petition and initiating CIRP. Two days

thereafter i.e. 03.03.2021, the OCs and the CD entered into

a settlement wherein the CD was required to pay an

amount of Rs.95.72 lakhs. The above settlement was

arrived at even before the Committee of Creditors6 could be

constituted.
6.       On 4th March, 2021, the OCs received Rs.50 Lakhs and

again on 8th March, 2021, it received the balance amount

of Rs.45.72 lakhs. Thus, the total amount to be paid as per

the settlement, was paid to the OCs. The Interim Resolution

Professional7 on 10th March, 2021 moved an application

under Regulation 30A of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy

Board of India (Insolvency Resolution Process for Corporate

Persons) Regulations, 20188 seeking withdrawal of CIRP

against the CD. Along with it the application of OCs dated

09.03.2021 was also attached which was moved under
6
In short “CoC”
7
In short “IRP”
8
In short “IBBI Regulations”
3
section 12A of IBC. The application for withdrawal was

registered as IA No. 196 of 2021.
7.         In the meantime, an appeal was preferred against the

admission order dated 01.03.2021 before the National

Company Law Appellate Tribunal9 apparently on the

ground that section 9 of IBC petition was not maintainable

as there was a pre-existing dispute. On 26.03.2021, the

appeal was withdrawn before the NCLAT with liberty to

apply for revival of the appeal in case the settlement failed.

The NCLAT while allowing the withdrawal of the appeal

granted stay of formation of CoC. The said order dated

26.03.2021 is reproduced below:
“Mr. Vikram Nankani, Advocate appears for the
               Appellant.     He submits that Respondent No.1 –
               Operational        Creditor   filed   CP     (IB)
               No.503/9/NCLT/AHM/2019 before Adjudicating
               Authority (NCLT Ahmedabad Bench, Court No.1).
               The Application was filed under section 9 of
               Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (IBC in
               short)       against    the   Respondent    No.2
               M/s.Manpasand Beverages Ltd. the Corporate
9
In short “NCLAT”
4
Debtor. Appellant is the Director of the Suspended
Board of the Corporate Debtor. Respondent No.3 is
Interim Resolution Professional.
2. Learned counsel for the Appellant submits that
the Application was admitted by the Impugned
Order and Appeal is filed.         It is stated that
thereafter the Appellant has settled the claim of
Operational Creditor and the Operational Creditor
has filed Application for withdrawal copy of which
is at Page 348 and even the IRP has filed
Application before the Adjudicating Authority copy
of which is at page 368. The Application for
withdrawal under section 12A of IBC has been filed
through IRP. Mr. Salil Thakore, Advocate agrees
with the Learned Counsel for the Appellant that
there has been a settlement and accordingly
Application under section 12A of IBC has ben filed.
The Learned Counsel for IRP however states that
the money has been paid violating moratorium
which the IRP has reported to the Adjudicating
Authority.
3. Mr. Hitesh Buch, PCS also agrees that settlement
has taken place.
4. Learned counsel for the Appellant submits that
considering these facts, the Appeal may be allowed
to be withdrawn with liberty to seek restoration in
case the effort with regard to section 12 A of IBC
runs into difficulty. The Learned Counsel for IRP
5
accepts that Committee of Creditors (CoC in short)
       has not been constituted.
5. The learned counsel for the Appellant submits
       that he is making request for withdrawal of the
       Appeal under instructions from the Appellant.
6. Considering the objects of IBC, we have no
       reason to doubt that the Adjudicating Authority
       without standing on technicalities would pass
       appropriate Orders, if settlement has taken place
       between the Original Operational Creditor and
       Corporate Debtor and CoC is not yet constituted.
       7(A)   For reasons stated above, the Appeal is
       permitted to be withdrawn with liberty to seek
       restoration of the Appeal in case at any future time
       the effort to settle in terms of section 12A of IBC
       runs into difficulty and does not happen.
       7(B)   Till the Adjudicating Authority decides
       Application under section 12 A of IBC which is
       stated to have already been filed, CoC may not be
       constituted.
The Appeal is disposed with observations and
       directions as above.”
8.   NCLT by the impugned judgment and order dated

13.04.2021 rejected the settlement application and fixed

the matter for disposal of the application under Regulation

30A of IBBI Regulations after hearing all creditors.
6
9.         Subsequent to the above order of NCLT dated

13.04.2021, the IRP constituted the CoC on 15.04.2021.

The appellant preferred the SLP on 19.04.2021. This Court

vide order dated 20.04.2021 while issuing notice, directed

the parties to maintain status quo.
10. It would be pertinent to mention here that primary

opposition is by the IRP by way of an intervention

application. The OC is not opposing the appeal in as much

as it had already received the full amount as per the

settlement                 dated   03.03.2021.   Further,   three   other

applications for intervention/impleadment have been filed

by creditors of the CD, who allegedly had raised their claims

before the IRP.
11. Before proceeding any further, the relevant statutory

provisions may be noticed.
12. Rule 11 of The National Company Law Tribunal Rules,

201610 confer inherent powers on the NCLT to pass
10
In short “the NCLT Rules”
7
appropriate orders for meeting the ends of justice or to

prevent abuse of the process of the Tribunal. The said rule

is reproduced hereunder:
“11. Inherent powers- Nothing in these rules shall
       be deemed to limit or otherwise affect the inherent
       powers of the Tribunal to make such orders as may
       be necessary for meeting the ends of justice or to
       prevent abuse of the process of the Tribunal.”
13. Section 12A of IBC which was inserted w.e.f.

06.06.2018 permits withdrawal of applications admitted

under sections 7, 9 or 10 of IBC, with the approval of 90

percent voting share of the CoC in such manner as may be

specified. The said provision is reproduced below:
“12A. Withdrawal of application admitted under
   section 7,9 or 10 – The Adjudicating Authority may
   allow the withdrawal of application admitted under
   section 7 or section 9 or section 10, on an application
   made by the applicant with the approval of ninety per
   cent voting share of the committee of creditors, in such
   manner as may be specified.”
14. Regulation 30A of IBBI Regulations was introduced

after insertion of section 12A in IBC. It provided the

mechanism      of   dealing    with    applications     filed   for
8
withdrawal. Later on, it was substituted by notification

dated 25.07.2019 in IBBI Regulations. According to the

said provision, withdrawal under section 12A of IBC could

be moved before Adjudicating Authority by the applicant

through IRP before constitution of the CoC and in case the

CoC has been constituted, then also by the applicant

through IRP or the RP. However, the applicant would be

required to justify the withdrawal by giving reasons. It

further provides the procedure for dealing with such an

application. Regulation 30A of IBBI Regulations, as it

stands today, is reproduced hereunder:
“30A. Withdrawal of application. (1) An application for
   withdrawal under section 12A may be made to the
   Adjudicating Authority –
(a) before the constitution of the committee, by the
     applicant     through     the    interim    resolution
     professional;
(b) after the constitution of the committee, by the
     applicant through the interim resolution professional
     or the resolution professional, as the case may be:
Provided that where the application is made under
   clause (b) after the issue of invitation for expression of
   interest under regulation 36A, the applicant shall state
   the reasons justifying withdrawal after issue of such
   invitation.
9
(2) The application under sub-regulation (1) shall be
made in Form-F A of the Schedule accompanied by a
bank guarantee-
(a) towards estimated expenses incurred on or by
  the interim resolution professional for purposes of
  regulation 33, till the date of filing of the application
  under clause (a) of sub-regulation (1); or
(b) towards estimated expenses incurred for
  purposes of clauses (aa), (ab), (c) and (d) of regulation
  31, till the date of filing of the application under
  clause (b) of sub-regulation (1).
(3) Where an application for withdrawal is under clause
(a) of sub-regulation (1), the interim resolution
professional shall submit the application to the
Adjudicating Authority on behalf of the applicant,
within three days of its receipt.
(4) Where an application for withdrawal is under clause
(b) of sub-regulation (1), the committee shall consider
the application, within seven days of its receipt.
(5) Where the application referred to in sub-regulation
(4) is approved by the committee with ninety percent
voting share, the resolution professional shall submit
such application along with the approval of the
committee, to the Adjudicating Authority on behalf of
the applicant, within three days of such approval.
(6) The Adjudicating Authority may, by order, approve
the application submitted under sub-regulation (3) or
(5).
(7) Where the application is approved under sub-
regulation (6), the applicant shall deposit an amount,
towards the actual expenses incurred for the purposes
referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-regulation
(2) till the date of approval by the Adjudicating
Authority, as determined by the interim resolution
professional or resolution professional, as the case may
be, within three days of such approval, in the bank
account of the corporate debtor, failing which the bank
guarantee received under sub-regulation (2) shall be
10
invoked, without prejudice to any other action
       permissible against the applicant under the Code. ”
15. NCLT, in the impugned order while rejecting I.A.No.196

of 2021 filed by the OCs, recorded the following findings:
i.     The facts relating to the settlement and the fulfilment

        of the terms of the settlement are not disputed;
ii.     The suspended directors of the CD despite the

        moratorium having commenced with effect from

        01.03.2021 have not only made transactions of deposit

        but also withdrawal from the account of the CD. They

        have thus violated the directions contained in the

        admission order dated 01.03.2021;
iii.    Although the IRP had made submissions that the

        suspended director having transferred huge amount

        from the account of the company to his personal

        account and from there having made the payment to

        the OC under the settlement but the same was not

        conclusively proved;
11
iv.    The suspended director and their counsel made

       frivolous arguments before the NCLT which were

       contrary to record in order to obtain favourable orders;

 v.    As many as 35 claims of creditors both operational and

       financial have been filed in the meantime.     As such

       withdrawal of the proceedings would adversely affect

       their rights;
vi.    The proceedings once admitted and IRP having

       initiated, such proceedings are in rem and all stake

       holders can participate in the proceedings with their

       respective claims; and

vii.   Regulation 30A of IBBI Regulations was not binding

       upon it and such provision would not be of any help to

       the CD or its suspended Directors;
16. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the

material on record.
17. Shri Shyam Divan, learned senior counsel appearing

for the appellant referring to statutory provisions like
12
section 12A of IBC, Regulation 30A of IBBI Regulations and

also to Rule 11 of the NCLT Rules, 2016 submitted that

such provisions clearly permit settlement between the

creditor and the debtor and withdrawal of proceedings prior

to the constitution of CoC.                  According to him, once the

settlement was arrived at and acted upon prior to the

constitution of CoC, the NCLT committed a grave error in

not allowing the withdrawal of the proceedings.                  He has

placed reliance on a number of orders/judgments passed

by this Court exercising powers under
Article 142
of the

Constitution allowing withdrawal of such petitions where

settlement had been arrived at and also certain orders

passed by NCLAT permitting withdrawal before constitution

of CoC. Reliance was also placed upon a judgment of this

Court in the case of
Swiss Ribbons (P) Ltd. V. Union of

India11
dated   25.01.2019     whereafter   the   Central

Government vide Notification dated 25th July, 2019 inserted
11
(2019) 4 SCC 17
13
Regulation 30A in IBBI Regulations which permitted

withdrawal of petitions before constitution of CoC.
18. Further submission advanced by Mr.Divan is to the

effect that NCLT was swayed by the fact that there were

several other creditors who had raised their claims against

the CD and as such without hearing such creditors,

permission of withdrawal would not be proper.         This,

according to the learned senior counsel, was an error

committed by the NCLT inasmuch as these third party

claims could not have been taken into consideration nor

they should have weighed with the NCLT in forming its

opinion. Once the CoC had not been constituted the claims

of other creditors would not come into play to defeat the

settlement arrived at between the OC and the CD.        In

support of the said submission he has
placed reliance upon
a judgment of this Court in the case of
Ashok G. Rajani v.

Beacon Trusteeship Ltd.& Ors.12 Reliance
is also placed
12
(2022) SCC Online SC 1275.
14
upon another order of this Court in the case of
Kamal

K.Singh v. Dinesh Gupta & Anr.
, dated 25.08.2021 in Civil

Appeal No.4993 of 2021.
19. The next submission relates to the objection taken by

the IRP that the suspended Director had transferred huge

amounts from the account of the CD during the period of

moratorium i.e. after 1 March, 2021 upto 18 March 2021

into his personal account as also other third parties.

Further the amount so transferred in the personal account

of the suspended Director was utilized in paying off the

amount as per the settlement to the OC. The submission

made by learned senior Counsel is to the effect that the

NCLT itself recorded a finding that the above objection

taken by the IRP was not conclusively established.     His

submission is that despite the said finding the NCLT was

apparently influenced by the objection taken by the IRP.
20. Lastly, it was submitted by Shri Divan, that the NCLT

had no jurisdiction to declare or hold that Regulation 30A
15
of IBBI Regulations was not binding on it; NCLT committed

a grave error of law in ignoring the said provision. According

to him, it was beyond the power of the NCLT to have

discarded a statutory provision.
21. Based on the above points it was submitted that the

appeal deserves to be allowed, the impugned order of the

NCLT be set aside and the withdrawal of the proceedings be

allowed.
22. On the other hand, the IRP and other interveners have

strongly opposed the appeal. The submissions advanced on

their behalf are the same as were raised before the NCLT

which had found favour therein resulting into the passing

of the impugned order. In effect they supported the findings

of the NCLT. Additionally, it has been objected on their

behalf that the appellant ought to have availed alternative

remedy by filing an appeal before the NCLAT. The IRP has

also raised the issue regarding non-clearance of his funds

with respect to the expenditure incurred by him. In support
16
of the submissions, reliance is placed upon the following

judgments:
(1)        P. Mohanraj v. Shah Bros.
ISPAT (P) Ltd.13
     (2)     Swiss Ribbons Private Limited & Anr. v. Union of
             India & Ors. (
supra)
     (3)     Dena Bank (Now Bank of Baroda) v. Shivakumar
             Reddy & Anr.14
(
4)     MSTC Limited v. Adhunik Metalliks Ltd.
and
             others15;
(
5)     Indian Overseas Bank v. Mr. Dinkar T.
             Venkatsubramaniam, Resolution Professional
for
             Amtek Auto Limited16;
(
6)     Manoj K. Daga v. ISGEC Heavy Engineering
             Limited
and others17;
(7)     Narayanamma and anr. v. Govindappa and Ors.18
     (8)     Ram Saran Das v. CTO Calcutta & Anr.19
     (
9)     Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of Orissa20
13
(2021) 6 SCC 258
14
(2021) 10 SCC 330
15
(2019) SCC Online NCLAT 146
16
(2017) SCC Online NCLAT 584
17
(2020) SCC Online NCLAT 869
18
(2019) 19 SCC 42
19
AIR 1962 SC 1362
20
(1983) 2 SCC 433
17
23.    The facts as stated above are not disputed. The

application had been filed prior to the constitution of the

CoC. The settlement had been arrived at within two days

of the admission order. The payment as per the

settlement had been made within the next five days i.e.

in a weeks’ time from the date of admission. The

application for withdrawal was filed on the 10th day. The

NCLT ought to have immediately taken the decision on

the application. Once the parties had settled the dispute

even   before   the   CoC   had   been   constituted,   the

application ought to have been allowed then and there

rather than await the other creditors to jump into the fray

and allow the IRP to proceed further.
24.    On behalf of the appellant number of orders of this

Court have been relied upon wherein the power under
Article 142
of the Constitution was exercised to approve

the settlement and permit withdrawal of cases wherein

CIRP had been initiated. We could have also done the
18
same which would have been an easy way out but

considering the order passed by the NCLT rejecting the

application for withdrawal and further the IRP and three

other OCs having filed intervention applications, we are

embarking upon to decide the issues raised and as to

what should be the course adopted by NCLT in dealing

with withdrawal matters before the constitution of CoC.

We take up the issues one by one.
Alternative Remedy
25.    Plea of alternative remedy is a self-imposed

restriction by the superior Courts and is never an

absolute bar unless barred by the statute. Further, in the

present case, this Court had entertained the SLP in 2021

itself and had granted an order of status quo on

20.04.2021. Substantial time has passed since then. As

such we are not inclined to entertain the said objection

relating to availability of alternative remedy of filing the

appeal before the NCLT. We may also note here that IBC
19
provides a statutory timeframe for disposal of matters.

Further, such matters being commercial in nature

keeping these matters pending for long, frustrates the

very object of IBC.
Violation of the Moratorium
26.    The intervenors have vehemently contended that

after 01.03.2021, once the NCLT has admitted the

petition and had issued restraint order, section 14 of IBC

had come into play; the transactions made in the

accounts of the CD would be unlawful and illegal as such

payment of the settlement amount from the funds of the

CD transferred to the account of the suspended Director

after 01.03.2021 ought to be rejected and no discretion

should be exercised permitting withdrawal of the

proceedings. In this respect, it would suffice to state that

even the NCLT was not satisfied with the said submission

of the IRP and has not approved the same. Secondly, even

if there was any transaction from the account of the CD,
20
the same may at best be held to be a wrongful transaction

and in any other proceedings where CIRP is initiated the

amount so transferred could be recovered under section

66 of IBC by the IRP or the RP subject to establishing

that the said transactions would be hit by the said

provision.
Multiple claims of OCs
27.    With respect to the said objection, it only needs to

be mentioned that other creditors would have their own

right to avail such legal remedies as may be available to

them under law with respect to their claims. The rights

of the creditors for their respective claims do not get

whittled down or adversely affected if the settlement with

the OC in the present case is accepted and the

proceedings allowed to be withdrawn.
Claims for expenses for IRP
28.    Any amount spent by the IRP legally admissible to

him could always be recovered in the same proceedings
21
and the NCLT or the Adjudicating Authority would be

well within its power to get the same cleared under

Clause 7 of Regulation 30A of IBBI Regulations.

Judgments relied upon:
29. In the facts and circumstances of the present case

and for the discussion made above none of the judgments

relied upon by the intervenors are of any help to the

intervenors. Briefly the same are discussed hereinafter.
30. The interveners have relied upon P.Mohanraj

(supra),
Swiss Ribbons
(supra),
Dena Bank
(supra),
MSTC Limited
(supra),
Indian Overseas Bank
(supra)

and
Manok K. Daga
(supra), for the proposition that

settlement would be in violation of moratorium as

payments have been made after transferring money from

the CD account after initiation of CIRP. As already

recorded above, we have held that firstly, the NCLT itself

was not satisfied that moratorium had been violated and

even if it had been violated, at best it would amount to a
22
wrongful   trading/transaction    and    the   same,   if

established, could always be recovered by the IRP or the

RP in appropriate proceedings for CIRP by other OCs

under section 66 of IBC. However, the present settlement

could not be stalled. Thus, these cases are of no help to

the intervenors.
31. The case of
Narayanamma and another
(supra) has

been relied upon for the proposition that this Court

would not put a seal on an illegal act of the suspended

Directors of the CD as they have transferred funds out

of CD’s account after application was admitted. Here

also, we may only add that as NCLT itself was not

satisfied with such violation, no benefit can be derived

by the intervenors.
32. Lastly, the intervenors have relied upon Ram Saran

Das (supra) and
Titaghur Paper Mills
(supra) for the

proposition that the appeal deserves to be dismissed as

the appellant did not avail the alternative remedy. This
23
aspect also, for the reasons recorded above, does not

benefit the interveners in any way.
Legality of the impugned order:
33.    Now coming to the legality and the correctness of

the impugned order passed by the NCLT in the present

appeal. Majority of the findings recorded in the impugned

orders are already covered above. An important issue

remains to be considered is the finding recorded by the

NCLT that Regulation 30A of IBBI Regulations was not

binding upon it and could not be of any help to the CD

or its suspended Directors.
In this respect, we may first

refer to the judgment of this Court in the case of
Swiss

Ribbons
(supra).   Section   12A   of   IBC   permitted

withdrawal of applications admitted under sections 7, 9

or 10 of IBC. But the said provision envisaged a situation

where the withdrawal application would be filed after the

CoC has been constituted, as it requires approval of 90

per cent voting shares of CoC. There was no provision
24
which would deal with withdrawal of proceedings before

constitution of CoC. Even Regulation 30A, as it existed

earlier, did not contemplate of consideration of an

application for withdrawal filed before constitution of

CoC.
This issue was flagged by this Court in the case of
Swiss Ribbons
(supra) in paragraph 82 thereof which is

reproduced hereunder:
“82. It is clear that once the Code gets triggered
    by admission of a creditor’s petition under
    Sections 7 to 9, the proceeding that is before the
    adjudicating authority, being a collective
    proceeding, is a proceeding in rem. Being a
    proceeding in rem, it is necessary that the body
    which is to oversee the resolution process must
    be consulted before any individual corporate
    debtor is allowed to settle its claim. A question
    arises as to what is to happen before a
    Committee of Creditors is constituted (as per
    the timelines that are specified, a Committee of
    Creditors can be appointed at any time within
    30 days from the date of appointment of the
    interim resolution professional). We make it
    clear that at any stage where the Committee of
    Creditors is not yet constituted, a party can
    approach NCLT directly, which Tribunal may, in
    exercise of its inherent powers under Rule 11 of
    NCLT Rules, 2016, allow or disallow an
    application for withdrawal or settlement. This
    will be decided after hearing all the parties
    concerned and considering all relevant factors
    on the facts of each case.”
25
This Court had required the NCLT to invoke its powers

       under Rule 11 of the NCLT Rules.
34. It was after the observations made by this Court in

       the case of
Swiss Ribbons
(supra), as noted above and

       also considering the aspect that large number of orders

       were being passed by this Court invoking
Article 142
of

       the Constitution that IBBI Regulations which were

       framed by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of

       India21 exercising powers conferred under sections 5, 7,

       9, 14, 15, 17, 18, 21, 24, 25, 29, 30, 196, 208 read with

       section 240 substituted section 30A vide notification

       dated 25.07.2019. The Board was conferred with powers

       to frame regulations for various purposes referred to in

       section 240 of IBC and the other allied sections. These

       regulations may be subordinate in character but would

       still carry a statutory flavor and would be binding on the

       NCLT. The NCLT committed an error in holding that
21
In short “IBBI”
26
Regulation 30A would have no binding effect.
This would

amount to defeating the very purpose of substituting

Regulation 30A in IBBI Regulations on 25.07.2019 after

the judgment of
Swiss Ribbons
(supra) which was dated

25.01.2019.
35.   Section   12A    of    IBC     permits   withdrawal   of

applications admitted under sections 7, 9 and 10 of IBC.

It permits withdrawal of such applications with approval

of 90 percent voting share of CoC in such manner as may

be specified. The role of CoC and 90 percent of its voting

share approving the said withdrawal would come into

play only when CoC has been constituted. Section 12A

did   not   specifically    mention    withdrawal    of   such

applications where CoC had not been constituted but at

the same time it does not debar entertaining applications

for   withdrawal    even    before    constitution   of   CoC.

Therefore, the application under section 12A for

withdrawal cannot be said to be kept pending for
27
constitution of CoC, even where such application was

filed before constitution of CoC. The IBBI which had the

power to frame Regulations wherever required and in

particular section 240 of IBC for the subjects covered

therein had accordingly substituted Regulation 30A

dealing with the procedure for disposal of application for

withdrawal filed under section 12A of IBC. The

substituted Regulation 30A of IBC as it stands today

clearly provided for withdrawal applications being

entertained before constitution of CoC. It does not in any

way conflicts or is in violation of section 12A of IBC.

There is no inconsistency in the two provisions. It only

furthers the cause introduced vide section 12A of IBC.

Thus, NCLT fell in error in taking a contrary view.
36.
In
Kamal K. Singh
(supra), relying upon paragraph

82 of the report in the case of
Swiss Ribbons
(supra),

the Supreme Court, which was dealing with a similar

situation where the settlement had been arrived before
28
constitution of CoC allowed the proceedings to be

withdrawn and held that the applications filed under

Rule 11 of the NCLT Rules would be maintainable and

the    OCs     therein   was    justified   in   moving    such

application.
37.
In the case of
Ashok G. Rajani
(supra), the

settlement had been arrived at between the parties on

08.08.2021, after the NCLT had admitted the application

under section 7 of IBC vide order dated 03.08.2021. On

appeal, the NCLAT vide order dated 18.08.2021 stayed

the formation of CoC but declined to exercise its powers

under Rule 11 of the NCLAT Rules. The said order was

challenged before this Court. This Court in its order in

paragraphs 29 and 30 gave reasons as to why the

applications for withdrawal cannot be stifled before the

constitution of CoC by third parties. The said paragraphs

are reproduced below:
“29. Considering the investments made by the
      Corporate Debtor and considering the number of
      people dependant on the Corporate Debtor for their
29
survival and livelihood, there is no reason why the
    applicant for the CIRP, should not be allowed to
    withdraw its application once its disputes have
    been settled.
30. The settlement cannot be stifled before the
    constitution of the Committee of Creditors in
    anticipation of claims against the Corporate Debtor
    from third persons. The withdrawal of an
    application for CIRP by the applicant would not
    prevent any other financial creditor from taking
    recourse to a proceeding under IBC. The urgency to
    abide by the timelines for completion of the
    resolution process is not a reason to stifle the
    settlement.”
38. This Court relying upon the order in the case of
Kamal K. Singh
(supra) issued directions in paragraph

32 to the NCLT to take up the settlement application and

decide the same in the light of observations made

therein. The said paragraph is reproduced hereunder:
“32. The application for settlement under Section
    12A of the IBC is pending before the Adjudicating
    Authority (NCLT). The NCLAT has stayed the
    constitution of the Committee of Creditors. The
    order impugned is only an interim order which does
    not call for interference. In an appeal under Section
    62 of the IBC, there is no question of law which
    requires determination by this Court. The appeal is,
    accordingly, dismissed. The NCLT is directed to
    take up the settlement application and decide the
    same in the light of the observations made above.”
30
39.   One more aspect needs to be flagged here. From a

perusal of the order of the NCLT it appears that it was

annoyed with the conduct of CD and its counsel. NCLT

has recorded its displeasure and annoyance at a couple

of places referring to the conduct of the CD and its

counsel before the NCLAT, and maybe for this reason,

the NCLT passed the impugned order ignoring the

observation in the NCLAT order dated 26.03.2021 which

had   specifically   expressed   that   the   Adjudicating

Authority (NCLT) would pass orders on the withdrawal

application without standing on technicalities.
40. Both the parties have relied upon paragraph 82 of the

judgment in the case of
Swiss Ribbons
(supra).
According to the appellant, the NCLT ought to have

exercised its inherent powers under Rule 11 of the NCLT

Rules whereas for the intervenors it is submitted that

this Court had observed that power under Rule 11 would

be exercised after hearing all concerned parties. It may
31
be noted that at the time when the application for

withdrawal of the proceedings was filed the CoC was not

constituted as such there could not have been any other

concerned parties except the OC, CD and IRP. It was only

because of the delay caused by the NCLT in disposing of

the applications under section 12A of IBC and Regulation

30A of IBBI Regulations that large number of creditors

filed their claims. The inherent powers are to be invoked

in order to meet the ends of justice which, in our opinion,

the NCLT failed to invoke.
41. Regulation 30A of IBBI Regulations provide a

complete mechanism for dealing with the applications

filed under such provision. The issue raised by the IRP

regarding its claim for expenses is well taken care of

under the said provision. Various safeguards have been

provided in Regulation 30A of IBBI Regulations to be

fulfilled by the OC which apparently have been fulfilled

as there is no complaint in that regard either by the IRP
32
nor it is apparent from the impugned order of the NCLT.

Thus, the objection raised by the IRP does not merit any

consideration in this appeal.
42.    For all the reasons recorded above, the impugned

order of the NCLT cannot be sustained. The application

filed under Regulation 30A of IBBI Regulations deserves

to be allowed.
43.    Accordingly, the appeal is allowed and the

impugned order of NCLT is set aside. Further, the

Application No. 196 of 2021 also deserves to be allowed

along with the application under Regulation 30A of IBBI

Regulations. The Application under section 9 of IBC filed

by the OCs shall stand withdrawn. It is further provided

that any claim for expenses incurred may be dealt with

by the NCLT in accordance with law.
44.    We make it clear that any observations made in

this judgment will not, in any manner, affect the claim of

other creditors of whatever category and they would be
33
free to raise their own independent claims in appropriate

  proceedings which would be dealt with in accordance

  with law.
45. Pending applications, if any, are disposed of.
…………..........................J.
                                                  [B. R. GAVAI]



                                  .………….........................J.
                                              [VIKRAM NATH]


NEW DELHI
MARCH 28, 2023.
34