[Cites
40
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Indore Development Authority Through ... vs Burhani Grih Nirman Sahakari Sanstha ... on 3 March, 2023
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE
                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                         CIVIL APPEAL No. 5071 of 2022


         Indore Development Authority                    …Appellant


                              Versus


         Burhani Grih Nirman Sahakari Sanstha Maryadit
         Sneh Nagar and Others                           …Respondents


                                    WITH

                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5099 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5074 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5075 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5076 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5078 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5079 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5081 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5080 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5082 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5084 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5085 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5087 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5088 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5090 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5091 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5093 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5092 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5094 OF 2022
Signature Not Verified   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5095 OF 2022
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5096 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5097 OF 2022
Date: 2023.03.03
16:50:12 IST
Reason:


                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5098 OF 2022
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5101 OF 2022

                                                                        1
                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5103 OF 2022
                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5104 OF 2022
                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5105 OF 2022
                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5106 OF 2022
                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5077 OF 2022
                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5083 OF 2022
                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5086 OF 2022
                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5089 OF 2022
                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5100 OF 2022
                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5102 OF 2022




                      JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.    Delay condoned. Substitution allowed. Abatement is set aside.

Cause title be amended accordingly.
1A.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned common

judgment and order dated 28.08.2014 passed by the High Court of

Madhya Pradesh at Indore in Writ Appeal No. 873 of 2008 and other

connected writ appeals, by which the Division Bench of the High Court

has dismissed the said appeals, confirming the common judgment and

order dated 10.12.1998 passed by the learned Single Judge whereby

the learned Single    allowed the respective writ petitions against

finalisation of Scheme No. 97 under Section 50 of the Madhya Pradesh

Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh Adhiniyam, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as
2
the ‘Adhiniyam’) and the subsequent land acquisition proceedings

undertaken by the State of Madhya Pradesh under
Sections 4
and
6
of

the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act,

1894’), the Indore Development Authority has preferred the present

appeals.
2.   The facts leading to the present appeals in a nutshell are as under:
The Indore Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as the

‘IDA’) passed a Resolution under
Section 50(1)
of the Adhiniyam on

13.03.1981 declaring its intention to frame Scheme No. 97 – a

residential scheme providing for other connected land uses. For the

sake of convenience, Scheme No. 97 was divided into four parts, i.e.,

Part I, II, III & IV. The declaration of intention of the said scheme was

further published in the form of public notice on 10.07.1981. Vide its

order dated 24.12.1983, the State Government empowered all the

Collectors and Divisional Commissioners to act as ex-officio Deputy

Secretaries of the Department of Revenue, Government of Madhya

Pradesh and ex-officio Secretary of the said Government respectively,

for disposal of the cases under
Sections 4
,
5
6
&
17
of the Act, 1894.
After completing various formalities, the IDA published Scheme No. 97

on 08.06.1984 as required under
Section 50(7)
of the Adhiniyam and the

Scheme was also published in the Official Gazette on the said date.
3
2.1   According to IDA, the State of Madhya Pradesh in exercise of its

powers conferred under
Article 166(2)
& (3)
of the Constitution of India

and in accordance with the Madhya Pradesh Government Rules of

Business framed by the Governor, Madhya Pradesh, delegated its power

to the District Collector to act as Under Secretary, Revenue Department,

Government of Madhya Pradesh. Vide its order dated 6.03.1987, the

State Government gave powers to the Deputy Collectors for exercising

functions of the Collectors for acquisition of land in their respective

areas.
According to IDA, as per
section 56
of the Adhiniyam, the IDA started

mutual negotiations with the landowners for procurement of their land for

Scheme No. 97. Since the mutual negotiations failed, the IDA vide its

letter dated 4.06.1987 moved the Collector for acquisition of the land.

2.2   Notification under
section 4
of the Act, 1894 in respect of the land

for Scheme No. 97 was published in the Official Gazette and the

notification was then also published in the two daily Hindi Newspapers

on 14.08.1987. Further, the publication was affixed on different dates

and lastly on 09.10.1987.
2.3   The Deputy Collector and Land Acquisition Officer filed its report

under
section 5A
of the Act, 1894 before the Collector for approval and

also submitted the notification under
section 6
of the Act, 1894 for

signature of the Collector. The same was duly approved by the Collector.
4
2.4   The Deputy Collector filed its reports in respect of village Tejpur

Garbari and also in respect of village Pipaliyarao under
section 5A
of the

Act, 1894 and also filed an approval order of the Collector, for issuance

of notification under
section 6
of the Act, 1894.      Declaration under
section 6
of the Act, 1894 was published in the Official Gazette on

7.10.1988 and the said declaration was then also published in daily

newspapers on different dates and lastly on 16.12.1988. The Collector

then submitted its report to the Commissioner under
section 5A
of the

Act, 1894 with the recommendation to reject the objections and to grant

approval for issuance of notification under
section 6
of the Act, 1894,

which was approved by the Commissioner vide its letter dated

6.12.1988.
2.5   After the publication of the declaration under
section 6
of the Act,

1894 and during the pendency of the land acquisition proceedings

before the Collector, some of the landowners whose lands were acquired

for Scheme No. 97 filed writ petitions before the High Court and obtained

interim orders against dispossession of their land. Some writ petitions

were filed after the declaration of the award. The Collector, Indore made

his award in respect of the acquired land on 6.03.1991. That the original

writ petitioners filed a Miscellaneous Petition before the learned Single

Judge of the High Court challenging the notifications under
sections 4
&
6
of the Act, 1894 and prayed that the entire acquisition proceedings be
5
quashed. The original writ petitioners also prayed that Scheme No. 97

prepared by the IDA be quashed and their land be ordered to be deleted

and released therefrom.               That in the year 1997, some lands were

released from Scheme No. 97. The IDA during the pendency of the writ

petitions filed a clarification regarding land release out of Scheme No.

97 pointing out the justification. The aforesaid release was sought

challenging Scheme No. 97 on the following grounds:
(i)     That the Scheme framed by the appellant under
Section 50(7)
of

      the Adhiniyam was not implemented within three years and therefore it

      stood lapsed, by virtue of
Section 54
of the Adhiniyam.
(ii)    That the notification issued under
Section 6
was not in accordance

      with law inasmuch as the objections invited under Section 5-A were not

      decided by the Competent Authority. There was also a plea of hostile

      discrimination inasmuch as various parcels of lands were released from

      acquisition indiscriminately.
2.6     The learned Single Judge by a common judgment and order dated

10.12.19998 allowed the respective writ petitions and quashed the

Scheme framed by the IDA as well as the land acquisition proceedings

initiated by the State Government, mainly on three grounds, namely,:-
(i)     The objections invited under
Section 5-A
of the L.A. Act were not

      decided by the Competent Authority, i.e., State Government.
6
(ii)    There was hostile discrimination against the respondents by the

      appellant and the State of Madhya Pradesh inasmuch as the various

      parcels of land owned by several other persons and societies forming part

      of the same scheme were released by the appellant violating the

      fundamental rights of the respondents as guaranteed under
Article 14
of

      the Constitution of India.
(iii)   That in view of
Section 54
of the Adhiniyam, the Scheme lapsed

      as it was not implemented within three years from the date of its

      publication as provided under
Section 54
of the Adhiniyam.
2.7     Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the common judgment and

order passed by the learned Single Judge, quashing and setting aside

the entire acquisition proceedings as well as quashing and setting aside

Scheme No. 97 on the ground that the same had lapsed in view of
Section 54
of the Adhiniyam, the IDA preferred the writ appeals before

the Division Bench of the High Court.               By the impugned common

judgment and order, the Division Bench of the High Court has dismissed

the said appeals, which has given rise to the present appeals.
3.      Shri Balbir Singh, learned Additional Solicitor General of India,

assisted by Shri Sanjay Kapur, learned counsel, appearing on behalf of

the IDA has vehemently submitted that in the facts and circumstances of

the case, the learned Single Judge as well as the Division Bench of the

High Court have materially erred in quashing and setting aside the entire
7
acquisition proceedings as well as Scheme No. 97 framed under the

Adhiniyam.
3.1       It is further submitted by the learned Additional Solicitor General

that the learned Single Judge allowed the writ petitions declaring

Scheme No. 97 as illegal and invalid and quashed and set aside the

entire acquisition proceedings under the Act, 1894, mainly on three

grounds, namely:-
(i)         That there was no delegation of power by the State Government
        with regard to
Section 5-A
of the Act, 1894 to Collector;
(ii)        That IDA failed to take substantial steps to implement the scheme
        within a period of three years from the date of final publication as
        envisaged under section 54 of the Adhiniyam; and
(iii)       That huge and big chunk of land, out of the total land sought to be
        acquired by the Authority, has been released.
3.2       Insofar as the finding recorded by the learned Single Judge, as

confirmed by the Division Bench, that there was no delegation of power

to the Collector with respect to
Section 5-A
of the Act, 1894 is concerned,

learned Additional Solicitor General has submitted as under:
(i)           That
Section 5-A
of the Act, 1894 provides for inviting and hearing of

                objections from the landowners by the appropriate authority and then

                preparation of report thereof. It is submitted that insofar as the decision on

                the report by the Appropriate Government is concerned, it is taken under
section 6
of the Act, 1894. Section 5-A merely declares that the decision of

                the Appropriate Government on the report would be final. Thus, Section 5-A
8
does not require any further delegation of power. The decision on the report

            is required to be taken under
Section 6
of the Act, 1894.
(ii)      Further, it is submitted that the State Government vide its letter dated

            22.03.1985 delegated its power to the District Collector to act as Dy.
Secretary of the Revenue Department and to the Commissioner of the

            Division, to act as Secretary of the Revenue Department, to adjudicate

            matters related to land acquisition by exercising powers given under
Sections 4
,
5
,
6
and
17
of the Act, 1894. A bare reading of
Sections 4
to
6
of the Act, 1894 would reveal that the power given to the District Collector

            and to the Commissioner under these sections are consequential and

            cannot be separated inasmuch as one section leads to another, which

            finally culminates in the passing of declaration under
Section 6
of the Act,

            1894.
(iii)     Further, a declaration under
section 6
of the Act, 1894 could be passed

            only after the report submitted under section 5-A has been considered by

            the appropriate government. It is respectfully contended that even though

            the order dated 22.03.1985 does not specifically mention Section 5-A, the

            same is implied in the said order.
(iv)      Under
section 5-A
of the Act, the objections are required to be considered

            by the Collector.
Section 3(c)
of the Act, 1894 defines Collector as under:
"3(c) The expression Collector means the Collector of a District, and
                includes a Dy. Commissioner and any Officer specially appointed by
                the appropriate Govt. to perform the functions of a Collector under this
                Act.”


3.3       It is contended that in the present case, apart from being specially

appointed by the appropriate Government to perform the functions of a
9
Collector, the Authority who has considered the objections u/s 5-A is the

Collector of a District. The definition of the Collector is an inclusive one

and means the Collector of the District and includes Dy. Commissioner

as well. Further the State Government vide its circular dated 06.03.1987

conferred power to the Dy. Collector for exercising functions of the

Collector for acquisition of land in their areas.
3.4 It is further contended that
Article 166
of the Constitution of India

provides that all executive action of the Government of a State shall be

expressed to be taken in the name of the Governor and orders and other

instruments made and executed in the name of the Governor shall be

authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to be made

by the Governor, and the validity of an order on instruction which is so

authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not

an order or instrument made or executed by the Governor.
3.5 It is submitted that therefore the learned Single Judge as well as

the Division Bench of the High Court have materially erred in quashing

and setting aside the entire acquisition proceedings on the ground that

there was no delegation of power by the State Government with regard

to
Section 5-A
of the Act, 1894 to the Collector.
It is further submitted that even the learned Single Judge

specifically observed and held that except for technical irregularity, the

award cannot be declared invalid.
3.6 As regards the quashing and setting aside Scheme No. 97 on the

ground that IDA failed to take substantial steps to implement the scheme
10
within three years from the date of publication as per
section 54
of the

Adhiniyam, it is submitted that
section 54
of the Adhiniyam provides that

“if the Town and Country Development Authority fails to commence

implementation of the Town Development Scheme within a period of

three years from the date of notification of the final scheme under
section 50
, it shall, on the expiration of the said period of three years,

lapse.”
3.7 It is submitted that in the present case the substantial steps were

taken within three years. That before the expiration of three years when

the negotiations failed, the State Government immediately issued the

notification under
Section 4
of the Act, 1894.
3.8 It is next submitted that in the present case declaration of intention

to prepare a town development scheme under section 50(1) was issued

on 13.03.1981; publication of the said declaration under Section 50(2)

was carried out on 10.07.1981; final development scheme was published

in the Official Gazette under section 50(7) of the Adhiniyam on

08.06.1984; the State Government was requested to acquire the land on
4.06.1987, i.e., within three years of the final publication. It is submitted

that substantial steps taken within these three years are as under:
Mutual Negotiation between the Petitioner
                 Authority and the landowners’ u/s 56 of the
                 Adhiniyam
      23.10.1984 Final sanction scheme was prepared and sent
                 to the Joint Director, Town and Country
                 Planning     and   Commissioner    Municipal
11
Corporation for being made available to the
                   general public
      01.03.1986   Patwari of the Petitioner Authority directed to
                   produce the revenue records
      24.11.1986   Petitioner Authority requested the Collector to
                   send the Patwari for preparation of the proposal
                   of the land acquisition
      06.09.1986   State of MP issued circular to all concerned to
                   proceed with whatever is required to be
                   followed in cases relating to land acquisition
      16.12.1986   Petitioner Authority sought NoC from the Town
                   and Country Planning Department, of proposed
                   acquisition of the land in question
      31.01.1987   Reminders sent to the Town & Country Planning
      24.02.1987   Department for giving NoC.
15.04.1987   NoC obtained by the Town & Country Planning
                   Department
      04.06.1987   Since Negotiation failed, State Govt. was
                   requested by the Petitioner to acquire the land
      24.07.1987   Notification issued
u/s 4
of the L.A. Act


3.9   It is submitted that in view of the timeline set out above, the

learned Single Judge has completely erred in declaring the scheme as

having lapsed on the ground of non-implementation of the scheme under
section 54
of the Adhiniyam. It is submitted that the words “commence

implementation” occurring in
Section 54
do not mean completion of

implementation of the scheme. It is submitted that the only reasonable

interpretation of
Section 54
would be that some steps should be taken

by the Authority for implementation of the scheme and must have an

intention to implement the scheme.
In support of his above submission, reliance is placed on the

decision of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in the case of
Sanjay
12
Gandhi Grih Nirman Sahakari Sanstha Maryadit v. State of M.P. &

Others
, reported in AIR 1991 MP 72. It is submitted that a special

leave petition against
the said decision
has been dismissed by this

Court. It is submitted that in the aforesaid decision, it was held as under:
“
S. 54
does not appear to apply when substantial steps have been taken
      within three years to implement the scheme. The Court had also taken into
      consideration
S. 56
,
57
and
58
of the Adhiniyam and has taken a view that the
      words 'fails to implement' would means failure to take any substantial steps
      for the implementation of the scheme and if no such step is taken within three
      years the scheme will lapse…”



      It is submitted that therefore the learned Single Judge as well as

Division Bench of the High Court have materially erred in declaring the

scheme as having lapsed on the ground of non-implementation of the

scheme under
Section 54
of the Adhiniyam.
3.10 Without prejudice to the above, it is further submitted that
Section

54
of the Adhiniyam is clear in its terms that in case the Development

Authority failed to commence implementation of the scheme (which

means taking substantial steps) within the period of three years from the

date of notification, the scheme shall lapse but the acquisition shall not.
It is averred that once the land is acquired, it vests in the Government

and once it is vested in the Government, it cannot be transferred back

and it becomes the property of the Government.
3.11. As regards the finding recorded by the learned Single Judge on

hostile discrimination and quashing and setting aside the entire
13
acquisition proceedings on the ground that a huge and big chunk of land,

out of the total land, has been released and therefore to continue with

the acquisition with respect to rest of the land is discriminatory and

violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India, it is submitted that the

learned Single Judge as well as the Division Bench have not properly

appreciated the grounds on which the lands were released. That the

learned Single Judge as well as the Division Bench have materially erred

in not properly appreciating the fact that the release of the land would

depend on the requirement. It is submitted that it is settled law that

where the land is acquired for establishing a residential, commercial, or

industrial area and the application for release of the land reveals that the

land has been used for the same purpose, the Government may release

the land, if its existence does not by any means hinder development as

per the notification for acquisition. Reliance is placed on the decisions of

this Court in the cases of Rajasthan State Industrial Development and

Investment Corporation v. Subhash Sindhi Cooperative Housing

Society, Jaipur, (2013) 5 SCC 427;
Union of India v. Bal Ram Singh
,

1992 Supp (2) SCC 136;
Sube Singh v. State of Haryana
, (2001) 7

SCC 545;
Jagdish Chand v. State of Haryana
, (2005) 10 SCC 162;

and
Dharam Pal v. State of Haryana
, (2009) 2 SCC 397.
3.12 It is next contended that in the present case, the lands were

acquired for residential, park and industrial purposes. That hence the
14
release of land has not prejudiced or affected the integrity of the scheme.

That the end result of the release of some land was that the total area of

the scheme has become lesser to that extent but the integrity of the

scheme remains the same.
3.13 It is submitted that as such in the present case the IDA filed a

clarification giving reasons regarding land released out of Scheme No.
97. That however the learned Single Judge failed to appreciate those

reasons.
3.14 It is further submitted that the following were the reasons to release

some of the land proposed to be acquired:
a.      111.156 hectors of land were released in favour of Housing
     Cooperative Societies - As stated above that this release has no impact on the
     implementation of the scheme because the object of the said housing societies
     and of the scheme was the same. It may further be pointed out that the
     Authority/ State Govt. had released the land only of those societies who had
     either developed or started development of colony or had acquired the title to
     the land or had obtained exemption
u/s 20
of the Urban Land (Ceiling &
     Regulation) Act, 1976 before publication of final scheme
u/s 50 (7)
of the
     Adhiniyam. It may be submitted that the Respondents have not fulfill any of
     these conditions, therefore, it cannot be said that they are similarly situated with
     the other Housing Societies.
In case of R-1/ Burhani Nagar Society, admittedly the exemption
u/s 20
of the Urban Land Ceiling Act was granted to the Burhani Nagar on
      30.09.1988 i.e., much after the final declaration of the scheme
u/s 50 (7)
of
      the Adhiniyam and also after the publication of notification
u/s 4
of the Act. It is
      also pertinent to mention that the said Burhani Nagar Society had purchased
      the land by a registered sale deed on 03.10.1988 i.e., after publication of
      notification
u/s 4
of the Act.
b.    104.524 hectors of land released from the scheme – As stated above, the
      land use of the said land was either agricultural or regional park.

c.    Release of land having area 46.116 hectors - Aforesaid land was released by
      the Land Acquisition Officer while considering the objections
u/s 5-A
of the
      Act because of certain reasons like existing houses, religious places, different
      land use etc.,
15
3.15 It is further submitted by Shri Balbir Singh, learned ASG that in the

present case some of the lands have been acquired and in fact used for

the park.
3.16 Making above submissions, it is prayed that the present appeals

be allowed and the impugned common judgment and order passed by

the Division Bench dismissing the writ appeals and the common

judgment and order passed by the learned Single Judge, quashing and

setting aside the entire acquisition proceedings under the
Land

Acquisition Act
as well as quashing and setting aside Scheme No. 97

under
section 54
of the Adhiniyam, be quashed and set aside.           It is

submitted that if the impugned judgment and order passed by the High

Court is not interfered with, the same shall affect the development of the

area under the scheme, which may be against public interest.                    :
:
4.    All these appeals are vehemently opposed by Shri Basava Prabhu

S. Patil, Shri Subash Samvatsar, Shri N.K. Mody, learned Senior

Advocates, Shri Puneet Jain and Shri Mayank Kshirsagar, learned

counsel appearing on behalf of the respective original writ petitioners.

4.1   Shri Punit Jain, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

respective contesting respondents in Civil Appeal No.5099/2022 @ SLP

No. 34880/2014, Civil Appeal No. 5101/2022 @ SLP No. 34907/2014,

Civil Appeal No. 5103/2022 @ SLP No. 34879/2014 and Civil Appeal No.

5077/2022 @ SLP 34855/2014 has vehemently submitted that in the

facts and circumstances of the case neither the learned Single Judge
16
nor the Division Bench of the High Court has committed any error in

quashing and setting aside the scheme(s) and acquisition proceedings

with respect to the lands in question.
4.2   It is submitted by Shri Punit Jain, learned counsel appearing on

behalf of the original writ petitioners that the learned Single Judge as

well as the Division Bench of the High Court has struck down the

scheme as well as the acquisition, inter alia, on the following grounds: -
(i) That the scheme has lapsed in view of
section 54
of the M.P.

       Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh Adhiniyam.
(ii) That a substantial portion of the lands forming part of the two

      schemes 97(2) and 97(4) had been released and continuing the

      scheme thereafter and acquiring the lands of the other landowners

      (i.e., the respondents herein) is an act of hostile discrimination

        being in violation of
Article 14.
(iii) That there was no delegation of the power of the State

      Government under section 5A to the Commissioner and hence, the

      decision for acquisition of land under section 5A is not by a proper

      authority. Therefore, the acquisition is vitiated.
4.3   It is contended that in the present case the date of publication of

final scheme under
section 50(7)
is 08.06.1984. No steps were taken by

the IDA to implement the scheme for approximately three years, except

engaging in so called negotiations with the original land owners to

acquire the land by mutual consent. The notification under
Section 4
of

the Land Acquisition Act (LA Act) was issued on 24.07.1987 and the
17
declaration under
Section 6
of the LA Act was made on 03.10.1988. It is

submitted that the award came to be declared under
Section 11
of the

LA Act on 06.03.1991. That therefore, when the final scheme No. 97 was

published on 08.06.1984, the IDA was expected to “implement” the

scheme within the period of three years from the said date.
4.4 It is further contended that the word “implement” appearing in
section 54
of the Adhiniyam must be understood narrowly and must

therefore, mean full and complete implementation. It is submitted that in

any case, the word “implement” ought to be understood to mean

“substantial implementation.”
4.5 It is submitted that in the present case, the learned Single Judge

did not accept the narrow view and proceeded to test the actions of the

IDA on the “substantial implementation” principle. It is submitted that the

High Court has found that sending a request for acquisition of land, four

days before the deadline did not satisfy the “substantial implementation”

test.
4.6 It is next submitted that the word “implement” appearing in
Section

54
ought to be interpreted purposively looking at the purpose of the said

section along with the other provisions of the Adhiniyam.
4.7 It is further contended with regard to
Section 54
on non-

implementation of the scheme as under: -
(a)     That
Section 54
must be understood as the time-cap for the restriction

    provided in
section 53
. It is submitted that,
section 53
places a restriction on

    land owners whose lands have been notified to be part of a Town Development

    scheme to carry out development of this land. That such restriction cannot be
18
for an unlimited duration and hence
section 54
gives the maximum period of

three years up to which such restrictions can continue.
(b)     While the restrictions under
section 53
are in place, substantial steps

are required to be taken for “acquisition” of land either by agreement or under

the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
.
(c)        The manner of acquisition has been provided under
Section 56
of the

Act and Rule 19 of the then existing M.P. Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh Niyam,

1975, prescribes the steps to be taken in the process of acquisition.
Section 56
provides two modes of acquisition: -
(i)       Proceed to acquire by agreement, and

 (ii)      On failure to acquire by agreement, proceed to acquire under the
Land

 Acquisition Act
.
Rule 19 of the 1975 Rules, read with
section 56
, provide as under: -
“19. Acquisition of land - (1) For the purpose of land acquisition under
section 56
of the Act, the land shall be in the Town and Country
      Development Authority subject to the following terms and conditions
      namely:-
(i)     Within three years from the date of publication of the Town
                   Development Scheme under
Section 50
, the town and
                   country development authority shall proceed to acquire the
                   land required for the implementation of the scheme.
(ii)    Where such acquisition is by agreement, the land shall vest
                   in the Town and Country Development Authority on terms
                   and conditions arrived at through such agreement.
(iii)   On failure of agreement the Town and Country
                   Development Authority shall request the state government
                   to acquire such land under the provisions of the
Land
                   Acquisition Act, 1894
(1 of 1894) on payment of
                   compensation awarded under that Act.
(iv)    Declaration shall be published under
section 6
of the Land
                   Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894)
19
(v)    After such declaration the collector shall proceed to take
                   order for the acquisition of the land under the said Act, and
                   the provisions of the Act shall apply so far as may be, apply
                   to the acquisition of the said land with the modification that
                   the market value of the said land shall be the determining
                   factor.”


      Rule 19(1)(i) contains a general statement enabling the authority to

"proceed to acquire" the land required for implementation of the scheme.
This, can be done in two ways - (1) acquisition by agreement under

19(1)(ii), and on failure to acquire by agreement, (2) by compulsory

acquisition the steps necessary for which are provided under 19(1)(iii)(iv)

and (v). Thus, for compulsory acquisition there should be :-
(1) A request by the Town and Country Development Authority for
      compulsory acquisition,
      (2) A declaration under
section 6
of the Land Acquisition Act, and

      (3) A request by the Collector to the appropriate government for an
      order for acquisition of land under
section 7
of the Land Acquisition Act,
      1894.
4.7   It is submitted that thus, while the restrictions under
section 53
are

in place, the Authority is expected to “implement” the scheme. During the

period, the authority must act in a manner and reach the stage where the

position becomes “irreversible” or substantially irreversible” so far as the

land owner is concerned, i.e.,
(i)   The land of the land owner is either "acquired" by agreement, in which
            case he would get the agreed compensation for his land; or
20
(ii)    Substantial steps are taken for compulsory acquisition of the land
              under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 such that the position reaches the
              stage of the order under section 7 of the said Act; or
(iii)   Passing of an award under
section 11
or takeover of possession under
section 16
resulting in complete vesting is however not the requirement
              of "implementation" for the purposes of
section 54
read in conjunction
              with
section 56
read and rule 19.
4.8   It is further submitted that as per
Section 55
, the land for a town

development scheme would be land needed for public purpose under

the
Land Acquisition Act
. That once a declaration under
section 6
is

issued under
section 6(3)
of the LA Act, the declaration becomes

conclusive evidence that the land is needed for public purpose. It is

submitted that the statutory fiction under
section 55
also continues for a

period of three years, for, if the scheme lapsed under
section 54
, the

statutory fiction under
section 55
also comes to an end. That therefore,

before the period lapses, a declaration under
section 6(3)
takes over and

necessity of a statutory fiction under
section 55
thereafter is no longer

necessary.
4.9   It is averred that in a case where a notification under
section 4
is

issued after expiry of 3 years from the date of final scheme under
section

50(7)
, the statutory fiction under
section 55
would come to an end and

acquisition for a lapsed scheme would not be for a public purpose. It is

submitted that acquisition of land for a "public purpose" is a sine-qua-

non, absent which no acquisition would be valid.
21
4.10 It is next submitted that taking steps for acquisition by agreement

cannot be said to amount to “taking steps” to implement the scheme

within a period of three years. That as rightly observed by the learned

Single Judge, even assuming that IDA was making efforts to acquire the

lands through private negotiations with the land owners, this effort of the

IDA would not create any bar against getting the scheme implemented

under the Adhiniyam. That as rightly observed by the learned Single

Judge, both the steps could have been taken by the IDA simultaneously.

Therefore, the learned Single Judge as well as the Division Bench of the

High Court have rightly held that the scheme in question had lapsed in

view of
Section 54
of the Adhiniyam as the scheme was not

implemented within a period of three years.
4.11 As regards the competence of the Collector to act as “appropriate

government” for the purposes of
section 5A
and
6
of the LA Act, 1894, it

is submitted that in the present case after the issuance of the notification

under
section 4
, objections under section 5A were invited which were

collated by the Deputy Collector and Land Acquisition Officer who filed

his report before the Collector. The collector proceeded to decide the

objections under
section 5A
of the Act. That thereafter, the collector

proceeded to issue a declaration under
section 6
of the Act. It is

submitted that in the present case, the Hon’ble Minister did not delegate
22
his powers under
section 5A
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 to the

Collector, who was empowered to act under
sections 4
,
5
,
6
and
17
of

the Act.
4.12 It is contended that the power to take a decision under section 5A

is the power of the “appropriate government”, which in view of
section

3(ee)
would mean the State Government in the facts of the present case.

That in the present case, the powers of the “appropriate government”

under section 5A have not been delegated to any authority by the order

dated 22.03.1985.
4.13 It is next submitted that powers under
section 6
have to be

exercised “under the signature of a Secretary to such government or of

some officer duly authorized to certify its orders”. That the said powers

have been conferred by the Government order dated 22.03.1985 upon

the “Divisional Commissioner.” The declarations under
section 6
have

been issued by and under the signatures of the Collector as Deputy

Secretary. Therefore, the High Court is fully justified in its conclusion that

the Collector, who had exercised powers of the State Government under

section 5A, did not have the said powers.
4.14 It is further submitted that even otherwise, as rightly observed and

held by the High Court, there was a hostile discrimination on the part of

the State Government and the IDA. That in the present case, out of
23
531.428 hectares of land identified and included for schemes at the time

of final notification of the scheme under
section 50(7)
, 261.796 hectares

of land has already been released by the IDA/State of Madhya Pradesh.

That once the large portions of the land have been released, the

schemes as originally envisaged cannot be implemented. Since the

scheme and the acquisition notification have been quashed, the

respondents did not avail of the remedy of increase in compensation by

filing a reference under
section 18
of the Act. That in case, this Court

upholds the scheme and the acquisition, the respondents may be given

liberty to file reference, if so advised, for increase in compensation

determined by the LAO.
4.15 It is further submitted that even otherwise the appeals filed by the

IDA have since been rendered infructuous in view of the amendment in
Section 50
of the Adhiniyam by 2019 Amendment Act.           That as per

amended
section 50(1)(b)
of the Act, where a town development scheme

has been notified under the repealed provisions of the Act, but

development has either not started or not been taken up for any reason,

the same shall lapse. It is submitted that in the present case, insofar as

others schemes are concerned, the same have been declared to have

lapsed in view of amended
section 50(i)(b)
. It is submitted that since the

scheme in question was quashed by the High Court in year 1988 which
24
order was confirmed by the Division Bench in the year 2014, the scheme

could not be acted upon. That in the present case, neither the

possession of the lands has been taken by the authority (as there was

stay orders by the High Court) nor compensation for the schemes has

been deposited. It is submitted that admittedly out of 531.428 hectares,

261.796 hectares of land out of approved scheme layout has been

released and no land has been acquired through mutual negotiations

with the land owners. Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the

case, learned Single Judge as well as the Division Bench of the High

Court have rightly quashed the scheme, treated it as having been lapsed

under
Section 54
of the Adhiniyam and have rightly quashed the

acquisition proceedings under the
LA Act
.
4.16 Other learned senior counsel/counsel appearing on behalf of the

original writ petitioners have virtually made the same submissions as

made by Shri Punit Jain and therefore, the same are not repeated. All

the learned counsel appearing for the original writ petitioners have

supported the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court

on the lapse of the scheme as well as quashing and setting aside the

acquisition proceedings.
5.   We have heard learned counsel for the respective parties at

     length.
25
By the impugned common judgment and order, the High Court has

quashed Scheme No. 97 framed by the appellant – Indore Development

Authority framed in exercise of the powers conferred under
Section 50
of

the Madhya Pradesh Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh Adhiniyam, 1973, as

well as the entire acquisition proceedings under the
Land Acquisition

Act, 1894
with respect to the lands covered under Scheme No. 97. From

the judgment and order passed by the learned Single Judge, confirmed

by the Division Bench, it appears that the High Court has set aside the

scheme as well as the acquisition proceedings, inter alia, on the

following grounds:
(i)       That the scheme has lapsed in view of
section 54
of the M.P. Nagar Tatha

               Gram Nivesh Adhiniyam;
(ii)      That a substantial portion of the lands forming part of the two schemes

               97(2) and 97(4) had been released and continuing the scheme thereafter

               and selectively acquiring the lands of the other landonwers (i.e., the

               respondents herein) is an act of hostile discrimination being in violation of

               Article 14; and
(iii)   There was no delegation of the power of the State Government under

               Section 5-A to the Commissioner and hence, the decision for acquisition

               of the land under Section 5A is not by a proper authority. Acquisition is

               thus vitiated.
6.          As regards the finding recorded by the High Court that Scheme

No. 97 has lapsed in view of
section 54
of the Adhiniyam and in order to

consider whether the High Court is justified in quashing the entire
26
scheme on the ground that the same has lapsed under
section 54
of the

Adhiniyam, the relevant provisions of the Adhiniyam are required to be

referred to, which are as under:
“50. Preparation of Town Development Schemes. - (1) The Town and
    Country Development Authority may, at any time, declare its intention to
    prepare a town development scheme.
(2) Not later than thirty days from the date of such declaration of intention
    to make a scheme, the Town and Country Development Authority shall
    publish the declaration in the Gazette and in such other manner as may be
    prescribed.
(3) Not later than two years from the date of publication of the declaration
    under sub-section (2) the Town and Country Development Authority shall
    prepare a town development scheme in draft form and publish it in such
    form and manner as may be prescribed together with a notice inviting
    objections and suggestions from any person with respect to the said draft
    development scheme before such date as may be specified therein, such
    date being not earlier than thirty days from the date of publication of such
    notice.
(4) The Town and Country Development Authority shall consider all the
    objections and suggestions as may be received within the period specified
    in the notice under sub-section (3) and shall, after giving a reasonable
    opportunity to such persons affected thereby as are desirous of being
    heard, or after considering the report of the committee constituted under
    sub-section (5) approve the draft scheme as published or make such
    modifications therein as it may deed fit.
(5) Where the town development scheme relates to reconstitution of plots,
    the Town and Country Development Authority shall, notwithstanding
    anything contained in sub-section (4), constitute a committee consisting of
    the Chief Executive Officer of the said authority and two other members of
    whom one shall be representative of the Madhya Pradesh Housing Board
    and the other shall be an officer of the Public Works Department not below
    the rank of an Executive Engineer nominated by the Chief Engineer,
    Public Works Department for the purpose of hearing objections and
    suggestions received under sub-section (3).
(6) The committee constituted under sub-section (5) shall consider the
    objections and suggestions and give hearing to such persons as are
    desirous of being heard and shall submit its report to the Town and
    Country Development Authority within such time as it may fix along with
    proposals to,-
27
(i) define and demarcate the areas allotted to or reserved for public
    purpose;
(ii) demarcate the reconstituted plots;
(iii) evaluate the value of the original and the reconstituted plots;
(iv) determine whether the areas reserved for public purpose are
    wholly or partially beneficial to the residents within the area of the
    scheme;
(v) estimate and apportion the compensation to or contribution from
    the beneficiaries of the scheme on account of the reconstitution of the
    plot and reservation of portions for public purpose;
(vi) evaluate the increment in value of each reconstituted plot and
    assess the development contribution leviable on the plot holder :
Provided that the contribution shall not exceed half the accrued
    increment in value;
(vii) evaluate the reduction in value of any reconstituted plot and
    assess the compensation payable therefor.
(7) Immediately after the town development scheme is approved under
sub-section (4) with or without modifications the Town and Country
Development Authority shall publish in the Gazette and in such other
manner as may be prescribed a final town development scheme and
specify the date on which it shall come into operation.
xxx                   xxx                   xxx
54. Lapse of scheme - If the Town and Country Development Authority
fails to commence implementation of the town development scheme within
a period of two years or complete its implementation within a period of five
years from the date of notification of the final scheme under
Section 50
, it
shall, on expiration of the said period of two years or five years, as the
case may be, lapse :
Provided that, if a dispute between the authority and parties, if any,
aggrieved by such scheme, is brought before a Court or Tribunal of
competent jurisdiction, for consideration, the period for which such dispute
pending before such Court or Tribunal shall not be reckoned for
determination of the lapse of the scheme.]

               xxx                   xxx            xxx
56. Acquisition of land for Town and Country Development Authority. - The
Town and Country Development Authority may at any time after the date of
publication of the final town development scheme under
Section 50
but not
later than three years therefrom, proceed to acquire by agreement the
land required for the implementation of the scheme and, on its failure so to
acquire, the State Government may, at the request of the Town and
Country Development Authority, proceed to acquire such land under the
28
provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
(No. 1 of 1894) and on the
     payment of compensation awarded under that Act and any other charges
     incurred by the State Government in connection with the acquisition, the
     land shall vest in the Town and Country Development Authority subject to
     such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.”




      Thus, as per
Section 54
of the Adhiniyam, if the Town and Country

Development Authority fails to commence implementation of the Town

Development Scheme within the period stipulated in
section 54
of the

Adhiniyam, the Scheme shall lapse. Therefore, the words “commence

implementation” are vital and important words which are required to be

considered and interpreted.
7.    It is the case on behalf of the Development Authority that the

following steps were taken for implementation of Scheme No. 97 within

three years, i.e., 8.6.1984, which are as under:
Date                 Particulars
     13.03.1981           Declaration of intention to prepare a town
                          development scheme as per section 50(1)
     10.07.1981           Publication of the declaration u/s 50(2)
     08.06.1984           Publication of the final development
                          scheme in the official gazette u/s 50(7)
                          Mutual Negotiation between the Petitioner
                          Authority and the landowners’ u/s 56 of the
                          Adhiniyam
     23.10.1984           Final sanction scheme was prepared and
                          sent to the Joint Director, Town and
                          Country Planning and Commissioner
                          Municipal Corporation for being made
                          available to the general public
     01.03.1986           Patwari of the Petitioner Authority directed
                          to get the revenue records
29
24.11.1986         Petitioner Authority requested the Collector
                       to send the Patwari for preparation of the
                       proposal of the land acquisition
    06.09.1986         State of MP issued circular to all concerned
                       to proceed which is required to be followed
                       in cases relating to land acquisition
    16.12.1986         Petitioner Authority sought NOC from the
                       Town and Country Planning Department of
                       proposed acquisition of the land in question
    31.01.1987         Reminders sent to the Town & Country
    &                  Planning Department for giving NOC
    24.02.1987
    15.04.1987         NOC obtained by the Town & Country
                       Planning Department
    04.06.1987         Since negotiation failed, State Govt. was
                       requested by the petitioner to acquire the
                       land
    24.07.1987         Notification issued u/s 4 of the L.A. Act
At this stage, it is required to be noted that as per
section 56
of the

Adhiniyam, the Development Authority may at any time after the date of

publication of the final town development scheme under
section 50
, but

not later than three years therefrom, proceed to acquire by agreement

the land required for the implementation of the scheme and, on its failure

so to acquire, the State Government may, at the request of the

Development Authority, proceed to acquire such land under the

provisions of the Act, 1894. Thus, under
section 56
of the Adhiniyam,

within three years the Development Authority was required to proceed to

acquire by agreement the land required for the implementation of the

scheme and only thereafter and on its failure so to acquire, the State
30
Government may, at the request of the Development Authority, proceed

to acquire such land.
8.   It is the case on behalf of the Development Authority that in the

present case since negotiations failed and the Development Authority

failed to acquire the land by agreement, the Development Authority

requested the State Government on 4.06.1987 to acquire the land, which

request was made within a period of three years from the date of

finalization of the scheme. Therefore, it is the case on behalf of the

Development Authority that the scheme shall not have lapsed under
section 54
of the Adhiniyam. It is the case on behalf of the Development

Authority that taking various steps between 8.06.1984 and 4.06.1987 can

be said to be in furtherance of, or commencing implementation of the

scheme.
However, on the other hand and as per the High Court, actual

implementation of the scheme is a must and that there were no

substantial steps to implement the scheme within three years. That to

make the request four days before the completion of three years would

not be sufficient and therefore the scheme has lapsed under
section 54
of the Adhiniyam. As observed hereinabove, the words used in
Section

54
of the Adhiniyam are “fails to commence implementation”. That does

not mean that there must be implementation of the scheme within the
31
time stipulated under
section 54
of the Adhiniyam.               There is a clear

distinction between the words “implementation” of the scheme and “to

commence implementation”.
9.    An identical question came to be considered by the Madhya

Pradesh High Court in the case of
Sanjai Gandhi Grah Nirman Sahkari

Sanstha Maryadit v. State of M.P. and others
, reported in 1990 SCC

OnLine MP 115 : AIR 1991 MP 72.                   While interpreting the words

“implementation of the scheme” and the word “implementation” occurring

in
section 54
of the Adhiniyam, it was observed and held that the word

“implementation” occurring in
section 54
of the Adhiniyam cannot be

construed to mean that even after substantial steps have been taken by

the authority towards the implementation of the scheme, the scheme

shall lapse after the expiry of three years because of its non-completion

within that period. While observing and holding so, in paragraphs 16 to

20, it was observed as under:
“16. It has next been contended by learned counsel for the petitioners that
     in accordance with the provisions contained in
S. 54
of the Adhiniyam the
     scheme has lapsed because the Indore Development Authority has failed
     to implement the scheme within a period of three years from the date of
     the publication of the scheme under
S. 50
of the Adhiniyam. The learned
     counsel for all the petitioners have laid much emphasis on the fact that the
     word ‘implementation’ would clearly mean fulfilment, performance,
     accomplish, complete, carry out and as such from the dictionary meanings
     in the Webster Dictionary, Chambers Dictionary, Oxford Dictionary or any
     other dictionary, there can only be one meaning to the word
     ‘implementation’ that the scheme has to be completed or carried out in all
     respects within the prescribed period of three years and if the Indore
     Development Authority fails to implement the scheme within that period
     the scheme shall lapse in view of the statutory provision of
S. 54
.
32
17. On the other hand it has been argued that the word ‘implementation’
has to be construed in the context of the Adhiniyam itself. The whole
scheme of the Adhiniyam in respect of formulation of the scheme and the
implementation of the scheme has to be taken into consideration before
holding that the implementation would only mean the completion.
18. For properly appreciating the respective arguments of the parties let us
read the different provisions contained in the Adhiniyam in respect of the
preparation and implementation of the scheme.
Section 50
provides for
the preparation, of a town development scheme and different stages have
been provided for the preparation of the scheme and sub-section (7) of
S.
50
of the Adhiniyam provides that as soon as the town development
scheme is approved under sub-section (4) with or without modifications
the Town and Country Development Authority shall publish in the gazette
and in such other manner as may be prescribed a final town development
scheme and specify the date on which it shall come into operation. After
the final publication of the scheme a power of revision has been provided
in
S. 51
, wherein the Director of Town and Country Planning has been
given a power, on an application filed by any of the aggrieved person or
suo motu, to examine the record of the scheme and pass any such order
modifying the scheme as he may deem fit after perusing the record and
during that time he may suspend the execution of the scheme. This power
of the Director can be exercised by him within two years from the date of
the publication of the final, scheme. Then again under
S. 52
of the
Adhiniyam the State Government has a power to give directions in respect
of modification of a scheme, revoking the scheme or for framing a fresh
scheme. Then
S. 54
of the Adhiniyam provides for the lapse of a scheme if
it is not implemented within a period of three years.
Section 56
of the Adhiniyam provides that after the date of publication of
the final scheme under
S. 50
the Authority may proceed to acquire the
land required for the implementation of the scheme within a period of three
years by agreement and if there is a failure in acquiring the land by
agreement then request for the acquisition of the land may be made to the
authority. Then
S. 57
provides for the development which clearly says that
when the land has vested in the Authority under
S. 56
of the Act in
accordance with the provisions of the Town Development Scheme, the
authority shall take necessary steps to develop the land. Thereafter also
the State Government or the Director has a supervisory power to ensure
that the development is in accordance with the scheme and may also
issue directions to the authority which are binding on the authority. As such
the aforesaid provisions made in the Adhiniyam have to be taken into
consideration before interpreting the word ‘implementation.’

After a scheme is published under
S. 50(7)
of the Adhiniyam, the Director
has an authority to revise the final scheme within a period of two years
and then under
S. 56
of the Adhiniyam the Authority has been given power
to initiate negotiations for acquisition a within a period of 3 years, failing
which the land acquisition proceedings may be initiated and
S. 57
33
postulates the commencement of the development work after the land is
acquired and is vested in the authority. As such the word ‘implementation’
can never be construed to mean that the scheme should be fulfilled or
carried out within a period of three years. Reading
S. 54
of the Adhiniyam
along with Ss. 56 and 57 of the Adhiniyam the irresistable conclusion is
that the intention of the legislature was that if a scheme is lying idle after
its final publication for a period of 3 years, then it will lapse. But if steps
have been taken by the authorities towards the implementation of the
scheme then, the word ‘implementation’ shall not be construed to mean
that the period of three years is the period prescribed for the completion of
the scheme.
19. In the instant case the scheme is for the preparation of a ring road and
developing different facilities and civic conveniences around the ring road.
A scheme for a much larger construction and development may be
prepared which may even take ten years to complete. If we interpret the
word ‘implementation’ in its narrow sense, a big scheme can never be
taken in hand by any development authority because it may not be
possible to complete that scheme within 3 years. Therefore, that only
reasonable interpretation in view of the different provisions of the
Adhiniyam, can be that if the development authority takes steps towards
the implementation of the scheme and does not sit just idle for a period of
three years, then the scheme shall not lapse, but if after the publication of
the scheme nothing is done on the part of the authority, towards the
implementation of the scheme then that scheme shall lapse.
20. A Division Bench of this Court in the case of
Laxmichand v. The Indore
Development Authority, Indore (M.P. No.
390 of 1980 decided on 14-12-
81) in which a similar argument was advanced that after the expiry of three
years if the scheme is not implemented it lapsed, has held that
S. 54
does
not appear to apply when substanital steps have been taken within three
years to implement the scheme. The Court had also taken into
consideration Ss. 56, 57 and 58 of the Adhiniyam and has taken a view
that the words ‘fails to implement’ would mean failure to take any
substantial steps for the implementation of the scheme and if no such step
is taken within three years the scheme will lapse. If substantial steps have
been taken within three years though the scheme is not fully implemented
within that period the scheme would not lapse and proceedings for
acquisition of land under the scheme is a substantial step towards its
implementation. We are in respectful agreement with the aforesaid view
taken by a Division Bench of this Court and hold that the word ‘implement’
occurring in
S. 54
of the Adhiniyam cannot be construed to mean that
even if a substantial step has been taken by the authority towards the
implementation of the scheme then also the scheme shall lapse after the
expiry of three years because of its non-completion within that period.”
34
We are in complete agreement with the view taken by the Madhya

Pradesh in the aforesaid case.
10.   At this stage, Rule 19 of the M.P. Nagar Tatha Gran Nivesh Niyam,

1975 r/w
Section 56
of the Adhiniyam are required to be referred to. As

per
section 56
of the Adhiniyam r/w Rule 19 and for the purposes of land

acquisition under
section 56
of the Adhiniyam, within three years from

the date of publication of the final town development scheme under
section 50
, the Town and Country Development Authority shall proceed

to acquire the land required for the implementation of the scheme. The

words used are “ proceed to acquire” and not “actual acquisition”. The

intention of the legislature thus seems to be very clear and

unambiguous. Therefore, when the Statute provides certain things to be

done within the stipulated time mentioned in the Act, the Authority is to

be given such time, more particularly while dealing with the scheme

which has been framed for the entire area and for the public purpose. In

the present case, Scheme No. 97 has been framed and the lands have

been acquired for residential, park and industrial purposes. Any other

meaning may frustrate the purpose of framing of the scheme for

residential, part and industrial purposes.
11.   In view of the above and when within three years various steps

were taken for implementation of the scheme including the steps to
35
acquire the land by negotiations and even thereafter on failure to acquire

the land by negotiations approaching the State Government to acquire

the land under the
Land Acquisition Act
, the High Court has erred in

declaring that the scheme has lapsed under
section 54
of the Adhiniyam.

The High Court has adopted too narrow a meaning while interpreting

and/or considering
section 54
of the Adhiniyam.
12.   So far as quashing and setting aside the entire acquisition

proceedings including
sections 4
&
6
notifications issued under the

provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act
with respect to the lands in

question on the ground that there was no proper delegation of power to

the Collector with regard to
Section 5A
of the Act, is concerned, it is

required to be noted that in the present case, the State Government vide

its letter dated 22.3.1985 delegated its power to the District Collector as

Deputy Secretary of the Revenue Department and to the Commissioner

of the division to act as Secretary of the Revenue Department and to

adjudicate matters related to land acquisition by exercising powers given

under
Sections 4
,
5
,
6
and
17
of the Act, 1894. Merely because Section

5A has not been mentioned in the said order, the entire acquisition

proceedings including notifications under
Sections 4
&
6
of the Act, 1894

and more particularly the declaration which was issued after considering

the report/objections under section 5A cannot be declared illegal.
36
12.1 Further, a declaration under
Section 6
of the Act, 1894 could be

issued only after the report submitted under Section 5A has been

considered by the appropriate government. Under
Section 5A
of the Act,

the objections are required to be considered by the Collector, i.e., the

Collector of a District including a Deputy Commissioner and any other

officer especially appointed by the appropriate government to perform

the functions of a Collector under the
Land Acquisition Act
.                 In the

present case, apart from being specially appointed by the appropriate

government to perform the functions of a Collector, the authority who has

considered the objections under Section 5A is the Collector of a District.

Even the State Government vide its circular dated 6.03.1987 conferred

power on the Deputy Collectors for exercising the functions of the

Collector for acquisition of the land in their respective areas.

12.2 An identical question came to be considered by the Madhya

Pradesh High Court in the case of
Adarsh Nagar Grih Nirman Sahkari

Sansthan Maryadit, Bhopal v. State of M.P. and Others
, reported in

2004 (1) M.P.L.J. 539 : 2003 SCC OnLine MP 329, in paragraphs 24 to

26, it was observed and held as under:
“24. The submission raised by the learned counsel that this notification (R-
6) is bad in law and based on the provisions of
sections 4
,
5-A
and
6
of the
    Act cannot be accepted. Division Bench of this Court in case
    of Gajancm v. State of M.P., AIR 2000 MP 2, repelled similar submission
    that such satisfaction was arrived at by Collector/Commissioner, not by
    State Government the acquisition cannot be challenged on the ground of
    satisfaction was not arrived at by ‘appropriate government’. The business
37
of the Government is required to be transacted in the name of Governor, it
is not possible or practicable that all such business was dealt with by him
or by Council of Ministers. In Gajanan (supra), it has been held:—

  “33. In State of M.P., Governor had made Rules of Business and Rules
  of allocation of Business and had also issued instructions thereunder.
Under Rule 4 of BAR he had put Revenue Department under the
  charge of a Minister. He had further allotted business of land acquisition
  to the Revenue Department. The Revenue Minister was authorised to
  delegate the power for disposal of any item of business to the Secretary
  of the Department under Rule 2-A of the Supplementary Instructions
  issued Rule 13 of Business Rules. Similarly, the government had
  declared in terms of Entry 49 of Business Allocation Rules that General
  Administrative Department would be entitled to designate ex-officio of
  ficers and in exercise whereof it had notified the Revenue
  Commissioners and Collectors as ex-officio Secretaries/Deputy
  Secretaries to take decisions in land acquisition matters on behalf of the
  Government. All this showed that power to deal with land acquisition
  subject flowed down to Secretary/Deputy Secretary of the Revenue
  Department        or     any      other     of     ficial    who      was
  declared/appointed/designated so ex-officio for the purpose and once
  such appointed ex-officio Secretary (Revenue Commissioner) was
  asked to dispose of land acquisition matters by the Minister-in-charge
  under Rule 2-A of supplementary instructions, he assumed the
  jurisdiction to deal with such matters and all his actions and decisions
  become that of the Government.”
25. The question of delegation of such power has been answered
in Gajanan (supra) as under:
“33A. Mr. Asudani's reliance on AIR 1957 Mad 48 to suggest that
  Minister's order to empower ex-officio Secretary (Revenue
  Commissioner) was invalid as it was not a Government order and that
  such power could not be delegated by him is wholly misconceived. It is
  true that a Minister's instruction or direction does not partake the
  character of a Government order unless formalised in conformity with
  the Rules of Business but in the present case no such Government
  order was required to be passed to vest the requisite power in the
  Revenue Commissioner. It is also fallacious to contend that the Minister
  could not delegate such power because Governor alone could do that.
  Once Governor himself had empowered the Minister to ask the
  Secretary to deal with and dispose of any item of business under the
  rules, it tantamounted to delegation of power by the Governor himself.
  We are also not impressed by the submission that such power could be
  delegated only to “a Secretary” perhaps implying Secretary of the
  Department. This overlooks a situation where a department may have
  more than one Secretary and the Minister could delegate the power to
  any of them.”
38
26. In the instant case Collector has exercised the power of appropriate
      Government and Deputy Collector has forwarded the objections and
      submitted the report to the Collector and Collector has exercised the
      power under
section 6
, I find no impropriety in the same.”




12.3 In the instant case also, when the Collector has exercised the

power of the appropriate government and a declaration under
section 6
of the Act has been issued after considering the report on the objections

under
Section 5A
of the Act, the High Court has seriously erred in

quashing and setting aside the entire acquisition proceedings on the

aforesaid ground.
13.    So far as the third ground on which the scheme and the entire

acquisition proceedings have been set aside, namely, the huge and big

chunk of land out of the total land sought to be acquired by the

Development Authority which has been released, is concerned, it is

required to be noted that out of the total land acquired, 68.11% of the

land has been developed and 31.89% has not been developed due to

interim orders passed by the Courts. Even otherwise, it is required to be

noted that out of the total land covered under the scheme, i.e., 332.616

hectares (277.853 hectares of land acquired through award plus 44.763

hectares of the land owned by the Authority), land has been released for

various purposes to the extent of 54.660 hectares and still the remaining

land would be to the extent of 267.956 hectares out of which the land
39
involved in the present appeals would be to the extent of 85.430

hectares. According to the Development Authority, 111.156 hectares of

the land covered under the scheme was released in favour of Housing

Cooperative Societies because the object of the housing societies and

the scheme was the same. According to the Development Authority, the

Authority/State Government had released the land only of those

societies who had either developed or started development of colonies

or had acquired the title to the land or had obtained exemption under
section 20
of the Urban Land (Ceiling & Regulation) Act, 1976 before

publication of the final scheme under
section 50(7)
of the Adhiniyam.

According to the Development Authority, 104.524 hectares of land

covered under the scheme which was released from the scheme, the

land use of the said land was either agricultural or regional park.

Release of the land having area of 46.116 hectares of land was in

response to objections under
section 5A
of the Act because of certain

reasons like existing houses, religious places, different land use etc.

13.1 Thus, from the above, it cannot be said that the release of the land

was arbitrary and/or with an object of undue favour to those persons

whose lands have been released.          As rightly submitted that even

otherwise such lands were to be acquired for residential, park and

industrial purposes, release of the land which according to the authority
40
was for valid reasons or valid grounds has not prejudiced or affected the

integrity of the scheme. The end result of the release of some land is

that the total area of the scheme is lesser to that extent but the integrity

of the scheme remains the same. At this stage, it is required to be noted

that some of the lands have already been used by the authority for the

purpose of a park which is used for the benefit of local people. Under the

circumstances, the third ground on which the scheme and the entire

acquisition proceedings have been quashed by the High Court does not

stand on its legs and the said finding is unsustainable.
14.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the present

appeals are allowed and the impugned common judgment and order

passed by the High Court dismissing the writ appeals and the common

judgment and order passed by the learned Single Judge declaring

Scheme No. 97 as having lapsed under
section 54
of the Adhiniyam and

quashing and setting aside the entire acquisition proceedings with

respect to the lands in question, are unsustainable and the same

deserve to be quashed and set aside and accordingly are hereby

quashed and set aside. However, in the facts and circumstances of the

case, there shall be no order as to costs.
……………………………….J.
                                             [M.R. SHAH]
41
NEW DELHI;        ………………………………J.
MARCH 03, 2023.   [B.V. NAGARATHNA]
42