[Cites
2
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Muruly M.S. vs The State Of Karnataka on 3 March, 2023
Author:
Krishna Murari
Bench:
Krishna Murari
NON-REPORTABLE

                    IN THE SUPREME Court OF INDIA
                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


           MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION NO. 231 OF 2023

                                    WITH

     I.A. NO. 32084 OF 2023 :- Application on behalf of the Petitioner for
                  clarification of the order dated 01.08.2022

                                      IN

        SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 12246 OF 2022



MURULY M. S.                                           … PETITIONER(S)


                                  VERSUS


THE STATE OF KARNATAKA & ORS.                          … RESPONDENT(S)


                                JUDGMENT
KRISHNA MURARI, J.
1.     The PIL petitioner has filed this Miscellaneous Application seeking

clarification of the order dated 01.08.2022 passed by this Court dismissing his

SLP(C) No. 12246 of 2022 filed against an order dated 06.06.2022 passed by
1
the Karnataka High Court, dismissing his WP (PIL)/10688/2022, wherein he

had, inter-alia, sought directions from the State of Karnataka to restrict

transfer/sale/gift/entrustment of wild and captive elephants within the State of

Karnataka to private individuals and in particular, to respondent no. 3, the

Radha Krishna Temple Elephant Welfare Trust.
2.    By means of the present Miscellaneous Application, the PIL petitioner

has made a prayer to clarify the order dated 01.08.2022 passed by this Court to

the effect that the directions of the High Court and this Court were confined

only to population of elephants exclusively within the State of Karnataka and

are not applicable to any other State or Territory.
3.    The clarifications sought by the PIL petitioner has been vehemently

opposed on behalf of respondent no.3. It is contended that from time to time

various Writ Petitions in the nature of Public Interest Litigation have been filed

against respondent no.3 and other persons acting with non profit philanthropic

noble object of taking care of abandoned or rescued elephants and other

animals. The main ground of challenge in these PILs has been that it is the

responsibility of the State to take care of such abandoned or rescued elephants

and other animals, which should not be abdicated in favour of the private

respondent no. 3, the Trust.
2
4.    Finding no merits in the PILs all of them have been dismissed. Reference

has been made to the following PILs which have been dismissed by various

High Courts :-
(i)     Judgment and order dated 07.11.2022 passed by the High

     Court of Tripura at Agartala, in WP(Civil)-PIL No. 17 of 2022 filed

     by one Smt. Sudipa Nath;
(ii)    Judgment and order dated 25.01.2023 passed by the Gauhati

     High Court in PIL No. 6 of 2023 filed by one Kaustuvmani Kakati;
(iii)   Judgment and order dated 16.08.2022 passed by this Court in

     WP(Civil) 547 of 2022, Kanhaiya Kumar Vs. Central Zoo Authority

     and Anr.;
(iv)    Judgment and order dated 08.08.2022 passed by this Court in
WP (Civil) 540 of 2022, Swetab Kumar Vs. Ministry of

     Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Ors
.
(v)     Judgment and order dated 10.08.2022 passed by Madras High

     Court in
Writ Petition No. 15230 of 2022, A. Viswanathan Vs. State

     of Tamil Nadu and Ors
.
3
5.    It is further submitted that respondent no. 3 is a registered public

charitable trust under the Gujarat Public Trust Act, 1950 and the object of the

trust is to promote welfare of animals and to establish paraphernalia for the

welfare of animals in need to carry out the object of the trust. Respondent no. 3

is neither availing any Government funds, nor generates any profits by

exhibition of animals to sustain its object. It is also submitted that respondent

no. 3 is engaged in rescue and rehabilitation of wild/captive elephants, who are

in need of long term care due to injury/old age, abusive captivity, such as circus,

street begging, etc. It is categorically stated during the course of arguments that

respondent no. 3 is not a breeding centre and is in no way making any profits

commercially in any manner from the rescued and rehabilitated animals.
6.    It is also submitted on behalf of respondent no. 3 that such frivolous

Public Interest Litigations filed by busy bees in different High Courts of the

country, disrupt the functioning of not only respondent no. 3 but such other

charitable institutions engaged in rescue and rehabilitation of wildlife, while

causing unnecessary drain on their resources which could otherwise be used by

them for the noble cause of welfare of the rescued animals.
4
7.    Our attention has also been invited to a reasoned and detailed judgment

dated 07.11.2022 passed by the Tripura High Court in Writ Petition (Civil - PIL)

No. 17 of 2022 seeking a direction restraining transfer and transportation of

captive bred elephants from Northeast India and in particular from the States of

Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh to the elephant camp of respondent no. 3. The

High Court of Tripura, while declining to grant relief prayed by the petitioner

therein, constituted a High Powered Committee (for short 'HPC') headed by the

retired Judge of this Court, namely, Hon'ble Mr. Justice Deepak Verma, as its

Chairman, and Members (by designation), which included Director General of

Forests (Union of India), Head of Project Elephant Division (MoEF), Member

Secretary (Central Zoo Authority of India), Chief Wild Life Warden (State of

Tripura) for Elephants from State of Tripura and Chief Wild Life Warden (State

of Gujarat). The said order further provides that the Chairman of the HPC shall

co-opt an expert having experience of Elephants as a Member of the Committee

and the Chairman may also consider taking assistance of the Chairman, Animal

Welfare Board of India. Various well thought of directions were issued for the

smooth functioning, powers, jurisdiction and assistance to be provided to the

said HPC.
8.    Though the scope and jurisdiction of the High Powered Committee was

limited by the High Court to transfer of the elephants from Northeast part of the
5
country to the elephant camp of respondent no. 3, we see no reason not to

extend it to Pan India, particularly, when by extending the jurisdiction of High

Powered Committee at Pan India level will not only serve the real public

interest and would advance the cause of welfare, care and rehabilitation of wild

animals, but will also curb the filing of frivolous PILs before different High

Courts by busy bees.
9.    In view of aforesaid facts and circumstances, we deem it appropriate to

extend the jurisdiction and scope of High Powered Committee as constituted by

the High Court of Tripura, with the modification that the Chief Wild Life

Warden(s) of the State(s) to which the issue relates will be the co-opted as

Members of the said Committee in place of the Chief Wild Life Wardens of

Tripura and Gujarat, throughout the territory of India, leaving it open to the

Committee to conduct necessary checks and to undertake fact finding exercise

in any pending or future complaint in this regard.    The said Committee may

also consider the request for approval, dispute or grievance, concerning transfer

or import into India or procurement or welfare of wild animals by any rescue or

rehabilitation centre or zoo, by taking assistance and co-operation whenever

needed from all departments and authorities across India. We also direct that all

complaints in this regard may be forwarded forthwith to the High Powered

Committee for consideration and recommending appropriate action.
6
10.   We further direct that all State and Central Authorities shall forthwith

report seizure of wild animals or abandonment of captive wild animals to the

Committee and the Committee shall be at liberty to recommend transfer of

ownership of captive animals or of seized wild animals to any willing rescue

centre or zoo for their immediate welfare, care and rehabilitation.
11.   We leave it open to the Chairman of the High Powered Committee to

determine the honorarium and the expenses required to carry out functions,

which shall be borne by the concerned State or Union of India as the case may

be.
12.   The above directions issued by us are in addition to the directions

contained in the judgment dated 07.11.2022 passed by the High Court of

Tripura and not in derogation thereof.
13.    We are of the considered opinion that the directions issued by us shall

serve real public interest and would advance the cause of welfare, care and

rehabilitation of wild animals.
7
14.     With the aforesaid clarifications and directions, the Miscellaneous

Application No. 231 of 2023 as well as Interlocutory Application No. 32084 of

2023 stand disposed of.
…...…...…....….......................…,J.
(KRISHNA MURARI)




                                          ……...….…....….......................…,J.
(AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH)


      NEW DELHI;
03RD MARCH, 2023
8