[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Neeraj Dutta vs State(Govt.Of N.C.T.Of Delhi) on 17 March, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
,
Abhay S. Oka
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



                                                                  REPORTABLE


                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1669 OF 2009


                Neeraj Dutta                                        …Appellant


                                              versus


             State (Govt. of N.C.T. of Delhi)                     ...Respondent




                                       J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.          The appellant was convicted by the Special Judge, Delhi

             for the offences punishable under Section 7 and clauses (i) and
(ii) of Section13(1)(d) read with
Section 13(2)
of the Prevention

             of Corruption Act, 1988 (for short, ‘the
PC Act
’).         The co­

             accused, Mr. Yogesh Kumar, was convicted by the Special
Signature Not Verified
Indu Marwah  Judge for the offence punishable under
Section 12
of the PC
Digitally signed by
Date: 2023.03.17
15:59:02 IST
Reason:
Act. The co­accused was acquitted by the High Court. The
1
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



     appellant was sentenced to undergo a rigorous imprisonment

     for a period of three years and to pay a fine of Rs.15,000/­ for

     the offence punishable under sub­section (2) of
Section 13
of

     the PC Act. For the offence punishable under
Section 7
, she

     was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years

     and to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/­.               Sentences in default of

     payment of fine were also imposed.               The conviction of the

     appellant has been upheld by the High Court by the impugned

     judgment.
2.      The complainant – Mr. Ravijit Singh died before the trial

     commenced. In fact, PW­7, the Investigation Officer, deposed

     that the complainant was murdered. In his complaint, the

     complainant stated that he was doing business of sale and

     purchase of cars in a shop situated at Vikas Puri, New Delhi.

     His case is that there was no electricity meter installed in his

     shop and therefore, on 6th May 1996 he applied for an

     electricity meter.           In the complaint filed by him on 17 th April

     2000, in the form of his statement recorded by the Anti­

     Corruption Bureau, he stated that pursuant to the application

     dated 6th May 1996, a meter was installed in his shop and after

     a few months, he found that the meter was removed. As the
2
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



     shopkeepers in the area had got the electricity meters installed

     through the appellant, he met her.                       On 17th April 2000, he

     received a telephone call at 7:30 a.m. from the appellant who

     was      working             as   an   Inspector    in    the    D.V.B./electricity

     department in the local area. She called him at her residence

     to discuss the issue of the electricity meter.                        At 8:00 a.m.,

     when the complainant met her, she demanded a sum of

     Rs.15,000/­ for getting the meter installed and ultimately after

     negotiations,           she       settled   the    demand        at     Rs.10,000/­.

     According to the complainant, the appellant stated that she

     would come to his shop between 3:00 and 4:00 p.m. when the

     complainant should hand over the papers for the electricity

     meter and Rs.10,000/­ as a bribe.                        The complainant stated

     that he had no option but to accept her demand for a bribe.
3.      The prosecution’s case is that on the basis of the

     aforesaid complaint, a trap was laid. PW­5, Mr. S. K. Awasthi,

     was the shadow witness. When he along with the complainant

     as     well     as      members        of   the    raiding      party    visited   the

     complainant’s shop at 3:50 p.m., the appellant was not present

     there. At about 4:40 p.m., a telephone call was received by the

     complainant that the appellant would come at around
3
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



     5:30/6:00 p.m. At 5:20 p.m., the appellant came with the co­

     accused          and         demanded     the   documents   and   bribe   of

     Rs.10,000/­, which was paid by the complainant. The Special

     Court held that there was sufficient circumstantial evidence on

     record to prove the guilt of the appellant. In fact, a finding was

     recorded on the basis of circumstantial evidence that the

     demand and acceptance were proved. The order of conviction

     of the learned Special Court as regards the appellant has been

     confirmed by the High Court in the impugned judgment.
4.      While hearing this appeal, a bench of two Hon’ble Judges

     of this Court came to a conclusion that the decisions of this

     Court of the benches of three Hon’ble Judges in the cases of
B.

     Jayaraj           v.         State   of    Andhra    Pradesh1
and     P.

     Satyanarayana Murthy v. District Inspector of Police,

     State of Andhra Pradesh & Anr.2 were in conflict with an

     earlier three­Judge bench’s decision in the case of
M.

     Narsinga Rao v. State of A.P.3                   Accordingly
, the following

     question was referred to the larger bench:
“The question whether in the absence of
                evidence of complainant/direct or primary
     1 2014 (13) SCC 55
     2 2015 (10) SCC 152
     3 2001 (1) SCC 691
4
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



                evidence of demand of illegal gratification, is it
                not permissible to draw inferential deduction of
                culpability/guilt of a public servant under
Section 7
and
Section 13(1)(d)
read with
Section
                13(2)
of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
                based on other evidence adduced by the
                prosecution.”
5.      The above­mentioned question was referred for decision to

     a Constitution Bench, which disposed of the reference by the

     judgment           dated        15th   December   20224.   Broadly,   the

     Constitution Bench held that in absence of the complaint’s

     testimony in a prosecution for offences punishable under
Sections 7
and
13(2)
of the PC Act, the prosecution can rely

     upon even circumstantial evidence to prove the demand of

     gratification.
In paragraph 74 of
the said decision
, the

     Constitution Bench has summarized its conclusions.


     RIVAL SUBMISSIONS
6.      Shri S. Nagamuthu, the learned senior counsel appearing

     for the appellant submitted that this is a case where there is no

     evidence of demand of illegal gratification by the appellant.

     The learned senior counsel submitted that proof of demand of

     gratification by a public servant is a sine qua non for the

     offences punishable under
Sections 7
and
13(1)(d)
of the PC



     4 2022 SCCOnline SC 1724
5
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



     Act. He submitted that the findings of the Courts are based on

     surmises and conjectures.
7.      Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, the learned Additional Solicitor

     General appearing for the prosecution supported the impugned

     judgments. She submitted that PW­5 has proved the demand.

     Moreover, on the basis of the circumstantial evidence, the

     demand and acceptance were proved. She also submitted that

     once the demand and acceptance are established, there is a

     presumption that the acceptance of gratification proves the

     existence of motive or reward. The learned ASG submitted that

     no interference is called for with the impugned judgments.


     LEGAL POSITION
8.      Before we analyze the evidence, we must note that we are

     dealing with
Sections 7
and
13
of the PC Act as they stood

     prior to the amendment made by the Act 16 of 2018 with effect

     from 26th July 2018. We are referring to
Sections 7
and
13
as

     they stood on the date of commission of the offence.
Section 7
,

     as existed at the relevant time, reads thus:
“7. Public servant taking gratification other
                  than legal remuneration in respect of an
                  official act.—
6
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



                  Whoever, being, or expecting to be a public
                  servant, accepts or obtains or agrees to accept
                  or attempts to obtain from any person, for
                  himself or for any other person, any
                  gratification whatever, other than legal
                  remuneration, as a motive or reward for doing
                  or forbearing to do any official act or for
                  showing or forbearing to show, in the exercise
                  of his official functions, favour or disfavour to
                  any person or for rendering or attempting to
                  render any service or disservice to any person,
                  with the Central Government or any State
                  Government or Parliament or the Legislature of
                  any State or with any local authority,
                  corporation or Government company referred
                  to in clause (c) of
section 2
, or with any public
                  servant, whether named or otherwise, shall be
                  punishable with imprisonment which shall be
                  not less than three years but which may
                  extend to seven years and shall also be liable
                  to fine.
Explanations.­
(a) "Expecting to be a public servant"­ If a
                  person not expecting to be in office obtains a
                  gratification by deceiving others into a belief
                  that he is about to be in office, and that he will
                  then serve them, he may be guilty of cheating,
                  but he is not guilty of the offence defined in
                  this section.
(b)"Gratification". The word “gratification” is
                  not restricted to pecuniary gratifications or to
                  gratifications estimable in money.
(c) "Legal remuneration"­ The words "legal
                  remuneration”     are    not    restricted    to
                  remuneration which a public servant can
                  lawfully demand, but include all remuneration
                  which he is permitted by the Government or
                  the organisation, which he serves, to accept.
7
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009
(d) "A motive or reward for doing”. A person
                  who receives a gratification as a motive or
                  reward for doing what he does not intend or is
                  not in a position to do, or has not done, comes
                  within this expression.
(e) Where a public servant induces a person
                  erroneously to believe that his influence with
                  the Government has obtained a title for that
                  person and thus induces that person to give
                  the public servant, money or any other
                  gratification as a reward for this service, the
                  public servant has committed an offence under
                  this section.”
9.
Section 13(1)(d)
, as existed at the relevant time, reads
     thus:
“13.Criminal misconduct by a public
                  servant.—
                  (1) A public servant is said to commit the
                  offence of criminal misconduct,­
(a) ………………………………
(b) ……………………………...
(c) ………………………………
(d) if he,­
(i) by corrupt or illegal means, obtains for
                          himself or for any other person any
                          valuable thing or pecuniary advantage; or
(ii) by abusing his position as a public
                          servant, obtains for himself or for any
                          other person any valuable thing or
                          pecuniary advantage; or
(iii) while holding office as a public
                          servant, obtains for any person any
                          valuable thing or pecuniary advantage
                          without any public interest; or
(e) ………………………………….”
8
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



     The demand for gratification and the acceptance thereof are

     sine qua non for the offence punishable under
Section 7
of the

     PC Act.
10. The Constitution Bench4 was called upon to decide the

     question which we have quoted earlier. In paragraph 74, the

     conclusions of the Constitution have been summarised, which

     read thus:
“74. What emerges from the aforesaid
                     discussion is summarised as under:
(a) Proof of demand and acceptance of
                     illegal gratification by a public servant as
                     a fact in issue by the prosecution is a sine
                     qua non in order to establish the guilt of
                     the accused public servant under
Sections
                     7
and
13(1)(d)(i)
and (ii) of the Act.
(b) In order to bring home the guilt of the
                     accused, the prosecution has to first
                     prove the demand of illegal gratification
                     and the subsequent acceptance as a
                     matter of fact. This fact in issue can be
                     proved either by direct evidence which
                     can be in the nature of oral evidence or
                     documentary evidence.
(c) Further, the fact in issue, namely, the
                     proof of demand and acceptance of illegal
                     gratification can also be proved by
                     circumstantial evidence in the absence of
                     direct oral and documentary evidence.
(d) In order to prove the fact in issue,
                     namely, the demand and acceptance of
9
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



                     illegal gratification by the public servant, the
                     following aspects have to be borne in mind:
(i) if there is an offer to pay by the
                            bribe giver without there being any
                            demand from the public servant and the
                            latter simply accepts the offer and
                            receives the illegal gratification, it is
                            a case of acceptance as per
Section 7
of
                            the Act. In such a case, there need not
                            be a prior demand by the public servant.
(ii) On the other hand, if the public
                            servant makes a demand and the bribe
                            giver accepts the demand and tenders
                            the demanded gratification which in turn
                            is received by the public servant, it is a
                            case of obtainment. In the case of
                            obtainment, the prior demand for illegal
                            gratification emanates from the public
                            servant. This is an offence under
Section
                            13(1)(d)(i)
and (ii) of the Act.
(iii) In both cases of (i) and (ii) above,
                            the offer by the bribe giver and the
                            demand        by  the     public   servant
                            respectively have to be proved by the
                            prosecution as a fact in issue. In other
                            words, mere acceptance or receipt of
                            an      illegal  gratification    without
                            anything more would not make it an
                            offence under
Section 7
or
Section
                            13(1)(d)
, (i) and (ii) respectively of the
                            Act. Therefore, under
Section 7
of the
                            Act, in order to bring home the offence,
                            there must be an offer which emanates
                            from the bribe giver which is accepted by
                            the public servant which would make it
                            an offence. Similarly, a prior demand
                            by the public servant when accepted
                            by the bribe giver and in turn there is
10
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



                            a payment made which is received by
                            the public servant, would be an
                            offence of obtainment under
Section
                            13(1)(d)
and (i) and (ii) of the Act.
(e) The presumption of fact with regard to
                     the     demand     and     acceptance       or
                     obtainment of an illegal gratification may
                     be made by a court of law by way of an
                     inference only when the foundational
                     facts have been proved by relevant oral
                     and documentary evidence and not in the
                     absence thereof. On the basis of the
                     material on record, the Court has the
                     discretion to raise a presumption of fact
                     while considering whether the fact of demand
                     has been proved by the prosecution or not.
Of course, a presumption of fact is subject to
                     rebuttal by the accused and in the absence
                     of rebuttal presumption stands.
(f) In the event the complainant turns
                     ‘hostile’, or has died or is unavailable to let in
                     his evidence during trial, demand of illegal
                     gratification can be proved by letting in the
                     evidence of any other witness who can again
                     let in evidence, either orally or by
                     documentary evidence or the prosecution
                     can prove the case by circumstantial
                     evidence. The trial does not abate nor does it
                     result in an order of acquittal of the accused
                     public servant.
(g) In so far as
Section 7
of the Act is
                     concerned, on the proof of the facts in
                     issue,
Section 20
mandates the court to
                     raise a presumption that the illegal
                     gratification was for the purpose of a
                     motive or reward as mentioned in the said
                     Section. The said presumption has to be
                     raised by the court as a legal presumption or
                     a presumption in law. Of course, the said
11
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



                     presumption is also subject to rebuttal.
                     Section 20 does not apply to Section 13(1)(d)
(i) and (ii) of the Act.
(h) We clarify that the presumption in law
                     under
Section 20
of the Act is distinct from
                     presumption of fact
referred to above
in point
(e) as the former is a mandatory presumption
                     while the latter is discretionary in nature.”

                                  (emphasis added)

     The referred question was answered in paragraph 76 of the
     aforesaid judgment, which reads thus:
“76. Accordingly, the question referred for
                     consideration of this Constitution Bench is
                     answered as under:
In the absence of evidence of
                          the complainant (direct/primary, oral/
                          documentary       evidence),     it   is
                          permissible to draw an inferential
                          deduction of culpability/guilt of a
                          public servant under
Section 7
and
Section 13(1)(d)
read with
Section 13(2)
of    the     Act     based     on other
                          evidence adduced by the prosecution.”

                                    (emphasis added)
11. Even the issue of presumption under
Section 20
of the

     PC Act has been answered by the Constitution Bench by

     holding that only on proof of the facts in issue,
Section 20
mandates the Court to raise a presumption that illegal

     gratification was for the purpose of motive or reward as

     mentioned in
Section 7
(as it existed prior to the amendment
12
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



     of 2018).         In fact, the Constitution Bench has approved two

     decisions by the benches of three Hon’ble Judges in the cases

     of B. Jayaraj1 and P. Satyanarayana Murthy2. There is

     another decision of a three Judges’ bench in the case of
N.

     Vijayakumar v. State of Tamil Nadu5
, which follows the

     view taken in the cases of B. Jayaraj1 and P. Satyanarayana

     Murthy2.          In paragraph 9 of the decision in the case of B.

     Jayaraj1, this Court has dealt with the presumption under
Section 20
of the PC Act.           In paragraph 9, this Court held

     thus:
“9. Insofar     as    the   presumption
                          permissible to be drawn under
Section
                          20
of the Act is concerned, such
                          presumption can only be in respect of
                          the offence under
Section 7
and not
                          the offences under
Sections 13(1)(d)(i)
and (ii) of the Act. In any event, it is
                          only on proof of acceptance of illegal
                          gratification that presumption can be
                          drawn under
Section 20
of the Act that
                          such gratification was received for
                          doing or forbearing to do any official
                          act. Proof of acceptance of illegal
                          gratification can follow only if there is
                          proof of demand. As the same is lacking
                          in the present case the primary facts on
                          the basis of which the legal presumption
                          under
Section 20
can be drawn are wholly
                          absent.”
     5 2021 (3) SCC 687
13
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



                                  (emphasis added)

     The presumption under
Section 20
can be invoked only when

     the two basic facts required to be proved under
Section 7
, are

     proved. The said two basic facts are ‘demand’ and ‘acceptance’

     of gratification. The presumption under
Section 20
is that

     unless the contrary is proved, the acceptance of gratification

     shall be presumed to be for a motive or reward, as

     contemplated by
Section 7
. It means that once the basic facts

     of the demand of illegal gratification and acceptance thereof

     are proved, unless the contrary are proved, the Court will have

     to presume that the gratification was demanded and accepted

     as a motive or reward as contemplated by
Section 7
. However,

     this presumption is rebuttable.          Even on the basis of the

     preponderance of probability, the accused can rebut the

     presumption.
12. In the case of N. Vijayakumar5, another bench of three

     Hon’ble Judges dealt with the issue of presumption under
Section 20
and the degree of proof required to establish the

     offences punishable under
Section 7
and clauses (i) and (ii)
Section 13(1)(d)
read with
Section 13(2)
of PC Act.            In

     paragraph 26, the bench held thus:
14
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



                 “26. It is equally well settled that mere
                 recovery by itself cannot prove the charge
                 of the prosecution against the accused.
                 Reference can be made to the judgments
                 of     this    Court      in C.M.     Girish
                 Babu v. CBI [C.M.     Girish   Babu v. CBI,
                 (2009) 3 SCC 779 : (2009) 2 SCC (Cri) 1]
                 and in B. Jayaraj v. State of A.P. [B.
                 Jayaraj v. State of A.P., (2014) 13 SCC
                 55 : (2014) 5 SCC (Cri) 543] In the
                 aforesaid judgments of this Court while
                 considering the case under
Sections 7
,
13(1)(d)(i)
and (ii) of the
Prevention of
                 Corruption Act, 1988
it is reiterated
                 that to prove the charge, it has to be
                 proved beyond reasonable doubt that
                 the     accused    voluntarily    accepted
                 money knowing it to be bribe. Absence
                 of proof of demand for illegal gratification
                 and mere possession or recovery of
                 currency notes is not sufficient to
                 constitute such offence. In the said
                 judgments it is also held that even the
                 presumption under
Section 20
of the Act
                 can be drawn only after demand for and
                 acceptance of illegal gratification is
                 proved. It is also fairly well settled that
                 initial presumption of innocence in the
                 criminal jurisprudence gets doubled by
                 acquittal recorded by the trial court.”
                             (emphasis added)
     Thus, the demand for gratification and its acceptance must be

     proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
13.
Section 7
, as existed prior to 26 th July 2018, was different

     from the present
Section 7
. The unamended
Section 7
which

     is applicable in the present case, specifically refers to “any
15
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



     gratification”.              The substituted
Section 7
does not use the

     word “gratification”, but it uses a wider term “undue

     advantage”. When the allegation is of demand of gratification

     and acceptance thereof by the accused, it must be as a motive

     or reward for doing or forbearing to do any official act. The fact

     that the demand and acceptance of gratification were for

     motive or reward as provided in
Section 7
can be proved by

     invoking the presumption under
Section 20
provided the basic

     allegations of the demand and acceptance are proved. In this

     case, we are also concerned with the offence punishable under

     clauses (i) and (ii)
Section 13(1)(d)
which is punishable under
Section 13(2)
of the PC Act. Clause (d) of sub­section (1) of
Section 13
, which existed on the statute book prior to the

     amendment of 26th July 2018, has been quoted earlier. On a

     plain reading of clauses (i) and (ii) of
Section 13(1)(d)
, it is

     apparent that proof of acceptance of illegal gratification will be

     necessary to prove the offences under clauses (i) and (ii) of
Section 13(1)(d)
. In view of what is laid down by the

     Constitution Bench, in a given case, the demand and

     acceptance of illegal gratification by a public servant can be

     proved by circumstantial evidence in the absence of direct oral
16
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



     or documentary evidence.              While answering the referred

     question, the Constitution Bench has observed that it is

     permissible to draw an inferential deduction of culpability

     and/or guilt of the public servant for the offences punishable

     under
Sections 7
and
13(1)(d)
read with
Section 13(2)
of the PC

     Act. The conclusion is that in absence of direct evidence, the

     demand and/or acceptance can always be proved by other

     evidence such as circumstantial evidence.
14. The allegation of demand of gratification and acceptance

     made by a public servant has to be established beyond a

     reasonable doubt.            The decision of the Constitution Bench

     does not dilute this elementary requirement of proof beyond a

     reasonable doubt. The Constitution Bench was dealing with

     the issue of the modes by which the demand can be proved.

     The Constitution Bench has laid down that the proof need not

     be only by direct oral or documentary evidence, but it can be

     by way of other evidence including circumstantial evidence.

     When reliance is placed on circumstantial evidence to prove

     the demand for gratification, the prosecution must establish

     each and every circumstance from which the prosecution

     wants the Court to draw a conclusion of guilt. The facts so
17
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



     established must be consistent with only one hypothesis that

     there was a demand made for gratification by the accused.

     Therefore, in this case, we will have to examine whether there

     is any direct evidence of demand. If we come to a conclusion

     that there is no direct evidence of demand, this Court will have

     to consider whether there is any circumstantial evidence to

     prove the demand.
CONSIDERATION OF THE EVIDENCE ON RECORD
15. Now, coming to the evidence on record, according to the

     prosecution, the direct evidence is in the form of evidence of

     PW­5 – Mr. S.K. Awasthi. In this case, the complainant had

     died and therefore, he could not be examined.       The raiding

     party consisted of PW­5, Mr. S.K. Awasthi, an Officer in

     Irrigation Department; PW­6, Mr. O.D. Yadav, Traffic Inspector

     and PW­7, Mr. Niranjan Singh, ACP. Going by the complaint

     which could not be proved through the complainant, it is the

     case of the prosecution that the first demand was made by the

     appellant to the complainant in the morning of 17th April

     2000 when he met her at her residence. There was no charge

     framed on the basis of this demand. According to the

     prosecution’s case, the second demand was made during the
18
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



     trap. There is absolutely no evidence about the first demand

     made in the house of the appellant as no one except the

     complainant             was      present   there.   According   to   the

     prosecution’s case, PW­5 was the witness to the second

     demand made by the appellant on 17 th April 2000 at around

     5:20 p.m.            PW­5 stated in his evidence that though the

     complainant had informed the trap party that the appellant

     will be visiting his shop at about 3:50 p.m., the appellant did

     not turn up. Subsequently, a telephone call was received by

     the complainant informing that she would come by 5:30/6:00

     p.m. Ultimately, according to the case of PW­5, at about 5:20

     p.m., the appellant along with the co­accused came to the

     Complainant’s shop. The version of PW­5, which according to

     the prosecution constitutes demand, reads thus:
“Mrs. Neeraj Dutta asked the complainant
               to give papers regarding his electricity
               meter and Rs.10,000/­ to her as she was
               in a hurry. Complainant handed over the
               documents of his electricity meter and
               treated GC Notes of Rs.10,000/­ to Mrs.
               Neeraj Dutta in her right hand after taking
               the same out of left pocket of his shirt. Mrs.
               Neeraj Dutta handed over said GC Notes to
               his associate Yogesh Kumar to count and
               she told the complainant that his work
               would be done.”

                                  (emphasis added)
19
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009
16. Rest           of        the   examination­in­chief   deals   with   the

     acceptance by the appellant and recovery. Now the question is

     whether, on the basis of the evidence on record, the

     prosecution has proved the demand of gratification by the

     accused. When we consider the issue of proof of demand

     within the meaning of
Section 7
, it cannot be a simpliciter

     demand for money but it has to be a demand of gratification

     other than legal remuneration. All that PW­5 says is when the

     appellant visited the shop of the complainant, she asked the

     complainant to give papers regarding the electricity meter and

     Rs.10,000/­ to her by telling him that she was in a hurry.

     This is not a case where a specific demand of gratification for

     providing electricity meter was made by the appellant to the

     complainant in the presence of the shadow witness. PW­5 has

     not stated that there was any discussion in his presence

     between the appellant and the complainant on the basis of

     which an inference could have been drawn that there was a

     demand made for gratification by the appellant. The witness

     had no knowledge about what transpired between the

     complainant and the appellant earlier. PW­5 had admittedly

     no personal knowledge about the purpose for which the cash
20
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



     was allegedly handed over by the complainant to the

     appellant.
17. We may note here that as per the version of the appellant

     in her statement under
Section 313
of the Code of Criminal

     Procedure, 1973 (
Cr.P.C
.), on 17th April 2000, she was working

     as an LDC in DVB office. On that day, she was busy with her

     official duty in a collection drive organized by the department

     to collect dues from the consumers. Her explanation is that

     the complainant was her neighbour and he wanted her

     assistance to deposit electricity charges.           She stated that

     earlier, she had a transaction of sale and purchase of a car

     through the complainant.             She has also stated that the

     complainant was a history­sheeter and there were three First

     Information Reports (FIRs) registered against him. In this

     context, PW­5 was questioned in the cross­examination. The

     relevant answer given by PW­5 reads thus:
“I cannot confirm or deny that accused
                          Neeraj Dutta along with her cashier and
                          other staff consisting of four five member
                          had collected Rs.71,000/­ in the single
                          delivery point camp held at Jai Vihar and
                          she along with her staff members were
                          coming in her car and on the way she
                          stopped at the shop of the complainant
                          who was her neighbour to collect the
21
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



                          balance sale proceeds of Rs.1 lac of her
                          previous car from the complainant as she
                          had sold the said car through the
                          complainant to M/s. Sagar Motors and
                          this payment was to be received by her
                          through complainant from M/s. Sagar
                          Motors.”


     It is pertinent to note here that PW­5 did not confirm the

     correctness of the suggestion but stated that he was not in a

     position to deny the same.          In fact, PW­7, the investigation

     officer, deposed that cash of Rs.71,900/­ was found in the

     appellant’s car. This lends support to the defence that there

     was a recovery drive conducted by the appellant. Apart from

     the evidence of PW­5, there is no other evidence that is

     pressed into service by the prosecution for proving the demand

     by the appellant. Even taking the statements of PW­5 in the

     examination­in­chief as correct, it is impossible to even infer

     that the demand of Rs.10,000/­ was made by the appellant by

     way of gratification.         Every demand made for payment of

     money is not a demand for gratification.              It has to be

     something more than mere demand for money.
18. There is one more important factual aspect to be noted

     which creates serious doubt about the prosecution’s case. In

     the complaint filed by the deceased complainant on 17 th April
22
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009



     2000, in the form of his statement recorded by the Anti­

     Corruption Bureau, he has stated that pursuant to the

     application dated 6th May 1996, a meter was installed in his

     shop and after a few months, he found that the meter was

     removed.          However,     the   Special   Court    has   observed    in

     paragraph 19 of the impugned judgment that a complaint

     regarding a stolen electricity meter was registered at the

     instance of the complainant on 25th April 2000. Thus, the

     grievance          regarding    stolen    meter   was     made    by     the

     complainant 8 days after the alleged demand for bribe. In fact,

     PW­7 admitted that the complainant did not produce a copy of

     the application made by him for providing electricity meter.

     PW­7 further stated that the complainant did not clearly tell

     him that he had given such application. In absence of proof of

     making such application, the prosecution’s case regarding

     demand of bribe for installing new electricity meter becomes

     doubtful. Moreover, till 24th April 2000, the complainant did

     not register a complaint regarding commission of offence. This

     makes the prosecution’s case regarding the demand of

     gratification on 17th April 2000 for installing a new electricity

     meter extremely doubtful.
23
Criminal Appeal No.1669 of 2009
19. In the present case, there are no circumstances brought

     on record which will prove the demand for gratification.

     Therefore, the ingredients of the offence under
Section 7
of the

     PC Act were not established and consequently, the offence

     under
Section 13(1)(d)
will not be attracted.
20. Hence, the appeal must succeed. We set aside the

     impugned judgment and the judgment of the Special Court

     and set aside the conviction and sentence of the appellant. The

     bail bonds of the appellant stand cancelled. Appeal is allowed.
……..…………………J.
                                                (Abhay S. Oka)



                                                ……..…………………J.
                                                (Rajesh Bindal)
     New Delhi;
March 17, 2023.
24