[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Jagtar Singh vs The State Of Punjab on 23 March, 2023
Author:
Rajesh Bindal
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
,
Rajesh Bindal
NON-REPORTABLE

                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             Criminal Appeal No. 2136 of 2010



          Jagtar Singh                                           … Appellant
                                           Versus
          State of Punjab                                       … Respondent


                                       JUDGMENT
Rajesh Bindal, J.
1.             The appellant has challenged his conviction under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
(for short ‘the Act’).     He was

          convicted by the Trial Court vide judgment dated 5.8.2005. His

          conviction was upheld by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana

          vide judgment dated March 2, 2010.
2.             The facts, as are evident from the paper book, are that

          a demand of ₹ 500/- was made as illegal gratification and the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
appellant accepted a sum of ₹ 300/- for supplying copy of death
Date: 2023.03.23
17:29:40 IST
Reason:
certificate of Maghar Singh (deceased).
1
3.         In the complaint, it was alleged that for getting the

death certificate of Maghar Singh S/o. Hari Singh, who expired on

6.3.2003, Ranjit Singh, his son, requested his cousin Jit Singh to

collect the same. On 17.10.2003, Jit Singh/complainant met the

appellant in connection with supply of death certificate, who

demanded ₹ 500/- as illegal gratification. Final settlement was for

payment of ₹ 300/-. As Ajit Singh was reluctant to pay the illegal

gratification,   he   contacted    Chamkaur    Singh,   Ex-Member

Panchayat and on his suggestion went to the Office of DSP,

Vigilance, Faridkot and got his statement recorded, on the basis of

which FIR was registered.      The complainant handed over three

currency notes of ₹ 100/- each to the DSP, Vigilance, who after

coating the same with phenolphthalein powder recorded their

numbers in the memo and handed over the same again to Jit

Singh.   Chamkaur Singh was made the shadow witness. It was

alleged that the appellant was arrested red-handed while

accepting the illegal gratification.
4.         During the course of trial, Jit Singh, Complainant (PW-1)

and Chamkaur Singh (PW-2) did not support the prosecution

version. They were declared hostile. Usha Kumari, a computer
2
operator in the office of Civil Surgeon (PW-3) deposed that the

appellant was working in the office as cleaner.      However, in

emergency he could be deputed for discharging other duties also.

The death certificate bearing no. 1241787 pertaining to late

Maghar Singh was prepared in the handwriting of Class IV, Basant

Singh.   It had been signed by the Additional District Registrar,

Birth and Deaths, Faridkot. She also stated that sometimes the

certificates are dispatched to the applicants and sometimes these

are given by hand.       The death certificate in question was

prepared on 17.10.2003. The appellant was deputed to prepare

the death certificates on 20.10.2003. Meaning thereby the death

certificate had been prepared prior to the date on which the

appellant was assigned the duty to prepare the death certificate.

He otherwise was not responsible for that job as he was merely

working as cleaner in the office.
5.        HC Kirpal Singh (PW-4), HC Parsan Singh (PW-6) and C.

Surinderjit Singh (PW-7) were the formal witnesses whereas

Harbans Kaur, Clerk of Civil Surgeon, Faridkot (PW-5) proved

certain official record and sanction of prosecution in the case of

the appellant.   Gurjinder Singh, (PW-8), District Social Security
3
Officer, Faridkot stated about recovery of ₹ 300/- from the

appellant.     These were the same currency notes which were

coated with phenolphthalein powder. In his statement recorded

under
Section 313
CrPC, the appellant submitted that he has been

falsely implicated in the case.
6.           The argument raised by the learned counsel for the

appellant, relying upon the Constitution Bench judgment of this

Court in
Neeraj Dutta v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi
) (2022)

SCC Online SC 1724, is that the demand and recovery both

must be proved to sustain conviction under the Act. In the case in

hand, at the most, it can be said that recovery has been proved

though that is also seriously doubtful.      There is no evidence of

demand of illegal gratification.       He further submitted that the

appellant was merely working as cleaner in the office, and he was

not having any authority either to prepare or deliver the death

certificates. Admittedly, he was assigned the duty to prepare the

death certificates on 20.10.2003 and in the case in hand the

death certificate had been prepared on 17.10.2003.
4
7.           On the other hand, learned counsel for the State

submitted that the fact that the phenolphthalein coated currency

notes with same serial numbers were recovered from the

appellant in the presence of independent witnesses, inference can

be drawn that there was demand and that is why he accepted the

illegal gratification, hence, the conviction of the appellant

deserves to be upheld.
8.           Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the

material on record.
9.           The conclusions of the Constitution Bench judgment
referred above
, have been summarized in paragraph 74, which

read thus:
“74. What emerges from the aforesaid discussion is
             summarised as under:
(a) Proof of demand and acceptance of illegal
             gratification by a public servant as a fact in
             issue by the prosecution is a sine qua non in
             order to establish the guilt of the accused
             public servant under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d)
(i) and (ii) of the Act.
5
(b) In order to bring home the guilt of the
accused, the prosecution has to first prove
the demand of illegal gratification and the
subsequent acceptance as a matter of fact.
This fact in issue can be proved either by
direct evidence which can be in the nature of
oral evidence or documentary evidence.
(c) Further, the fact in issue, namely the proof
of   demand      and    acceptance   of   illegal
gratification    can    also   be   proved    by
circumstantial evidence in the absence of
direct oral and documentary evidence.
(d) In order to prove the fact in issue, namely, the
demand and acceptance of illegal gratification by
the public servant, the following aspects have to be
borne in mind:
(i) if there is an offer to pay by the bribe
     giver without there being any demand from
     the public servant and the latter simply
     accepts the offer and receives the illegal
     gratification, it is a case of acceptance as
     per
Section 7
of the Act. In such a case,
     there need not be a prior demand by the
     public servant.
(ii) On the other hand, if the public
     servant makes a demand and the bribe
     giver accepts the demand and tenders the
     demanded gratification which in turn is
6
received by the public servant, it is a case
    of obtainment. In the case of obtainment,
    the prior demand for illegal gratification
    emanates from the public servant. This is
    an offence under
Section 13(1)(d)(i)
and (ii)
    of the Act.
(iii) In both cases of (i) and (ii) above,
    the offer by the bribe giver and the
    demand       by    the   public    servant
    respectively have to be proved by the
    prosecution as a fact in issue. In other
    words, mere acceptance or receipt of
    an illegal gratification without anything
    more would not make it an offence
    under
Section 7
or
Section 13(1)(d)
, (i)
    and (ii) respectively of the Act.
Therefore, under
Section 7
of the Act, in
    order to bring home the offence, there must
    be an offer which emanates from the bribe
    giver which is accepted by the public
    servant which would make it an offence.
Similarly, a prior demand by the public
    servant when accepted by the bribe
    giver and in turn there is a payment
    made which is received by the public
    servant, would be an offence of
    obtainment under Section 13(1)(d) and
(i) and (ii) of the Act.
(e) The presumption of fact with regard to
the demand and acceptance or obtainment of
an illegal gratification may be made by a
court of law by way of an inference only when
the foundational facts have been proved by
7
relevant oral and documentary evidence and
not in the absence thereof. On the basis of the
material on record, the Court has the discretion to
raise a presumption of fact while considering
whether the fact of demand has been proved by the
prosecution or not. Of course, a presumption of
fact is subject to rebuttal by the accused and in the
absence of rebuttal presumption stands.
(f) In the event of complaint turns ‘hostile’, or has
died or is unavailable to let in his evidence during
trial, demand of illegal gratification can be proved
by letting in the evidence of any other witness who
can again let in evidence, either orally or by
documentary evidence or the presumption can
prove the case by circumstantial evidence. The
trial does not abate nor does it result in an order of
acquittal of the accused public servant.
(g) In so far as
Section 7
of the Act is
concerned, on the proof of the facts in issue,
Section 20
mandates the court to raise a
presumption that illegal gratification was for
the purpose of a motive or reward as
mentioned in the said Section.            The said
presumption has to be raised by the court as a legal
presumption or a presumption in law. Of course,
the said presumption is also subject to rebuttal.
Section 20
does not apply to
Section 13(1)(d) (i)
and (ii) of the Act.
(h) We clarify that the presumption in law under
Section 20
of the Act is distinct from presumption of
fact
referred to above
in point (e) as the former is a
8
mandatory presumption       while     the   latter   is
          discretionary in nature.”
                                              (emphasis added)
10.       The referred question was answered in paragraph 76 of

the aforesaid judgment, which reads thus:
“76.     Accordingly, the question referred for
          consideration of this Constitution Bench is answered as
          under:
In the absence of evidence of the
               complainant                   (direct/primary,
               oral/documentary evidence), it is permissible
               to   draw    an   inferential  deduction    of
               culpability/guilt of a public servant under
Section 7
and
Section 13(1)(d)
read with
Section 13(2)
of the Act based on other
               evidence adduced by the prosecution.”
                                                 (emphasis added)
11.       In the case in hand, Jit Singh, complainant as well as

Chamkaur Singh, shadow witness have turned hostile. The Trial

Court had specifically held that there is no evidence produced on

record to prove the demand of illegal gratification. It is not the

case in which the demand was reiterated when the money was

allegedly paid to him. Gurjinder Singh (PW-8) is only a witness

who stated that he had recovered the money from the appellant.

The High Court has passed its judgment on the assumption that
9
the money having been recovered from the appellant, there was

demand of illegal gratification. This is not a case where there was

circumstantial evidence to prove the demand.
12.       If the evidence produced on record by the prosecution

is examined in the light of the law
laid down by
the Constitution

Bench in
Neeraj Dutta v. State (Govt. of N.C.T. of Delhi
)

(supra), the conviction and sentence of the appellant cannot be

legally sustained.
13.       The appeal is, accordingly, allowed.     The impugned

order passed by the High Court and that of the Trial Court are set

aside. The appellant is acquitted of the charges and his bail bond

stands discharged.
________________, J.
(Abhay S. Oka)



                                                ________________, J.
(Rajesh Bindal)
New Delhi
March 23, 2023.
10