[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Paneer Selvam vs State Of Tamil Nadu Represented By ... on 21 March, 2023
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
,
Ajay Rastogi
NON-REPORTABLE


                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. ……………OF 2023
                         (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (Crl.) No. 533 OF 2021)


         PANNEER SELVAM                                                .....APPELLANT

                                                     VERSUS

         STATE OF TAMIL NADU                                           .....RESPONDENT


                                               JUDGMENT
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.
1.               Leave granted.
2.               The present appeal is directed against the judgement and order

                          dated 29.03.2019 passed by the High Court of Judicature at

                          Madras in Crl. Appeal No. 85 of 2019, whereby the High Court

                          has dismissed the said appeal and confirmed the judgement and

                          order passed by the 3rd Additional District and Sessions Court,

                          Fast Track Court, Coimbatore in Sessions Case No. 192 of 2016.

                          The Sessions Court while acquitting the appellant-accused for

                          the offence under
Section 302
of IPC, had convicted him for the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora
Date: 2023.03.21
offences under
Section 304(ii)
and
506(i)
of IPC and had directed
16:44:40 IST
Reason:
him to undergo 07 years of rigorous imprisonment and pay fine of
1
Rs. 5,000/- in default thereof to undergo further simple

     imprisonment for a period of 06 months for the offence under
Section 304(ii)
IPC, and directed to pay fine of Rs. 1,000/- in

     default thereof to undergo simple imprisonment for a period of 04

     weeks for the offence under
Section 506(i)
of IPC.
3.   This Court vide order dated 13.01.2021, had issued notice to the

     respondent only on the quantum of sentence. Accordingly, the

     learned counsels for the parties were heard only on limited issue

     of the quantum of sentence.
4.   As per the case of the prosecution, the appellant-accused and

     the deceased-Mahalingam were the relatives. The appellant and

     the deceased used to have quarrels prior to the alleged incident

     as the deceased used to pester the appellant to get liquor for

     him. Frequently, the appellant therefore had developed hatred

     against the deceased and had planned to eliminate him. On

     14.04.2015, Mariamman Kovil festival was going on in the village

     Vellanaipatti, where the appellant and the deceased were

     staying. On the said day, at about 05:00 PM, the appellant

     deceitfully invited the deceased for having liquor. Along with the

     deceased, the appellant had also taken one Sarathkumar Samy

     (PW-2) and he took them to a remote place on Nilambur Road.

     At about 05:15 PM, a quarrel took place with the appellant and

     the deceased, and the appellant thrashed the deceased with
2
repeated blows on his face. As a result, deceased lost his

     balance and fell down on the ground. The appellant again

     thrashed him on cheeks repeatedly by pressing him on the

     ground with his legs. The witness Sarathkumar Samy tried to

     intervene but the appellant threatened him not to intervene. The

     panicked Sarathkumar on seeing the unconscious Mahalingam

     (deceased) requested a passerby named Ponnusamy (PW-3)

     who belonged to the same village to give him a phone, and he

     then called the brother of the deceased Arulkumar (PW-1).

     Arulkumar having come on the spot took his brother Mahalingam

     to the Government Hospital at Coimbatore, where his brother

     Mahalingam succumbed to the injuries on the next day. He

     therefore lodged the complaint before the Kovilpalayam Police

     Station against the appellant-accused.
5.   The learned senior advocate Mr. S. Nagamuthu submitted that

     the fight had occurred between appellant and the deceased on

     the spot and there was no premeditation on the part of the

     appellant to commit murder of the deceased. He further

     submitted that there was nothing on record to suggest that the

     appellant had taken undue advantage or had acted in a cruel or

     unusual manner. According to him, considering the evidence on

     record, the Trial Court and High Court had acquitted the
3
appellant from the charges levelled against him under
Section

     302
IPC and convicted him only for the offence under
Section

     304(ii)
of IPC. He further submitted that the appellant has already

     undergone more than 04 years of the sentence and this is the fit

     case to reduce the sentence to the extent of the sentence

     undergone by the appellant. However, the learned advocate Dr.

     Joseph Aristotle for the respondent-State submitted that the

     Sessions Court and High Court have already shown leniency to

     the appellant by treating the case as falling under
Section 304(ii)
of IPC instead of
section 302
of IPC and sentenced him to

     undergo rigorous imprisonment of 07 years, which may not be

     further reduced.
6.   Having regard to the submissions made by the learned counsels

     for the parties and to the observations and findings recorded by

     the courts below, it appears that the Sessions Court had

     convicted the appellant-accused for the offence under
Section

     304(ii)
of IPC by recording the finding that there was no

     premeditation and that the appellant-accused had not taken any

     undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner. The

     fight had taken place as the deceased used to pester the

     appellant to get liquor for him frequently, which had annoyed the

     appellant. The Sessions Court while imposing the sentence had
4
also taken into consideration the fact that the appellant-accused

      was the only son of his aged parents. Having regard to the said

      findings recorded by the Sessions Court and confirmed by the

      High Court, this Court is of the opinion that the interest of justice

      would be met if the sentence imposed on the appellant-accused

      is reduced to the extent of 05 years in place of 07 years.
7.   In that view of the matter, the appellant is directed to undergo

     rigorous imprisonment for a period of 05 years for the offence

     under
Section 304(ii)
of IPC. Rest of the sentence imposed by the

     Sessions Court and confirmed by the High Court shall remain

     unchanged. The appeal stands partly allowed accordingly.
..………………………. J.
[AJAY RASTOGI]


                                                 …..................................J.
                                                       [BELA M. TRIVEDI]

NEW DELHI;
21.03.2023
5