[Cites
14
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Maharashtra Rajya Padvidhar Prathamik ... vs Pune Municipal Corporation on 17 March, 2023
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
J.K. Maheshwari
,
Surya Kant
REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1765 OF 2023

                      [ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.
                                        18911 OF 2021]




          Maharashtra Rajya Padvidhar Prathamik
          Shikshak Va Kendra Pramukh Sabha                            .…Appellant

                                              VERSUS

          Pune Municipal Corporation and Ors.                      .…Respondents



                                             JUDGMENT
Surya Kant, J.
Leave granted.
2.              The issue that requires our consideration in this case is

          whether the services rendered by primary teachers while in the
Signature Not Verified
service of the Zilla Parishad (hereinafter “ZP”) deserves to be
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2023.03.17
15:00:26 IST
Reason:
counted towards their seniority after the transfer and merger of


                                                                             Page|1
their services into the Pune Municipal Corporation (hereinafter

“PMC”)?
FACTS :
3.   The State of Maharashtra is vested with the power to specify

a `larger urban area’ of a municipal corporation under
Section

3(1)
of the Maharashtra Municipal Corporation Act, 1949 (in

short, “
MMC Act
”). Such an area can further be altered by

issuing a Notification under
Section 3(3)
. The expression, “larger

urban area” is defined under
Article 243Q(2)
of the Constitution,

which says that:­

          “(2) In this article, “a transitional area”, a “smaller
          urban area” or “a larger urban area” means such area as
          the Governor may, having regard to the population of the
          area, the density of the population therein, the revenue
          generated for local administration, the percentage of
          employment in non­ agricultural activities, the economic
          importance or such other factors as he may deem fit,
          specify by public notification for the purposes of this
          Part.”
4.   State of Maharashtra in exercise of its powers under
Section

3(1)
of MMC Act decided to expand the territorial limits of the

PMC and, consequently, the geographical area of 38 villages

which were part of the Pune ZP were merged into the PMC with

effect from 01.11.1999. Post the merger, primary teachers as well

                                                                     Page|2
as employees from other departments who were serving in those

villages were given the option to have themselves transferred and

absorbed into the services of PMC.
5.   In this context,
Sections 3(1)
&
3(3)
of the MMC Act being

relevant are reproduced below: ­

          “3. Specification of larger urban areas and
          constitution of Corporations. [(1) The Corporation for
          every City constituted under this Act existing on the date
          of coming into force of the Maharashtra Municipal
          Corporations and Municipal Councils (Amendment) Act,
          1994, specified as a larger urban area in the notification
          issued in respect thereof under clause (2) of Article 243­Q
          of the Constitution of India, shall be deemed to be a duly
          constituted Municipal Corporation for the larger urban
          area so specified forming a City, known by the name "The
          Municipal Corporation of the City of....";
          xxx   xxx   xxx
          (3) [(a)Subject to the provisions of sub­section (2), the
          State Government] may also from time to time after
          consultation with the Corporation by notification in the
          Official Gazette, alter the limits specified for any larger
          urban area under sub­section (1) or sub­section (2) so as
          to include therein, or to exclude therefrom, such area as
          is specified in the notification.
(b) Where any area is included within the limits of
          the [larger   urban     area] under   clause     (a),  any
          appointments, notifications, notices, taxes, orders,
          schemes, licences, permissions, rules, bye­laws or forms
          made, issued, imposed or granted under this Act or any
          other law, which are for the time being in force in
          the [larger urban area] shall, notwithstanding anything
          contained in any other law for the time being in force but
          save as otherwise provided in
section 129A
or any other
          provision of this Act, apply to and be in force in the
          additional area also from the date that area is included in
          the City.
xxx   xxx   xxx”

                                                                        Page|3
6.   Respondent Nos. 5 to 79 were working as Primary Teachers

in the Pune ZP. They were appointed on different dates prior to

01.11.1999. They too were given option for their merger in the

PMC. They opted to accede to the absorption and joined the PMC.

It may be relevant to mention at this stage that with a view to

regulate the conditions of service of employees who are merged

from the Zilla Parishad to Municipalities, the State Government

had passed a Resolution (hereinafter “GR”) dated 13.08.1990, the

relevant part whereof reads as follows: ­

          “xxx   xxx   xxx
          government was considering whether to consider service
          provided for Zilla Parishad by said teachers should be
          considered for pay fixing, seniority, retirement benefit,
          etc.in   Municipal      Council/Municipal       Corporation
          education department. Government is passing order now
          regarding same that, service in Zilla Parishad of primary
          teachers should be considered for pay fixing, seniority,
          retirement benefit, etc. in Municipal Council/Municipal
          Corporation service, who are transferred under rule in
          concerned Municipal Corporation/Municipal Council
          education board from concerned Zilla Parishad for
          reasons mentioned above. but concerned Zilla Parishad
          should accept liability of service prior to classification of
          concerned primary teachers. government grant shall be
          passed for. Zilla Parishad at the rate fixed thereon.
2. This government resolution is passed under official
          approval of town development department, village
          development department and finance department
          and under official reference ­ 1045 / number­cr­1045/
          86/ser­4, dated 18.8.1986 of finance department.
xxx    xxx   xxx”
                                                              (sic.)



                                                                          Page|4
7.   The GR reproduced above unambiguously provides that the

services rendered by teachers in a ZP shall be taken into

consideration when fixing pay, seniority, retiral benefits etc. on

their permanent transfer to Municipalities. Despite the seeming

clarity on this point, there arose a dispute in respect to fixation of

inter se seniority between the teachers who were initially

recruited in the ZP and were later on absorbed into the PMC, as

opposed to the primary teachers who had been part of the

services of the PMC from the very beginning. There were a series

of correspondence on this issue between the Chief Executive

Officer of the ZP and the Administrative Officer, Shikshan Mandal

of the PMC, including two letters dated 11.10.1999 and

02.07.2011. These communications do not appear to us of any

legal consequence given the fact that the GR dated 13.08.1990

has not been rescinded, modified or superseded by any

subsequent government resolution.
8.   The Appellant is an Association formed by the primary

teachers who were directly recruited by the PMC. Its members

have an inter se seniority dispute with Respondent Nos. 5 to 79.

A draft seniority list was circulated by the PMC which proposed


                                                                Page|5
to assign seniority to Respondent Nos. 5 to 79 from the dates

they joined service in the ZP. The PMC, however, reversed its

tentative decision vide letter on 04.02.2017 which stated that

Respondent Nos. 5 to 79 would be assigned seniority only from

the date of their absorption into PMC. The private respondents

raised objections against the aforementioned decision, which

resulted in the constitution of a committee of five officers of the

PMC     for      consideration       of   those     objections.      On       the

recommendations of the Committee a final seniority list was

eventually issued on 20.02.2018 in which the seniority of

Respondent Nos. 5 to 79 was fixed only from the date of their

absorption into the PMC. For the sake of specificity, the outcome

of the Committee’s recommendations was that the service

rendered by Respondent Nos. 5 to 79 in their roles within the ZP

stood excluded from the length of their service.
9.    Aggrieved, Respondent Nos. 5 to 79 approached the High

Court and a Division Bench vide the impugned judgment dated

1st October, 2021 has allowed their writ petition in the following

terms: ­

              “52. A conjoint reading of
Section 493
which provides for
              transitory provisions read with Clause 5 of Appendix IV
              clearly indicates that the service rendered by the officers

                                                                            Page|6
         and servants before in the employment of the
         Municipality or the local authority immediately before the
         appended date shall be the officers and servants
         employed by the Corporation under the said Act and the
         services rendered by such officers and servants before the
         appointed date shall be deemed to be service rendered in
         the service of the Corporation. The second proviso to
         Clause 5 of Appendix IV empowers the Corporation to
         discontinue, the service of any officer or servant who in
         its opinion is not necessary or suitable to the
         requirements of the municipal service, after giving such
         officer or servant, such notice as is required to be given
         by the terms of his employment. Such discontinued
         employee shall be entitled to such leave, pension or
         gratuity as he would have been entitled to take or receive
         on being invalided out of service if this Act had not been
         passed.
53. It is not the case of the respondent no.1 or
         respondent no.3 that service of any of these petitioners
         were discontinued by the respondent no.1 under second
         proviso to Clause 5 of Appendix IV on the ground of not
         being suitable to the requirements of the municipal
         service or on the ground that their services were not
         necessary for the respondent no.1 – Corporation.
54. In our view, the said provision under
Section 493
of
         the Maharashtra Municipal Corporations Act read with
         Clause S(c) of the Appendix IV would also apply in case of
         en bloc transfer of the property forming part of such
         village which were transferred to the Municipal
         Corporation along with the schools, employees and the
         students. In our view, the seniority of each of these
         petitioners thus will have to be counted from their initial
         date of appointment in the schools run by Zilla Parishad
         and not from the date of their transfer in the schools run
         by the respondent no.1 Corporation. The impugned order
         showing the petitioners below the then existing
         employees of the respondent no. 1 by considering the
         date of their transfer in the schools run by the
         respondent no.1 as the date of appointment is totally
         illegal and contrary to
Section 493
read with Clause S(c)
         of Appendix IV thereto.”
10. The Appellant Association, representing those primary

teachers who have been recruited directly by the PMC and whose


                                                                       Page|7
seniority is adversely affected by the inclusion of the period spent

by Respondent Nos. 5 to 79 in ZP towards their seniority after

absorption into the PMC, has now filed this appeal.

SUBMISSIONS:
11. Mr. Vinay Navare, learned Senior Counsel for the Appellant

advanced three submissions:
(i)    Firstly, he argued that Respondent Nos. 5 to 79 were

            given a choice to either seek transfer into the PMC or

            to continue with their services in the schools run by

            the ZP. The respondent­teachers consciously made a

            choice to be assimilated into the PMC. Since this was a

            case involving ‘voluntary transfer’ rather than an

            ‘administrative transfer’, they cannot claim the benefit

            of their past service towards fixation of seniority.
(ii)   Secondly, it was a case of expansion of the `larger

            urban area’ belonging to the PMC and, hence,

            conditions of service of Respondent Nos. 5 to 79 shall

            remain protected only to the extent as provided under
Section 3(3)(b)
of the MMC Act. The said provision is

            conspicuously silent with respect to protection and


                                                                   Page|8
               consideration of past service.
Section 493
of the MMC

               Act read with Clause 5(c) of Appendix (IV) relied upon

               by the High Court will be attracted only in a case of

               newly constituted Municipality. That being not the

               case here, the High Court gravely erred in relying upon

               the said provision. Shri Navare explained that the

               legislative intent can be discerned from the fact that a

               provision similar to the first proviso to Clause 5(c) of

               Appendix IV, has not been added to
Section 3(3)(b)
of

               the MMC Act. Reliance was placed on
Union of India

               v. Shiv Dayal Soin & Sons (P) Ltd.1
, wherein the

               following was observed:
“6. …… As        a     canon      of     statutory
                       interpretation, expression unaus Est exclusion
                       arteries, what is expressly mentioned in one place
                       but not in another must be taken to have been
                       deliberately omitted. ……..”
(iii) Thirdly, Shri Navare argued that the decision of PMC

               five­Member Committee, which unequivocally held that

               the date of joining the PMC would be the conclusive

               determinant for the purpose of inter­se seniority, was a

               quasi­judicial order which Respondent Nos. 5 to 79 did
1
(2003) 4 SCC 695

                                                                            Page|9
           not assail before any forum. Their acquiescence and

           long silence on the matter estop them from questioning

           the subsequently published final seniority list which

           was a step taken to comply with the decision of the

           Five Member Committee.
12. Learned counsel for Respondent No. 1, the PMC, also

supported the cause of the Appellant and urged that in the event

of granting the benefit of past service to Respondent Nos. 5 to 79,

a cascading domino effect will be triggered which will lead to

other employees of different departments who have been

absorbed into PMC raising similar claims, thus, spawning an

unending seniority dispute between different cadres.
13. On the other hand, Mr. Abhay Anil Anurak, learned counsel

for Respondent Nos. 5 to 79 strenuously opposed the Appellant’s

claim and urged that:
(i)   First proviso to Clause 5(c) of Appendix IV, which is to

           be read into
Section 493
of MMC Act, categorically

           provides that the service rendered by Officers and

           Servants before their date of appointment shall be

           deemed to be service rendered in the service of the


                                                             Page|10
       Municipal Corporation itself. In view of this statutory

       mandate, the High Court has rightly held that

       Respondent Nos. 5 to 79 are entitled to assign the

       seniority from the date they were appointed in ZP.
(ii)   The Government Resolution dated 13.08.1990, in no

       uncertain terms, provides that on inclusion of the area

       of a ZP within the limits of Municipal Corporation, the

       transferred employees shall be entitled to the benefit of

       their past service towards fixation of pay, seniority and

       retiral benefits etc. This Resolution falls within the

       ambit of
Article 162
of the Constitution, and is binding

       on all inferior authorities including the PMC. Since

       Respondent Nos. 5 to 79 were appointed in the ZP,

       their previous service cannot be ignored. He forcefully

       denied the Appellant’s contention that it was a case of

       `voluntary   transfer’   and   maintained   that   private

       respondents had no choice but to give their consent for

       absorption in PMC as all the schools where they were

       working had been transferred to within the municipal

       limits.
Page|11
(iii)   The Appellants have mis­quoted the contents of letter

        dated 11.10.1999. The true extracts of the letter are as

        follows:
“xxx xxx xxx
4.   Also, it is hereby ordered to absorb only
              those primary teachers who have consented for
              being transferred to the Pune Municipal
              Corporation and it is hereby requested to
              accommodate said primary teachers with
              Municipal Corporation.
xxx    xxx xxx”


(iv)    Neither the Appellant nor the PMC        invoked Section
3(3)(b) of
MMC Act
before the High Court and their

        reliance upon this provision has been made for the

        first time before this Court only.
(v)     With regard to the claim raised by Appellant regarding

        acquiescence and estoppel, learned counsel countered

        by arguing that Respondent Nos. 5 to 79 were not

        obliged     to   challenge   recommendations    of     PMC

        Committee specifically, given that they consequently

        objected to the culmination of those recommendations

        into the final seniority list dated 20 th February, 2018,

        without any delay.
Page|12
ANALYSIS :
14. We have considered the rival submissions made on behalf of

the parties and have minutely examined the statutory provisions

relied upon by both the sides. In our considered view, the

following two questions need to be determined to resolve the

controversy:
(I)    Whether the inter se seniority of the primary teachers

     who were appointed in the ZP and were later on absorbed

     into PMC, vis­à­vis those primary teachers who directly

     joined PMC, is to be determined in accordance with
Section

     3(3)(b)
of the MMC Act?;
(II)   Alternatively,   should   such   inter   se   seniority   be

     determined in accordance with
Section 493
read with

     Clause 5I of Appendix IV of the MMC Act?
Question No. I:
15. On a cursory look of the legislative scheme behind the
MMC

Act
, it is evident that
Section 3
falls in Chapter 1, which is

captioned as ‘PRIMARY’. Since, the MMC Act was enacted in

1949, it has been suitably amended from time to time, especially


                                                                 Page|13
after the insertion of Part IX­A ‘Municipalities’ in our Constitution

with effect from 01.06.1993.
Article 243Q(1)
mandates that, in

every State, the following would be constituted: (a) A nagar

panchayat, for a transitional area, namely, an area in transition

from rural to urban area; (b) a municipal council for a smaller

urban area; and (c) a municipal corporation for a larger urban

area. The obligation was placed on every State under sub­Article

(2) of
Article 243Q
to define ‘transitional area’, ‘a smaller urban

area’ or ‘a larger urban area’. It is in discharge of this

Constitutional obligation that the State of Maharashtra also

amended the
MMC Act
thereby providing under
Section 3(1)
that

a `larger urban area’ shall be specified by way of a Notification to

be issued under
Article 243Q(2)
of the Constitution, and such an

area shall be deemed to be a duly constituted Municipal

Corporation. Sub­Section (3) further provides that the State

Government, in consultation with the Corporation, may include

or exclude an area from within the limits of the Municipal

Corporation. It is in this context that Clause (b) of sub­section (3)

provides that when an area is included within the limits of the

`larger urban area’, any appointments, notifications, notices,

taxes, orders, schemes, licenses, permissions, rules, by­laws

                                                              Page|14
issued, imposed or granted, under the
MMC Act
or any other law

which is for the time being in force in the larger urban area shall,

notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, apply to

and be in force in the additional area, from the date that area in

question is included in the city. To simplify, Clause (b) merely

states that whatever appointments, notifications, notices, rules or

by­laws etc. are already in force in the existing ‘larger urban area’

will mutatis mutandis come into force in the “additional area”

which is included by issuing a notification under Clause (a) of
Section 3(3)
of the MMC Act.
16. The purpose of Clause (b) is to ensure that any statutory or

administrative decision which has already been enforced by a

Municipal Corporation in its existing larger urban area shall stay

in force and will become applicable automatically in the newly

added area also. The expression ‘appointments’ has to be

understood in this context only.
17.   The scope of Clause (b) as a provision is meant to facilitate

the inclusion of newly added additional areas and to ensure that

such areas do not remain in a vacuum for want of statutory or

administrative decisions following the cessation of its status as


                                                              Page|15
part of the ZP. Clause (b) of Section (3)(3) is not concerned with

the protection of conditions of service of the employees of the ZP

who are absorbed into a Municipal Corporation. When the

Legislature never intended to regulate terms and conditions of

the employees who are merged in a Municipal Corporation due to

expansion of `larger urban area’, no inference in relation thereto

can be drawn from the plain wording of
Section 3(3)(b)
of the

MMC Act. The reliance placed by the Appellants on the said

provision is, thus, completely misplaced and is liable to be

rejected.
Question No. II:
18.
Section 493
of the MMC Act reads as follows: ­

            “493. Transitory provisions.­ The provisions of
            Appendix IV shall apply to the constitution of the
            Corporation and other matters specified therein.”


      It may be seen that the provisions of Appendix (IV) shall

apply to the constitution of the Corporation and other matters

specified therein. Clause (1) of Appendix (IV) pertains to

‘construction of reference in other enactments’ whereas Clause 2

provides that all rights of the municipality or any other local

authority shall, on the date in question, vest in the Corporation



                                                             Page|16
constituted for the said area. Clauses (3) and (4) deal with ‘sums

due’ and ‘debts, obligations, contracts and pending proceedings’,

respectively.
19. Clause (5) thereafter reads as follows:­

                                “APPENDIX IV


          TRANSITORY PROVISIONS
1. Construction of references in other enactments. ….
2. Transfer of rights.­ …
3. Sums due. ­ ….
4. Debts, obligations, contracts and pending
          proceedings. ­ ….
5. Continuation of appointments, taxes, budget
          estimates, assessments, etc. – Save as expressly
          provided by the provisions of this Appendix or by a
          notification issued under paragraph 22 or order made
          under paragraph 23, ­
(a)    any appointment, notification, notice, tax, order,
          scheme, licence, permission, rule, bye­law or form made,
          issued, imposed or granted under (the area constituted to
          be a City immediately, before the appointed day shall, in
          so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this
          Act, continue in force until it is superseded by any
          appointment, notification, notice, tax, order, scheme,
          licence, permission, rule, bye­law, or form made, issued,
          imposed or granted under this Act or any other law as
          aforesaid, as the case may be;
(b)    all budget estimates, assessments, valuations,
          measurements, and divisions made under (the
          Maharashtra Municipalities Act, 1965) or any other law
          in force in any area constituted to be a City immediately
          before the appointed day shall in so far as they are
          consistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to
          have been made under this Act;
(c)  all officers and servants in the employ of the said
          municipality or local authority immediately before the


                                                                     Page|17
          appointed day shall be officers and servants employed by
          the Corporation under this Act and shall, until other
          provision is made in accordance with the provisions of
          this Act, receive salaries and allowances and be subject
          to the conditions of service to which they were entitled to
          subject on such date:
Provided that service rendered by such officers and
          servants before the appointed day shall be deemed to
          be service rendered in the service of the Corporation:
Provided further that it shall be competent to the
          Corporation to discontinue the services of any officer or
          servant who, in its opinion, is not necessary or suitable
          to the requirements of the municipal service, after giving
          such officer or servant, such notice as is required to be
          given by the terms of his employment and every officer or
          servant whose services are so discontinued, shall be
          entitled to such leave, pension or gratuity as he would
          have been entitled to take or receive on being invalided
          out of service if this Act had not been passed.”
                                                 [Emphasis applied]
20. Clause 5, thus, deals with ‘continuation of appointments’,

taxes, budget estimates, assessments etc.’ and its Sub­Clause (C)

specifically says that all officers and servants under the

employment     of a municipality or local authority immediately

before the appointed day shall be officers and servants employed

by the Corporation under this Act and shall, subject to other

provisions made in accordance with the provisions of this Act,

receive salaries and allowances and be subject to the conditions

of service which were operative on such date. The first proviso

provides, crucially, that service rendered by such officers and



                                                                      Page|18
servants before the appointment date shall be deemed to be

service rendered in the service of the Corporation itself.
21. There is no dispute regarding the fact that Clause 5(c),

including its first proviso, occupies this field of law till date. The

provision explicitly deals with protection of conditions of service

of the officers and servants who were earlier employed in a local

authority like a ZP, and who have been subsequently absorbed

into a Municipal Corporation. It expressly protects their service

rendered by them in the local authority before the appointed day

and further provides that it shall be considered as service

rendered in the Municipal Corporation itself. Given the existence

of this unambiguous provision, the only logical conclusion is that

the service rendered by Respondent Nos. 5 to 79 in the ZP has to

be treated as service rendered in the PMC. Such service,

therefore, has to be counted towards the determination of their

seniority as well. There is no infirmity in the view taken by the

High Court in this regard.
22. Additionally, Clause (5) of Appendix IV starts with the

expression    ‘continuation’    of    appointments.      The    word

‘continuation’ connotes ‘without interruption’. It is an unbroken


                                                               Page|19
and consistent state of affairs or operation of something. In other

words, the service rendered by Respondent Nos. 5 to 79 in the ZP

is consistent and unbroken and it remains in existence even after

their absorption into the PMC as a result of the statutory

protection embodied under Clause (5) of Appendix (IV) read with
Section 493
of the MMC Act.
23. The    appellant’s   attempt    to   invoke   estoppel     against

Respondent Nos. 5 to 79 for their failure to challenge the report

of the PMC Committee does not assist its case. Firstly, the PMC

Committee was not competent to make any administrative

recommendation     dehors    the   Government     Resolution    dated

13.08.1990. Secondly, the cause of action to launch the

challenge arose in the first place only when final seniority list was

issued on 20.02.2018. Soon thereafter, Respondent Nos. 5 to 79

approached the High Court, thus, dispelling any notion of them

having slept on their rights. They cannot be said to have

acquiesced to the adverse decision taken against them and

neither there is any delay or latches on their part. Appellant’s

objection on this ground is untenable and must be rejected.
Page|20
CONCLUSION:
24. For the aforementioned reasons, we do not find any merit in

this appeal which is, accordingly, dismissed.
25. All pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
………………….………..J.
                                             (SURYA KANT)




                                         ………………….………..J.
                                          (J.K. MAHESHWARI)
NEW DELHI;
MARCH 17, 2023.
Page|21