[Cites
16
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Icon Education Society vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 17 March, 2023
Author:
Sanjay Kumar
Bench:
Sanjay Kumar
,
Dinesh Maheshwari
REPORTABLE



                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.1760 OF 2023
                           (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 4006 OF 2021)



  ICON EDUCATION SOCIETY                                               ..... Appellant

                                                   Vs.

  STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & OTHERS                                     ..... Respondents




                                              J U D G M E N T
SANJAY KUMAR, J.
Leave granted.
2.                  The short question that arises for consideration in this case

  is whether a minority educational institution in the State of

  Madhya Pradesh is required to get the fees charged by it fixed by

  the Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee under the provisions of

  the Madhya Pradesh Niji Vyavsayik Shikshan Sanstha (Pravesh Ka

  Viniyaman Avam Shulk Ka Nirdharan) Adhiniyam, 2007 (for short,
Signature Not Verified
'the Act of 2007')?
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2023.03.17
15:28:10 IST
Reason:
1
3.    This issue is no longer res integra as the contours and import

of the Act of 2007, including the question aforestated, were dealt

with and decided by a Constitution Bench in
Modern Dental College

and Research Centre and others Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and

others
[(2016) 7 SCC 353]. However, failure of the parties in

properly understanding the ratio decidendi of
the above decision
led to the present litigation.
4.    Icon Education Society, the appellant herein, maintains and

manages   two   unaided    educational           institutions       at     Indore,   viz.,

Indore Institute of Law and Indore Nursing College. Both these

institutions qualify as ‘minority educational institutions’ under

Section 2(g) of the National Commission for
Minority Educational

Institutions Act, 2004
.             While so, by letter dated 08.07.2019, the

Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee (for short, ‘the AFRC’),

constituted under
Section 4
of the Act of 2007, called upon the

Indore Institute of Law to submit its proposal for regulation of

the   fees   pertaining        to    law   courses    offered       by     it.   This   was

followed up by a reminder on 24.07.2019, which was addressed to

all   private   law   colleges        in   the   State   of    Madhya       Pradesh.    The

appellant society addressed reply dated 31.07.2019, stating that

the   AFRC   was    not   empowered        to    regulate     the    fees    charged     by

minority educational institutions and requesting that the notices

issued may be withdrawn or cancelled. The AFRC responded, vide

letter dated 14.11.2019, stating that a decision had been taken in

the   meeting      held   on        08.11.2019    that   the        fees    of   minority
2
institutions should be fixed by the AFRC. The appellant society

was   accordingly      informed        that   its      request       for       relaxation     from

getting the fees fixed by the AFRC was rejected.
5.    Aggrieved thereby, the appellant society preferred an appeal

under
Section       10
of    the    Act       of    2007    before         the    designated

authority. The appeal was dismissed by the appellate authority, by

order    dated       10.01.2020,         holding             that    the        procedure        of

regulating/fixing of fee was common to both minority and non-

minority institutions. The review/recall petition preferred by the

appellant      society     was   dismissed         with       costs       by    the       appellate

authority on 06.03.2020.
6.    Thereupon, the appellant society filed WP No. 9690 of 2020

before the Indore Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court. Its

prayer therein was to declare
Sections 4
and
9
of the Act of 2007

ultra   vires    as    these     provisions            did    not    distinguish            between

minority       educational        institutions                and     other           educational

institutions      and,     in     consequence,           did        not    exempt          minority

educational institutions from fee-fixation. A further direction

was   sought    to    exempt     the    appellant        society,         being       a    minority

educational institution, from the application of
Section 9
of the

Act of 2007, thereby permitting it to fix its own fees.
7.    By order dated 19.11.2020, a Division Bench of the Madhya

Pradesh High Court at Indore dismissed the writ petition. The
3
Division Bench noted that the validity of the Act of 2007 had

already been upheld in
Modern Dental College and Research Centre
(supra).
The High       Court then   relied upon
Sk. Md.     Rafique Vs.

Managing     Committee,      Contai   Rahamania        High     Madrasah   and   others
[(2020) 1 SCT 627(SC)], wherein this Court referred to its earlier

edict in
Ahmedabad Saint Xaviers College Society and another Vs.

State of Gujarat and another
[(1974) 1 SCC 717] that the right

under
Article 30(1)
of the Constitution is not absolute or above

other provisions of law and the essence of
Article 30(1)
was to

ensure equal treatment between majority and minority institutions.

It was further held that the laws of the land, including rules and

regulations, must apply equally to majority institutions as well

as minority institutions. In his concurring opinion, H.R.Khanna J

had held that a balance must be kept between the two objectives –

one, to ensure the standard of excellence of the institution and

the other, preserving the right of minorities to establish and

administer educational institutions.
In the light of
Modern Dental

College and Research Centre
(supra) and
Sk. Md. Rafique
(supra),

the   High    Court    concluded      that       no   grounds    were    made    out   to

interfere with the orders passed by the AFRC.
8.    Heard    Mr.Dama       Seshadri    Naidu,        learned      senior      counsel,

appearing     for     the    appellant   society;        and     Mr.P.V.Yogeshwaran,

learned AAG, appearing for the State of Madhya Pradesh.
4
9.
Section 4
in Chapter 2 of the Act of 2007 deals with the

constitution and establishment of the AFRC.
Section 4(1)
provides

that the State Government shall, by notification in the official

gazette, constitute a committee to be called the ‘Admission and

Fee Regulatory Committee’, for the supervision and guidance of the

admission process and for the fixation of fees to be charged from

candidates seeking admission in a private professional educational

institution.
Section 4(8)
provides that the AFRC may require a

private aided or unaided professional educational institution or a

deemed university to furnish, by the prescribed date, information

as may be necessary for enabling the AFRC to determine the fees

that    may    be     charged       by     the    institution         in    respect       of    each

professional course and the fees so determined shall be valid for

such period as may be notified by the State Government.
10.    Chapter 4 of the Act of 2007 deals with fixation of fees.
Section 9(1)
therein provides that, having regard to the location

of the private unaided professional educational institution; the

nature   of     the       professional       course;       the    cost      of    the    land    and

building;      the       available       infrastructure,          teaching,        non-teaching

staff    and     equipment;          the     expenditure         on    administration            and

maintenance;         the    reasonable           surplus    required         for    growth        and

development         of     the     professional          institution;        and        any    other

relevant       factor,       the     AFRC        shall     determine,        in     the       manner

prescribed,         the    fees     to     be     charged    by       the    private          unaided

professional educational institution.
Section 9(2)
provides that
5
the AFRC shall give the institution an opportunity of being heard

before fixing any fees. The proviso thereunder states that no such

fees, as may be fixed by the AFRC, shall amount to profiteering or

commercialization of education.
11.   Significantly, in the 11-Judges Bench decision of this Court

in
T.M.A. Pai Foundation and others Vs. State of Karnataka and

others
[(2002)     8    SCC    481],      the      majority         opinion    voiced      by

B.N.Kirpal CJ, speaking for himself and five other learned Judges,

answered     the     question       as     to       whether       statutory        provisions

regulating     facets       of    administration            of    educational       agencies,

including regulation of fees, would interfere with the right of

administration by minorities in the negative, but held that such

regulatory    measures       should      be   minimal        in    the    case    of     unaided

minority    educational          institutions.         As    regards      the     fees    to   be

charged by unaided institutions, it was held that the same could

not be regulated but no institution should charge capitation fee.

It was emphasized that, inasmuch as the occupation of education

is, in a sense, regarded as charitable, the Government can provide

regulations     that       will    ensure       excellence         in     education,       while

forbidding the charging of capitation fee and profiteering by the

institution.       Since    the     object        of     setting     up     an    educational

institution is by definition "charitable", it was held to be clear

that an educational institution cannot charge such a fee as is not

required for the purpose of fulfilling that object. To put it

differently,       per     the    majority,         in      the   establishment          of    an
6
educational institution, the object should not be to make a profit

inasmuch as education is essentially charitable in nature, but

there could, however, be a reasonable revenue surplus, which may

be generated by the educational institution for the purpose of

development of education and expansion of the institution.                                           The

partly-concurring opinion of S.N.Variava J, speaking for himself

and    Ashok   Bhan       J,    was     to    the       effect     that    there       could    be    an

appropriate mechanism to ensure that no capitation fee is charged

and profiteering is not resorted to, but the extent of regulation

would not be the same for aided and unaided institutions.
12.    Thereafter, in the 7-Judges Bench decision of this Court in
P.A.    Inamdar      and       others    Vs.    State         of    Maharashtra         and    others
[(2005) 6 SCC 537], this Court unanimously held that, as per the

law    declared      in
T.M.A.       Pai    Foundation
(supra),         setting     up    a

reasonable     fee     structure         is    also       a   component         of   the    right     to

establish and administer an institution, within the meaning of
Article 30(1)
of the Constitution, and every institution is free

to devise its own fee structure subject to the limitation that

there can be no profiteering and no capitation fee can be charged

directly or indirectly or in any form. It was further held that it

is     permissible        to    regulate       admission           and     fee       structure       for

achieving that purpose. The question whether guidelines could have

been    issued    in      the    matter       of        regulating        the    fee    payable       by

students to educational institutions was, therefore, answered in

the    affirmative        by    holding       that       every     institution         is     free    to
7
devise its own fee structure but the same can be regulated in the

interest of preventing profiteering and capitation fees.
13.    As stated hereinbefore, the Act of 2007 fell for consideration

before a Constitution Bench in
Modern Dental College and Research

Centre
(supra) in the context of regulation of unaided educational

institutions in the State of Madhya Pradesh. Significantly, the

validity/vires of various provisions of the Act of 2007, including

provisions pertaining to fixation of fees, was also under attack.

The issue was as to whether provisions relating to fixation of

fees   were   violative   of
Article   19(1)(g)
or   whether   they   were

regulatory in nature and were permissible under
Article 19(6)
of

the Constitution. Keeping in mind the fact that the State has the

power to regulate fixation of fees in the interest of preventing

profiteering and such fixation of fees has to be regulated and

controlled at the initial stage itself, this Court observed that

the parameters
laid down in
Section 9(1)
of the Act of 2007, which

have to be kept in mind while fixing the fees were, in fact, the

ones enunciated in earlier judgments of this Court.
This Court,

therefore, held that analysis of the provisions of the Act of 2007

by the Madhya Pradesh High Court in
Association of Private Dental

and Medical Colleges Vs. State of MP
[(2009) SCC Online MP 760],

from which the appeal arose, was perfectly in order. Reference was

made to the observations contained therein to the effect that each

professional educational institution can furnish information with

regard to the fees that it proposes to charge from the candidates,
8
taking into account the cost of components, the reasonable surplus

required for growth and development and other factors relevant to

impart professional education as mentioned in
Section 9(1)
of the

Act of 2007, and that the function of the AFRC is only to find

out, after giving due opportunity of hearing to the institution,

whether    the    fees   proposed       by   the   institution    is     based   on   the

factors mentioned in
Section 9(1)
of the Act of 2007 and did not

amount    to   profiteering       and    commercialization       of    education.     The

High Court had further observed that the AFRC, while determining

the fees, only gives final approval to the proposed fees to be

charged, after being satisfied that it was based on the factors

mentioned in
Section 9(1)
, and that there was no profiteering or

commercialization         of   education.          The   High    Court     accordingly

concluded that the provisions of
Sections 4(1)
,
4(8)
and
9
of the

Act of 2007, in substance, empowered the AFRC to be only satisfied

that     the     fee   proposed     by       private     professional      educational

institutions did not amount to profiteering or commercialization

of education and was based on the factors mentioned in
Section

9(1)
of the Act of 2007 and held that the Act of 2007, therefore,

did not violate the right of the private professional educational

institution       to     charge     its      own     fee.   Accepting       the       said

interpretation, this Court observed that the AFRC which is set up

for that purpose is discharging only a regulatory function, as the

fee which a particular educational institution seeks to charge

from its students has to be suggested by the said educational

institution itself and the AFRC is empowered to satisfy itself
9
that   the    fee     proposed      by    the     educational        institution     did   not

amount to profiteering or commercialization of education and was

based on the intelligible factors mentioned in
Section 9(1)
of the

Act of 2007. This Court, therefore, concluded that it was only a

regulatory         measure    and   did     not        take   away     the   power    of   the

educational institutions to fix their own fees.
14.    The supplementing opinion of R. Banumathi J noted that, though
Section 9
of the Act of 2007 empowered the AFRC to determine the

fees, the High Court had read down
Sections 4(1)
,
4(8)
and
9
of

Act    of    2007,    by     holding      that    those       provisions     "in   substance

empower the committee to be only satisfied that the fee proposed

by a private professional educational institution did not amount

to profiteering or commercialization of education and was based on

the factors mentioned in
Section 9(1)
of the Act 2007...". The

learned Judge accordingly held that the State had the legislative

competence to enact the Act of 2007 and regulation of fixation of

the fees was to protect the right of the students in having access

to higher education without being subjected to exploitation in the

form    of    profiteering.         The     learned         Judge     concurred    with    the

majority      view     in      upholding         the       validity     of   the     impugned

legislation and affirmed the decision of the High Court.
15.    It    is,    therefore,      too    late       in   the   day   for   the   appellant

society to again seek to challenge the validity of the Act of

2007, as the provisions of this enactment have already been read
10
down by this Court to mean that the AFRC would have the power only

to regulate the fee once the same is proposed by the educational

institution itself, keeping in mind the parameters encapsulated in
Section 9(1)
thereof.
16.    Therefore,        as       matters       stand,    the    Act     of     2007      has      been

interpreted             to         mean         that       the          AFRC,          constituted

thereunder, exercises only the power of ‘regulation’ in respect of

the     fees     proposed          by     the     institution,         conditioned          by     the

parameters in
Section 9(1)
of the Act of 2007. In effect, the

liberty given to unaided institutions to propose the fees that

they    wish     to   charge,       keeping       in     mind    the    factors       set    out    in
Section 9(1)
of the Act of 2007, stands protected and it is only

by way of regulating the fees so proposed that the AFRC would

exercise the power of reviewing the proposed fees, after giving

due     opportunity          of     hearing       to      the    educational           institution

concerned. The contrary stand taken by the AFRC, as is evident

from its communications to the appellant society, therefore cannot

be     countenanced.          It    is     not     open    to     the    AFRC       to      seek    to

unilaterally fix the fees to be charged by the appellant society

for    the     professional          courses       offered      through       its      educational

institutions. At the same time, it is not open to the appellant

society to claim complete immunity in undertaking this exercise

and     seek     exemption         from     any    interference          by     the      AFRC.      The

appellant society must necessarily submit the fees proposed by it

in     respect     of    the       professional          courses       offered        through      its
11
institutions to the AFRC for the purpose of review and regulation,

as per the provisions of
Section 9
of the Act of 2007 and the

principles
laid down by
this Court in the decisions referred to

hereinabove. Making this position clear, the appeal is disposed of

accordingly.
Parties shall bear their own costs.
………………………………………...J
                                               [DINESH MAHESHWARI]



                                               ………………………………………...J
                                                    [SANJAY KUMAR]

NEW DELHI;
March 17, 2023.
12