[Cites
19
, Cited by
62
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Gujarat vs Mirzapur Moti Kureshi Kassab Jamat & Ors on 26 October, 2005
Equivalent citations: AIR 2006 SUPREME COURT 212, 2005 AIR SCW 5723, 2006 (1) AIR BOM R 168, (2006) 1 GCD 426 (SC), (2005) 7 SCJ 701, (2005) 8 SUPREME 697, (2006) 1 ALLCRIR 588, (2005) 8 SCALE 661, (2006) 2 JCR 272 (SC), (2006) 1 GUJ LR 294, (2006) 1 RAJ LW 705, 2005 (8) SCC 534, 2006 (1) ALLMR (NOC) 32
Author:
A.K. Mathur
Bench:
A.K. Mathur
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  4937-4940 of 1998

PETITIONER:
State of Gujarat					      

RESPONDENT:
Mirzapur Moti Kureshi Kassab Jamat & Ors.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 26/10/2005

BENCH:
A.K. MATHUR

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T 
With

C.A. No.4941-44 of 1998 and C.A. No.4945 of 1998


A.K. MATHUR, J.
I have gone through the erudite  judgment  by Hon'ble  Chief Justice. 
But I  regret  I cannot  support the view taken by Hon'ble Chief Justice.
Basic question that arises in  these petitions are whether there is need 
to over-rule the earlier decisions which held the field right from 1958-1996,  
is the ground realities have materially changed so as to reverse the view held 
by successive Constitutional Benches of this Court or those decisions  
ceased to have any relevance.
It is true that  life is ever changing and the concept which was useful 
in 18th century may not be useful in this millennium.  We  have gone  from 
cartage to space age.  New scientific temper is a guiding factor in this 
millennium.  But despite the  changing pattern of life it cannot be said  that 
the decision delivered in the case of Mohd. Qureshi  followed by subsequent 
decisions have outlived its ratio.  In my respectful view the material which 
has been placed for taking a contrary  view  does not  justify the reversal of 
earlier decisions.
The detailed history of the legislation and various decisions bearing 
on the subject has been dealt with by Hon'ble Chief Justice in most 
exhaustive and  pains-taking manner.  Therefore,  there is no  need  to repeat 
those legislative as well as judicial history  here.     My endeavor  in this 
opinion will be  to show that the  situation which existed  right from 1958  
till this date there is no material change warranting reversal of the judgments 
bearing on the subject from 1958-96.
The whole controversy arose in the writ petition  filed in the Gujarat 
High Court challenging the validity of  the
Bombay Animal Preservation 
(Gujarat Amendment) Act, 1994
(hereinafter referred to
Gujarat Act
No. 4 
of 1994).  By this amendment the age of bulls and bullocks which was 
existed at that time  that is bull below the age of 16 years and bullocks below  
the age of 16 years can not be slaughtered was deleted.  By this amendment  
the age restriction was totally taken away and that means that  no  bull and 
bullock irrespective of  age shall be slaughtered.  This amendment was 
challenged before the Gujarat High Court.  The Gujarat High Court  after 
dealing with  all aspects  in detail held that amendment  is ultra vires.  
Hence, the present petition alongwith the  other petitions came up  before  
this Court by Special Leave Petition.
The matter was listed before the three Judges' Bench.  Thereafter, it 
was  taken by the Constitution Bench and the Constitution Bench realizing 
difficulty  that there are  already  Constitution Bench judgments holding the 
field, referred the matter to the seven  Judges' Bench for reconsideration of 
all the earlier decisions of the Constitution Benches.  Hence these matters 
are before  seven Judges' Bench.
Hon'ble the Chief Justice has already reproduced the objects and 
reasons for  amendment  therefore same need not be reproduced here. This 
amendment brought about to effect  directive principles of the State Policy 
under
Articles 47
,  48
of the Constitution and Clause (b) and (c)  of
Article 
39
of the Constitution.
Thereafter,  Hon'ble  Chief Justice  has also reviewed all the cases 
bearing on the subject which can be enumerated as under:
1.	AIR 1958 SC 731 (
Mohd. Hanif Qureshi & Ors. Vs. State of 
Bihar
)
2.	AIR 1961 SC448 (
Abul Hakim Vs. State of Bihar
)
3.	1969 (1) SCC 853 (
Mohd. Faruk Vs. State of M.P. & Ors
.)
4.	1986 (3) SCC 12 (
Haji Usmanbhai Hasanbhai Qureshi Vs. State of 
Gujarat
5.	1996 (4) SCC 391 (
Hashmattullah  Vs. State of M.P. & Ors.
)



In these cases, this very question  was agitated  & by  series of  
decisions it was  answered in the negative.
In
Mohd. Hanif Qureshi
's case this Court upheld  a  total  prohibition  
of   slaughter of  the cows of all ages   and calf of buffalows  (male and 
female) & she-buffaloes, breeding bulls and working bullocks, without 
prescribing any test of requirement  as to their age.  But so far as bull & 
bullocks are concerned   when they  ceased to have  draughtability  
prohibition of their slaughter was not upheld in public interest.  Hon'ble S.R. 
Das, CJ speaking for the Court exhaustively  dealt with all the aspects which 
practically covers all the arguments which  have been raised before  us, 
especially, the utility of the cow-dung for manure as well as the  cow urine 
for its chemical qualities like Nitrogen Phosphates and Potash. His Lordship  
recognized that this enactment was made in discharge of  State's obligation  
under
Art. 48
of the Constitution to preserve our livestock.
His  Lordship has discussed the  question of reasonable restriction 
under
Article 19 (6)
and after considering all  material placed before the 
Court, and adverting to social, religious, utility point of  view in  most 
exhaustive manner finally concluded thus :
"After giving our most careful and anxious consideration to the 
pros and cons of the problem as indicated and discussed above 
and keeping in view the presumption in favour of the validity of 
the legislation and without any the least disrespect to the 
opinions of the legislatures concerned we feel that in 
discharging the ultimate responsibility cast on us by the 
Constitution we must approach and analyze the problem in an 
objective and realistic manner and then make our 
pronouncement on the  reasonableness of the restrictions 
imposed by the impugned enactments.  So approaching and 
analyzing the problem, we have reached the conclusion (i)  that 
a total ban on the slaughter of cows of all  ages and calves of 
cows  and  calves of she-buffaloes, male and female,  is quite 
reasonable and valid and is in consonance with the directive 
principles
laid down  in
Art. 48; (ii)
that a total ban on the 
slaughter of she-buffaloes,  or breeding bulls or working 
bullocks (cattle as well as buffaloes)  as long as they are as 
milch or draught cattle is also reasonable and valid and (iii) that 
a total ban on the slaughter of she-buffaloes, bulls and bullocks 
(cattle or buffalo)  after they cease to be capable of yielding 
milk or of  breeding or working as draught animals cannot be 
supported as reasonable in the interest of the general public."
Therefore,  their Lordships have summarized the whole concept of 
preservation of  the  cattle life in India with reservation that those cattle head 
which have lost their utility can be slaughtered specially with regard to  
draught  cattle, bulls, bullocks & buffaloes so as to preserve the other 
milching cattle  for  their better  breed and their better produce.
Subsequently in another decision, in the case of
Abdul Hakim vs. 
State  of Bihar
reported in AIR 1961 SC 448   the ban was imposed by the 
States of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and U.P. which came up for consideration 
before this Court and in this context  it was observed as under:
"The test of reasonableness should be applied to each 
individual statute impugned and no abstract standard, or general 
pattern, of  reasonableness can be laid down as applicable to all 
cases.  The nature of the right alleged to have been infringed, 
the underlying purpose of the restrictions imposed, the extent 
and urgency of the evil sought to be remedied thereby, the 
disproportion of the imposition, the prevailing conditions at the 
time, should all enter into the judicial verdict."
Their Lordship  also emphasized that the legislature  is the best Judge 
of what is good for the community, by whose suffrage it comes into 
existence, the ultimate responsibility for determining the validity  of the law 
must rest with the Court and the Court must  not shirk that solemn duty cast 
on it by the Constitution.
It was  observed that the unanimous opinion of  the experts is that 
after the age of 15, bulls, bullocks and buffaloes are no longer useful for 
breeding, draught and other purpose and whatever little use they may have 
then is greatly off-set by the economic disadvantage of feeding and 
maintaining unserviceable cattle.
Section  3 of the Bihar  Act in so far as it has increased the age limit  
to 25  in respect  of   bulls, bullocks and she-buffaloes, for the purpose of 
their slaughter imposes an unreasonable restriction on the fundamental right 
of the butchers  to carry on their trade and profession.  Moreover the 
restriction cannot be said to be in the interests of the general public, and to 
that extent it is void.
Then again in  the case of
Mohd. Faruk vs. State of Madhya Pradesh 
and Ors.
reported in  1969 (1) SCC 853,  Constitution Bench  was called 
upon to decide the validity of  the notification issued by the Madhya Pradesh 
Government under
Municipal Corporation Act
.  Earlier,  a notification was 
issued by the Jabalpur  Municipality permitting  the slaughter of bulls and 
bullocks alongwith the other  animals.    Later on State Government issued 
notification cancelling the notification  permitting the slaughter of bulls and 
bullocks.  This came up for  a  challenge  directly  under
Art. 32
of the 
constitution before  this Court,  that this  restriction amounts to breach of
Art. 19(1)(g)
of  the constitution.  In that context, their Lordship observed:
"That the sentiments of  a section of the people may be hurt by 
permitting slaughter of bulls and bullocks in premises 
maintained by a local authority.  But a prohibition imposed on 
the exercise  of a fundamental right to carry on an occupation,  
trade  or  business  will not be regarded as reasonable if it is 
imposed not in the interest of the general  public but merely to 
respect the susceptibilities and sentiments of a section of the  
people  whose way of life belief or thought is not the  same as 
that of the claimant.  The notification issued must, therefore, be 
declared ultra virus as infringing
Article 19(1)(g)
of  the  
Constitution."
Then again in the case of
Haji Usmanbhai Hasanbhai Qureshi & Ors. 
vs. State of Gujarat
reported in (1986) 3 SCC 12,  the insertion of
Section 5
(1-A) (c) and (d)   was made under the  Bombay Animal Preservation  
(Gujarat amendment) act 1979) came up for consideration.  By virtue of this 
insertion by the Gujarat State, it was laid down that there will be ban of  
slaughter of  bulls, bullocks below the age of 16 years.  It was contented that 
this prohibition is unreasonable and violative of
Art. 19(1)(g).
Their 
Lordships upheld the restriction under
Art. 19(6)
with reference to
Art. 48
of the constitution.     Their Lordships   upheld the contention of the  State of 
Gujarat    that with the improvement of scientific methods cattle up to   the 
age of 16 years    are used for the purpose of breeding and other agricultural  
operation.   But by this Act of  1994 this age restriction has now been totally  
taken away by the Act of 1994 (which is subject matter of challenge  in these 
petitions).
Then again the matter  came up before this Court in the case of
Hashmattullah vs. State of  M.P. and Ors.
reported in   1996 (4) SCC 391.  
This time  the provisions of the
M.P. Agricultural  Cattle Preservation Act, 
1959
came up  for consideration.
This Act
was amended by
Amending Act
of  1991 and a total ban on slaughter  of bulls and bullocks came  to  be 
imposed.   And this was challenged being violative of
Art. 19 (1)(g)
of the 
constitution.
Their Lordships after reviewing all earlier cases on the subject and 
taking into consideration the uselessness of  these  bulls  and bullocks after 
they have attained  a particular age for agriculture operation like  manure as 
well as  bio-gas and ecology,  observed  in para 18  as under:
"We are pained to notice the successive attempts made by the 
State of Madhya Pradesh to nullify the effect of this Court's 
decisions beginning with
Mohd. Hanif
's case and ending with
Mohd. Faruk
's case, each time on flimsy grounds.  In this last 
such attempt, the objects and reasons show how insignificant 
and unsupportable the ground for bringing the legislation was.  
The main thrust of the objects and reasons for the legislation 
seems to be that even animals which have ceased to be capable 
of yielding milk or breeding or working as draught animals can 
be useful as they would produce dung which could be used to 
generate non-conventional sources of energy like bio-gas 
without so much as being aware of the cost of maintaining such 
animals for the mere purpose of dung.  Even the supportive 
articles relied  upon do not bear on this point.  It is obvious that 
successive attempts are being made in the hope that some day it 
will succeed as indeed it did with the High Court which got 
carried away by research papers published only two or three 
years before without realizing that they dealt with the aspect of 
utility of dung but had nothing to do with the question of the 
utility of animals which have ceased to be reproductive of 
capable of being used as draught animals.   Besides, they do not 
even reflect on the economical aspect of; maintaining such 
animals for the sole  purpose of  dung. Prim facie it seems 
farfetched and yet the State Government thought it as sufficient 
to amend the law."
And their Lordships  declined to review the
ratio
laid  down in
Mohd. Hanif 
Qureshi
's  case & reiterated the same.
This is a survey of the judicial determination on the subject.   And in 
the last case their Lordships frowned on unsuccessful attempt by the State to 
somehow nullify the
ratio
laid down in
Mohd. Hanif Qureshi
's  case and 
subsequent decisions following
Qureshi
's case.      But this time, the State of 
Gujarat  has come up to seek  the review of earlier decisions.   Now I shall 
examine the material which has been placed  by  the State of Gujarat to 
justify the total prohibition of  slaughter of bulls and bullocks.
Learned counsel  for the appellant has brought to our notice the 
affidavit filed by the State  of Gujarat  which has been reproduced by the 
Hon'ble Chief Justice on page 56 in his opinion onwards.    Therefore, I 
need not reproduce the  whole of the affidavit.   Mr. J.S.Parikh, Deputy 
Secretary, Agricultural Cooperative and Rural Development Department of 
the State of Gujarat has in his affidavit stated that  almost in 50% of the 
agricultural operation by tractor is not possible because of small holdings in 
the State of Gujarat.   Therefore, for such small holdings the  draught 
animals are best used for cultivation purposes.   It  was also stated  that the 
total cultivated area of Gujarat  State  is about 124 lakh hectares and   a pair 
of bullocks is required for ploughing 10 hectares of land. Therefore, 
5.481million  and approximately equal number is required for carting of  
whole land.   In accordance with livestock census, the Gujarat State  has 
availability of indigenous bullocks around 2.84 millions that means  that  a 
State  has only 25% of  their requirement and it is also stated that each bull is 
required for this purpose.   He has also stated that bull or bullocks  at every 
stage  of life  supplies 3500 kg. of dung and  2000 ltrs.  of urine  and  this  
quantity of dung  can supply 5000 cubic feet of biogas, 80 M.T. of organic 
fertilizer and the urine can supply 2000 ltrs of pesticides and the use of  it in 
farming increases the yield very substantially.   That in recent advancement 
of technology use of biogas has become very useful source of energy and the 
biogas can be prepared out of the cow dung and other inputs.  It was pointed 
out that  there are 19362 biogas plants installed in the State during 1995-97.
Similarly, an additional affidavit  was filed  by Mr. D.P. Amin, Joint 
Director of Animal Husbandry, Gujarat State.  He has mentioned that the 
number of the  slaughter houses  have declined during the year 1982-83  to 
1996-97.  The average number of   animals slaughtered  in regulated 
slaughter houses  was 4,39,141.  It is also stated  that there  is a reduction in 
slaughter   of  the bull and bullocks above the age of 16 years.  Almost 50 
per cent of the land holdings are less than 2 hectares; tractor operation is not 
affordable to small farmers.  For tractors operation one should have large 
holding of land.  Such land holders are only around 10 per cent of the total 
land holders.  Hence the farmers with small land holdings require bullocks 
for their agricultural operations and transport.  There is reduction in 
slaughter of bulls and bullocks above the age of 16 years reported in the 
regulated slaughter houses of Gujarat  State.  As reported in the years from 
1982-83 to 1996-97, the slaughter of bulls and bullocks above the age of 16 
years was only 2.48% of the total animals of different categories slaughtered 
in the State.  This percentage has gone down to the level of only 1.10% 
during last 8 years i.e. 1997-98 to 2004-05 which is very less significant to 
cause or affect the business of butcher communities.  He has also stated that 
the  bullock above the age of 16 years can  generate 0.68  horse power  
draught output    while the  prime bullock generates 0.83 horse power per  
bullock during carting/hauling draught work.  Considering the utility of 
bullocks above 16 years of age as draught power a detailed combined study 
was carried out by Department of Animal Husbandry and Gujarat 
Agricultural University (Veterinary Colleges S.K. Nagar & Anand).   The 
study covered different age groups of 156 (78 pairs) bullocks above the age 
of 16 years age generated 0.68 horse power draught output per bullock while 
the prime bullock generated 0.83 horse power per bullock during 
carting/hauling draught work in a summer with about more than 42: F temp.  
The study proves that 93% of aged bullock above 16 years of age are still 
useful to farmers to perform light and medium draught works.  The 
importance of organic manure as a source of humus and plant nutrients to 
increase the fertility level of soils has been well recognized.  The organic 
matter content of cultivated soils of the tropics and sub-tropics is 
comparatively low due to high temperature and intense microbial activity.  
The crops remove annually large quantity of plant nutrients from soil.  
Moreover, Indian soils are poor in organic matter and in major plant 
nutrients.  Therefore, soil humus has to be replenished through periodic 
addition of organic manure for maintaining soil productivity.  It was 
mentioned that there is  number of bio-gas plants operating in the State of 
Gujarat.
Apart from these affidavits many more published documents have 
been placed on record which has been reproduced by the Hon'ble Chief 
Justice of India in his opinion.  But all these are general datas which only 
provide the usefulness of cow dung for the purposes of manure as well as for 
biogas and likewise the urine of the cows for pesticides and ayurvedic 
purposes. But all those datas cannot change the reality that such an aged bull 
and bullocks produce huge quantity of the cow dung manure and urine 
which can alter a situation materially so as to reverse the earlier decisions of 
this court.  Utility of the cow dung and urine was realized and appreciated in 
the earlier decision of this Court in Mohd. Hanif Qureshi's and Ors. vs State 
of Bihar and Ors. (AIR 1958 SC 731)  The then Chief Justice has quoted 
from various scriptures emphasizing the importance of the cattle life.  
Therefore it cannot be said that the earlier decisions rendered by the 
Constitution Bench was oblivious of these facts.
However, so far as the affidavits filed on behalf of State of Gujarat 
about the use of biogas and the usefulness of the draught animals has to be 
taken with pinch of salt, in both the affidavits it has been admitted that urine 
and the cow dung of the aged bull and bullocks beyond 16 years is reduced 
considerably and likewise their draughtability.  Therefore, it is admitted that 
the bullocks which have crossed the age of 16 years their output for the 
urine, cow dung and draughtability is substantially  reduced.  Therefore it is 
explicit from their affidavits that the age of 16 years prescribed earlier was 
on a very reasonable basis after proper scientific study but de hors those 
scientific study the State Government brought this amendment removing the 
age limit for slaughtering of the bulls and bullocks and totally prohibited 
slaughtering of the same.  This decision of the State Government does not 
advance the public interest.
Another significant disclosure in both these affidavits is that 
slaughtering of these bulls and bullocks has considerably reduced in the year 
1997-98 to 2004-2005.  The slaughtering of bulls and bullocks beyond the 
age of 16 years was only 2.48 % of the total animals of different categories 
slain in the State prior to this period.  This percentage has gone down to the 
level of only 1.10 % during the last 8 years i.e. 1997-98 to 2004-2005.  
These details reveal that in fact the slaughtering of these bulls and bullocks 
beyond the age of 16 years constituted only 1.10% of the total slaughtering 
takes place in the State.  If this is the ratio of the slaughtering, I fail to 
understand how this legislation can advance the cause of the public at the 
expense of the denial of Fundamental Right of this class of persons 
(butchers).  In view of facts disclosed in the affidavit filed by the two senior 
officer of the State of Gujarat speaks volume that for small percentage of 
1.10% can the fundamental right of this class of persons should be sacrificed 
and earlier decisions be reversed. I fail to understand how it would advance 
the cause of the public at large so as to deprive the handful of persons of 
their rights to profession.    On the basis of this material, I am of the opinion 
that the earlier decisions of this Court have not become irrelevant in the 
present context.  The tall claim made by State looks attractive in a print but 
in reality it is not so.  I fail to understand that how can an animal  whose 
average age is said to be 12-16 years  can at  the age of 16 years reproduce 
the cow-dung or urine which can off set the  requirement of the  chemical  
fertilizer.
In this connection reference be made to text book where average 
age is 12 years.  It is a common  experience that the use of the chemical 
fertilizer has increased  all over the country and the first priority of the 
farmer is the chemical fertilizer, as a result of which the production in food  
grain in the country has gone up  and  today the  country has become 
surplus.   This is because of the use of the chemical fertilizer only  and not 
the  organic manure.  It was observed  in
Mohd. Hanif
's case    that India has 
a largest cattle head but a lower in the production of milk.  It is only because 
of the scientific methods employed by veterinarian which has increased the 
milk production in the country  not because of the poor  breed of  the bulls.  
It is common  experience  that aged bulls are not used for purposes  of  
covering the  cows for better quality of the breed.   Only well-built young 
bulls are used for the purpose of  improving the breeding and not the aged 
bulls.   If the aged and weak bulls are allowed for mating purposes, the off-
spring will be of poor health and that will not be in the interest of the  
country.	So far as the use of biogas is concerned, that has also been 
substantially reduced after the advent of L.P.G.
Therefore in my opinion, in the background of this scenario, I do not 
think that it will be proper to reverse the view which has been held good for 
a long spell of time from 1958 to 1996.  There is no material change in 
ground realities warranting reversal of earlier decisions.
One of the other reasons which has been advanced for reversal of 
earlier judgments was that at the time when these earlier judgments were 
delivered
Article 48(A)
and
51(A)
were not there and impact of both these 
Articles were not considered.  It is true that
Article 48(A)
which was 
introduced by the 42nd Constitutional Amendment in 1976 with effect from 
3.1.1977 and
Article 51(A)
i.e. fundamental duties were also brought about 
by the same amendment.  Though, these Articles were not in existence at 
that time but the effect of those Articles were indirectly considered in the
Mohd. Hanif Qureshi
's case in 1958. It was mentioned that cow dung can be 
used for the purposes of manure  as well as for the purpose of fuel that will 
be more echo-friendly.
Similarly, in
Mohd. Hanif Qureshi
's case their 
Lordships have quoted from the scriptures to show that we should have a 
proper consideration for our cattle wealth and in that context their Lordships 
quoted in para 22 which reads as under:
"22. The avowed object of each of the impugned Acts is to 
ensure the preservation, protection, and improvement of the 
cow and her progeny.  This solicitude arises out of the 
appreciation of the usefulness of cattle in a predominantly 
agricultural society.  Early Aryans recognized its importance as 
one of the most indispensable adjuncts of agriculture.  It would 
appear that in Vedic times animal flesh formed the staple food 
of the people.  This is attributable to the fact that the climate in 
that distant past was extremely cold and the Vedic Aryans had 
been a pastoral people before they settled down as 
agriculturists.  In Rg. Vedic times goats, sheep, cows, buffaloes 
and even horses were slaughtered for food and for religious 
sacrifice and their flesh used to be offered to the Gods.  Agni is 
called the "eater of ox or cow" in Rg.Veda (VIII,43,11).  The 
slaying of a great ox (Mahoksa) or a "great Goat" (Mahaja) for 
the entertainment of a distinguished guest has been enjoined in 
the Satapatha Brahmana (III.4. 1-2).  Yagnavalkya also 
expresses a similar view (Vaj.1. 109).  An interesting account 
of those early days will be found in Rg.Vedic Culture by Dr. 
A.C. Das, Chapter 5, pages 203-5 and in the History of 
Dharamasastras (Vol.II, Part II) by P.V. Kane at pages 772-773.  
Though the custom of slaughtering of cows and bulls prevailed 
during the vedic period, nevertheless, even in the Rg. Vedic 
times there seems to have grown up a revulsion of feeling 
against the custom.  The cow gradually came to acquire a 
special sanctity and was called "Aghnya" (not to be slain).  
There was a school of thinkers amongst the Risis, who set their 
face against the custom of killing such useful animals as the 
cow and the bull.  High praise was bestowed on the cow as will 
appear from the following verses from Rg.Veda, Book VI, 
Hymn XXVIII (Cows) attributed to the authorship of Sage 
Bhardavaja:
"1 . The kine have come and brought good fortune; 
let them rest in the cow-pen and be happy near us.

Here let them stay prolific, many coloured, and 
yield through many morns their milk for Indra.
6. O Cows, ye fatten e'n the worn and wasted, and 
make the unlovely beautiful to look on.

Prosper my house, ye with auspicious voices, your 
power is glorified in our assemblies.
7. Crop goodly pasturages and be prolific; drink 
pure sweet water at good drinking places.

Never be thief or sinful man your master, and may 
the dart of Rudra still avoid you."
(Translation by Ralph Griffith).  Verse 29 of hymn 1 in Book X 
of Atharva Veda forbids cow slaughter in the following words:
"29. The slaughter of an innocent, O Kritya, is an 
awful deed, Slay not cow, horse, or man of ours."
Hyman 10 in the same book is a rapturous glorification of the 
cow:
"30. The cow is Heaven, the cow is Eath, the cow 
is Vishnu, Lord of life.
The Sadhyas and the Vasus have drunk the 
outpourings of the cow.
34. Both Gods and mortal men depend for life and 
being on the cow.
She hath become this universe; all that the sun 
surveys is she."
P.V. Kane argues that in the times of the Rg.Veda only barren 
cows, if at all, were killed for sacrifice or meat and cows 
yielding milk were held to be not fit for being killed.  It is only 
in this way, according to him that one can explain and reconcile 
the apparent conflict between the custom of killing cows for 
food and the high praise bestowed on the cow in Rg.Vedic 
times.  It would appear that the protest raised against the 
slaughter of cows greatly increased in volume till the custom 
was totally abolished in a later age.  The change of climate 
perhaps also make the use of beef as food unnecessary and even 
injurious to health.  Gradually cows became indicative of the 
wealth of the owner.  The Neolithic Aryans not having been 
acquainted with metals, there were no coins in current use in the 
earlier stages of their civilization, but as they were eminently a 
pastoral people almost every family possessed a sufficient 
number of cattle and some of them exchanged them for the 
necessaries of their life.  The value of cattle (Pasu) was, 
therefore, very great with the early Rg.Vedic Aryans.  The 
ancient Romans also used the word pecus or pecu (pasu) in the 
sense of wealth or money.  The English words, "pecuniary" and 
"impecunious", are derived from the Latin root pecus or pecu, 
originally meaning cattle.  The possession of cattle in those 
days denoted wealth and a man was considered rich or poor 
according to the large or small number of cattle that he owned.  
In the Ramayana king Janaka's wealth was described by 
reference to the large number of herds that he owned.  It 
appears that the cow was gradually raised to the status of 
divinity.  Kautilya's Arthasastra has a special chapter 
(Ch.XXIX) dealing with the "superintendent of cows" and the 
duties of the owner of cows are also referred to in Ch.XI of 
Hindu Law in its sources by Ganga Nath Jha.  There can be no 
gainsaying the fact that the Hindus in general hold the cow in 
great reverence and the idea of the slaughter of cows for food is 
repugnant to their notions and this sentiment has in the past 
even led to communal riots.  It is also a fact that after the recent 
partition of the country this agitation against the slaughter of 
cows has been further intensified.  While we agree that the 
constitutional question before us cannot be decided on grounds 
of mere sentiment, however passionate it may be, we, 
nevertheless, think that it has to be taken into consideration, 
though only as one of many elements, in arriving at a judicial 
verdict as to the reasonableness of the restrictions."
Therefore it cannot be said that the Judges were not conscious about 
the usefulness and the sanctity with which the entire cow and its progeny has 
been held in our country.  Though
Article 48(A)
and
51(A)
were not there, 
but their Lordships were indirectly conscious of the implication.
Articles 
48(A)
and
51(A)
do not substantially change the ground realities which can 
persuade to change the views which have been held from 1958 to 1996.  
Reference was also made that for protection of top soil, the cow dung will be 
useful.  No doubt the utility of the cow dung for protection of the top soil is 
necessary but one has to be pragmatic in its approach that whether the small 
yield of the cow dung and urine from aged bulls and bullocks can 
substantially change the top soil.  In my opinion this argument was advanced 
only for the sake of argument but does not advance the case of the 
petitioners/appellants to reverse the decision of the earlier Benches which 
had stood the test of time.
In this connection, it will be relevant to refer the principle of stare 
decisis.  The expression of 'stare decisis' is a Latin phrase which means "to 
stand by decided cases; to uphold precedents; to maintain former 
adjudications".  It is true that law is a dynamic concept and it should change 
with the time.  But at the same time it shall not be so fickle that it changes 
with change of guard.  If the ground realities have not changed and it has not 
become irrelevant with the time then it should not be reviewed lightly.  I 
have discussed above the reasons which have been given by the State of 
Gujarat for reconsideration of the earlier decisions on the subject, in my 
humble opinion the justification so pleaded is not sufficient to change or 
review the decision of the Constitution Bench by the present Bench of seven 
Judges.
The principle of stare decisis is based on a public policy.  This policy 
is based on the assumption that certainty, predictability and stability in the 
law are the major objectives of the legal system; i.e. that parties should be 
able to regulate their conduct and enter into relationships with reasonable 
assurance of the governing rules of law.  If the courts start changing their 
views frequently then there will be a lack of certainty in the law and it is not 
good for the health of the nation.
Craies on Statue Law, 7th Edition, it was observed that:
"The rule is also founded more logically on the axiom statre 
decisis, which was the ground of the decision in Hanau vs 
Ehrlich.  The case turned on the ambiguous words in the Statute 
of Frauds as to agreements not to be performed within a year 
from the making thereof.  The House of Lords in 12912 decided 
that though it may be well doubted whether an agreement for 
more than one year determinable by notice within the year is 
within the statute, a long course of decisions going back to 
1829 in the affirmative ought not to be disturbed.  And in 1945 
Scott L.J. refused to decide against a decision of Malins Vs. C. 
in 1870 on the ground that the construction placed by the Vice-
Chancellor on certain sections of the
Companies Act
1862 had 
been accepted for a long time.  In 1958 Lord Evershed M.R. 
said: "There is well-established authority for the view that a 
decision of long standing, on the basis of which many persons 
will in the course of time have arranged their affairs, should not 
lightly be disturbed by a superior court not strictly bound itself 
by the decision."
In 1919 Lord Buckmaster enunciated the principles on which 
the rule of stare decisis is based.  "Firstly, the construction of a 
statute of doubtful meaning once laid down and accepted for a 
long period of time ought not to be altered unless your 
Lordships could say positively that it was wrong and productive 
of inconvenience.  Secondly, that the decisions upon which title 
to property depends or which by establishing principles of 
construction otherwise form the basis of contracts ought to 
receive the same protection.  Thirdly, decisions affecting the 
general conduct of affairs, so that their alteration would mean 
that taxes had been unlawfully imposed or exemption 
unlawfully obtained, payments needlessly made or the position 
of the public materially affected, ought in the same way to 
continue."
Earlier, Lord Westbury had thus stated the rule, "We must bow 
to the uniform interpretation which has been put upon the 
statute of Elizabeth and must not attempt to disturb the 
exposition it has received .  If we find a uniform 
interpretation of a statue upon a question materially affecting 
property, and perpetually recurring, and which has been 
adhered to without interruption, it would be impossible for us to 
introduce the precedent of disregarding that interpretation.  
Disagreeing with it would thereby be shaking rights and titles 
which have been founded through so many years upon the 
conviction that that interpretation is the legal and proper one 
and is one which will not be departed from."
The rule of stare decisis was followed in Associated 
Newspapers Ltd. vs City of London Corporation, where the 
House of Lords declined to overrule two old cases which 
established the non-ratability of certain property in the City of 
London on the construction of an Act of 1767, and in Morgan 
vs Fear, where the House of Lords refused to disturb a 
construction of the Prescription Act 1832, which had been 
settled and acted on for forty-six years.  In Cohen vs Bayley-
Worthington which turned on the construction of the Fines and 
Recoveries Act, 1833, the House of Lords refused to put on that 
Act a new construction, as property had been settled or 
otherwise dealt with for a long period of time on the faith of the 
older cases, and in Close vs Steel Co. of Wales Ltd. Lord 
Morton of Henryton said: "I have always understood that when 
this House clearly expresses a view upon the construction of an 
Act of Parliament and bases its decision on that view, the Act 
must bear that construction unless and until Parliament alters 
the Act."
Therefore one of the hallmarks of the law is certainty predictability 
and stability unless the ground realty has completely changed.  In the present 
case, as discussed above, in my opinion the ground reality has not changed 
and the law laid down by this court holds good and relevant.  Some 
advancement in technology and more and more use of the cow dung and 
urine is not such a substantial factor to change the ground realities so as to 
totally done away with the slaughtering of the aged bulls and bullocks.  It is 
true my Lord the Chief Justice has rightly observed that principle of stare 
decisis is not a dogmatic rule allergic to logic and reason; it is a flexible 
principle of law operating in the province of precedents providing room to 
collaborate with the demands of changing times dictated by social needs, 
State policy and judicial conscience.   There is no quarrel to this proposition, 
but the only question is whether the earlier decisions are not logical or they 
have become unreasonable with the passage of time.  In my humble opinion, 
those decisions still hold good in the present context also.  Therefore, I do 
not think that there are compelling reasons for reversal of the earlier 
decisions either on the basis of advancement of technology or reason, or 
logic, or economic consideration. Therefore, in my humble opinion, there is 
no need to reverse the earlier decisions.
An argument was raised with regard to role of objects and reasons 
preceding the enactment.  There is no two opinion that they are useful and 
for purposes of interpretation of the provisions whenever its validity is 
challenged.  This aspect has been dealt with by the Hon'ble Chief Justice 
and I do not wish to add anything more to it.
Likewise, the Hon'ble Chief Justice has dealt in detail the relation of 
Fundamental Rights with Directive Principles. His Lordship has very 
exhaustively dealt with all the cases bearing on the subject prior and after 
decision in Keshwanand Bharti's case. The court should guard zealously 
Fundamental Rights guaranteed to the citizens of the society, but at the same 
time strike a balance between the Fundamental Rights and the larger 
interests of the society. But when such right clashes with the larger interest 
of the country it must yield to the latter.  Therefore, wherever any enactment 
is made for advancement of Directive Principles and it runs counter to the 
Fundamental Rights an attempt should be made to harmonise the same  if it 
promotes larger public interest.
Therefore, as a result of above discussion, I am of the view that the 
view taken by the Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court is correct and 
there is no justification for reversing the view taken by the earlier 
Constitution Bench decision of this Court.  All appeals are dismissed.  No 
order as to costs.