[Cites
19
, Cited by
186
]
Supreme Court of India
Rajendra Construction Company vs Maharashtra Housing & Area Development ... on 12 August, 2005
Equivalent citations: AIR 2005 SUPREME COURT 3701, 2005 (6) SCC 678, 2005 AIR SCW 3992, 2005 (2) UJ (SC) 1259, 2005 (2) ARBI LR 637, 2005 UJ(SC) 2 1259, 2005 (6) SCALE 535, (2005) 4 ALLMR 1003 (SC), (2005) 5 CTC 150 (SC), (2005) 7 JT 388 (SC), 2005 (8) SRJ 181, 2005 (6) SLT 263, (2005) 33 ALLINDCAS 817 (HP), (2005) 6 SUPREME 292, (2005) 4 RECCIVR 16, (2005) 2 ARBILR 637, (2005) 4 CURCC 18, (2005) 2 SIM LC 15, (2005) 4 MAD LW 539, (2005) 6 SCJ 357, (2005) 4 ICC 645, (2005) 6 SCALE 535, (2005) 3 GCD 2292 (SC), (2005) 3 BLJ 60, (2005) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 398, (2006) 1 BOM CR 374
Author:
C.K. Thakker
Bench:
C.K. Thakker
,
P.K.Balasubramanyan
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  5045-5046 of 2005

PETITIONER:
Rajendra Construction Company			

RESPONDENT:
Maharashtra Housing & Area Development Authority & Ors. 

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 12/08/2005

BENCH:
C.K. Thakker & P.K.Balasubramanyan

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
(Arising out of S.L.P (c) Nos. 10963-10964 of 2003)



C.K. Thakker, J.
Leave granted.
The present appeals are directed against the judgment and order dated 
June 4, 2003 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Bombay 
(Aurangabad Bench) in First Appeal Nos. 528 and 529 of 1996.  By the said 
judgment, the High Court allowed the appeals filed by the Maharashtra 
Housing & Area Development Authority and set aside decrees dated August 
25, 1996, passed by the Court of Civil Judge, (Senior Division), Aurangabad 
in Special Civil Suit Nos. 265 and 266 of 1991.
The relevant facts leading to these appeals may now be stated in brief;
	Appellant Rajendra Construction Company ('RCC' for short) is a 
partnership firm doing business in construction work. Maharashtra Housing 
& Area Development Authority ('MHADA' for short) issued a Tender 
Notice No. 4/87-88 calling offers from registered contractors for the 
construction of  444 tenements under the Low Income Group Scheme 
(LIGs), near Scot Grini, Garkheda, Aurangabad  and 192 tenements under 
Middle Income Group Scheme (MIGs), near Griha Nirman Bhavan, 
Aurangabad.
In November, 1987, work orders were issued in favour of RCC for an 
amount of Rs. 50,38,068/- in respect of the first work and for an amount of 
Rs. 74,56,972/- in respect of the second work.  According to the appellant, 
the time limit within which the construction was to be completed was 
eighteen months for the first scheme and twelve months for the second 
scheme.  However, the execution of construction work was delayed on 
account of variation in the existing and agreed items as also certain extra 
work as per the instructions of MHADA.  Requests were, therefore, made by 
RCC for extension of time which was granted and within that extended 
period, the work was completed to the satisfaction of MHADA.  MHADA, 
however, took no steps to prepare final bill on one pretext or the other and 
no payment was made to RCC.  It was the case of RCC that its claim was 
not properly worked out.  Still, however, RCC accepted the payment made 
by MHADA 'under protest'.
RCC then issued notice to MHADA on April 17, 1991 demanding 
additional amount of Rs. 19,01,600 for construction work in the first scheme 
and Rs. 21,08,100/- for the work in the second scheme.  MHADA, however, 
refused to make payment. RCC filed two appeals before MHADA Board on 
May 06, 1991 under Clause 30 of the agreement claiming the above amounts 
with interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum.  On June 14, 1991, RCC 
requested the Board to decide its claim.  On June 29, 1991, RCC issued 
notice to MHADA under
Section 173
of Maharashtra Housing & Area 
Development Act, 1976 to settle the claim within a period of sixty days.  As 
the claim was not settled, and payment was not made, RCC filed two suits in 
the Court of Civil Judge, (Senior Division); Aurangabad being Special Civil 
Suit No. 265 of 1991 for Rs. 19,01,100/- with running interest of 18 per cent 
per annum from the date of the suit till realization of the amount and Special 
Civil Suit No. 266 of 1991 for Rs. 21,08,100/- with running interest of 18 
per cent per annum for the second scheme.  The Civil Judge, (Senior 
Division), Aurangabad issued summons to MHADA.  MHADA filed written 
statements in the suits.  On September 3, 1993, the Court framed issues in 
Special Civil Suit No. 266 of 1991 and on October 27, 1993 in Special Civil 
Suit No. 265 of 1991.  On January 5, 1995, RCC filed an application (Ex.
38) for appointment of sole arbitrator under
Section 21
of Arbitration Act, 
1940 for settling of the disputes/claims in the light of Clause 30 of contract 
giving the names of five officers.  A copy was served on defendant MHADA 
immediately and the court passed the order "Call say other side". On March 
10, 1995, MHADA filed application (Ex. 45) thereby giving no objection for 
appointment of sole arbitrator but suggested three different names.  On April 
3, 1995, RCC, vide its application (Ex. 47) agreed to the appointment of Mr. 
S.R. Wadekar as sole arbitrator as suggested by MHADA and to refer the 
dispute to the said arbitrator.    In pursuance of the above agreement, the 
learned Civil Judge, (Senior Division), Aurangabad passed an order on April 
6, 1995 vide ex. 48 and on April 7, 1995 vide Ex. 51.  The order Ex. 47 
reads as under :
ORDER PASSED BELOW EXH. NO. 47
"Shri S.R. Wadekar, Ex. Chief Engineer is appointed as 
Sole Arbitrator who shall settle the terms of the agreement 
along with the record if any, relevant and necessary.  The sole 
Arbitrator shall also collect the record from the Court and 
shall report and shall write the award within 60 days from the 
date of passing of this order, and without any further delay."
The Court then stated;
"You are therefore hereby appointed as Sole Arbitrator in 
the matter.  Accordingly the disputes and claims between the 
parties are referred to you for Arbitration.
	You are required to complete the proceedings as per 
provisions of
Arbitration Act, 1940
and file your award in 
this Court within the time fixed by this Court.
	You may fix up terms of fees and expenses with the 
parties after entering on this reference. (Rs.2,000/- deposited 
in Court).
Please notify the parties at the earliest.
	Please acknowledge receipt of this order."
On the same day, the Court communicated the decision to sole 
Arbitrator Mr. Wadekar.  Mr. Wadekar sent his acceptance vide letter dated 
April 10, 1995.  The Arbitrator then conducted the proceedings, called for 
record of the Civil Court and examined it.  He also visited the site of 
construction. After going through all the documents, terms and conditions of 
tender agreement and other relevant records and after hearing the parties, he 
passed awards on August 17, 1995.  He considered the claims under 
different heads and awarded an amount of Rs. 14,36,708.00 in respect of 
Scheme No.1 and an amount of Rs.11,80,935.00 in respect of Scheme No.2.  
The sole Arbitrator also awarded interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum 
on the principal amount of the award from the date of the suit till the date of 
the awards as also from the date of the awards to the date of payment or the 
date of decrees, 'whichever is earlier'.
The Arbitrator issued notice to both the parties intimating them about 
passing of the awards.  The Arbitrator also filed awards in the court.  On 16th 
September, 1995, sealed envelope of award was opened in the court.  
MHADA raised objection against the awards under
Section 30
of the Act, 
vide objections (Ex. 62 and 66) on October 13, 1995.  RCC filed its 
objections (Ex. 63 and 67) on October 16, 1995 to the applications of 
MHADA.  On the same day, RCC filed applications (Exs. 64 and 68) under
Section 17
of the Act for making awards of the Arbitrator as rule of the court 
by pronouncing judgment.  By final order dated April 25, 1996, the Civil 
Judge, (Senior Division), Aurangabad made Arbitrator's awards as "rule of 
court".  He also passed an order to draw up decrees accordingly.
Against the above judgment of the Civil Court, MHADA filed two 
First Appeals.  The Division Bench of the High Court, by the judgment 
impugned in the present appeals, allowed those appeals, set aside the order 
passed by the trial court and remitted arbitration proceedings to the sole 
arbitrator to pass fresh awards.  According to the High Court, the awards 
passed by the sole Arbitrator were not speaking awards and, therefore, could 
not be said to be in accordance with law. The High Court concluded that the 
awards were vitiated under
Section 30
of the Act.
The Court observed :
"We are, therefore, of the view that the award of 
the sole arbitrator which has been made rule of the court 
by the trial court is unsustainable on the ground that it 
suffers from errors apparent on the face of the record 
and the sole arbitrator misdirected the proceedings, in as 
much as, he was required to adjudicate upon the issues 
framed by the trial court and give reasons thereof in 
respect of the claims allowed by him.  In addition, the 
directions to pay interest at 18% per annum for the post-
pendente lite period are not supported by any reasons, 
howsoever short they may be, and therefore, the said 
directions are also unsustainable.  We, therefore, deem it 
appropriate to remit the arbitration proceedings to the 
sole arbitrator for fresh award and thereupon the trial 
court would examine the same for its decision under
Section 21
of the Act.
In the result, the appeals are allowed and the 
decrees passed by the trial court in Special Civil Suit Nos. 
265 and 266 of 1991 are hereby quashed and set aside.  
The arbitration proceedings initiated pursuant to the order 
passed by the trial court are restored to the sole arbitrator 
Shri S.R. Wadekar.  He shall pass a fresh award within a 
period of 60 days from the date of appearance of the 
parties before him.  The parties shall appear before the 
sole arbitrator on1 16.6.2003.  No order as to costs."
The above judgment is challenged by RCC in the present appeals. 
	We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
The learned counsel for RCC submitted that the High Court has 
committed an error of law in interfering with the order passed by the trial 
court and in setting aside the award made by the sole Arbitrator on the 
ground that the awards were not 'speaking' awards.  The learned counsel 
submitted that the High Court was wrong in holding that an award passed by 
the Arbitrator must be a reasoned one.  According to the counsel, under the
Arbitration Act, 1940
(hereinafter referred to as 'the old Act'), there was no 
obligation on the Arbitrator to record reasons. He further submitted that 
admittedly the proceedings were governed by the old
Act and the Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act, 1996
, (hereinafter referred to as 'the new Act'), has no 
application and the provisions of the new Act could not be pressed into 
service by MHADA. Since it was not necessary for the Arbitrator to record 
reasons under the old Act and as there was no agreement between the parties 
nor the contract provided for recording of reasons by the Arbitrator, he was 
under no obligation to make reasoned awards.  Setting aside of award by the 
High Court, therefore, was contrary to law.  It was submitted that the 
Arbitrator followed the requisite procedure under the old Act.  He conducted 
the proceedings by calling the parties and by affording opportunity of 
hearing to them.  He also visited the construction-site.  He perused the 
material documents, pleadings of the parties, relevant record and having 
applied his mind, passed awards which were in conformity with law.  The 
counsel also submitted that the trial court before which the awards were 
produced to make them rule of the court, again considered the objections 
raised by MHADA.  It negatived the objections and by detailed judgment, 
the awards were made rule of the court.  The Court also ordered to draw 
decrees in terms of  awards.  In the circumstances, there was no reason for 
the High Court to interfere with the awards passed by the sole Arbitrator as 
also the judgment and order passed by the trial court.  The order passed by 
the High Court, therefore, deserves to be quashed and set aside.
The learned counsel for the respondent MHADA, on the other hand, 
supported the order passed by the High Court.  He submitted that since there 
was dispute between the parties, RCC had approached Civil Court by filing 
two civil suits.  In those suits, written statements were filed by MHADA 
raising several objections against maintainability of the claim and also the 
amount demanded by RCC.  On the basis of pleadings of the parties, issues 
were framed and thereafter an application was made by RCC to refer the 
matter to sole Arbitrator.  In the light of the facts and attending 
circumstances, it was clear that the Arbitrator was a "substituted forum".  It 
was, therefore, incumbent on him to apply his mind to the rival contentions 
of the parties, to consider the issues framed by the trial court and to record 
findings on those issues supported by reasons and to make awards.  Since 
the Arbitrator had totally overlooked those aspects and the facts and 
circumstances in which the matters were referred to him, the awards suffer 
from non-application of mind and the trial court was wrong in making such 
awards rule of the court and by directing to draw up decrees on the basis of 
the awards.  The High Court was fully justified in setting aside such awards 
and also the judgment and order of the trial court by remitting the matter to 
the sole Arbitrator to decide the same in accordance with law.   It was also 
submitted that even if there was no clause in the contract or agreement 
providing for recording of reasons, since the Arbitrator was to decide the 
question and to adjudicate the matter, he ought to have recorded reasons in 
support of such decision, finding and adjudication.   The counsel, therefore, 
submitted that no case for interference with the order passed by the High 
Court has been made out and the appeals deserve to be dismissed.
Having given anxious and thoughtful consideration to the rival 
contentions of the parties, in our opinion, the appeals deserve to be allowed 
partly.  The main question, according to us, is as to whether the sole 
Arbitrator was required to record reasons in support of the awards made by 
him.  If that was the duty on the part of the Arbitrator, the contention of 
MHADA must be upheld by holding that the order passed by the High Court 
was in accordance with law and no fault can be found against the decision.  
If, on the other hand, there was no such requirement of law and Arbitrator 
was not bound to record reasons in support of the awards, they could not 
have been set aside 'merely' on the ground of non-recording of reasons and 
the High Court ought not to have interfered with the said awards and set 
them aside reversing the judgment and order passed by the trial court.
The learned counsel for RCC drew our attention to the relevant case 
law on the point.  We would refer to only few of them.  Raipur Development 
Authority & Others vs. M/s. Chokhamal Contractors & others, (1989) 2 
SCC 721 is indeed the leading decision of this Court on the point.  A 
Constitution Bench of this Court was called upon to consider an identical 
issue which has been raised before us, i.e. whether an award passed under 
the (old) Act was liable to be set aside under
Section 30
or to be remitted 
under
Section 16
of the Act "merely" on the ground that no reasons had been 
recorded by the Arbitrator in support of the award.
After considering the relevant provisions of law, legal position in 
England, America and Australia and after referring to leading decisions on 
the point, this Court held that an award passed under the (old) Act was not 
liable to be set aside or remitted only on the ground that no reasons had been 
recorded in support of such award. The Court also referred to the Hand Book 
of Arbitration Practice by Ronald Bernstein wherein it was stated' "The 
absence of reasons does not invalidate an award.  In many arbitrations the 
parties want a speedy decision from a tribunal whose standing and integrity 
they respect, and they are content to have an answer Yes or No; or a figure 
of X.   Such an award is wholly effective; indeed, in that it cannot be 
appealed as being wrong in law it may be said to be more effective than a 
reasoned award."   (emphasis supplied)

	The Court then proceeded to state;
"It is now well settled that an award can neither be 
remitted nor set aside merely on the ground that it 
does not contain reasons in support of the conclusion 
or decisions reached in it except where the 
arbitration agreement or the deed of submission 
requires him to give reasons.  The arbitrator or 
umpire is under no obligation to give reasons in 
support of the decision reached by him unless under 
the arbitration agreement or in the deed of 
submission he is required to give such reasons and if 
the arbitrator or umpire chooses to give reasons in 
support of his decision it is open to the court to set 
aside the award if it finds that an error of law has 
been committed by the arbitrator or umpire on the 
face of the record on going through such reasons.  
The arbitrator or umpire shall have to give reasons 
also where the court has directed in any order such 
as the one made under
Section 20
or
Section 21
or
Section 34
of the Act that reasons should be given or 
where the statute which governs an arbitration 
requires him to do so."
In the opinion of this Court, it could not be disputed that in India, it 
has been 'firmly established' that it was not obligatory on the Arbitrator or 
Umpire to record reasons in support of the award when "neither any 
arbitration agreement nor any deed of submission" required reasons to be 
recorded.  In that case also, it was urged, as has been done in the instant 
case, that if no reasons are disclosed by the Arbitrator, it would not be 
possible for the court to find out whether the award passed is in accordance 
with law.  The Court, however, negatived the contention observing that if the 
parties wanted reasons to be recorded in support of the award to be passed 
by Arbitrator or Umpire it was open to them to make a provision in the 
agreement/contract itself to that effect.  But in the absence of any stipulation 
in the contract, the court could not say that Arbitrator was duty bound to 
record reasons and if reasons are not recorded in support of the award, the 
award was vulnerable and liable to be set aside or should be remitted to the 
Arbitrator. According to this court, such an order would amount to virtually 
introducing by judicial verdict an amendment to the Act.  No doubt, if the 
reasons are recorded by the Arbitrator or Umpire in support of the award, 
they can be considered by the court and if those reasons disclose an error 
apparent on the face of the record, the award can be set aside by a competent 
court of law.  But in the absence of such requirement under the agreement 
itself, the party could not insist for reasons in support of the award nor a 
court of law can interfere with non speaking award.
It was, however, urged that recording of reasons in support of the 
order is part and parcel of 'natural justice' and on that count also, 
unreasoned award should be treated as null and void and ineffective.  We are 
unable to uphold the argument. A similar contention was raised in 
Chokhamal   and   negatived   by    this    Court    observing    that    the   
said doctrine applies to Administrative Law field.  In the decisions 
pertaining to Administrative   Law,   this   Court   has   always    insisted    
for   recording   of    reasons    in   support   of   the    order   or decision.  
The Court observed that it would apply to "public law" field and not to 
"private law" field like Arbitration agreement.
The Court stated:
"It is no doubt true that in the decisions pertaining to 
Administrative Law, this Court in some cases has observed 
that the giving of reasons in an administrative decision is  
rule of natural justice by an extension of the prevailing rule.  
It would be in the interest of the world of commerce that the 
said rule is confined to the area of Administrative Law.  We 
do not appreciate the contention, urged on behalf of the 
parties who contend that it should be made obligatory on the 
part of the arbitrator to give reasons for the award, that there 
is no justification to leave the small area covered by the law 
of arbitration out of the general rule that the decision of every 
judicial and quasi-judicial body should be supported by 
reasons.  But at the same time it has to be borne in mind that 
what applies generally to settlement of disputes by 
authorities governed by public law need not be extended to 
all cases arising under private law such as those arising 
under the law of arbitration which is intended for settlement 
of private disputes." 	(emphasis supplied)


	This Court noted that a consistent view has been taken by all courts 
that an award was not liable to be set aside merely because reasons were not 
given except where the arbitration agreement or the deed of submission or 
an order made by the court under
Sections 20
,
21
or 34 of the Act or the 
statute governing the arbitration required the Arbitrator or Umpire to give 
reasons for the award.
In our opinion, the ratio in Chokhamal applies to the case on hand.  
The law laid down in that case has been reiterated by this Court in many 
cases.
[See
T.N. Electricity Board v. Bridge Tunnel Construction & Others
, 
(
1997) 4 SCC 121, Kundale & Associates v. Konkan Hotels (P) Ltd.
, (
1999) 
3 SCC 533, Build India Construction System v. Union of India
, (2002) 5 
SCC 433].
In T.N. Electricity Board, this Court considered the old Act as well as 
new Act and particularly sub-section (3) of
Section 31
of the new Act  which 
provides for recording of reasons by Arbitrator in support of the award 
unless (a) the parties have agreed that no reasons are to be given, or (b) the 
award is an arbitral award on agreed terms  under
Section 30
.  The Court 
noted that Parliament had expressed the legislative judgment that the award 
must state reasons upon which it is passed unless the parties have agreed 
otherwise or the award is on agreed terms.
The present awards are not under the new Act but under the old Act.  
It is, therefore, obvious that they could not have been set aside by the High 
Court on the ground that they were not supported by reasons and were not 
speaking awards.
The learned counsel for the respondent invited our attention to a 
decision of this Court in
State of Punjab vs. Bhag Singh
, (2004) 1 SCC 547 
and contended that this Court has held that reasons must be recorded in 
support of the order.  That was a case wherein the High Court dismissed an 
appeal against an order of acquittal without recording reasons.  The State 
approached this Court.  Reversing the order passed by the High Court, this 
Court held that in an appeal against acquittal recorded by the Sessions Court, 
the High Court must record reasons as the High Court was obliged to 
undertake the exercise by application of mind and coming to the conclusion 
that an order of acquittal recorded by the trial court was or was not in 
accordance with law.  The
ratio
laid down in
Bhag Singh, in our opinion, 
does not apply to the facts of the present case.
The counsel relied upon the observations of Lord Denning, M.R. in 
Breen v. Amalagamated Engineering Union, (1971) 1 All ER 1148.  There 
His Lordship observed; "The giving of reasons is one of the fundamentals of 
good administration". Reference was also made to Alexander Machinery 
(Dedley) Ltd. v. Crabtree, 1974 ICR 120, wherein it was indicated that 
failure to give reasons amounts to denial of justice.  Reasons are live links 
between the mind of the decision maker to the controversy in question and 
the decision or conclusion arrived at by him.  Reasons substitute subjectivity 
by objectivity.  The emphasis on recording reasons is that if the decision 
reveals the inscrutable face of the sphinx, it can by its silence render it 
virtually impossible for the courts to perform their appellate function or 
exercise the power of judicial review in adjudging the validity of the 
decision.
As already observed by us, all these principles apply to 
Administrative Law and in the public law field.  They would not get 
attracted in the field of private law.  The court, in such matters, does not 
exercise appellate jurisdiction and cannot substitute its decision for the 
decision of the Arbitrator.  Those principles, therefore, have no place when 
one is considering the legality of an award made by an Arbitrator with the 
consent of parties, which is otherwise legal and valid.
The learned counsel also placed reliance on a decision of this Court in
Gora Lal v. Union of India
, (2003) 12 SCC 459.  The Court
in that case
held 
that when the Arbitrator was to give his findings, it was obligatory on him to 
record reasons.  In Gora Mal, the relevant clause  of arbitration was as 
under;
"The arbitrator shall be deemed to have entered on the 
reference on the date he issues notice to both the parties, 
asking them to submit to him their statement of case and 
pleadings in defence.
The arbitrator may, from time to time, with the consent 
of the parties, enlarge the time up to but not exceeding one 
year from the date of his entering on the reference, for 
making and publishing the award.
The arbitrator shall give his award within a period of six 
months from the date of his entering on the reference or 
within the extended time as the case may be on all matters 
referred to him and shall indicate his findings, along with the 
sums awarded, separately on each individual item of the 
dispute."
Observing that the word 'findings' denotes 'reasons' in support of the 
conclusion 'on each item of dispute', the Court held that the Arbitrator was 
required to record reasons in support of his findings.  The Court, however, 
added; "We make it clear that this order is confined to the facts of this case 
and our interpretation is confined to clause 70 of the arbitration agreement in 
this case".  Gora Lal thus was decided in the fact-situation before the Court 
and the relevant clause in the agreement and the ratio of that case cannot 
make the awards in the present case illegal or unlawful in absence of a 
similar clause.
For the foregoing reasons, the awards passed by the sole Arbitrator 
cannot be held illegal or unlawful.  In making such awards the rule of the 
court, the Court of Civil Judge, (Senior Division), Aurangabad had not 
committed any illegality which vitiated the awards and the High Court could 
not have set aside them.
The question then remains as to interest.  The appellant had claimed 
interest in the suits.  The Arbitrator awarded interest at the rate of 18 per 
cent per annum on the principal amount from the date of the suits to the date 
of awards and also from the date of the awards to the date of payment or up 
to the date of decrees, 'whichever is earlier'.  This Court has dealt with the 
power of Arbitrator to award interest for (i) pre-reference period [
Executive 
Engineer, Dhenkanal Minor Irrigation Division & Others v. N.C. Budhraj 
(Deceased) by LRs & Others
(2001) 2 SCC 721]; (ii) pendente lite 
[
Secretary, Irrigation Department, Government of Orissa & Others v. G.C. 
Roy
(1992) 1 SCC 508]; and (iii) post-award period [
Hindustan 
Construction Co. Ltd. v. State of Jammu & Kashmir
, (1992) 4 SCC 217].
In
Bhagwati Oxygen Ltd. v. Hindustan Copper Ltd.
, AIR 2005 SC 2071 : JT 
(2005) 4 SC 73, one of us (C.K. Thakker, J.) had an occasion to consider the 
relevant decisions on the power of Arbitrator to award interest at all the three 
stages.  It was held that the arbitrator had power to award interest.  Keeping 
in view the facts and circumstances of the present case that the contract was 
entered into in 1987, the work was completed in 1990 after extension 
granted by MHADA and the Arbitrator passed awards in 1995, it would be 
proper, equitable and in the interest of justice if we reduce the rate of interest 
to 10 per cent per annum.
For the foregoing reasons, in our opinion, the order passed by the 
High Court deserves to be interfered with by partly allowing the appeals.  
We, therefore, allow the appeals in part confirming the awards made by the 
Arbitrator.  We, however, direct the respondent MHADA to pay interest at 
the rate of 10 per cent per annum instead of 18 per cent per annum as 
awarded by the Arbitrator.  The other directions in the awards are hereby 
confirmed.  The appeals are allowed to the extent indicated above.  There 
shall be no order as to costs.