[Cites
3
, Cited by
37
]
Supreme Court of India
National Insurance Co. Ltd vs Harjeet Rice Mills on 25 July, 2005
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2005 SC 367, (2005) 2 CLR 238, (2005) 3 CPJ 6, (2005) 3 JLJR 116, (2005) 3 PAT LJR 235, (2005) 4 ALL WC 3309, (2006) 1 MAD LW 555, 2005 (6) SCC 45, (2005) 60 ALL LR 752, (2005) 5 SCALE 606, (2005) 4 MAD LJ 58, (2005) 4 CIV LJ 440, (2005) 3 REC CIV R 413, (2005) 4 ICC 270, (2006) 1 LAND LR 199, (2005) 3 PUN LR 285, (2005) 6 JT 372, (2005) 5 SUPREME 206, (2005) 2 CLR 238 (SC), 2005 UJ(SC) 2 1037, (2005) 2 WLC (SC)CIVIL 185, (2005) 6 JT 372 (SC), (2005) 4 CTC 41 (SC), 2005 UJ(SC) 1037, (2005) 32 ALL IND CAS 8 (SC), (2005) 32 ALLINDCAS 8, (2009) 121 FACLR 603, (2009) 3 ANDHLD 104
Author:
P.K. Balasubramanyan
Bench:
R.C. Lahoti
,
P.K. Balasubramanyan
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2431 of 2000

PETITIONER:
National Insurance Co. Ltd..				

RESPONDENT:
Harjeet Rice Mills 						

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 25/07/2005

BENCH:
CJI R.C. LAHOTI & P.K. BALASUBRAMANYAN

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T 

P.K. BALASUBRAMANYAN, J.
1.		The National Insurance Company, the respondent in a claim 
before the State Commission under the
Jammu & Kashmir Consumer 
Protection Act
, is the appellant before us.  M/s Harjeet Rice Mills, the 
respondent herein, had insured its stocks with the appellant for the 
period September 1991 to September 1992.  The respondent herein 
approached the State Consumer Commission with a claim that there was 
an accidental fire in its godown in the night intervening the first and 
second January 1992; that the goods stocked were lost in the fire; that 
the surveyor appointed had estimated the loss at Rs. 8,96,500/- on 
finding that the loss was due to a fire caused by a short circuit; that the 
appellant had repudiated the claim unjustly; that there was thus 
deficiency in service and that the respondent was entitled to a sum of Rs. 
9 lakhs as the value of the goods lost, to a sum of Rs. 1 lakh as damages 
for mental agony and for interest at 24% per annum on the entire 
amount, from the date of the incident of fire.  The appellant resisted the 
claim by contending, inter alia, that the State Commission had no 
jurisdiction to entertain the claim; that on a further investigation, it was 
revealed that the fire was not caused by short-circuit; that it was a 
deliberate act of causing a fire with a view to make a claim on the 
insurance policy; that the loss was highly exaggerated since the godown 
concerned did not have the capacity to take in the quantity allegedly 
stored and lost; that it was a case of an attempted insurance fraud; that 
the claim was closed as a no claim; that there was no deficiency in 
service and that the claim was liable to be rejected.
2.		The State Commission did not consider the objection to its 
jurisdiction on merits.  It held that the Surveyor's report relied on by the 
claimant has to be accepted and an order for payment out of that amount 
with interest thereon at the rate of 18% per annum from the date of the 
loss till the date of payment had to be made.  It also held that the claim 
for compensation had to be denied, since, if granted, the amount 
awarded would have exceeded its jurisdiction.  Thus, the appellant was 
directed to pay a sum of Rs. 8,96,500/- with interest thereon at the rate of 
18% per annum from 2.1.1992, till the date of payment.  The appellant 
filed an appeal before the High Court of Jammu & Kashmir.  The High 
Court declined to interfere, essentially stating that the finding of fact 
arrived at by the State Commission, could not be interfered with in the 
circumstances of the case.  Thus, the appeal was dismissed.
3.		Learned Senior Counsel for the appellant first submitted 
that the High Court was in error in not setting aside the decision of the 
State Commission on the ground that the State Commission lacked 
pecuniary jurisdiction to entertain the claim. He pointed out that the 
pecuniary jurisdiction was limited to entertaining claims for Rs. 10 lakhs 
or less and that in the present case, the claim was for Rs. 10 lakhs plus 
interest thereon, taking the claim out of the purview of the Commission.  
Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the claim was for Rs. 
10 lakhs and the claim for interest cannot take the claim beyond the 
jurisdiction of the State Commission.  He also pointed out that the Act 
has since been amended and now the Commission has been conferred 
jurisdiction to entertain a claim for a sum above Rs. 10 lakhs.  He also 
submitted that the objection to pecuniary jurisdiction was not taken at 
the threshold and the High Court was justified in overruling the 
contention in that regard.
4.		We do not think it necessary to go into this question on 
merits in view of the course we propose to adopt and in view of the 
amendment to the Act enhancing the pecuniary jurisdiction of the State 
Commission and the present claim being within that enhanced 
jurisdiction.
5.		One of the main defences attempted by the appellant was 
that the fire was not accidental and hence the appellant had no liability 
under the policy.  The respondent- claimant met this plea by pointing out 
that the surveyor had reported that the fire was caused by a short-circuit 
as pleaded by it.  It is true that the Surveyor's report supported the claim 
of the respondent herein.  But the said report was also based on an 
investigation by the police, supporting a conclusion that the fire was 
caused by short-circuit of electricity.  It is seen that there was a further 
police investigation and the Deputy Superintendent of Police R.S. Pura 
had reported that the earlier investigation was perfunctory, that the cause 
of the fire has to be properly investigated and in the circumstances a 
fresh investigation was called for.  The appellant had engaged a private 
investigator to investigate and that agency had reported that the fire 
might not have been caused by short-circuit; that it could have been 
arson or a deliberate attempt to make an insurance claim; that the loss 
estimated could not have occurred considering the capacity of the 
godown and that the available materials in the custody of the police 
indicated that what was burned was paddy husk and not rice or paddy 
itself as claimed.  The appellant argued before the Commission that in 
the light of this report, the Commission should decline jurisdiction and 
direct the claimant to go to a Civil Court to establish its claim.  It was 
also argued that the report of the Surveyor could not be accepted in the 
circumstances, especially in view of the report of the Deputy 
Superintendent of Police.  The claimant argued that the report of the 
private investigator could not be looked into in the light of Section 64 
UM(c) of the
Insurance Act
, since there was nothing to show that the 
private investigator was licensed.  The State Commission accepted the 
position canvassed for by the claimant and refused to look into the report 
of the private investigator.  The High Court in appeal, also endorsed that 
position.
6.		We are of the view that the State Commission should have 
given an opportunity to the appellant before us to prove the investigation 
report.
Section 64UM
of the Insurance Act cannot stand in the way of 
the insurance company in establishing that the claim was a fraud on the 
company, or that it was a case of deliberately causing a fire so as to lay 
the foundation for an insurance claim.  Similarly, the Commission did 
not apply its mind to the aspect highlighted that the first police 
investigation was reported to be perfunctory and a fresh, proper 
investigation had been recommended.  Similarly, the discrepancy in the 
capacity of the godown and the possibility that what was lost was only or 
mainly paddy husk, should have persuaded the Commission to make a 
proper enquiry before deciding to accept the Surveyor's report in this 
case.  The High Court, in our view, has failed to exercise its appellate 
jurisdiction properly.  It failed to see that it had the duty as the Appellate 
Authority to satisfy itself that no fraud was involved and that the claim 
was genuine and sustainable.  We are of the view that adequate prima 
facie material was available to warrant a proper enquiry on that question.  
In this situation, we are satisfied that interference is called for in this 
appeal.
7.		We are satisfied that the proper course to adopt is to set 
aside the decisions of the High Court and the State Commission and to 
remand the claim for a fresh enquiry and decision by the Commission.  
Since, we are of the view that a proper enquiry and a fresh decision by 
the initial authority itself is called for, we refrain from discussing the 
relevant aspects argued before us, so as to ensure that no prejudice is 
caused to either side.  Now that the claim comes within the limit of the 
pecuniary jurisdiction of the State Commission, we are satisfied that the 
proceedings can be remanded to the State Commission itself for a proper 
decision on all the questions involved including the question of the cause 
of fire.  We, therefore, allow this appeal and setting aside the decisions 
of the High Court and that of the State Commission, remand the claim of 
the respondent herein to the State Commission for an investigation de 
novo.  The State Commission will give the parties effective opportunity 
to lead whatever evidence they may want and decide the claim afresh, 
including its sustainability, on the basis of the evidence that may be 
adduced.  The parties will appear before the State Commission on 
19.9.2005.  We make no order as to costs.