[Cites
26
, Cited by
136
]
Supreme Court of India
Umabai & Anr vs Nilkanth Dhondiba Chavan (Dead) By Lrs. ... on 13 April, 2005
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2005 SC 754, AIRONLINE 2005 SC 350
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
H.K. Sema
,
S.B. Sinha
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2583 of 2005

PETITIONER:
Umabai & Anr.

RESPONDENT:
Nilkanth Dhondiba Chavan (Dead) by Lrs. & Anr.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 13/04/2005

BENCH:
H.K. Sema & S.B. Sinha

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

[Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 23864 of 2004]


S.B. SINHA, J :
Leave granted.
This appeal is directed against a  judgment and order dated  3.9.2004 
passed by  the Bombay High Court in Letters Patent Appeal No.102 of 1990 
whereby and whereunder the Appeal preferred against a judgment and order 
dated 30.1.1990 passed by a learned Single Judge of the said Court in First 
Appeal No.120 of 1984 affirming the judgment and decree dated 5.9.1983 
passed by the Civil Judge, Sr. Division, Kolhapur in Special Suit No. 1 of 
1979; was allowed.
The basic fact of the matter is not in dispute.  The suit premises 
measure about 346 sq. yds. of  land.  Structures consisting of ground and 
first floor were built thereupon.  The Appellant No.2 was a tenant in the 
ground floor of the said building.
A decree at the instance of his creditor was said to have been passed 
against the plaintiff-Respondents herein.  The First Respondent  with a view 
to repay the said loan entered into an agreement of sale with the Appellants 
on or about 30.12.1970.  In terms of the said agreement, the plaintiff-
Respondents agreed to sell the said property for a consideration of 
Rs.45,000/-, out of which a sum of Rs.3,434/- was paid by way of earnest 
money and the rest being sum of Rs. 40,076/- was  to be disbursed to the 
creditors.  Pursuant to or in furtherance of the said agreement, the plaintiff-
Respondents executed a deed of sale in favour of the First Appellant herein.  
An agreement of sale was also entered into by and between the parties on the 
same day, in terms whereof the First Appellant agreed to reconvey the said 
property in favour of the First Respondent on  receipt  of the said sum of 
Rs.45,000/- between a period of seven years and nine years  from the said 
date.  The Respondents treating  the said transaction to be one of mortgage 
filed an application purported to be under Sections 4(e) and 7(f) before the 
competent authority under the
Maharashtra Debt Relief Act
, inter alia, for a 
declaration that he is a 'debtor' thereunder and his debt should be 
discharged.  While the said application was pending, a notice was sent by the 
plaintiff-Respondents to the Appellants herein wherein the aforementioned 
transaction was said to be a mortgage.  A plea was raised therein that the 
said debt stood discharged under the provisions of the
Maharashtra Debt 
Relief Act
.  It was contended that the First Appellant herein had already 
received more than Rs.50,000/- out of the income from the said property by 
way of  rent.    Despite the same, the Appellants asked for specific 
performance of the said  agreement of re-conveyance.  In her reply, the First 
Appellant offered to reconvey the property on receipt of a further sum of 
Rs.4,646/-, which allegedly was spent by her towards repairs of the house.  
Thereafter,  the suit was filed by the Respondents herein in the Court of 
Civil Judge, Senior Division at Kolhapur on 30.12.1978 which was marked 
as Civil Suit No.1 of 1979.  The Respondents in their plaint raised a plea that 
the value of the suit property was about Rs.2 lacs but despite the same with a 
view to discharge their dues they requested the Appellants to advance a loan 
of Rs.50,000/- and to which the Appellants agreed for a sum of Rs.45,000/-; 
whereupon the suit property was agreed to be mortgaged.  It was further 
contended that as the Appellants did not possess a money lenders' licence 
and the period of repayment was large, the parties agreed that the 
Respondents would execute a deed of mortgage by way of conditional sale; 
but the said document was termed as a deed of sale wherein a clause of re-
conveyance  was to be incorporated.  However,  such condition having 
mistakenly been not mentioned in the deed of sale and which having been 
noticed, the First Appellant entered into an agreement of re-conveyance of 
the suit property in the name of the Respondents on the same day.  Both the 
deeds were said to be part of the same transaction and in fact, it was 
categorically averred that the "sale deed transaction"  is a "mortgage 
transaction". As regard readiness and willingness on the part of the 
Respondents, it was averred in the plaint:
"Accordingly to the conditions in the agreement 
Plaintiff was and is ready to pay the amount to defendant.  
And also the Plaintiff is and was ready to bear the cost of 
reconveyance deed.  According to the agreement Plaintiff 
is and was ready to prepare the reconveyance deed"
In the said suit, the plaintiff-Respondents  prayed for the following 
reliefs :
"(a) 	The defendant no.1 be ordered to prepare the sale 
deed of the suit property and get it registered as per 
the agreement.  The Plaintiff will pay the amount 
when the order is passed.
(b)	The sale deed be prepared in the plaintiff's name 
through the Honourable Court if the defendant 
no.1 denies the same.
(c)	According to the  mortgage document at sr. no.7 
dated 2.11.1971, the suit property be mortgaged 
Relief and be given in the possession of the 
Plaintiff.
(d)	The declaration be passed under the provision of 
Mumbai Debt Relief Act that the Plaintiff has been 
debt released and the possession of the debt 
released suit property be given to the plaintiff.
(e)	If not done as mentioned above, then the 
accounting of mortgage be done and whatever 
amount remains be given to the Plaintiff or else 
Plaintiff be ordered to pay the amount to defendant 
no.1 and the reconveyance deed for the mortgage 
relief be made in the name of the plaintiff by the 
defendant on denial it should be done through the 
court and possession of suit property be given to 
the plaintiff.
(f)	The Plaintiff be allowed to amend or alter the 
plaint, if necessary."
The Appellants, however, in their written statement denied and 
disputed the contentions raised in the Plaint.  It was averred that the 
transaction was for a sale with an agreement of reconveyance.  The 
Appellants denied and disputed that the  First Respondent  was  'ready to act 
as per the agreement'.  It was contended that he never offered any amount to 
the Appellants.  It was further contended :
"But plaintiff did not take any steps to reconvey the 
sale deed as per the notice of the plaintiff.  But the 
plaintiff did nothing.  So the Plaintiff has committed a 
breach of agreement and on that count suit may kindly be 
dismissed.  On the contrary Plaintiff had taken a stand 
that the suit transaction is mortgaged and from rent 
received the amount has been satisfied such a wrong and 
false stand was taken by the Plaintiff.  Also before the 
Tahsildar proceeding was initiated saying that the 
property is redeemed (Property is released from the debt) 
from the total behaviour of plaintiff it cannot be said that 
Plaintiff was ready to fulfill the terms of agreement."
The Trial Court dismissed the said suit holding  (i) the suit property 
was not undervalued; (ii) consideration of Rs.45,000/- mentioned in the 
document was not inadequate; (iii) the transaction was one of sale and not of 
mortgage; (iv) the suit property was not self-redeemed under the
Maharashtra Debt Relief Act
; (v) the plaintiffs were not ready and willing to 
perform their part of contract; and (vi) the defendants had spent a sum of 
Rs.4,646/- over the repairs of the suit property.
Before the High Court, the First Respondent herein gave up the plea 
that he was a debtor in terms of the
Maharashtra Debt Relief Act
.  The 
learned Single Judge of the High Court while holding that the transaction 
was that of sale and not mortgage proceeded also to consider as to whether 
the transaction was a mortgage or not.  As regard the plea of purported 
readiness and willingness on the part of the Respondents, it was opined :
"It will not be open to the plaintiff to put his own 
construction on the terms but he would be bound by the 
terms as determined by the Court.  It will not be open to 
the plaintiff to vary the terms according to his 
interpretation and yet claim specific performance.  In the 
present case the plaintiffs set up a plea under the
Maharashtra Debt Relief Act
.  In other words, the 
plaintiffs sought to contend that their debt under the suit 
transaction was discharged under the
Maharashtra Debt 
Relief Act
.  They were, therefore, not liable to pay and 
yet claim reconveyance.  This is not the conduct of a 
party who is expected to perform his part of the terms 
and conditions of the contract of repayment of 
Rs.45,000/-.  The first plaintiff had applied under the 
aforesaid Act to the Mamlatdar for a declaration that he 
was a debtor and that the debt had been discharged.  He 
had engaged an Advocate in those proceedings.  When 
the present suit was filed, the plea about the aforesaid 
proceedings was set up in the forefront and a conditional 
offer to pay was made subject to the result of those 
proceedings.  In the alternative, the plaintiffs set up a 
case of a mortgage which case I have found as not proved  
both on facts as also in law.  The plaintiffs averred that 
the entire mortgage debt had been paid up from out of the 
income of the property.  They offered to pay if any 
amount was found due on taking accounts.  In my 
judgment, the aforesaid rival pleas set up by the plaintiffs 
disentitle them to a decree for specific performance.  By 
setting up these rival pleas they have exhibited their 
unwillingness to make an unconditional offer to pay 
which was a pre-requisite condition in the agreement of 
reconveyance where it was provided that, if after the 
period of 7 years and within the period of 9 years, the 
plaintiff paid the amount of Rs.45,000/- along with 
incidental charges of the sale deed, the defendants would 
reconvey the property"
The Division Bench of the High Court, however, by reason of the 
impugned judgment reversed the said findings holding that although 
evidences were led to show that the amount of Rs.45,000/- paid by the 
Appellants to the Respondents was a loan but having regard to
Section 58(c)
of the Transfer of Property Act, the document could not be construed to be a 
deed of mortgage.
The Division Bench differed from the learned Single Judge and the 
learned Trial Judge on their finding as regard valuation of the property 
holding that the Respondents had proved that the sale-deed was under-
valued, observing :
"From the fact that the agreement for reconveyance 
provided for the payment of Rs.45,000/- after 7 years and 
before nine years by itself would indicate that the 
transaction was much more than a mere deed of 
conveyance.  No interest was provided for.  It is in these 
circumstances that the court must consider whether the 
discretion should be exercised in favour of the Plaintiff."
As regard readiness and willingness on the part of the Respondents to 
perform their part of contract in terms of the said agreement of reconveyance 
dated 1.1.1971, the Division Bench came to the conclusion that the plaintiff-
Respondents had pleaded and proved the said fact.
Mr. Ajit S. Bhasme, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
Appellants, in support of the appeal would urge that the Division Bench of 
the High Court clearly erred in holding that the Respondents were ready and 
willing to perform their part of contract.  According to  the learned counsel, 
the plea taken by the Respondents that the amount of debt stood satisfied 
from the income therefrom by way of rent and, thus, the debt stood 
discharged was wholly inconsistent with a plea of readiness and willingness. 
Totality of circumstances, the learned counsel would contend, vis-`-vis the 
conduct of the parties would be relevant for determining as to whether the 
plaintiff-Respondents have been able to satisfy the court as regard 
fulfillment of the conditions laid down under
Section 16(c)
of the Special 
Relief Act, 1963.
Mr. Bhasme would submit that a manifest error had been committed 
by the Division Bench of the High Court in arriving at the finding that the 
plaintiff-Respondents pleaded and proved that they had all along been ready 
and willing to perform their part of contract; without taking into 
consideration that they initiated proceedings before the competent authority 
under the
Maharashtra Debt Relief Act
and raised insufficient plea in that 
behalf in the notice dated 9.6.1978 and furthermore made clear averments in 
the plaint that they were debtors and their debt stood discharged.
The learned counsel would contend that from a perusal of the plaint, it 
would appear that the plaintiffs made a conditional offer which does not 
satisfy the requirement of
Section 16(c)
of the Specific Relief Act.
In 
support of the said contention, the learned counsel would relied upon
Prem 
Raj vs. D.L.F. Housing & Construction Pvt. Ltd. & Another
[(
1968) 3 SCR 
648], Mahabir Prasad Jain vs. Ganga Singh
[(
1999) 8 SCC 274], Pushparani 
S. Sundaram and Others vs. Pauline Manomani James (Deceased) and 
Others
([(
2002) 9 SCC 582], Manjunath Anandappa Urf Shivappa Hanasi 
vs. Tammanasa and Others
[(
2003) 10 SCC 390] and Pukhraj D. Jain and 
Others vs. G. Gopalakrishna
[(2004) 7 SCC 251].
Mr. Bhasme would submit that the Division Bench had wrongly 
interfered with the concurrent findings of fact arrived at by the two courts.
Mr. A.V. Sawant, the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of 
the Respondents, on the other hand, would contend that there is no limitation 
as regard exercise of jurisdiction by a Division Bench of the High Court 
while entertaining a Letters Patent Appeal as in such an appeal, the Court is 
entitled to consider the questions of both fact and law.  Reliance, in this 
behalf, has been placed on
Smt. Asha Devi vs. Dukhi Sao and Another
[(1974) 2 SCC 492].
Mr. Sawant would submit that the plea that a transaction is a mortgage 
vis-`-vis an ostensible sale cannot be said to be  fraudulent nor dishonest 
which would debar the court from granting an equitable relief for specific 
performance of contract.
The learned counsel would argue that the Trial Judge as also the 
learned Single Judge of the High Court overlooked the pleadings of  
Respondents in the plaint as also the evidence adduced in this behalf as 
regard readiness and willingness on their part of contract and, thus, the 
Division Bench of the High Court cannot be said to have committed any 
error in interfering therewith.  Readiness and willingness to perform one's 
part of contract must be judged,  Mr. Sawant would submit, upon taking into 
consideration all the attending circumstances as also the conduct of both the 
parties and, therefore, it is not necessary to deposit the amount in court or to 
be possessed of the requisite amount at all times.  Strong reliance, in this 
behalf, has been placed on The Bank of India Ltd. and Others vs. Jamsetji 
A.H. Chinoy and Messrs.
Chinoy and Co. [AIR (37) 1950 PC 90], Nathulal 
vs. Phoolchand [(
1969) 3 SCC 120],  Smt. Indira Kaur and Others vs. Sheo 
Lal Kapoor
[(1988) 2 SCC 488], Tamboli Ramanlal Motilal (Dead) by Lrs. 
vs. Ghanchi Chimanlal Keshavlal (Dead) by Lrs. And Another [(1993) Supp. 
(1) SCC 295]; and  Mushir Mohammed Khan (Dead) by Lrs. Vs. Sajeda 
Bano (Smt.) and Others [(2000) 3 SCC 536].
It may be true that level of a document is not decisive.  A true nature 
of transaction must be determined having regard to the intention of the 
parties as well as the circumstances attributing thereto as also the wordings 
used in the document  in question.
In this case, admittedly, two documents were executed on the same 
day.  In view of the express provisions contained in
Section 58(c)
of the 
Transfer of Property Act, indisputably the transaction in question was not a 
mortgage by way of conditional sale.
There exists a distinction between mortgage by conditional  sale and a 
sale with a condition of repurchase.  In a mortgage, the debt subsists and a 
right to redeem remains with the debtor; but a sale with a condition of 
repurchase is not a lending and borrowing arrangement.  There does not 
exist any debt and no right to redeem is reserved  thereby.  An agreement to 
sell confers merely a personal right which can be enforced strictly according 
to the terms of the deed and at the time agreed upon.   Proviso appended to
Section 58(c)
, however, states that if the  condition for re-transfer is not 
embodied in the document which effects or purports to effect a sale,  the 
transaction will not be  regarded as a mortgage.  [See
Pandit Chunchun Jha 
vs. Sheikh Ebadat Ali and Another
(
1955) 1 SCR 174,  Shri Bhaskar 
Waman Joshi and Others vs. Shri Narayan Rambilas Agarwal
(
deceased) 
and Others (1960) 2 SCR 117],  K. Simrathmull vs. Nanjalingiah Gowder
, 
AIR 1963 SC 1182; Mushir Mohammed Khan (supra); and Tamboli 
Ramanlal Motilal (supra)],  
	
The plaintiff in a suit for specific performance of contract may raise 
an alternative plea that the transaction is a mortgage by way of conditional 
sale but he must be ready and willing either to repay the debt  or pay the 
amount of consideration as agreed upon.  In the instant case, the First 
Respondent herein, however, raised a specific plea that he was a debtor and 
that the deed of mortgage was executed only because the Appellants were 
not licensed money lenders.  He not only approached the competent 
authority under the
Maharashtra Debt Relief Act
for a declaration that he 
was a debtor and  stood discharged from his debt, but also in the plaint he 
sought for a decree for possesion of the suit land on the premise that the 
provisions of  the
Maharashtra Debt Relief Act
were attracted.  He even 
asked for a decree of  accounting.
It may be true that the plaintiff had made alternative prayers of 
specific performance of the agreement of reconveyance and redemption of 
mortgage but it appears that the plaints starts with the description of the 
mortgage property.
In the plaint, the plaintiffs averred :
"2The sale deed and the agreement are two documents 
of the same transaction.  They are written in same 
meeting and registered on same day.  Sale deed 
transaction is a mortgage transaction"
"3.  The Plaintiff as agreed wrote a sale deed in the name 
of defendant no.1 on 1.1.1971 as a security to the loan"
After reciting the relevant stipulations contained in the registered  
deed of agreement of sale to the effect that the First Appellant would 
reconvey the suit property in his name and got a document registered, it was 
averred :
"Accordingly to the conditions in the agreement Plaintiff 
was and is ready to pay the amount to defendant.  And 
also the Plaintiff is and was ready to bear the cost of 
reconveyance deed.  According to the agreement Plaintiff 
is and was ready to prepare  the reconveyance deed"
However, from paragraph 6 onwards, a plea as regard creation of a 
mortgage was raised specifically contending  :
"(7).	Plaintiff is a debtor under Mumbai Debt 
Relief Act.  According to the Plaintiff the mortgage 
amount in the said document has been shunked.
Therefore Plaintiff prays that accordingly it be decided.
(8)	If not decided as above then the accounting 
of the mortgage property shall be done under the 
provisions of Mumbai Money Lending Act.  The 
defendant has earned a large amount by giving the 
mortgage property on rental basis.  After the accounting 
whatever amount remains for paying or taking 
accordingly the Plaintiff is ready to give and take."
It was further averred :
"The Plaintiff prays that if it is not done as 
mentioned above then the amount of Rs.45,000/- which 
the Plaintiff is ready to pay to the defendants be given to 
the defendant and the Plaintiff be given the possession of 
mortgage relief suit property with necessary documents."
Reading the plaint as a whole, it becomes evident that the First 
Respondent principally raised a contention that the transaction was of 
mortgage and the sale stood redeemed and he was discharged from the debt.  
He moreover prayed for a decree for accounting, but contended that only in 
the event, such prayer is not granted, he was ready to pay the defendants the 
said sum of Rs.45,000/-  The averments made in the pleadings must be 
construed  reasonably and so read the statement made as regard  purported 
readiness and willingness to pay the stipulated amount to the defendants 
according to the conditions mentioned in the agreement cannot be read in 
isolation.
In his examination-in-chief although he stated  :
"I am and I was ready to pay the consideration as per 
the agreement.  I am ready to pay the consideration 
amount of Rs.45,000/-.  I was also ready to pay the said 
sum.  I am also ready to pay the costs of the registration 
of the sale deed".
but in his cross-examination, he admitted :
"I am not doing any business or work, since last 10 
years.  I have no source of income.  I have no bank 
account.  I am not to receive any amounts from any one.   
I have no amount with me.  I am money less since last 10 
years.  At the time of giving notice (9.6.1978) I have no 
my own accounts.  It is not true to say that I was never 
ready and willing to pay the sums of the defendants, for 
the reconveyance of the suit house."
The learned trial Judge further noticed the following statement of te 
plaintiffs in paragraph 18 of the cross-examination :
"It  is my prayer in the suit that the suit property is 
to redeemed without any amount being given, as the said 
sum is already satisfied out of the income of rent, 
received by the Defendant.  It is also my prayer that 
account of dues be taken and if necessary, I would pay if 
any dues remained unsatisfied.  It is also my say that the 
suit transaction is of mortgage nature."
(Emphasis supplied)		
			
		
	It is now well-settled that the conduct of the parties, with a view to 
arrive at a finding as to whether the plaintiff-Respondents were all along and 
still are ready and willing to perform their part of contract as is mandatorily 
required under
Section 16(c)
of the Specific Relief Act must be determined 
having regard to the entire attending circumstances.  A bare averment in the 
plaint or a statement made in the examination-in-chief would not suffice.  
The conduct of the plaintiff-Respondents must be judged having regard to 
the entirety of the pleadings as also the evidences brought on records.
In terms of Form Nos. 47 and 48 appended to Appendix A
of the 
Code of Civil Procedure
, 'the plaintiff must plead that he has been and still 
is ready and willing specifically to perform the agreement on his part of 
which the defendant has had notice' or 'the plaintiff is still ready and willing 
to pay the purchase-money of the said property to the defendant'.  The offer 
of the plaintiff in the instant case is a conditional one and, thus, does not 
fulfill the requirements of law.
In Bank of India (supra),  it was held :
"It is true that plaintiff 1 stated that he was buying for 
himself, that he had not sufficient ready money to meet 
the price and that no definite arrangements had been 
made for finding it at the time of repudiation.  But in 
order to prove himself ready and willing a purchaser has 
not necessarily to produce the money or to vouch a 
concluded scheme for financing the transaction.  The 
question is one of fact and in the present case the 
appellate Court had ample material on which to found the 
view it reached"
The said decision was, thus, rendered on its own fact.  Such a 
conclusion was arrived at having regard to the fact that ample material had 
been brought on records.  There must, thus,  be some evidence to show that 
the plaintiff could arrange for the amount stipulated for payment to the 
vendor as and when called upon to do so.  In this case no such evidence was 
disclosed.
In Nathulal (supra), the contract was required to be performed in 
certain sequence.  Therein it was found that certain arrangements had been 
made by the Respondent therein for paying the amount due.  It was held that 
so long as Nathulal did not carry out his part of contract, Phoolchand could 
not be called upon to pay the balance of the price and it was in that situation 
held that latter at all relevant time was ready to perform his part of contract.
The said decision also has no application in the instant case.
In
Smt. Indira Kaur
(supra), this Court merely held that for 
determining the question as regard readiness and willingness on the part of 
the plaintiff to perform his part of contract, the Court must examine the 
position of both the parties.  This Court  did not say, as was submitted by 
Mr. Sawant, that the conduct of both the parties must be taken into 
consideration.  In that case, the defendant's contention that he had not 
received the notice of the plaintiff was held to be incorrect, as despite his 
alleged receipt of notice, he admitted to have visited the Sub-Registrar's 
office on 16.8.1977.  In that situation it was held that the defendant was not 
ready and willing to perform his part of contract.  It was held that as of fact 
that the plaintiff had done what he could do.  He went to the Sub-Registrar's 
Office, he filed an application for recording his presence.  The said decision, 
therefore, has no application in the instant case.
On the other hand in
Mahabir Prasad Jain
(supra), it has been held :
"22. The way in which the respondent has been 
instituting different proceedings in different fora within a 
short time making inconsistent allegations shows that the 
respondent has been abusing the process of court and not 
come to court with clean hands. He is not entitled to get 
any equitable relief under the
Specific Relief Act
."
In
Pushparani S. Sundaram
(supra), it was opined :
"Inference of readiness and willingness could be 
drawn by the conduct of the plaintiff, the circumstances 
in a particular case in other words to be gathered from the 
totality of circumstances."
It was further held 
		
"So far these being a plea that they were ready and 
willing to perform their part of the contract is there in the 
pleading, we have no hesitation to conclude, that this by 
itself is not sufficient to hold that the appellants were 
ready and willing in terms of
Section 16(c)
of the 
Specific Relief Act. This requires not only such plea but 
also proof of the same. Now examining the first of the 
two circumstances, how could mere filing of this suit, 
after exemption was granted be a circumstance about 
willingness or readiness of the plaintiff. This at the most 
could be the desire of the plaintiff to have this property. 
It may be for such a desire this suit was filed raising such 
a plea. But
Section 16(c)
of the said Act makes it clear 
that mere plea is not sufficient, it has to be proved."
In N.P. Thirugnanam (Dead) by Lrs. vs. Dr. R. Jagan Mohan Rao and 
Others [(1995) 5 SCC 115], this Court held :
"The continuous readiness and willingness on the part 
of the plaintiff is a condition precedent to grant the relief 
of specific performance. This circumstance is material 
and relevant and is required to be considered by the court 
while granting or refusing to grant the relief. If the 
plaintiff fails to either aver or prove the same, he must 
fail. To adjudge whether the plaintiff is ready and willing 
to perform his part of the contract, the court must take 
into consideration the conduct of the plaintiff prior and 
subsequent to the filing of the suit along with other 
attending circumstances. The amount of consideration 
which he has to pay to the defendant must of necessity be 
proved to be available..."
Yet again in
Manjunath Anandappa
(supra), this Court held :
"27. The decisions of this Court, therefore, leave no 
manner of doubt that a plaintiff in a suit for specific 
performance of contract not only must raise a plea that he 
had all along been and even on the date of filing of suit 
was ready and willing to perform his part of contract, but 
also prove the same. Only in certain exceptional situation 
where although in letter and spirit, the exact words had 
not been used but readiness and willingness can be culled 
out from reading all the averments made by the plaintiff 
as a whole coupled with the materials brought on record 
at the trial of the suit, to the said effect, the statutory 
requirement of
Section 16(c)
of the Specific Relief Act 
may be held to have been complied with."
In
Pukhraj D. Jain
(supra), it was held :
"6.
Section 16(c)
of the Specific Relief Act lays 
down that specific performance of a contract cannot be 
enforced in favour of a person who fails to aver and 
prove that he has performed or has always been ready 
and willing to perform the essential terms of the contract 
which are to be performed by him, other than terms the 
performance of which has been prevented or waived by 
the defendant. Explanation (ii) to this sub-section 
provides that the plaintiff must aver performance of, or 
readiness and willingness to perform, the contract 
according to its true construction. The requirement of this 
provision is that the plaintiff must aver that he has always 
been ready and willing to perform the essential terms of 
the contract. Therefore, not only should there be such an 
averment in the plaint but the surrounding circumstances 
must also indicate that the readiness and willingness 
continue from the date of the contract till the hearing of 
the suit. It is well settled that equitable remedy of specific 
performance cannot be had on the basis of pleadings 
which do not contain averments of readiness and 
willingness of the plaintiff to perform his contract in 
terms of Forms 47 and 48
CPC
. Here Respondent 1 
himself sent a legal notice rescinding the contract and 
thereafter filed OS No. 801 of 1977 on 7-11-1977 
claiming refund of the advance paid by him. In fact the 
suit for recovery of the amount was decreed by the trial 
court on 24-7-1985 but he himself preferred a revision 
against the decree wherein an order of rejection of the 
plaint was passed by the High Court. In such 
circumstances, it is absolutely apparent that Respondent 
1 was not ready and willing to perform his part of the 
contract and in view of the mandate of
Section 16
of the 
Specific Relief Act, no decree for specific performance 
could be passed in his favour. The trial court, therefore, 
rightly held that the suit filed by Respondent 1 was not 
maintainable."
Furthermore, the First Respondents had raised inconsistent plea in the 
sense that he  had categorically taken a standing that the debt stood 
discharged.  Such a plea was irreconcilable with the plea that he had all 
along been ready and willing to perform his part of contract.  It is in that 
situation, the decision of this Court in
Prem Raj
(supra) is attracted wherein 
it was held that although inconsistent reliefs by a party to the suit is 
maintainable but it must be shown that each of such pleas is maintainable.
The plea of automatic redemption of mortgage and discharge from 
debt raised on the part of the Respondents herein cannot stand with a plea of 
readiness and willingness on his part to perform their  part of contract.
The Division Bench of the High Court, thus,  posed a wrong question 
unto itself.  It also failed to take into consideration the statement of the 
plaintiff in his cross-examination and in particular paragraphs 12 and 19 
thereof in their proper perspective.  The statements made by the plaintiff 
before the court, if read as a whole would clearly show that he was neither in 
a position to raise any fund.   He proceeded on the basis that he was not 
required to pay any amount.  The Division Bench furthermore misdirected 
itself in holding :
"The test would be whether the Plaintiff was in a 
position to pay the money on direction by the court and 
not whether he had the money.  No such question was 
ever put to him to suggest that if he was called upon by 
the Court to deposit the money, he  had no means to 
deposit the money or make it available for deposit.
It was for the plaintiff  to prove his readiness and willingness to pay 
the stipulated amount and it was not for the Appellants to raise such 
question.  The Division Bench furthermore considered irrelevant facts in 
holding that the plaintiff deposited the amount of Rs.60,000/- in the Court of 
Appeal to arrive at the conclusion that the plaintiff-Appellant was ready and 
willing to perform his part of contract.  Deposit of any amount in court at the 
appellate stage by the plaintiffs by itself would not establish their readiness 
and willingness to perform their part of the contract within the meaning of
Section 16(c)
of the Specific Relief Act.  It further erred in holding that the 
mere fact that he did not have money at the time of issuance of the notice, 
the day when plaint was filed or at the time of his evidence was of no 
consequence in total disregard of statutory mandate contained in
Section 
16(c)
of the Specific Relief Act.  Similarly, the finding of the Division 
Bench that the prayer for grant of  specific performance of contract  and in 
the alternative for redemption of mortgage or cancellation of debt cannot be 
said to be pleas which could not be raised or be a bar for the court to 
consider to grant the relief of specific performance, cannot be accepted, as 
pleas of specific performance of contract and cancellation of debt and/or a 
decree for accounting are inconsistent.
As regard the question as to whether the transaction was undervalued, 
the Appellate Court committed a manifest error in taking into consideration 
the fact that  payment of Rs.45,000/- was to be made after 7 years and before 
9 years without any interest is a circumstance to hold that discretion should 
be exercised in favour of the plaintiff-Respondents.
In
Sargunam (Dead) by Lr. Vs. Chidambram and Another
[(2005) 1 
SCC 162], this Court  observed :
"In the case of
Mademsetty Satyanarayana v. G. 
Yelloji Rao
, it has been held that the jurisdiction to 
decree specific performance is discretionary and the court 
is not bound to grant such relief merely because it is 
lawful to do so; that in cases where one of the three 
circumstances mentioned in
Section 20(2)
is established, 
no question of discretion arises"
[See also
M.V. Shankar Bhat and Another  vs. Claude Pinto
since 
(Deceased) by Lrs. And Others.  (2003) 4 SCC 86].
It is furthermore trite that normally a court of appeal would not 
interfere with a concurrent finding of fact which is based on appreciation of 
oral evidence.
In Bank of India (supra) whereupon Mr. Sawant placed reliance, the 
Privy Council held :
"Their Lordships are not unmindful of the great 
weight to be attached to the findings of fact of a Judge of 
first instance who sees and hears the witnesses and is in a 
position to assess their credibility from his own 
observation.  For this reason  they would be reluctant to 
differ from the learned Judge in this instance if his 
conclusion on the issue under consideration had turned 
on the impression made by Jamsetji in the witness- 
box."
Yet in
Manjunath Anandappa
(supra), it was held :
"It is now also well settled that a court of appeal 
should not ordinarily interfere with the discretion 
exercised by the courts below."
The question also came up for consideration in
Collector of Customs, 
Bombay  vs.  Swastic Woollens (P) Ltd. and Others
[(1988) Supp. SCC 796]
 
"An appeal has been provided to this Court to oversee 
that the subordinate tribunals act within the law.  Merely 
because another view might be possible by a competent 
court of law is no ground for interference under
Section 
130-E
of the Act though in relation to the rate of duty of 
customs or to the value of the goods for purposes of 
assessment, the amplitude of appeal is unlimited.  But 
because the jurisdiction is unlimited, there is inherent 
limitation imposed in such appeals.  The Tribunal has not 
deviated from the path of correct principle and has 
considered all the relevant factors.  If the Tribunal has 
acted bona fide with the natural justice by a speaking 
order, in our opinion, even if superior court feels that 
another view is possible, that is no ground for 
substitution of that view in exercise of power under 
clause (b) of
Section 130-E
of the Act."
[See also
West Bengal Electricity Regulatory Commission vs. CESC 
Ltd.
(
2002) 8 SCC 715 and Commissioner of Customs, Chennai vs. Adani 
Exports Ltd. and another
(2004)  4 SCC 367]

	It may be, as has been held in
Asha Devi
(supra)  that the power of the 
Appellate Court in intra court appeal is not exactly the same as contained in
Section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure but it is also well-known that 
entertainment of a Letters Patent Appeal is discretionary and normally the 
Division Bench would not, unless there exist cogent reasons, differ from a 
finding of fact arrived at by the learned Single Judge.  Even as noticed 
hereinbefore, a court of first appeal which is the final court of appeal on fact 
may have to exercise some amount of restraint.
For the reasons aforementioned, the impugned judgment cannot be 
sustained which is set aside accordingly.  The appeal is allowed.  In the facts 
and circumstances of the case, however, there shall be no order as to costs.