[Cites
5
, Cited by
541
]
Supreme Court of India
New India Assurance Co. Ltd vs Charlie And Anr on 29 March, 2005
Equivalent citations: AIR 2005 SUPREME COURT 2157, 2005 (10) SCC 720, 2005 AIR SCW 1801, 2005 (5) SRJ 53, 2005 (3) SCALE 541, 2005 SCC(CRI) 1657, (2005) ILR(KER) 2 SC 427, 2005 (3) SLT 501, (2005) 2 ALLMR 486 (SC), (2005) 1 CLR 746 (SC), (2005) 3 MAD LJ 118, (2005) 3 JCR 65 (SC), (2005) 29 ALLINDCAS 87 (SC), 2005 (2) UJ (SC) 772, 2005 UJ(SC) 2 772, 2005 (2) BLJR 1148, 2005 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 505, (2005) 3 SUPREME 262, (2005) 2 RECCIVR 550, (2005) 3 SCALE 541, (2005) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 149, (2005) 59 ALL LR 626, (2005) 3 ALL WC 2221, (2005) 2 ACC 74, (2005) 2 ACJ 1131, (2005) 2 CURCC 47, (2005) 2 GCD 27 (SC), (2005) 3 CIVILCOURTC 273, (2005) 3 GUJ LR 2343, (2005) 3 KER LT 227, (2005) 2 PAT LJR 249, (2005) 2 PUN LR 661, (2005) 3 SCJ 296, (2005) 2 TAC 297, AIRONLINE 2005 SC 275, (2005) 3 CIV LJ 644
Author:
Arijit Pasayat
Bench:
Arijit Pasayat
,
S.H. Kapadia
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1862 of 2005

PETITIONER:
New India Assurance Co. Ltd.

RESPONDENT:
Charlie and Anr.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 29/03/2005

BENCH:
Arijit Pasayat & S.H. Kapadia

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT




ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.
Leave granted.
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as the `Insurer')
calls in question legality of the judgment rendered by a Division Bench of
the Kerala High Court holding that the appellant was liable to pay
compensation to the respondent No. 1 for the injuries sustained by him in
an automobile accident. The accident took place on 14.12.1997 at about 3.10
A.M. It was claimed by the claimant that he sustained injuries because of
the rash and negligent driving of the vehicle (Motor Cycle bearing
Registration No. KL- 7Q/9101) driven by the respondent No. 2. The
claimant's stand was that he was travelling as a pillion rider. Total
compensation of Rs. 9,00,000 was claimed. After considering the evidence on
record, the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, Perumbavoor (in short the
`MACT') awarded Rs. 4, 68, 825 with 9% interest from the date of
application till payment. The figure was arrived at in the following manner
: -
1.	Rs. 2,88, 000	for loss of earning;
2.	Rs. 2,600 	towards transport to hospital;
3.	Rs. 4,000 	for extra nourishment expenses;
4.	Rs. 250 	for damage to clothing;
5.	Rs. 1,18,975 	for medical expenses;
6.	Rs. 15,000	for pain and suffering;
7.	Rs. 40,000 	towards compensation for continuing or
permanent disability.
Total Rs. 4,68,825

In appeal filed by the insurer-appellant the amount granted for permanent
disability was deleted.
In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the appellant submitted that
the age of the injured was about 37 years and a multiplier of 16 was
adopted on the ground that there was permanent disability and, therefore,
deprivation of contribution is on the higher side. Strong reliance is
placed on the decisions of this Court in
General Manager, Kerala State Road
Transport Coporation Trivandrum v. Susamma Thomas Mrs. and Ors.
, [1994] 2
SCC 176 and U.P. State Road Transport Corporation and Ors. v. Trilok
Chandra and Ors.
, [1996] 4 SCC 362 to contend that the multiplier is on the
higher side. It is also submitted that whatever be the earning, a portion
of it is spent for personal expenditure and normally 1/3rd deduction is
made therefrom. But in the instant case after taking into account the fact
that the income of the injured was Rs. 18,000 per year, the multiplier of
16 has been applied without making any deduction.
In response, learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the injured
has totally crippled and has been almost rendered immobile by the 100%
disability. Even at the time of discharge he was not in a conscious
condition. Taking into account this factor the quantum as awarded cannot be
said to be on the higher side.
What would be the percentage of deduction for personal expenditure cannot
be governed by any rigid rule or formula by universal application. It would
depend upon circumstances of each case. In the instant case the claimant
was nearly 37 years of age and was married. Therefore, as rightly contended
by learned counsel for the appellant, 1/3rd deduction has to be made for
personal expenditure.
Certain principles were highlighted by this Court in the case of
Municipal
Corporation of Delhi v. Subhagwanti
, [1966] 3 SCR 649 in the matter of
fixing the appropriate multiplier and computation of compensation. In a
fatal accident action, the accepted measure of damages awarded to the
dependants is the pecuniary loss suffered by them as a result of the death.
``How much has the widow and family lost by the father's death?''
The
answer to this lies in the oft quoted passage from the opinion of Lord
Wright in Davies v. Powell Duffryn ssociated Collieries Ltd. which says :
``The starting point is the amount of wages which the deceased was
	earning, the ascertainment of which to some extent may depend on
	the regularity of his employment. Then there is an estimate of how
	much was required or expended for his own personal and living
	expenses. The balance will give a datum or basic figure which will
	generally be turned sum, however, has to be taxed down by having
	due regard to uncertainties, for instance, that the widow might
	have again married and thus ceased to be dependent, and other like
	matters of speculation and doubt.''

The rule in common law in Baker v. Bolton, [1979] 1 All ER 774 enunciated
by Lord Ellenborough was that ``in a Civil Court, the death of a human
being could not be complained of as a injury, ''. Indeed, the maxim action
personalis moritur cum persona, had the effect that all actions in tort,
with very few exceptions, also became extinguished with that person. Great
changes were brought about by the Fatal Accidents Act, 1846 (now
Fatal
Accidents Act, 1976
) and the Law Reforms (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act,
1934. Under the statute, as indeed under the Indian Statute as well, there
are two separate and distinct cause of action, which are maintainable in
consequence of a person's death. There were the dependant's claim for the
financial loss suffered and acclaim for injury, loss or damage, which the
deceased would have had, had he lived, and which survives for the benefit
of his estate.
The measure of damage is the pecuniary loss suffered and is likely to be
suffered by each dependant. Thus ``except where there is express statutory
direction to the contrary, the damages to be awarded to a dependant of a
deceased person under the Fatal Accidents Acts must take into account any
pecuniary benefit accruing to that dependant in consequence of the death of
the deceased. It is the net loss on balance which constitutes the measure
of damages.'' Lord Wright in the Davies's case (supra) said, ``The actual
pecuniary loss of each individual entitled to sue can only be ascertained
by balancing on the one hand the loss to him of the future pecuniary
benefit, and on the other any pecuniary advantage which from whatever
sources comes to him by reason of the death.''
These words of Lord Wright
were adopted as the principle applicable also under the Indian Act in
Gobald Motor Service Ltd. v. R.M.K. Veluswami
, [1962] 1 SCR 929 where this
Court stated that the general principle is that the actual pecuniary loss
can be ascertained only by balancing on the one hand the loss to the
claimant of the future pecuniary benefit and on the other any pecuniary
advantage which from whatever source comes to them by reason of the death,
that is, the balance of loss and gain to a dependant by the death, must be
ascertained.
The assessment of damages to compensate the dependants is beset with
difficulties because from the nature of things, it has to take into account
many imponderables, e.g., the life expectancy of the deceased and the
dependants, the amount that the deceased would have earned during the
remainder of his life, the amount that he would have contributed to the
dependants during that period, the chances that the deceased may not have
lived or the dependants may not live up to the estimated remaining period
of their life expectancy, the chances that the deceased might have got
better employment or income or might have lost his employment or income
together.
The manner of arriving at the damages is to ascertain the net income of the
deceased available for the support of himself and his dependants, and to
deduct therefrom such part of his income as the deceased was accustomed to
spend upon himself, as regards both self-maintenance and pleasure, and to
ascertain what part of his net income the deceased was accustomed to spend
for the benefit of the dependants. Then that should be capitalized by
multiplying it by a figure representing the proper number of year's
purchase.
Much of the calculation necessarily remains in the realm of hypothesis
``and in that region arithmetic is a good servant but a bad master'' since
there are so often many imponderables. In every case ``it is the overall
picture that matters'', and the court must try to assess as best as it can
the loss suffered.
There were two methods adopted to determine and for calculation of
compensation in fatal accident actions, the first the multiplier mentioned
in Davies case (supra) and the second in Nance v. British Columbia Electric
Railway Co. Ltd., [1951] 2 All ER 448 .
The multiplier method involves the ascertainment of the loss of dependency
or the multiplicand having regard to the circumstances of the case and
capitalizing the multiplicand by an appropriate multiplier. The choice of
the multiplier is determined by the age of the deceased (or that of the
claimants whichever is higher) and by the calculation as to what capital
sum, if invested at a rate of interest appropriate to a stable economy,
would yield the multiplicand by way of annual interest. In ascertaining
this, regard should also be had to the fact that ultimately the capital sum
should also be consumed-up over the period for which the dependency is
expected to last.
The considerations generally relevant in the selection of multiplicand and
multiplier were adverted to by Lord Diplock in his speech in Mallett v. Mc
Mongle, [1969] 2 All ER 178 where the deceased was aged 25 and left behind
his widow of about the same age and three minor children. On the question
of selection of multiplicand Lord Diplock observed :
``The starting point in any estimate of the amount of the `dependency` is
the annual value of the material benefits provided for the dependants out
of the earnings of the deceased at the date of his death. But....there are
many factors which might have led to variations up or down in the future.
His earnings might have increased and with them the amount provided by him
for his dependants. They might have diminished with a recession in trade or
he might have had spells of unemployment. As his children grew up and
became independent the proportion of his earnings spent on his dependants
would have been likely to fall. But in considering the effect to be given
in the award of damages to possible variations in the dependency there are
two factors to be borne in mind. The first is that the more remote in the
future is the anticipated change the less confidence there can be in the
chances of its occurring and the smaller the allowance to be made for it in
the assessment. The second is that as a matter of the arithmetic of the
calculation of present value, the later the change takes place the less
will be its effect upon the total award of damages. Thus at interest rates
of 4- 1/2% the present value of an annuity for 20 years of which the first
ten years are at $ 100 per annum and the second ten years at $ 200 per
annum, is about 12 years' purchase of the arithmetical average annuity of $
150 per annum, whereas if the first ten years are at $200 per annum and the
second ten years at $ 100 per annum the present value is about 14 years'
purchase of the arithmetical mean of $ 150 per annum. If therefore the
chances of variations in the `dependency' are to be reflected in the
multiplicand of which the years' purchase is the multiplier, variations in
the dependency which are not expected to take place until after ten years
should have only a relatively small effect in increasing or diminishing the
`dependency' used for the purpose of assessing the damages.''

In regard to the choice of the multiplicand the Halsbury's Laws of England
in vol. 34, para 98 states the principle thus :
``98. Assessment of damages under the Fatal Accident Act, 1976 - The courts
have evolved a method for calculating the amount of pecuniary benefit that
dependants could reasonably expect to have received from the deceased in
the future. First the annual value to the dependants of those benefits (the
multiplicand) is assessed. In the ordinary case of the death of a wage-
earner that figure is arrived at by deducting from the wages the estimated
amount of his own personal and living expenses.
The assessment is split into two parts. The first part comprises
	damages for the period between death and trial. The multiplicand is
	multiplied by the number of years which have elapsed between those
	two dates. Interest at one-half the short-term investment rate is
	also awarded on that multiplicand. The second part is damages for
	the period from the trial onwards. For that period, the number of
	years which have based on the number of years that the expectancy
	would probably have lasted; central to that calculation is the
	probable length of the deceased's working life at the date of
	death.''

As to the multiplier, Halsbury states :
``However, the multiplier is a figure considerably less than the number of
years taken as the duration of the expectancy. Since the dependants can
invest their damages, the lump sum award in respect of future loss must be
discounted to reflect their receipt of interest on invested funds, the
intention being that the dependants will each year draw interest and some
capital (the interest element decreasing and the capital drawings
increasing with the passage of years), so that they are compensated each
year for their annual loss, and the fund will be exhausted at the age which
the court assesses to be the correct age, having regard to all
contingencies. The contingencies of life such as illness, disability and
unemployment have to be taken into account. Actuarial evidence is
admissible, but the courts do not encourage such evidence. The calculation
depends on selecting an assumed rate of interest. In practice about 4 or 5
per cent is selected, and inflation is disregarded. It is assumed that the
return on fixed interest bearing securities is so much higher than 4 to 5
per cent that rough and ready allowance for inflation is thereby made. The
multiplier may be increased where the plaintiff is a high tax payer. The
multiplicand is based on the rate of wages at the date of trial. No
interest is allowed on the total figure.''

In case, where the injured has suffered 100% the logic applicable to a
deceased can, in appropriate cases, taking note of all relevant factors be
reasonably applied.
The claimant was deriving income from agriculture.
Normal rule about the deprivation of income is directly not applicable to
cases where agricultural income is the source of deceased's or injured's
income. In that case other circumstances have to be considered.
In both Susamma Thomas and Trilok Chand's cases (supra) the multiplier
appears to have been adopted taking note of the prevalent banking rate of
interest.
In
Susamma Thomas
's case (supra) it was noted that the normal rate of
interest was about 10% and accordingly the multiplier was worked out. As
the interest rate is on the decline, the multiplier has to consequentially
be raised.
Therefore, instead of 16 the multiplier of 18 as was adopted in
Trilok Chandra
's case (supra) appears to be appropriate.
In fact in
Trilok
Chand
's case (supra), after reference to
Second Schedule to the Act
, it was
noticed that the same suffers from many defects. It was pointed out that
the same is to serve as a guide, but cannot be said to be invariable ready
reckoner. However, the appropriate highest multiplier was held to be 18.
The highest multiplier has to be for the age group of 21 years to 25 years
when an ordinary Indian Citizen starts independently earning and the lowest
would be in respect of a person in the age group of 60 to 70, which is the
normal retirement age.
Taking the totality of the circumstances, on the basis of the various
factors indicated above, the quantum of compensation is fixed at Rs.
3,50,000. The amount shall carry interest @7.5% per annum from the date of
filing of the claim application up to the date of payment. If any amount
has already been paid the same shall be adjusted from the amount to be
worked out on the above said basis.
Appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent. No costs.