[Cites
4
, Cited by
467
]
Supreme Court of India
Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation ... vs S. Rajapriya And Two Others on 20 April, 2005
Equivalent citations: AIR 2005 SUPREME COURT 2985, 2005 (6) SCC 236, AIR 2005 BOMBA 107, 2005 AIR SCW 2542, 2005 SCC(CRI) 1436, (2005) 3 ALLMR 575 (SC), (2005) 3 CTC 373 (SC), (2005) 3 JCR 138 (SC), (2005) 2 KER LT 848, 2005 (3) ALL MR 575, 2005 (3) CTC 373, 2005 (4) SCALE 336, (2005) 30 ALLINDCAS 741 (SC), (2005) 4 JT 531 (SC), (2005) 2 PUN LR 650, 2005 (4) SLT 42, 2005 (5) SRJ 471, 2005 (2) PUN LR 651, 2005 (2) BLJR 1322, (2005) 4 MPLJ 245, (2005) 31 OCR 536, (2005) 4 RECCIVR 628, (2005) 4 SCALE 336, (2005) 60 ALL LR 154, (2005) 3 CIVLJ 906, (2005) 4 MAD LW 642, (2005) 2 CIVILCOURTC 801, (2005) 4 MAH LJ 553, (2006) 1 RECCRIR 598, (2005) 4 SCJ 179, (2005) 4 SUPREME 87, (2005) 2 ACC 476, (2005) 3 ACJ 1441, (2005) 2 TAC 305, (2005) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 732, (2005) 4 ANDH LT 14, (2005) 3 KCCR 1967, (2006) 2 BOM CR 376
Author:
Arijit Pasayat
Bench:
Arijit Pasayat
,
S.H. Kapadia
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2765 of 2005

PETITIONER:
Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation Ltd

RESPONDENT:
S. Rajapriya and two others

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 20/04/2005

BENCH:
ARIJIT PASAYAT & S.H. KAPADIA

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

(Arising out of SLP(C) No.6144 of 2004)


ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.
Leave granted.
Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation Ltd. (hereinafter referred 
to as the 'Corporation') calls in question legality of the judgment 
rendered by a Division Bench of the Madras High Court dismissing the 
appeal filed by the Corporation.  By the impugned order the Division 
Bench confirmed the compensation awarded to the respondents by the 
Motor Vehicle Accident Compensation Claim Tribunal, Principal District 
Judge, Thanjur (in short the 'Tribunal').
Background facts in a nutshell are as follows:
On 30.8.2001 one Sathyamurthy (hereinafter referred to as the 
'deceased') lost his life in an automobile accident.  His widow 
(respondent no.1) and minor son (respondent no.2) filed petition 
claiming compensation under the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
(in short the 
'Act'). Deceased's mother was impleaded as respondent no.2 in the claim 
petition, while the Corporation was impleaded as respondent no.1. It 
was stated in the claim petition that the accident occurred due to rash 
and negligent driving of the Corporation's driver. Claim of Rs.20 lakhs 
was made.  Tribunal noted that the deceased was about 38 years of age 
and was getting monthly salary of Rs.4688/- (annually Rs.56,208/-) from 
the Corporation. After deductions one-third for personal expenses 
contribution of the deceased was fixed at Rs.37,472/- per annum.  As 
the deceased was about 38 years of age, multiplier of 16 was applied.  
Accordingly, the compensation was worked out at Rs.6,09,552/-.  The 
award was questioned in appeal before the Madras High Court and the 
Division Bench as noted above, dismissed the same.
In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the appellant 
submitted that quantum as arrived at by applying multiplier of 16 is 
high.  There is no appearance on behalf of the respondents in spite of 
the notice. While issuing notice on 22.3.2004 the dispute was 
restricted to the appropriate multiplier to be adopted. The question 
regarding appropriate multiplier has been considered by this Court in 
General Manager, Kerala State Road Transport Corporation, Trivandrum v. 
Susamma Thomas (Mrs.) and Ors. (1994 (2) SCC 176) and U.P. State Road 
Transport Corporation and Ors. v. Trilok Chandra and Ors. 1996 (4) SCC
362).
Certain principles were highlighted by this Court in the case of
Municipal Corporation of  Delhi  v. Subhagwanti
(1966 (3) SCR 649) in 
the matter of fixing the appropriate multiplier and computation of 
compensation. In a fatal accident action, the accepted measure of 
damages awarded to the dependants is the pecuniary loss suffered by 
them as a result of the death.  "How much has the widow and family lost 
by the father's death?"
The answer to this lies in the oft quoted 
passage from the opinion of Lord Wright in Davies v. Powell Duffregn 
Associated Collieries Ltd. (1942 AC 601) which says:
"The starting point is the amount of wages 
which the deceased was earning, the ascertainment of 
which to some extent may depend on the regularity of 
his employment.  Then there is an estimate of how 
much was required or expended for his own personal 
and living expenses.  The balance will give a datum 
or basic figure which will generally be turned into a 
lump sum by taking a certain number of years' 
purchase. That sum, however, has to be taxed down by 
having due regard to uncertainties, for instance, 
that the widow might have again married and thus 
ceased to be dependent, and other like matters of 
speculation and doubt."
The rule in common law in Baker v.  Bolton (1979 (1) All ER 774) 
enunciated by Lord Ellenborough was that "in a Civil Court, the death 
of a human being could not be complained of as a injury,". Indeed, the 
maxim action personalis moritur cum persona, had the effect that all 
actions in tort, with very few exceptions, also became extinguished 
with that person. Great changes were brought about by the Fatal 
Accidents Act, 1846 (now
Fatal Accidents Act, 1976
) and the Law Reforms 
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1934.  Under the statute, as indeed 
under the Indian Statute as well, there are two separate and distinct 
cause of action, which are maintainable in consequence of a person's 
death.  There were the dependant's claim for the financial loss 
suffered and acclaim for injury, loss or damage, which the deceased 
would have had, had he lived, and which survives for the benefit of his 
estate.
The measure of damage is the pecuniary loss suffered and is 
likely to be suffered by each dependant.  Thus "except where there is 
express statutory direction to the contrary, the damages to be awarded 
to a dependant of a deceased person under the Fatal Accidents Acts must 
take into account any pecuniary benefit accruing to that dependant in 
consequence of the death of the deceased.  It is the net loss on 
balance which constitutes the measure of damages."  Lord Wright in the 
Davies's case (supra) said, "The actual pecuniary loss of each 
individual entitled to sue can only be ascertained by balancing on the 
one hand the loss to him of the future pecuniary benefit, and on the 
other any pecuniary advantage which from whatever sources comes to him 
by reason of the death."
These words of Lord Wright were adopted as 
the principle applicable also under the Indian Act in
Gobald Motor 
Service Ltd. v. R.M.K. Veluswami
(1962 (1) SCR 929)  where this Court 
stated that the general principle is that the actual pecuniary loss can 
be ascertained only by balancing on the one hand the loss to the 
claimant of the future pecuniary benefit and on the other any pecuniary 
advantage which from whatever sources comes to them by reason of the 
death, that is, the balance of loss and gain to a dependant by the 
death, must be ascertained.
The assessment of damages to compensate the dependants is beset 
with difficulties because from the nature of things, it has to take 
into account many imponderables, e.g., the life expectancy of the 
deceased and the dependants, the amount that the deceased would have 
earned during the remainder of his life, the amount that he would have 
contributed to the dependants during that period, the chances that the 
deceased may not have lived or the dependants may not live up to the 
estimated remaining period of their life expectancy, the chances that 
the deceased might have got better employment or income or might have 
lost his employment or income together.
The manner of arriving at the damages is to ascertain the net 
income of the deceased available for the support of himself and his 
dependants, and to deduct therefrom such part of his income as the 
deceased was accustomed to spend upon himself, as regards both self-
maintenance and pleasure, and to ascertain what part of his net income 
the deceased was accustomed to spend for the benefit of the dependants.  
Then that should be capitalized by multiplying it by a figure 
representing the proper number of year's purchase.
Much of the calculation necessarily remains in the realm of 
hypothesis "and in that region arithmetic is a good servant but a bad 
master" since there are so often many imponderables.  In every case "it 
is the overall picture that matters", and the court must try to assess 
as best as it can the loss suffered.
There were two methods adopted to determine and for calculation 
of compensation in fatal accident actions, the first the multiplier 
mentioned in Davies case (supra) and the second in Nance v. British 
Columbia Electric Railway Co. Ltd. (1951 (2) All ER 448) .
The multiplier method involves the ascertainment of the loss of 
dependency or the multiplicand having regard to the circumstances of 
the case and capitalizing the multiplicand by an appropriate 
multiplier.  The choice of the multiplier is determined by the age of 
the deceased (or that of the claimants whichever is higher) and by the 
calculation as to what capital sum, if invested at a rate of interest 
appropriate to a stable economy, would yield the multiplicand by way of 
annual interest. In ascertaining this, regard should also be had to the 
fact that ultimately the capital sum should also be consumed-up over 
the period for which the dependency is expected to last.
The considerations generally relevant in the selection of 
multiplicand and multiplier were adverted to by Lord Diplock in his 
speech in Mallett v. Mc Mongle (1969 (2) All ER 178) where the deceased 
was aged 25 and left behind his widow of about the same age and three 
minor children.  On the question of selection of multiplicand Lord 
Diplock observed:
"The starting point in any estimate of the amount of 
the 'dependency' is the annual value of the material 
benefits provided for the dependants out of the 
earnings of the deceased at the date of his death.  
But....there are many factors which might have led to 
variations up or down in the future.  His earnings 
might have increased and with them the amount 
provided by him for his dependants.  They might have 
diminished with a recession in trade or he might have 
had spells of unemployment.  As his children grew up 
and became independent the proportion of his earnings 
spent on his dependants would have been likely to 
fall.  But in considering the effect to be given in 
the award of damages to possible variations in the 
dependency there are two factors to be borne in mind.  
The first is that the more remote in the future is 
the anticipated change the less confidence there can 
be in the chances of its occurring and the smaller 
the allowance to be made for it in the assessment.  
The second is that as a matter of the arithmetic of 
the calculation of present value, the later the 
change takes place the less will be its effect upon 
the total award of damages.  Thus at interest rates 
of  4- 1/2%  the present value of an annuity for 20 
years of which the first ten years are at $ 100 per 
annum and the second ten years at  $ 200 per annum, 
is about 12 years' purchase of the arithmetical 
average annuity of $ 150 per annum, whereas if the 
first ten years are at $200 per annum and the second 
ten years at $ 100 per annum the present value is 
about 14 years' purchase of the arithmetical mean of 
$ 150 per annum.  If therefore the chances of 
variations in the 'dependency' are to be reflected in 
the multiplicand of which the years' purchase is the 
multiplier, variations in the dependency which are 
not expected to take place until after ten years 
should have only a relatively small effect in 
increasing or diminishing the 'dependency' used for 
the purpose of assessing the damages."
In regard to the choice of the multiplicand the Halsbury's Laws 
of England in vol. 34, para 98 states the principle thus:
"98. Assessment of damages under the Fatal Accident 
Act, 1976  The courts have evolved a method for 
calculating the amount of pecuniary benefit that 
dependants could reasonably expect to have received 
from the deceased in the future.  First the annual 
value to the dependants of those benefits (the 
multiplicand) is assessed.  In the ordinary case of 
the death of a wage-earner that figure is arrived at 
by deducting from the wages the estimated amount of 
his own personal and living expenses.
The assessment is split into two parts.  The 
first part comprises damages for the period between 
death and trial.  The multiplicand is multiplied by 
the number of years which have elapsed between those 
two dates.  Interest at one-half the short-term 
investment rate is also awarded on that multiplicand.  
The second part is damages for the period from the 
trial onwards.  For that period, the number of years 
which have based on the number of years that the 
expectancy would probably have lasted; central to 
that calculation is the probable length of the 
deceased's working life at the date of death."
As to the multiplier, Halsbury states:
"However, the multiplier is a figure considerably 
less than the number of years taken as the duration 
of the expectancy.  Since the dependants can invest 
their damages, the lump sum award in respect of 
future loss must be discounted to reflect their 
receipt of interest on invested funds, the intention 
being that the dependants will each year draw 
interest and some capital (the interest element 
decreasing and the capital drawings increasing with 
the passage of years), so that they are compensated 
each year for their annual loss, and the fund will be 
exhausted at the age which the court assesses to be 
the correct age, having regard to all contingencies.  
The contingencies of life such as illness, disability 
and unemployment have to be taken into account.  
Actuarial evidence is admissible, but the courts do 
not encourage such evidence.  The calculation depends 
on selecting an assumed rate of interest.  In 
practice about 4 or 5 per cent is selected, and 
inflation is disregarded.  It is assumed that the 
return on fixed interest bearing securities is so 
much higher than 4 to 5 per cent that rough and ready 
allowance for inflation is thereby made.  The 
multiplier may be increased where the plaintiff is a 
high tax payer.  The multiplicand is based on the 
rate of wages at the date of trial.  No interest is 
allowed on the total figure."
In both Susamma Thomas and Trilok Chand's cases (supra) the 
multiplier appears to have been adopted taking note of the prevalent 
banking rate of interest.
In Susamma Thomas's case (supra) it was noted that the normal 
rate of interest was about 10% and accordingly the multiplier was 
worked out.  As the interest rate is on the decline, the multiplier has 
to consequentially be raised.  Therefore, instead of 16 the multiplier 
of 18 as was adopted in Trilok Chandra's case (supra) appears to be 
appropriate. In fact in Trilok Chand's case (supra), after reference to
Second Schedule to the Act
, it was noticed that the same suffers from 
many defects.  It was pointed out that the same is to serve as a guide, 
but cannot be said to be invariable ready reckoner. However, the 
appropriate highest multiplier was held to be 18.  The highest 
multiplier has to be for the age group of 21 years to 25 years when an 
ordinary Indian Citizen starts independently earning and the lowest 
would be in respect of a person in the age group of 60 to 70, which is 
the normal retirement age.
Considering the age of the deceased and the principles indicated 
above, the appropriate multiplier would be 12 and not 16 as adopted by 
the Tribunal and affirmed by the High Court. By applying multiplier 12, 
amount of compensation is fixed at Rs.4,50,000/- (in round figures).  
The Tribunal has fixed interest @ 9% per annum from the date of the 
claim petition.  Taking note of the prevailing rate of interest in bank 
deposits, the same is fixed at 7.5% per annum. It is stated that a sum 
of Rs.4,00,000/- has been deposited pursuant to the order dated 
22.3.2004.  The balance amount shall be deposited with the Tribunal 
within four weeks from today.  Out of the total deposit 90% of the 
amount shall be kept in fixed deposit in the name of widow (respondent 
no.1), minor child (respondent no.2) and the mother (respondent no.3) 
in the proportion of 35%, 40% and 15% respectively.  Rest 10% shall be 
paid in cash equally to the widow and the mother.  Fixed deposits shall 
be made initially for a period of five years and no withdrawal 
permitted and only monthly interest will be paid, so far as the fixed 
deposits in the names of the widow and the mother are concerned. So far 
as the minor child is concerned, fixed deposit shall be made initially 
for a period of five years and shall be renewed till the child attains 
majority.  The monthly interest on the deposit shall also be released 
to the mother as the guardian of the minor.
No loan advance of any kind and/or pre-mature encashment shall 
be permitted in respect of the fixed deposits.  However, on an 
application being made to the Tribunal and it being satisfied about the 
urgency of any need and absence of financial resources to meet any 
urgent financial need may permit loan or advance or pre-mature 
encashment by a reasoned order.
Appeal is allowed to the extent indicated. No costs.