[Cites
23
, Cited by
147
]
Supreme Court of India
Punjab State Electricity Board Ltd vs Zora Singh & Ors on 11 August, 2005
Equivalent citations: AIR 2006 SUPREME COURT 182, 2005 (6) SCC 776, 2005 AIR SCW 5676, 2006 (1) ALL LJ 291, 2006 (1) AIR KANT HCR 177, (2005) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 377, (2005) 4 JCR 149 (SC), (2005) 5 SUPREME 660, (2005) 3 CIVILCOURTC 550, (2005) 33 ALLINDCAS 100 (SC), (2005) 6 SCJ 197, (2005) 4 RECCIVR 155, (2006) 1 CIVLJ 9, (2006) 1 KCCR 41, (2006) 1 CAL LJ 127, (2006) 2 MAD LJ 178, (2006) 1 COMLJ 8, (2006) 1 ICC 713, 2005 BLJR 3 1820, (2005) 2 CLR 387 (SC), (2005) 61 ALL LR 1, (2005) 6 SCALE 457, (2005) 3 CPJ 35
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
Ashok Bhan
,
S.B. Sinha
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  4910-4981 of 2005

PETITIONER:
Punjab State Electricity Board Ltd.				

RESPONDENT:
Zora Singh & Ors.	

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 11/08/2005

BENCH:
Ashok Bhan & S.B. Sinha

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
[@ S.L.P. (C) No. 22352-22423 of 2003]
W I T H

CIVIL APPEAL NOS.  4983-4984   OF 2005
[@ SLP (C) Nos. 14960 and 16202 of 2004] 


S.B. SINHA, J :
Leave granted in S.L.Ps.
Punjab State Electricity Board (for short 'the Board') is a statutory 
authority created in terms of
Section 5
of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 
inter alia for the purpose of rationalization of the production and supply of 
electricity to the consumers.  Supply and distribution of electricity 
indisputably are public utility services.  The Respondents herein are 
agriculturists.
Section 22
of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 imposes a statutory 
obligation on the licensee to supply the electrical energy in the following 
term :
"Where energy is supplied by a licensee, every 
person within the area of supply shall, except in so 
far as is otherwise provided by the terms and 
conditions of the licence be entitled, on 
application, to a supply on the same terms as those 
on which any other person in the same area is 
entitled in similar circumstances to a 
corresponding supply."
Electrical undertakings acquire the character of public utilities by 
reason of their virtually monopolistic position and their profession to serve 
the public.  The State in exercise of its legislative power had a right to 
compel the licensees to render service efficiently, promptly and impartially 
to the members of the public, as has been done by enacting
Section 22
of the 
said Act.  Even in common law such public utilities having obtained a 
licence under a statute are under an automatic obligation by reason of the 
fact that the property of a public utility is dedicated to public service and 
impressed with public interest to serve the public and any such statutory 
obligation is in effect and substance a declaration of the common law.
Upon the dedication of public utility to public use and in return for the 
grant to it of a public franchise, the public utility is under a legal obligation 
to render adequate and reasonably efficient service, without unjust 
discrimination and at reasonably rates to all the members of the public to 
whom its use and scope of operation extend and who apply for such service 
and comply with reasonable rules and regulations of the public utility.  
Although
Section 22
of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 per se does not 
apply to Board in view of the provisions of the
Electricity (Supply) Act, 
1948
, the provisions contained therein indicate that the Board has also a duty 
to render such services.
The right of a prospective consumer is meticulously and minutely 
regulated under the
Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948
and/ or the
Indian 
Electricity Act, 1910
and Indian Electricity Rules.  The grounds upon which 
a licensee can refuse to supply electrical energy is also governed by the 
statute.
The licensee, thus, has a statutory liability to supply electrical energy 
to any prospective consumer on the same terms as those on which any other 
person in the same area is entitled in similar circumstances to a 
corresponding supply.  Such a statutory obligation on the part of the licensee 
is also reinforced in terms of Clause VI of the Schedule appended to the Act.
The Respondents herein with a view to obtain supply of electricity 
energy filed applications and the Board asked them to deposit the security 
amount.  As despite deposit of such security amount and compliance of other 
formalities electrical energy was not supplied to the Respondents, 
complaints were filed before various District Forums alleging deficiency in 
service on the part of the Board.
The Respondents had also spent a huge amount on construction of 
Kotha and making other arrangements for obtaining supply of electrical 
energy.  The District Forums found the Board guilty of deficiency in service 
and directed the Board to give the connections to the complainants within 
the period(s) specified therein and also awarded compensation.  The Board 
preferred appeals thereagainst inter alia on the ground that it was obligated 
to supply electrical energy to the applicants maintaining the order of 
seniority, in view of
Regulation 24
of the Sales Manual. The said appeals 
were dismissed.  Aggrieved by and dissatisfied therewith Revision Petitions 
were filed by the Board and by reason of the impugned judgment dated 
4.8.2003, the National Commission while upholding the claim of the Board 
that the order of seniority should be maintained in the matter of supply of 
electrical energy, directed it to release connections to all applicants by 
31.3.2004.  It also directed payment of interest at the rate of 12% per annum 
on the amounts deposited by  the complainants and awarded compensation 
of Rs. 10,000/- each to them.  Cost of Rs. 2000/- was also directed to be 
paid.
Aggrieved the Board is before us.
In these appeals, an additional affidavit has been filed annexing 
therewith the regulations purported to have been framed under
Section 79(j)
of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948.
Mr. Ashwani Kumar, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of 
the Board would contend that the National Commission acted illegally and 
without jurisdiction in passing the impugned judgments and orders without 
taking into consideration that the Board at the relevant time did not act only 
in terms of the circulars issued by the State but also acted under the 
regulations framed under
Section 79(j)
of the said Act in terms whereof no 
interest was payable.
The learned counsel submitted that  this Court should  take judicial 
notice of the fact that the Government of Punjab at one point of time 
directed supply of free electrical energy to the agriculturists resulting in 
drainage of huge fund and on that account the Board was not in a position to 
purchase materials required for supply of electrical energy.
The learned counsel would contend that if the order of the 
Commission is to be given effect to, the Board would have to bear a huge 
financial liability as during the relevant period 15000 applications for supply 
of electrical energy were received.
It is not in dispute that prior to framing of the regulations, the Board 
by way of executive instructions issued  circulars known as Sales Manual 
and Abridged Conditions of Supply.  The said executive instructions were 
restricted for internal circulation only.  However, allegedly with a view to 
provide transparency in the functioning of the Board, Sales Regulations were 
issued in 1999 incorporating and amending certain provisions contained in 
Commercial Circular No. 2/97 dated 3.1.1997, including Instruction No. 26.  
The said Regulations were also placed before the State Legislature on 
28.3.2000 as is required in terms of
Section 79-A
of the Electricity (Supply) 
Act.
The relevant provisions of Commercial Circular No. 2/97 which 
allegedly formed a part of Regulation framed under
Section 49
and Sub-
section (j) of
Section 79
of the Electricity (Supply) Act read, thus:
"Subject: Time limit for grant of connections  SMI26
The matter regarding time limit for release of connections to 
various categories of consumers has been reconsidered and it 
has been decided as under:
After the compliance of demand notice, the connection to 
various categories of prospective consumers should be given 
within the time schedule specified below:-
i)	Large Industrial Power Supply and
	Bulk Supply above 100 KW			:3 months
ii)	Medium Industrial Power Supply and
	Bulk Supply upto 100 KW			:2 months
iii)	Small Industrial Power Supply category:
a) Where no augmentation is involved		:2 weeks
b) Where augmentation is involved		:6 weeks
iv)	Domestic and Non-residential Supply
	category						:2 weeks
v)	Agricultural Pumping Supply category	:2 months

Note: The above specified period shall be subject to availability 
of requisite material like poles, conductors, transformers, 
insulators and other allied material.  It will further be subject to 
any court case/ dispute or other bottlenecks such as damage of 
power transformer etc.

However, where connections cannot be released within the 
above time schedule, reasons for delay shall be displayed on the 
Notice Board but individual intimation would also be given, in 
case of small power, medium supply and large supply 
applicants, indicating the probable date.  Where the connection 
cannot be released within 2 months of compliance of requisite 
formalities/ compliance of demand notice then the same with 
the detailed reasons would be brought to the notice of C.E./ 
Operation concerned.
2.	***	***	***
3. In view of the time limits specified above, it should be 
ensured that the demand notices are issued carefully taking all 
the circumstances viz. availability of the funds, materials and 
also power position into consideration.  The release of 
connections will also be subject to restrictions imposed due to 
power shortage and loading conditions of the system etc.

The provisions of SMI-26 may be considered as amended 
above."
Clause 24 of the Sales Regulations also specifies the period during 
which electrical connections are to be granted.  Clauses 24.6 and 24.8 read 
as under:
"24.6 Above time frame shall be subject to 
availability of requisite material particularly poles, 
conductors, transformers and insulators.  It will 
further be subject to any court case/ dispute or 
other bottlenecks such as damage to power 
transformer, etc.

24.8 In view of the time limits specified above, it 
should be ensured that the demand notices are 
issued carefully taking all the circumstances viz. 
availability of funds, materials and also power 
position into consideration.  Release of 
connections will also be subject to restrictions 
imposed due to power shortage and loading 
conditions of the System etc."
On or about 11.7.2001, a Commercial Circular No. 57/2001 was also 
issued wherein it was stated:
"8.1 Before commencing supply to a prospective 
consumer or resuming supply / allowing additional 
load to an existing consumer or any time during 
the existence of an agreement executed by the 
consmer with Board, the Board may require the 
consumer to lodge with it an Advance 
Consumption Deposit (ACD) and / or Additional 
Advance Consumption Deposit (AACD), against 
advance energy charges on which no interest shall 
be payable.  This advance consumption deposit 
shall not be transferable.  Normally, the Advance 
Consumption deposit will be equivalent to three 
months electricity bill on the prevalent tariff.
8.4 The ACD/ AACD/ security shall be deposited 
in cash.  No interest is payable on ACD/ AACD 
deposit against energy consumption.  However, 
interest @ 6% per annum shall be payable on 
security deposit of Rs. 100/- and above against 
meters/ metering equipment.  However, no interest 
will be payable, if a connection is disconnected 
within a year of giving supply."
Before adverting to the rival contentions raised before us, we may 
notice that keeping in view the fact that the Board had failed and/ or 
neglected to supply electrical energy to a large number of agriculturists, the 
National Commission secured the presence of the Chief Engineer 
(Commercial) of the Board who gave an assurance and undertaking that 
while maintaining the seniority list electrical connections would be given to 
all the complainants/ Respondents by 31.3.2004.
Although a contention was raised  that the Board is bound to supply 
electrical energy in terms of the seniority of the applications, no factual 
dispute was raised that electrical connections  were required to be granted 
within two months of issue of demand notice, the same had not been done 
for years.
Section 79(j)
of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 confers power 
upon the Board to make regulations laying down principles governing the 
supply of electricity by the Board.  Although it is doubtful as to whether the 
Board in exercise of its regulation making power under
Section 79(j)
can 
direct that no interest shall be payable at all or limit the rate of interest, it 
may not be necessary for us to go into the said question in this case  as the 
said regulations are not applicable in the instant case having been brought 
into force only in 1999 in view of the fact that all the applications had been 
filed prior to 1999 and demands were raised in 1999.
The administrative circulars as thence existed as also the regulations 
indisputably require supply of electrical energy to the agriculturists within a 
period of two months from the date of receipt of the amount asked for in 
terms of the demand notice.  It may be true that the note appended thereto 
provides that the period specified therein shall be subject to availability of 
requisite material but the same does not absolve the Appellant from 
performing its statutory duties.
In
Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation v. The State 
Transport Appellate Tribunal & Ors., [ILR
(2001) AP 1], a Full Bench of the 
Andhra Pradesh High Court has noticed thus:
"24.	The meaning of "note" as per P. Ramanatha 
Aiyar's Law Lexicon, 1997 Edition is 'a brief 
statement of particulars of some fact', a passage or 
explanation"
The note, therefore, was merely an explanatory in nature and thereby 
the rigor of the main provision was not diluted.
The Board in terms of the Regulations was obligated to display the 
reasons for delay on the Notice Board.  They were also required to indicate 
the probable date of supply therefor.  Furthermore, such cases were also 
required to be brought to the notice of Chief Engineer (Operation).  
Compliance of the  said statutory requirements had not been brought on 
record.   Clause 2 of the said Circular reads as under:
"2. It may, however, be pointed out that the period 
specified above is the maximum to give 
connections in much shorter period."
Clause 3 of the said Circular mandates the authorities to ensure that 
prior to issuance  of demand notice, care is taken to take into consideration 
all circumstances, viz., availability of funds, materials and also power 
position.
Commercial Circular No. 57/2001 provides for advance consumption 
deposit or meter security deposit.  Clause 8.4 thereof which puts a restriction 
in the matter of payment of interest relates to only ACD/AACD.  6%, 
however, is payable on security deposit of Rs. 100/- and above against 
meters/ metering equipment.
Consumer Protection Act
was enacted to provide for better protection 
of the interests of consumers and for that purpose to make provision for the 
establishment of consumer councils and other authorities for the settlement 
of consumers' dispute and for matters connected therewith.  No dispute has 
been raised before us that the provisions of the said Act are not applicable.
"Deficiency" has been defined in
Section 2(g)
to mean "any fault, 
imperfection or shortcoming in the quality, quantity, potency, purity or 
standard which is required to be maintained by or under any law for the time 
being in force or under any contract, express or implied or as is claimed by 
the trader in any manner whatsoever in relation to any goods".  "Service" is 
defined in
Section 2(o)
to mean "service of any description which is made 
available to potential users and includes provision of facilities in connection 
with banking, financing, insurance, transport, processing, supply of electrical 
or other energy, board or lodging or both, housing construction, 
entertainment, amusement or the pureveying of news or other information, 
but does not include the rendering of any service free of charge or under a 
contract of personal service".
The Board is a statutory authority.  It is a 'State' within the meaning 
of
Article 12
of the Constitution of India.  As a State, the Board is expected 
to discharge its statutory functions within a reasonable time having regard to 
the fact that it undertakes an important public utility service.  Its actions 
besides being governed by the
Electricity (Supply) Act
and the regulations 
framed thereunder, it must also fulfill the test of reasonableness as 
envisioned under
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.
What would be a reasonable period for supply of electrical energy to  
different categories of consumers has been specified in the administrative 
circulars issued as well as the regulations made by the Board itself.  We find 
from the records that  the persons had applied for grant of electrical 
connection as far back in 1986 and the Board had asked then to deposit the 
security amount only sometimes in the year 1999.  The complaints were 
filed as despite expiry of the prescribed period, no electrical connection was 
given.  If the Board was serious to implement its own circular, it was 
obligatory on its part to draw a blue-print so as to enable it to make supply 
of electrical energy to the consumers in order of seniority of application 
upon procuring the requisite materials therefor.  It failed and/ or neglected to 
do so.  It was also under an obligation to notify the persons concerned 
stating the reasons why such supply could not be made during the period 
specified in the administrative circular and/ or regulations.  The Board does 
not say that the said requirements were complied with.
It is also idle to contend that the Board was cash-starved owing to any 
faulty decision on the part of the State.  If  it suffered losses owing to any 
direction issued  by the State pursuant to any policy decision adopted by it, 
the same being an internal matter between the State and the Board, the 
prospective consumers cannot suffer therefor.
Furthermore, it is evident from the orders passed by the District 
Forums, State Commission and the National Commission that no reason was 
assigned by the Board as to why it could not comply with its administrative 
circulars/ regulations.
Section 24
of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 mandates a licensee to 
grant electrical connection to an applicant.  Although the said provision is 
not applicable so far as the Board is concerned, as has been noticed 
hereinbefore, it is bound to supply electrical energy.  The provisions 
contained therein also envisage supply of electrical energy within a 
reasonable time.  The Board being a deemed licensee under the
Indian 
Electricity Act
having been constituted in terms of
Section 5
of the Act 
ordinarily cannot be heard to say that it was not in a position to supply 
electricity to a class of consumers, having invited applications therefor from 
them.
In this case, apparently, the Board was not in a position to supply 
electrical energy to the consumers within a reasonable time from the date of 
issuance of the demand notice.  It not only failed to supply electrical energy 
to the 71 complainants who were before the National Commission but even 
failed to supply electrical energy to those who had applied much prior 
thereto.  Before the State Commission and the National Commission, the 
primal contention of the Board was that the claimants-Respondents could 
not have been given a march over others who had filed applications prior to 
them.  The National Commission rightly did not find fault with such 
contention but secured the presence of the Chief Engineer of the Board only 
for the purpose of ascertaining as to how soon supply of electrical energy 
could be ensured to all concerned including the claimants  Respondents.
Faced with the orders passed by the District Forums and State 
Commission and having regard to its own stand taken before the National 
Commission, the Chief Engineer gave an undertaking that all such 
connections would be given by 31st March, 2004.  From the aforementioned 
conduct of the authorities of the Board, we have no doubt in our mind had 
the claimants  Respondents not knocked the doors of the forum under the
Consumer Protection Act
, they might not have even obtained electrical 
connection for years to come.
In the premises aforementioned, the Commission, in our opinion,  has 
rightly found that the Board having not made itself ready to supply electrical 
energy to the agriculturists unjustly enriched itself with the money deposited 
by the complainants without rendering any service in return.  It is evident 
that the Board wanted to fill its coffer with the amount of the security 
deposits and other deposits made by the prospective buyers of electricity.  It 
has also not been denied that relying on or on the basis of the representations 
made by the Board in terms of its circular letters and / or regulations, the 
prospective consumers also spent a huge amount on construction of kotha 
and making themselves ready for getting the electrical connection.
We are not oblivious of the fact that when public functionary is asked 
to perform a statutory duty within a specified time, the provisions of the 
statutes are normally held to be directory in nature.  [See
P.T. Rajan Vs. 
T.P.M. Sahir and Others
, (2003) 8 SCC 498]  But the said principle would 
not apply in cases when injustice or inconvenience to others would be 
caused who have no control over those exercising the duty if such 
requirements are not essential or imperative.
[See
Karnal Improvement 
Trust, Karnal Vs. Parkash Wanti (Smt.) (Dead) and Another
[(1995) 5 SCC 
159]

 	In
Chandrika Prasad Yadav Vs. State of Bihar and Others
[(2004) 6 
SCC 331], this Court held:
"31. The question as to whether a statute is 
directory or mandatory would not depend upon the 
phraseology used therein. The principle as regards 
the nature of the statute must be determined having 
regard to the purpose and object the statute seeks 
to achieve."
[See also
U.P. State Electricity Board Vs. Shiv Mohan Singh and 
Another
, (2004) 8 SCC 402]

 	Furthermore, there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that even if an 
order is found to be not vitiated by reason of malice on fact but still can be 
held to be invalid if the same has been passed for unauthorized purposes, as 
it would amount to malice in law.
In
Smt. S.R. Venkataraman Vs. Union of India
, [AIR 1979 SC 49 :
(1979) 2 SCC 491] this Court observed:
"It is not therefore the case of the appellant that 
there was actual malicious intention on the part of 
the Government in making the alleged wrongful 
order of her premature retirement so as to amount 
to malice in fact. Malice in law is however, quite 
different. Viscount Haldane described it as follows 
in Shearer v. Shields:
"A person who inflicts an injury upon another 
person in contravention of the law is not 
allowed to say that he did so with an innocent 
mind; he is taken to know the law, and he must 
act within the law. He may, therefore, be guilty 
of malice in law, although, so far the state of his 
mind is concerned, he acts ignorantly, and in 
that sense innocently."
Thus malice in its legal sense means malice such 
as may be assumed from the doing of a wrongful 
act intentionally but without just cause or excuse, 
or for want of reasonable or probable cause."
In
State of A.P. and Others Vs. Goverdhanlal Pitti
[(2003) 4 SCC 
739], this Court observed:
"12. The legal meaning of malice is "ill-will or 
spite towards a party and any indirect or 
improper motive in taking an action". This is 
sometimes described as "malice in fact". "Legal 
malice" or "malice in law" means "something 
done without lawful excuse". In other words, "it 
is an act done wrongfully and wilfully without 
reasonable or probable cause, and not necessarily 
an act done from ill feeling and spite. It is a 
deliberate act in disregard of the rights of others".
(See Words and Phrases Legally Defined, 3rd 
Edn., London Butterworths, 1989.)
13. Where malice is attributed to the State, it 
can never be a case of personal ill-will or spite on 
the part of the State. If at all it is malice in legal 
sense, it can be described as an act which is taken 
with an oblique or indirect object. Prof. Wade in 
his authoritative work on Administrative Law 
(8th Edn., at p. 	414) based on English 
decisions and in the context of alleged illegal 
acquisition proceedings, explains that an action 
by the State can be described mala fide if it seeks 
to "acquire land" "for a purpose not authorised 
by the Act"
[See also
Chairman & MD, BPL Ltd. Vs. S.P. Gururaja and Others
, 
(
2003) 8 SCC 567 and P. Anjaneyulu vs. Chief Manager, A.P. Circle, Bharat 
Sanchar Nigam Ltd., Govt. of India, Hyderabad and Another
- 2001 (3) 
ALD 313].
A 'State' within
Article 12
of the Constitution of India must act fairly 
and bona fide.  It cannot act for a purpose which is wholly unauthorized and 
not germane for achieving the object it professes whether under a statute or 
otherwise.
We do not, therefore, find any fault in the judgments of the National 
Commission.  However, before us a statement has been made that all 
connections have been given to the claimants  Respondents within the 
period of aforementioned 31.3.2004.
Keeping in view the said fact as also the peculiar facts and 
circumstances of this case, we are of the opinion that the interest of justice 
shall be sub-served if the directions issued by the National Commission is 
modified to the extent that in stead and  place of interest at the rate of 12% 
per annum, the Appellants are directed to pay interest at the rate of 9% per 
annum and in stead of compensation at the rate of Rs. 10,000/- in each, 
compensation of Rs. 5000/- in each is directed to be awarded.  These appeals 
are dismissed subject to the aforementioned modifications.  No costs.