[Cites
31
, Cited by
40
]
Supreme Court of India
Ruma Chakraborty vs Sudha Rani Banerjee & Anr on 4 October, 2005
Equivalent citations: 2005 (8) SCC 140, AIR 2005 SUPREME COURT 3557, AIRONLINE 2005 SC 335, 2005 AIR SCW 4938, 2005 (8) SCALE 124, 2005 (7) SLT 497.2, 2006 CALCRILR 1 120, (2005) 36 ALLINDCAS 398 (SC), 2005 (10) SRJ 384, 2006 (1) HRR 163, (2005) 2 ALL RENTCAS 907, (2005) 2 DMC 716, (2005) 2 HINDULR 641, (2005) 2 RENCR 460, (2005) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 632, (2005) 36 ALLINDCAS 398, (2005) 4 ALL WC 3791, (2005) 4 CURCC 63, (2005) 4 RECCIVR 394, (2005) 5 CTC 226 (SC), (2005) 6 ANDHLD 116, (2005) 6 SUPREME 734, (2005) 8 SCALE 124, (2005) 8 SCJ 458, 2005 SCFBRC 579, (2006) 1 CAL HN 90, (2006) 1 CAL LJ 5, (2006) 1 CLR 61 (SC), (2006) 1 ICC 52, (2006) 1 MAD LW 717, (2006) 2 CIVLJ 91, (2006) 62 ALL LR 144, 2006 HRR 1 163, MANU/SC/919/2005, (2006) 1 RENT LR 241
Author:
Ar. Lakshmanan
Bench:
Ar. Lakshmanan
,
Altamas Kabir
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2565 of 2001

PETITIONER:
Ruma Chakraborty 		               				

RESPONDENT:
Sudha Rani Banerjee & Anr.			   	           

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 04/10/2005

BENCH:
Dr. AR. Lakshmanan & Altamas Kabir

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

Dr. AR. Lakshmanan, J.
The appellant, who is an unsuccessful intervenor in both the courts below, is the 
divorced wife of the recorded sole tenant (second respondent herein) who is also the 
sole defendant in the suit filed by the first respondent herein  Sudha Rani Banerjee.
The instant appeal is against the judgment and order dated 26.09.2000 passed 
by the High Court of Calcutta in C.O. No. 582 of 2000 rejecting the appellant's 
application for being added as a party defendant under Order 1 Rule 10 (2)
of the 
C.P.C
.  The High Court concurred with the judgment and order dated 02.02.2000 
passed by the IIIrd Civil Judge, Alipore.  The High Court rejected the plea of the 
appellant that she is directly interested in the tenanted suit premises by way of her 
entitlement towards maintenance which includes residence as per the
Hindu Adoptions 
and Maintenance Act, 1956
.
The facts of the case, in brief, are as follows:-
As already stated the action arises out of a suit for ejectment filed on 28.03.1992 
on the ground of default, subletting without the prior written consent of the contesting 
first respondent herein (plaintiff landlady).  Her case, very briefly, is that after dissolution 
of the marriage, the appellant is no longer a part of the proforma respondent's family 
having the status of a rank outsider/stranger and she was in illegal occupation of the 
suit premises in contravention of the statutory provisions of the
West Bengal Premises 
Tenancy Act, 1956
(hereinafter referred to as 'the Act').  The proforma 
respondent/husband has admittedly effaced himself from the suit premises long prior to 
the institution of the suit retaining any control of suit premises.  It is the case of the 
contesting respondent that the appellant is in illegal occupation without the prior written 
consent of the landlady and, therefore, has attracted the provisions of
Section 13 (1)(a)
of the Act and has become liable for eviction.
The sole defence taken in the suit is that the son and daughter are entitled to the 
tenancy right and virtually can step into the shoes of the recorded tenant who is still 
alive and contesting the suit who is long back walked out of the suit premises parting 
with exclusive legal possession to the appellant.
The appellant filed application under Order 1 Rule 10 (2)
C.P.C
. for being 
impleaded as a party defendant before the Civil Judge, Alipore on 17.12.1999 almost 8 
years after the institution of the suit.  The Civil Judge dismissed the appellant's 
application on 02.02.2000.  The appellant, thereafter, moved the High Court in civil 
revisional jurisdiction and the High Court, by its judgment and order dated 26.09.2000, 
rejected the appellant's application concurring with the finding of the courts below and 
finding no infirmity therein.  Being aggrieved, the appellant has preferred the above 
appeal in this Court.
We heard Ms. Kamini Jaiswal, learned counsel for the appellant and Mr. Rana 
Mukherjee, learned counsel for the respondents.
Learned counsel for the respective parties took us through the pleadings, 
annexures and the orders passed by the courts below and other relevant records.
Ms. Kamini Jaiswal, learned counsel for the appellant, made the following 
submissions:-
1)	that the appellant being the divorced wife continues to enjoy the status 
akin to that of licensee under her husband in respect of tenancy of her 
husband pursuant to the provisions of
Sections 3
and
18
of the Hindu 
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956;
2)	that by precluding the appellant from contesting the suit, the suit would 
be decreed ex parte to the detriment of the appellant and her minor 
children who even after the said decree of divorce continue to have a 
right of residence in the suit premises and cannot be dispossessed 
except in accordance with law;
3)	that the High Court has failed to appreciate that even after the passing 
of a decree of divorce even though the marital status of the husband 
and wife is brought to an end, the divorced wife still has a right of 
maintenance which right includes right of residence.  Consequently, 
the appellant had a right of her residence vis-`-vis her husband and 
consequently her stay in the rented accommodation of her husband 
could not be treated as illegal.
Ms. Kamini Jaiswal, learned counsel for the appellant, invited our attention to the 
documents filed and, in particular, the notice dated 18.12.1989 which was issued after 
the decree of divorce by the landlady and also took us through the averments made in 
the plaint and in the written statement.  In support of her contention, she cited the 
following decisions:-
1.
Hochtief Gammon vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bhubaneshwar, Orissa 
and Ors.
, [1964] 7 SCR 596
2.	Khetrabasi Biswal vs. Ajaya Kumar Baral and Others, (2004) 1 SCC
317
3.
Dattatreya and Others vs. Mahaveer and Others
, (2004) 10 SCC 665
4.	Hutchinson vs. Hutchinson, 1947 (2) All ER 792
5.	Middleton vs. Baldock, 1950 (1) All ER 708
6.	Old Gate Estates, Ltd. Vs. Alexander and Another, 1949 (2) All ER
822
7.	Brown vs. Draper, 1944 (1) All ER 246

Mr. Rana Mukherjee, learned counsel for the respondents, made the following 
submissions by way of reply:-
1)	the view taken by the High Court is highly justified in the facts and 
circumstances of the case and does not deserve any interference by 
this Court;
2)	That Order 1 Rule 10(2)
of the C.P.C
. envisages addition of 
defendants only in two specified cases:
a)	parties who ought to have been joined as necessary parties;
b)	whose presence is necessary for complete and effective 
adjudication of all the questions involved in the suit as proper 
parties;
3)	That the Court does not have the jurisdiction or the power to add 
parties who do not fall under either of these two categories.
4)	Who are necessary parties have been made clear by the Act itself.  Only 
notifying sub-tenants are to be made parties under
Section 13(2)
of the 
Act.  Only when the tenant obtains the prior written consent of the 
landlord under
Section 14
of the Act and both the tenant and the sub-
tenant have notified under
Section 16(1)
that the sub-tenancy may be 
said to be perfected and the subtenant a notifying sub-tenant.  Admittedly 
this is not the case of the appellant.
Therefore, he submitted that the appellant cannot be impleaded as a 
necessary party.
5)	So far as proper party is concerned, he submitted that the law is firmly 
established that the intervenor has to show a direct legal interest as 
opposed to commercial or indirect interest in the subject matter of 
litigation especially in a suit relating to immoveable property.  The 
intervenor has to show that in her absence some order is to be passed 
which will affect her legal right.  It was submitted that the appellant not 
being a party to the contractual tenancy is not able to claim any right, title 
or interest through her divorced husband and that she has totally failed to 
demonstrate any legal interest which would entitle her to be impleaded as 
a proper party also.
6) 	The appellant being neither a necessary nor a proper party, there is no 
machinery available at law to implead the appellant as party defendant.
In support of his contention, he relied on the following decisions:-
1.
Dr. H.S. Rikhy and Others vs. The New Delhi Municipal Committee
, 
[1962] 3 SCR 604
2.
Razia Begum vs. Sahebzadi Anwar Begum and Others
, AIR 1958 SC 886
3.
Kumar Jagdish Chandra Sinha and Others vs. Eileen K. Patricia 
D'Rozarie (Mrs
) (1995) 1 SCC 164
4.
B.P. Achala Anand vs. S. Appi Reddy and Another
, (2005) 3 SCC 313
5.
Bibi Zubaida Khatoon vs. Nabi Hassan Saheb and Another
, (2004) 1 
SCC 191
6.
India Umbrella Manufacturing Co. and Others vs. Bhagabandei 
Agarwalla and Ors.
(2004) 3 SCC 178
7.
Vijay Lata Sharma vs. Raj Pal and Another
, (2004) 6 SCC 762
8.
Balvant N. Viswamitra and Others vs. Yadav Sadashiv Mule and Others
, 
(2004) 8 SCC 706.
9.
Dr. A.K. Roy vs. J.C. Roy Choudhury and Another
, AIR 1982 Calcutta 8
	
We have carefully gone through the pleadings and other records and also the 
judgments relied on by both the parties including the provisions of law under the
West 
Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956
.
Section 2(d)
of the Act defines 'landlord' as follows:
"'landlord' includes any person who, for the time being, is entitled to receive 
or but for a special contract, would be entitled to receive the rent of any 
premises, whether or not on his own account."
Section 2(h)
of the Act defines 'tenant' as follows:
"'tenant' means any person by whom or on whose account or behalf, the 
rent of any premises is , or but for a special contract would be, payable and 
includes any person continuing in possession after the termination of his 
tenancy or in the event of such person's death, such of his heirs as were 
ordinarily residing with him at the time of his death but shall not include any 
person against whom any decree or order for eviction has been made by a 
Court of competent jurisdiction."
The only question for consideration in this appeal is whether the appellant has a 
right to be impleaded as party defendant.  As per the appellant's own averment, the 
proforma respondent has divested himself of physical possession.  While dissolving 
marriage under
Section 13-B
of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, the matrimonial court 
with the consent of the parties ordered the proforma respondent to pay a sum of 
Rs.200/- p.m. for maintenance of the minors only.  The appellant, in our opinion, by 
such consent order has expressly waived her right to maintenance.
Section 3(b)
of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 reads thus:
""maintenance" includes-
(i)	in all cases, provision for food, clothing, residence, education and 
medical attendance and treatment;
(ii)	in the case of an unmarried daughter, also the reasonable 
expenses of and incident to her marriage;"
Section 18
of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 reads as follows:-
"18. Maintenance of wife.- (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a 
Hindu wife, whether married before or after the commencement of this Act, 
shall be entitled to be maintained by her husband during her lifetime.
(2) A Hindu wife shall be entitled to live separately from her husband without 
forfeiting her claim to maintenance,-
(a)	if he is guilty of desertion, that is to say, of abandoning her without 
reasonable cause and without her consent or against her wish, or of 
wilfully neglecting her;
(b)	if he has treated her with such cruelty as to cause a reasonable 
apprehension in her mind that it will be harmful or injurious to live with 
her husband;
(c)	if he is suffering from a virulent form of leprosy;
(d)	if he has any other wife living;
(e)	if he keeps a concubine in the same house in which his wife is living or 
habitually resides with a concubine elsewhere;
(f)	if he has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion;
(g)	if there is any other cause justifying her living separartely.
(3) A Hindu wife shall not be entitled to separate residence and 
maintenance from her husband if she is unchaste or ceases to be a Hindu 
by conversion to another religion."
Section 23
of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 reads as follows:-
"Amount of maintenance.- (1) It shall be in the discretion of the Court to 
determine whether any, and if so what, maintenance shall be awarded 
under the provisions of this Act, and in doing so, the Court shall have due 
regard to the considerations set out in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), as 
the case may be, so far as they are applicable.
(2) In determining the amount of maintenance, if any, to be awarded to a 
wife, children or aged or infirm parents under this Act, regard shall be had 
to-
(a)	the position and status of the parties;
(b)	the reasonable wants of the claimant;
(c)	if the claimant is living separately, whether the claimant is justified in 
doing so;
(d)	the value of the claimant's property and any income derived from such 
property, or from the claimant's own earnings or from any other source;
(e)	the number of persons entitled to maintenance under this Act.
(3) In determining the amount of maintenance, if any, to be awarded to a 
dependant under this Act, regard shall be had to-
(a)	the net value of the estate of the deceased after providing for the 
payment of his debts;
(b)	the provision, if any, made under a will of the deceased in respect of the 
dependant;
(c)	the degree of relationship between the two;
(d)	the reasonable wants of the dependant;
(e)	the past relations between the dependant and the deceased;
(f)	the value of the property of the dependant and any income derived from 
such property, or from his or her earnings or from any other source;
(g)	the number of dependants entitled to maintenance under this Act."
Section 25
of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 reads as follows:-
"25. Permanent alimony and maintenance.-(1) Any Court exercising 
jurisdiction under this Act may, at the time of passing any decree or at any 
time subsequent thereto, on application made to it for the purpose by either 
the wife or the husband, as the case may be, order that the respondent shall 
pay to the applicant for her or his maintenance and support such gross sum 
or such monthly or periodical sum for a term not exceeding the life of the 
applicant as, having regard to the respondent's own income and other 
property, if any, the income and other property of the applicant, the conduct 
of the parties and other circumstances of the case, it may seem to the Court 
to be just, and any such payment may be secured, if necessary, by a charge 
on the immoveable property of the respondent.
(2) If the Court is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances of 
either party at any time after it has made an order under sub-section (1), it 
may, at the instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind any such order 
in such manner as the Court may deem just.
(3) If the Court is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order has been 
made under this section has remarried or, if such party is the wife, that she 
has not remained chaste, or, if such party is the husband, that he has had 
sexual intercourse with any woman outside wedlock, it may at the instance 
of the other party vary, modify or rescind any such order in such manner as 
the Court may deem just."
A perusal of
Section 3(b)
of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 
would clearly show that the intention of the legislature by including food, clothing, 
residence etc. was to provide a real maintenance and not a bare or starving 
maintenance.  The intention of the legislature is further indicative from the words "also 
the reasonable expenses of" appearing in clause (ii) of
Section 3(b)
, clearly meaning 
thereby that an unmarried daughter besides the expenses of food, clothing, residence 
etc. is also entitled to the expenses of and incident to her marriage.  The intention of 
the legislature becomes absolutely clear and lucid from the heading and contents of
Section 23
of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 which speaks of amount 
of maintenance.  Therefore, it can safely be said that what is implicit under
Section 3
is 
made explicit in
Section 23
.  In the instant case, while dissolving the marriage under
Section 13(b)
of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, the court ordered maintenance for 
minors only with mutual consent.
According to Ms. Kamini Jaiswal, learned counsel for the appellant, 
maintenance includes residence and, therefore, the appellant is entitled to stay on in 
the suit premises as a licensee under her husband.  The fact remains otherwise.  The 
husband parted with legal possession and not retaining any control thereof whatsoever 
without complying with the statutory provisions of the Act which attract the provisions of
Section 13(1)(a)
of the Act.
Section 13(1)(a)
of the Act is attracted where the tenant 
without the prior written consent of the landlord transfers, assigns or sublets in whole or 
in part of the suit premises.  The contesting respondents case in the suit in para 4 
reads as follows:-
"The defendant left the suit premises by inducting some strangers outsiders 
sometime in the month of November, 1989.  It may be mentioned that the 
defendant took the tenancy for residential purposes and in fact was 
occupying the same with the members of his family that is to say his wife 
and children.  All of a sudden without the consent of the plaintiff the 
defendant inducted some strangers outsiders in the suit premises in 
contravention of the terms of tenancy and allowed the said stranger 
outsiders to occupy a portion of the suit premises along with the members of 
his family and the defendant himself left the same allowing the said stranger 
outsiders to continue in occupation of the same illegally and without any 
authority whatsoever."
The husband of the appellant filed written statement.  Para 7 of the written 
statement reads as follows:-
"That with regard to the contention made in paragraph 4 of the plaint, it is 
emphatically denied that any strangers and/or outsiders were ever inducted 
in the suit premises by the defendant at any time or at all.  As admitted by 
the plaintiff the defendant took tenancy of the suit premises for the purpose 
of residing there with his family.  It is totally false to say as stated by the 
plaintiff that any stranger and/or outsider was ever allowed to occupy a 
portion of the suit premises.  The defendant for his own business and 
professional activities has to live outside the suit premises keeping the 
members of his family viz. his son and daughter in the suit premises in the 
care and custody of the mother of the children, who has since been 
divorced by a decree by mutual consent.  The said divorced wife i.e. the 
mother of the children has been staying in the suit premises only as the 
custodian of the said minor son and daughter of this defendant.  The 
defendant as the father of those minor children did never sever his 
connection with those children.  As such the defendant had no obligation to 
handover the possession of the suit premises to the plaintiff, particularly 
when his dearest and nearest ones i.e. the children of his own both having 
the right and claim of any property including this tenancy right unless 
divested by the defendant or under any law in force.  The defendant has 
already obtained a decree of divorce on mutual consent from a competent 
court of law.  Under the said decree, the children born out of the wedlock 
were handed over to the custody of the wife and the defendant was directed 
to pay a sum of Rs.200/- every month to the wife for the maintenance of 
these minor children.  The wife, by virtue of the said divorce decree may not 
be the member of the defendant's family, but the children cannot lose their 
right to remain in occupation of the suit premises as the members of the 
family of this defendant.  This defendant, it is reiterated even at the cost of 
reputation never allowed his ex-wife qua ex-wife to occupy the suit 
premises.  She is therein the suit premises only as the custodian of the 
minor children of the defendant, the monthly rents payable are being paid 
on account and/or behalf of the defendant.  In no stretch of imagination the 
lady can be said to be in occupation of the suit premises instead of or in  
place of the defendant.  She is there only as the custodian of the minor 
children of the defendant who have every right to continue in possession of 
the suit premises as members of the family of the defendant.  It is once 
again emphatically denied that the defendant did ever or at all induct any 
stranger/outsider in the suit premises or in any part thereof."
It is thus seen from the above averment in the written statement that the 
husband has never allowed his wife to occupy the suit premises and that she is in 
possession of the suit premises only as a custodian of the minor children of the 
defendant and that the monthly rents payable are being paid on account and on behalf 
of the defendant.  The husband also entered appearance in the suit and is contesting 
the suit by filing a written statement and, therefore, the appellant has no locus standi to 
be impleaded in the suit either as a necessary or a proper party in whose presence the 
suit ought to be or should be heard.
The trial Judge also in his order arrived at the following conclusion:-
a)	that the mere payment of money cannot create a jural 
relationship of landlord and tenant;
b)	the appellant is neither a necessary nor a proper party which is 
in conformity with the provisions of the
West Bengal Premises 
Tenancy Act, 1956
and the well settled principles of law 
governing addition of proper parties;
c)	that the appellant could not continue as a joint tenant after 
dissolution of marriage;
d)	since the original tenant was alive and contesting the suit, the 
question of representing the interest of the minor son could not 
arise.
On these findings, the trial Judge dismissed the appellant's application for being 
impleaded as a party defendant.
The High Court of Calcutta, vide its judgment which is under challenge, 
concurred with the findings of the trial Court and has held that the trial Court did not 
commit any jurisdictional error nor acted with material irregularity in dismissing the 
appellant's application under Order 1 Rule 10(2) C.P.C.
We shall now refer to the decisions cited by counsel for both the parties.  
Though very many decisions were cited, we feel that it is not necessary to load this 
judgment by referring to all the citations.  It is also not necessary to multiply citations in 
this regard.
Ms. Kamini Jaiswal, learned counsel for the appellant relied on the following 
judgments:-
1.
Khetrabasi Biswal vs. Ajaya Kumar Baral and Others
, (2004) 1 SCC 317.
This is a case of filing of a writ petition filed by the selectees whose names were 
omitted by the State Government while purporting to interpret the service rules, 
preparing a fresh list without issuing notices to the candidates prejudiced 
thereby.  This Court remitted the matter to the High Court for decision afresh 
after giving opportunity to implead all necessary parties.  This case will have no 
application for the case on hand because the writ petition was filed in this case 
by the selectees whose names are omitted by the State Government.  
Therefore, this Court set aside the order under challenge and remit the matter to 
the High Court for decision on merits after giving an opportunity to the writ 
petitioners to implead all necessary parties in the writ petition.
2.
Dattatreya and Others vs. Mahaveer and Others
, (2004) 10 SCC 665
This case deals with non-impleadment of proper party.  In this case, the material 
facts were not brought to the notice of the Court and the persons who were 
ultimately to be affected were avoided to be impleaded as parties.  This Court 
held that it was merely not a question of non-impleadment of necessary parties 
technically and strictly in accordance with the provisions
of the Code of Civil 
Procedure
, rather was very much a question of proper parties being there before 
the Court particularly in the proceedings under
Article 226
of the Constitution of 
India.  This
case has no application
to the case on hand and distinguishable on 
facts and law.
3.	Hutchinson vs. Hutchinson, 1947 (2) All ER 792
	The King's Bench Division held as under:-
"The parties were married in 1924 and a son was born in 1929.  In 1932 the 
husband bought a house in his own name, and the parties resided there as 
their matrimonial home until the husband left to live with another woman.  
The wife obtained a decree of judicial separation and the husband made 
payments for the support of his wife and son.  The husband applied under 
s.17 of the Married Women's Property Act, 1882, for an order for 
possession of the house.
Held: the court had a discretion under
s.17
which was not affected by the 
fact that a decree for judicial separation had been obtained, and in the 
circumstances it would be unjust to make an order for possession."
4.	Middleton vs. Baldock, 1950 (1) All ER 708
	The Court of Appeal held as under:-
"(i) where a husband had deserted his wife and the wife remained in the 
matrimonial home she was lawfully there and the husband remained in 
occupation by her; possession of a dwelling-house to which the Rent 
Restrictions Acts applied could only be ordered on one of the grounds 
specified in the Acts, and a tenant could not by agreement waive the 
statutory protection afforded by the Acts; and, therefore, the orders for 
possession were wrongly made."
Denning, L.J., observed as under:-
"The reason [why the husband cannot give possession] is because the wife 
has a very special position in the matrimonial home.  She is not the sub-
tenant or licensee of the husband.  It is his duty to provide a roof over her 
head.  He is not entitled to tell her to go without seeing that she has a 
proper place to go to.  He is not entitled to turn her out without an order of 
the court: see Hutchinson v. Hutchinson (5).  Even if she stays there against 
his will, she is lawfully there, and, so long as she is lawfully there, the house 
remains within the Rent Acts and the landlord can only obtain possession if 
the conditions laid down by the Acts are satisfied."
5.	Old Gate Estates, Ltd. Vs. Alexander and Another, 1949 (2) All ER 822
The Court of Appeal held as under:-
"A statutory tenant living with his wife in a flat which constituted the 
matrimonial home left the premises following a quarrel with his wife, and 
purported to surrender them to the landlords by agreement.  His wife 
remained in occupation with the use of his furniture.  On the wife's refusing 
to quit the premises, the husband gave her written notice revoking any 
authority which she might have from him to occupy the flat.  In proceedings 
by the landlords against the tenant and his wife for possession,

Held: the tenant had not given up possession, as he remained in occupation 
through his wife and furniture, and, accordingly, his statutory tenancy had 
not been terminated."
6.	Hochtief Gammon vs. Industrial Tribunal, Bhubaneshwar, Orissa and Ors., 
[1964] 7 SCR 596
The matter arises under the Industrial Disputes Act and, therefore, the judgment 
is not adverted to.
All the above judgments, in our opinion, will be of any assistance to the case on 
hand and all the judgments are distinguishable on facts and on law.
Mr. Rana Mukherjee, learned counsel for the respondents relied on the following 
judgments:-
1.
Dr. H.S. Rikhy and Others vs. The New Delhi Municipal Committee
, 
[1962] 3 SCR 604
This case was cited for the proposition that mere payment of rent creates no 
jural relationship.
2.
Razia Begum vs. Sahebzadi Anwar Begum and Others
, AIR 1958 SC 886
This case was cited for the proposition of law that the question of addition of 
parties under
Order 1 Rule 10 of C.P.C
. is generally not one of initial jurisdiction 
of the court but of the judicial discretion which has to be exercised in view of all 
the facts and circumstances of a particular case.
3.
Dr. A.K. Roy vs. J.C. Roy Choudhury and Another
, AIR 1982 Calcutta 8
In this case, the High Court held as under:
"Where the application under O.1, R.10 was filed by the wife of real tenant 
to be added as a defendant to the suit for ejectment in absence of her 
husband and her father-in-law, the ostensible tenant was the benamidar of 
the real tenant, the wife could be impleaded as a party to the suit for the 
ends of justice as the rules relating to the joinder of parties are based on the 
principles of avoiding multiplicity of suits and also preventing possible 
conflict of decisions."
This is a case prior to the coming into force of the
Benami Transactions 
Prohibition Act, 1988
.   It was held that in the case of alleged Benami, the real 
tenant who had not entered appearance in the suit and was not contesting the 
same could be represented by his wife.  In this case, matrimonial suit was 
pending.  At page 9 of para 9, it has been stated that in the absence of the real 
owner, the wife can represent his interest till the marriage is dissolved by a 
decree of divorce.  In our view, both the courts below were just and right to 
ignore this decision as it instead of holding the appellant comes to the direct aid 
of the contesting respondent.
4.
Bibi Zubaida Khatoon vs. Nabi Hassan Saheb and Another
, (2004) 1 
SCC 191
	This case deals with the case of transfer pendente lite without leave of 
the Court.  This Court held such a transferee cannot as of right seek 
impleadment in the suit though normally joinder based on transfer pendente lite 
is permitted to enable the transferee to protect his interest.  This Court held the 
application under Order 1 Rule 10 was rightly rejected.
5.
Vijay Lata Sharma vs. Raj Pal and Another
, (2004) 6 SCC 762, 
In this case, it was alleged that on the death of the original owner the 
appellant became the owner of the property.  The respondent-tenant, in his 
written statement, has stated that the property was not let out to him in his 
individual capacity but to his firm and that the rent was paid to the appellant 
on behalf of the firm.  At this stage, a third party made an application for 
impleadment as a party respondent alleging that the original owner had 
executed a Will bequeathing the property to the temple.  This Court held that 
the party seeking impleadment on the basis of Will was neither a necessary 
nor proper party to the release proceedings.  This Court also held that the 
question of title could not be decided by the prescribed authority under the 
Act.
6.
Balvant N. Viswamitra and Others vs. Yadav Sadashiv Mule and Others
, 
(2004) 8 SCC 706.
In this case, this Court held that a sub-tenant in a suit for possession by 
landlord against tenant is merely a proper party and not a necessary 
party and, therefore, it was not necessary for the plaintiffs to join the 
respondents as defendants.  This Court held as follows:
"A necessary party is one without whom no order can be made 
effectively; a proper party is one in whose absence an effective order 
can be made but whose presence is necessary for a complete and final 
decision on the question involved in the proceeding."
A very recent judgment of this Court in
B.P. Achala Anand vs. S. Appi Reddy 
and Another
, (2005) 3 SCC 313 was strongly relied on by counsel for both sides.  This 
Court considered the right of deserted wife to stay in the tenancy premises.  This Court 
also considered the right of the deserted wife to contest the eviction suit.  Both the 
parties relied on paras  32-35 of
the said judgment
.  They are reproduced hereunder:
32. In our opinion, a deserted wife who has been or is entitled to be in 
occupation of the matrimonial home is entitled to contest the suit for eviction 
filed against her husband in his capacity as tenant subject to satisfying two 
conditions: first, that the tenant has given up the contest or is not interested 
I n contesting the suit and such giving up by the tenant-husband shall 
prejudice the deserted wife who is residing in the premises; and secondly, 
the scope and ambit of the contest or defence by the wife would not be on a 
footing higher or larger than that of the tenant himself.  In other words, such 
a wife would be entitled to raise all such pleas and claim trial thereon, as 
would have been available to the tenant himself and no more.  So long as 
by availing the benefit of the provisions of the
Transfer of Property Act
and 
rent control legislation, the tenant would have been entitled to stay in the 
tenancy premises, the wife too can continue to stay exercising her right to 
residence as a part of right to maintenance subject to compliance with all 
such obligations including the payment of rent to which the tenant is subject.
This right comes to an end with the wife losing her status as wife 
consequent upon decree of divorce and the right to occupy the house as 
part of right to maintenance coming to an end.
33. We are also of the opinion that a deserted wife in occupation of the 
tenanted premises cannot be placed in a position worse than that of a sub-
tenant contesting a claim for eviction on the ground of sub-letting.  Having 
been deserted by the tenant-husband, she cannot be deprived of the roof 
over her head where the tenant has conveniently left her to face the peril of 
eviction attributable to default or neglect of himself.  We are inclined to hold 
 and we do so  that a deserted wife continuing in occupation of the 
premises obtained on lease by her husband, and which was their 
matrimonial home, occupies a position akin to that of an heir of the tenant-
husband if the right to residence of such wife has not come to an end.  The 
tenant having lost interest in protecting his tenancy rights as available to him 
under the law, the same right would devolve upon and inhere in the wife so 
long as she continues in occupation of the premises.  Her rights and 
obligations shall not be higher or larger than those of the tenant himself.  A 
suitable amendment in the legislation is called for to that effect.  And, so 
long as that is not done, we, responding to the demands of social and 
gender justice, need to mould the relief and do complete justice by 
exercising our jurisdiction under
Article 142
of the Constitution.  We hasten 
to add that the purpose of our holding as above is to give the wife's right to 
residence a meaningful efficacy as dictated by the needs of the times; we 
do not intend nor do we propose the landlord's right to eviction against his 
tenant be subordinated to the wife's right to residence enforceable against 
her husband.  Let both the rights coexist so long as they can.
34. We have dealt with all the abovesaid aspects of the law as it was urged 
on behalf of the landlord, Respondent 1 that Smt Achala, the appellant has 
no right to contest or defend herself in these proceedings nor a right to file 
and prosecute this appeal as there is no privity of contract between the 
appellant and landlord and the appellant is neither a tenant nor so 
recognised ever by Respondent 1 landlord.  We cannot agree.  We feel that 
the appellant was rightly  in the facts and circumstances of the case  
permitted by the High Court to be joined as a party to the proceedings.  She 
was also rightly allowed to contest the suit and deposit the rent in the court 
for payment to the landlord for and on behalf of the tenant-husband.
35. So far as a deserted wife, whose status as wife has not come to an end 
by a decree of divorce or by decree for annulment of marriage, is 
concerned, we have made the position of law clear as above.  However, the 
case of a divorced wife stands on a little different footing.  Divorce is 
termination of matrimonial relationship and brings to an end the status of 
wife as such.  Whether or not she has the right of residence in the 
matrimonial home, would depend on the terms and conditions in which the 
decree of divorce has been granted and provision for maintenance 
(including residence) has been made.  In the event of the provision for 
residence of a divorced wife having been made by the husband in the 
matrimonial home situated in the tenanted premises, such divorced wife too 
would be entitled to defend, in the eviction proceedings, the tenancy rights 
and rights of occupation thereunder in the same manner in which the 
tenant-husband could have done and certainly not higher or larger than that.  
She would be liable to be evicted in the same manner in which her husband 
as tenant would have been liable to be evicted."
The case on hand is a case of divorced wife.  It is true that divorced wife is also 
a wife.  We have already dealt with the case of the appellant and her right to contest or 
defend herself in the pending eviction proceedings.  We have already held that she has 
no right to contest or defend herself nor a right to file and prosecute the eviction 
proceedings.  There is no privity of contract between the appellant and the landlady.  
The tenancy is in favour of the appellant's husband.  The Family Court has granted a 
decree for divorce on payment of certain sum by way of maintenance.  As a matter of 
fact, the appellant's husband, the tenant is contesting the Rent Control proceedings 
and has filed a written statement denying the claim of the landlady.  It was argued by 
Ms. Kamini Jaiswal on behalf of the appellant that the appellant was recognised by the 
landlady as a sub-tenant.  In support of the said submission, she placed reliance on the 
letter written by the landlady to the appellant on 18.12.1989.  This letter, in our opinion, 
will be of any aid or assistance to the appellant.  It has been stated in that letter that the 
appellant has been paying the rent on behalf of one Duttas and occupying the said 
accommodation.  The appellant was requested to get a confirmation in writing that he 
has no interest in the ground floor accommodation of the house in question and 
surrender the possession of the same to the landlady so that the agreement could be 
entered into with the appellant on fresh terms if the appellant proposed to continue to 
stay there.  The letter was concluded by saying that until these formalities are 
completed the occupation of the ground floor accommodation by the appellant is 
unauthorised and illegal.
We, therefore, cannot agree with the submission of learned counsel for the 
appellant that the landlady has so recognized the appellant as sub-tenant.  In para 35 
above, this Court deals with the case of a divorced wife.  We have already extracted 
para 35.
For the foregoing discussion, we are of the opinion that the Court has no 
jurisdictional power to add a person as a party who is neither a necessary party nor a 
proper party.  The appellant in the status of divorcee cannot claim interest in the suit 
premises either independently or through her erstwhile husband and as such she 
cannot be held to say that she is a party without whose presence the court cannot 
adjudicate and pass the decree.  She is, therefore, not a necessary party.  The 
appellant is also not a person whose presence is necessary to enable the Court 
effectually and completely to adjudicate all the questions involved with the suit.
In view of the discussion made above, we find merit and substance in the 
submission made by counsel for the respondents.  We are of the opinion that the trial 
Court and the High Court did not commit any jurisdictional error nor acted with material 
irregularity in dismissing the application under
Order 1 Rule 10 C.P.C
. filed by the 
appellant.
The impugned orders, therefore, does not call for any interference.  The present 
appeal is dismissed without any order as to costs.