[Cites
16
, Cited by
56
]
Supreme Court of India
Murlidhar & Ors vs State Of Rajasthan on 9 May, 2005
Equivalent citations: AIR 2005 SUPREME COURT 2345, 2005 (11) SCC 133, 2005 AIR SCW 2596, 2005 CRI LJ (NOC) 70, 2005 AIR - JHAR. H. C. R. 1577, 2005 CRILR(SC&MP) 454, 2005 (2) UJ (SC) 915, 2005 UJ(SC) 2 915, 2005 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 454, (2005) 5 JT 358 (SC), 2005 (6) SRJ 242, 2005 (4) SLT 271, 2005 (2) CURCRIR 220, 2005 (5) JT 358, 2005 (5) SCALE 46, 2006 (1) SCC(CRI) 86, (2005) 30 ALLINDCAS 676 (DEL), (2005) 3 CRIMES 203, (2006) 1 EFR 107, (2005) 1 FAC 162, 2005 FAJ 192, (2005) 119 DLT 590, (2005) 81 DRJ 211, (2005) 3 CRIMES 1, (2005) 3 KCCR 264, (2005) 3 ALLCRILR 1, (2005) 2 CHANDCRIC 124, (2005) 3 EASTCRIC 138, (2005) 31 OCR 656, (2005) 3 PAT LJR 161, (2005) 2 RAJ CRI C 476, (2005) 4 SCJ 709, (2005) 4 SUPREME 411, (2005) 2 ALLCRIR 1749, (2005) 5 SCALE 46, 2005 (3) ANDHLT(CRI) 35 SC, 2005 (2) ALD(CRL) 363, (2005) 3 ANDHLT(CRI) 35
Bench:
P. Venkatarama Reddi
,
B.N. Srikrishna
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  355 of 2004

PETITIONER:
Murlidhar & Ors.

RESPONDENT:
State of  Rajasthan

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 09/05/2005

BENCH:
P. Venkatarama Reddi & B.N. Srikrishna

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

SRIKRISHNA, J.
The three appellants before this Court by special leave impugn the 
judgment of the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan which has convicted 
them on charges under
Sections 364
,
302
/
34
IPC and sentenced them 
appropriately thereunder.
At about 11:40 a.m. on 3rd November, 1996, a written complaint was 
lodged by Rameshwar (PW 1) with the Police Station, Govindgarh, District 
Jaipur regarding abduction of his brother, Ramlal stating thus:  On 2nd 
November, 1996 in the night around 6:30 p.m. Ramlal had left Ringus for 
his village Bagdi. He took a lift in camel cart of Manaram (PW 2) of village 
Gudiliya.  When the camel cart was passing by   (Manawali Dhani),  the 
field of Khemaram,  Khemaram and his family members stopped the camel 
cart, pulled Ramlal down the camel cart, beat him up and took him inside the 
house of Khemaram.  Ramlal was beaten inside the house and, thereafter, 
taken to some unknown place.  The camel cart owner, on his way, informed 
one Girdhari Lal Kumawat and other villagers of village Bagadi Nangal  
about the abduction and beating of Ramlal. Next day morning, the villagers 
told the informant about these facts. The informant searched around, but 
Ramlal could not be traced. The persons of neighbourhood also told the 
informant that at night they have heard the cry of Ramlal coming from 
Khemaram's house, and Ramlal was beaten up inside the house and 
thereafter taken to some unknown place.
The Police registered a case under
Sections 147
,
148
,
149
and
364
IPC and commenced investigation.  The investigation turned up the dead 
body of Ramlal which was discovered in the path of a dried up nullah under 
the Ringus bridge. The police arrested nine persons of which, apart from the 
present three appellants, the other accused were Khema Ram, Deepa Ram, 
Sheopal, Babulal son of Deepa Ram, Sagar Mal and Laxman Prasad. The 
said nine accused were tried by the sessions court.
The Sessions Court acquitted all the accused from the charges of
Section 120B
IPC but convicted all the accused as follows:
Accused Khemaram, Deeparam, Shyopal, Babulal son of Deeparam, 
Sagarmal and Laxman Prasad were acquitted of the charge under
Section 
120B
/
364
IPC.
Accused Murlidhar was acquitted of charge under
Section 394
/
397
.
Accused Khemaram, Murlidhar, Deeparam, Shyopal, Babulal son of 
Deeparam, Sagarmal, Babulal son of Chhajuram, Chhajuram and Laxman 
Prasad were held guilty for offence under
Section 302
/
149
IPC.
Accused Khemaram, Murlidhar, Deeparam, Shyopal, Babulal son of 
Deeparam, Sagarmal, Babulal son of Chhajuram, Chhajuram and Laxman 
Prasad were held guilty for offence under
Section 148
IPC.
Accused Murlidhar, Deeparam, Shyopal, Babulal son of Deeparam, 
Sagarmal, Babulal son of Chhajuram, Chhajuiram and Laxman Prasad were 
held guilty for offence under
Section 201
IPC.
Accused Babulal son of Chhajuram, Chhajuram and Murlidhar were 
held guilty for offence under
Section 364
IPC.
Accused Murlidhar was held guilty for offence under
Section 379
IPC.
All the convicted accused appealed to the High Court.  The appeals of 
Khema Ram, Sheopal, Babulal son of Deepa Ram, Sagar Mal and Laxman 
Prasad were allowed and they were acquitted of the charges under
Section 
302
/
149
,
148
and
201
IPC. The appeals of Murlidhar, Chhaju Ram and 
Babulal, son of Chhaju Ram were dismissed and their conviction and 
sentence under
Section 364
IPC were confirmed.  The  High Court converted 
the conviction to one under
Section 302
/
34
IPC instead of
Section 302
/
149
IPC and sentenced each of them to undergo imprisonment for life and fine of 
Rs. 10,000/- with a default sentence of six months rigorous imprisonment.  
The sentences were directed to run concurrently.  These three accused were, 
however, acquitted of charges under
Sections 148
,
201
and
379
IPC.  The 
convicted accused are in appeal before us.
The evidence before the trial court consisted partly of the evidence of 
eye witnesses and partly of circumstantial evidence.  The trial court 
discussed the evidence under the following heads.
1.	Evidence regarding criminal conspiracy.
2.	Evidence regarding abduction of Ramlal.
3.	Evidence regarding beatings with Ramlal in the house of 
Khemaram.
4.	Evidence regarding witnessing the accused persons going in 
Tractor Trolley.
5.	Medical evidence
6.	Evidence regarding recovery
7.	Other evidence
1.	Evidence regarding criminal conspiracy:
Both,  the Sessions Court and the High Court concurrently concluded 
that the evidence of Ajeet Singh (PW 3), Hari Ram (PW 15) and Kalu Ram 
(PW 31) could not be relied upon for insufficiency of their testimony to 
establish  that there was a criminal conspiracy to abduct and murder. We are 
in agreement with the High Court on this issue.
2.	Evidence regarding abduction of Ramlal:
Ramlal had taken a ride in the camel cart of Manaram (PW 2), who 
was also accompanied by his son Sardar Mal (PW 4). Girdhari Kumawat 
also took a ride in the camel cart. The evidence of Manaram (PW 2) shows 
that first he dropped Girdhari Kumawat at Manawali Dhani. The camel cart 
then proceeded towards Hasteda. When the camel cart was passing by 
Khemaram's well, Murlidhar and Chhajuram suddenly appeared and caught 
hold of Ramlal and tried to pull him down from the cart.  Babulal, son of 
Chhajuram, and Bhagguram also appeared on the scene and started beating 
him with lathis. In all the fracas the camel cart started running away. 
Manaram sitting on the cart tried to balance and hold the flour mill with 
which the cart was loaded. Manaram's (PW 2) evidence is corroborated by 
that of his son Sardar Mal (PW 4). The evidence of these two witnesses 
suggests that Ramlal was pulled out of the cart, belaboured by the accused 
persons and the others and dragged away to the interior of Khemaram's 
house.
The learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the evidence of 
Manaram (PW 2) and Sardar Mal (PW 4) was not reliable as it was 
inherently improbable particularly, with regard to identification of the 
accused. On a careful perusal of the evidence, we are not impressed by this 
contention. Sardar Mal (PW 4) states in his evidence that although there was 
some darkness, there was some amount of light in front of the house of 
Khemaram. It is not, as if, the assailants were unknown to Manaram and his 
son Sardar Mal. In fact, the evidence suggests that he knew Chhajuram, 
Murlidhar, Babulal and Bhaggu well for two or three years, as they used to 
go with him sometimes, and they were meeting once or so in a month.
We are not satisfied that the evidence of Manaram (PW 2) and his son 
Sardar Mal (PW 4) can be discarded because of some minor inconsistencies 
and so called contradictions highlighted by the learned counsel. Nor we are 
prepared to discard the testimonies of these two eye witnesses merely 
because of their not immediately rushing to the Police Station, but 
proceeding to  Nangal village and  requesting the people to inform the police 
about the abduction of Ramlal.
Read as a whole, the testimonies of these two witnesses prove that, on 
the fateful day, while the camel cart  driven by Manaram was passing by the 
farm of Khemaram, the accused suddenly appeared on the scene and pulled 
down Ramlal,  belaboured him and dragged him away.
Learned counsel for the appellants contended that even assuming the 
evidence of Manaram (PW 2) and Sardar Mal (PW 4) was accepted, the 
offence under
Section 364
IPC could not be said to have been proved.  He 
contended that in order to make out an offence under
Section 364
IPC, it 
must be shown that the abduction must be of some person "in order that 
some person may be murdered or may be so disposed of as to be put in 
danger of being murdered". Learned counsel contended that there was no 
evidence, whatsoever, on this aspect of the matter. We are not inclined to 
agree. The intention of the accused while dragging away Ramlal is 
evidenced by the statement attributed to one of the accused, Bhaggu 
addressed to Babulal, son of Chhajuram, calling him to bring a lathi to kill 
Ramlal. The acts and words imputed to the accused when they pulled 
Ramlal, belaboured him and dragged him away, leaves us in no doubt that 
their intention was to so dispose him of as to put him in danger of being 
murdered. We are, therefore, satisfied that the Sessions Court and the High 
Court were justified in recording a conviction under
Section 364
IPC against 
the accused-appellants.
3.   Evidence regarding beatings given to Ramlal in the house of Khemaram:
The High Court concluded that the evidence as to what transpired 
within the house of Khemaram could not have been known by anyone. The 
prosecution examined Babulal (PW 5),  Ramratan (PW 7), Isro (PW 10), 
Govind (PW 13) and Manbhari (PW 8) on this aspect of the case as to what 
happened inside Khemaram's house.  The High Court has disbelieved this 
part of the evidence of Babulal (PW 5),  Ramratan (PW 7), Isro (PW 10) and 
Govind (PW 13)  as "replete with inherent improbabilities and they are 
wholly unreliable witnesses". We agree with this finding of the High Court.  
We also feel that Khemaram and his family would not have kept the doors of 
their house open so that someone could conveniently witness what was 
transpiring inside the house. This part of the story appears to be too artificial 
to believe.
4.	Evidence regarding witnessing the accused persons going in Tractor 
Trolley:
The High Court has correctly analysed the evidence in this regard and 
came to the conclusion that the story given out by the witnesses is 
unbelievable. The witnesses on this part of the evidence are Mansingh     
(PW 6) and Surjaram (PW 9). These witnesses stated that on 2nd November, 
1996 at about 8:30 p.m. when they were going back from Ringus to their 
village Bagdi Nagal, they saw a tractor trolley driven by Laxman. They 
named, Sheopal, Deepa, Bhagirath, Chhajuram, Murli, Sagar, Babulal son of 
Chhaju and Babulal son of Deepa were riding on the tractor. According to 
these witnesses, on an inquiry being made as to where they were going, 
Bhagirath and Chhaju informed them that Ballu Ram had become sick and 
they were taking him to Srimadhopur Hospital. PW 6 and PW 9 also claimed 
that they saw some body wrapped in a white gudri lying on the tractor. To 
say the least, the evidence appears to be wholly unnatural, as the High Court 
has pointed out that Man Singh (PW 6) is the 'motbir' of most of the memos 
drawn by the Investigating Officer. Under the cross examination, he 
admitted that he had not informed the Police at the time of drawing the 
inquest report that he had seen the appellants carrying some body on the 
tractor trolley.  While in his police statement (Ex. D-1) he named only six 
accused, but at the trial he gave 10-11 names.  Surja Ram (PW 9) under his 
cross examination stated that, when he reached near the dead body of the 
deceased lying under the Ringus bridge, the police were already there, but at 
that time, he did not disclose the fact to the police that he had seen the 
appellants taking a body on the tractor trolley during the preceding night. 
We are satisfied that the analysis of the evidences by the High Court is 
perfectly justified, and we agree with the conclusion of the High Court that 
the testimony of these witnesses on this aspect of the matter did not inspire 
confidence.
5.	Medical Evidence:
The medical evidence is acceptable and proves without any doubt that 
Ramlal was done to homicidal death. The probable cause of death is 
"asphyxia due to strangulation as well as neurogenic shock as a result of 
cumulative effect of multiple injuries on the body some of which are on the 
vital parts, namely, testicles."
6.	Evidence of recoveries:
The evidence as to recoveries also appears doubtful.  The recoveries 
consisted of lathis and HMT wrist watch from the accused Murlidhar. As to 
the evidence of lathis, the High Court has rightly refused to attach 
importance to the recoveries of the lathis as lathi is something to be found in 
every household in the concerned area.
As to the recovery of the HMT wrist watch, the evidence of Mahendra 
(PW 20), son of the deceased, is contradictory.  While at one time he said 
that he identified the watch because it had a broken side pin, he changed his 
testimony later to say that he identified it because the strap was broken. No 
formal Test Identification Parade was arranged.  It was also admitted by the 
witness that the model HMT-Kohinoor watch was a popular model and there 
must have been thousands of watches manufactured by the company.  The 
special reason given by PW 20 for identifying the watch was that it had been 
presented by the in-laws of his younger brother at the time of betrothal 
ceremony. Neither the said brother of the deceased, who was actually the 
owner of the watch, nor the in-laws who had gifted the watch had examined 
to identify the watch. There was nothing special in the watch, which was, in 
any event broken, for accused Murlidhar to treasure it as a prized possession. 
There were no marks of blood or finger prints which could have connected 
the accused with the watch. Significantly, the charges under
Sections 397
IPC for alleged robbery, or theft of the watch were failed and Murlidhar was 
acquitted of the said charges.  In these circumstances, the High Court was 
justified in rejecting the evidence of recoveries.
Finally, the High Court having accepted the evidence as to the offence 
of abduction punishable under
Section 364
IPC came to the conclusion that 
the prosecution evidence, when considered in the light of the proximity of 
time within which Ramlal sustained injuries and the proximity of the place 
within which the dead body was found, was enough to draw an inference 
that Ramlal's death was caused by the accused.  Relying on
Section 106
of 
the Evidence Act, 1872 and the observations of this Court in
State of W.B.  
v.  Mir Mohammad Omar and Ors.
, the High Court held that it was 
established that the appellants were the abductors of Ramlal, and since the 
facts were especially in the knowledge of the abductors, as the accused-
abductors failed to offer any explanation as to what transpired after Ramlal 
had been abducted, the court would be justified in drawing the inference that 
the abductors had murdered the victim, Ramlal, after abduction.
The learned counsel for the appellants strenuously urged this last 
conclusion of the High Court was erroneous in law and that the appellants, 
even if liable to be convicted under
Section 364
IPC, could not have been 
convicted under
Section 302
/
34
IPC.
In
Mir Mohammad Omar
(supra) it was established that the accused 
had abducted the victim, who was later found murdered. The abductors had 
not given any explanation as to what happened to the victim after he was 
abducted by them.  The Sessions Court held that the prosecution had failed 
to establish the charge of murder against the accused persons beyond any 
reasonable doubt as there was "a missing link in the chain of events after the 
deceased was last seen together with the accused persons and the discovery 
of the dead body of the deceased at Islamia Hospital". Rejecting the said 
contention this Court observed (vide para 31):
"The pristine rule that the burden of proof is on the 
prosecution to prove the guilt of the accused should not 
be taken as a fossilized doctrine as though it admits no 
process of intelligent reasoning. The doctrine of 
presumption is not alien to the above rule, nor would it 
impair the temper of the rule.  On the other hand, if the 
traditional rule relating to burden of proof of the 
prosecution is allowed to be wrapped in pedantic 
coverage, the offenders in serious offences would be the 
major beneficiaries and the society would be the 
casualty."
This Court further observed thus (vide para 33):
"Presumption of fact is an inference as to the existence of 
one fact from the existence of some other facts, unless 
the truth of such inference is disproved. Presumption of 
fact is a rule in law of evidence that a fact otherwise 
doubtful may be inferred from certain other proved facts.  
When inferring the existence of a fact from other set of 
proved facts, the court exercises a process of reasoning 
and reaches a logical conclusion as the most probable 
position.  The above principle has gained legislative 
recognition in India when
Section 114
is incorporated in 
the
Evidence Act
. It empowers the court to presume the 
existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have 
happened. In that process the court shall have regard to 
the common course of natural events, human conduct etc. 
in relation to the facts of the case."
The judgment of Vivian Bose, J. in
Shambu Nath Mehra v.  State of 
Ajmer
lays down the legal principle underlying the shifting of burden of 
proof under
Section 106
of the Evidence Act  thus (vide para 38):
"This lays down the general rule that in a criminal case 
the burden of proof is on the prosecution and
Section 106
is certainly not intended to relieve it of that duty.  On the 
contrary, it is designed to meet certain exceptional cases 
in which it would be impossible, or at any rate 
disproportionately difficult for the prosecution to 
establish facts which are 'especially' within the 
knowledge of the accused and which he could prove 
without difficulty or inconvenience.
The word 'especially' stresses that. It means facts that are 
pre-eminently or exceptionally within his knowledge."
In our judgment, the High Court was not justified in relying on and 
applying the rule of burden of proof under
Section 106
of the Evidence Act 
to the case. As pointed out in
Mir Mohammand Omar
(supra) and
Shambu Nath Mehra
(supra), the rule in
Section 106
of the Evidence Act 
would apply when the facts are "especially within the knowledge of the 
accused" and it would be impossible, or at any rate disproportionately 
difficult  for the prosecution to establish such facts, "especially within the 
knowledge of the accused." In the present case, the prosecution did not 
proceed on the footing that the facts were especially within the knowledge of 
the accused and, therefore, the principle in
Section 106
could not apply.  On 
the other hand, the prosecution  proceeded on the footing that there were eye 
witnesses to the fact of murder. The prosecution took upon itself the burden 
of examining Babulal (PW 5) as eye witness.
Testimony of Ram Ratan (PW
7) and Isro (PW 10) shows that their agricultural land was situated in a close 
distance from the house of Khema Ram. As rightly pointed out by the High 
Court, it is highly unlikely and improbable that their kith and kin Ramlal 
would have been given beating resulting in his death by the accused-
appellants while keeping lights of their house on and door of the room 
opened.  It is also unlikely that the accused-appellants would have taken the 
risk of dragging Ramlal to the house of Khema Ram, which was situated in 
the vicinity of agricultural land and well of Isro (PW 10), the father of 
Ramlal.  The evidence of Govind (PW 13) also appears to be unnatural, as 
he had not disclosed the incident to anybody.  The High Court has correctly 
analysed that all the witnesses, namely, Babulal (PW 5), Ram Ratan (PW 7), 
Isro (PW 10) and Govind (PW 13) are wholly unreliable as their evidence is 
repleated with contradiction and inherent improbabilities.
In the result, we are of the view that the prosecution having put 
forward a case that, what transpired after Ramlal was dragged away by the 
assailants was within the knowledge of witnesses, utterly failed in proving 
the said facts.  Once this is established, it was not open for the High Court to 
have fallen back on the rule of burden of proof under
Section 106
of the 
Evidence Act.  In fact, as we notice, it was nowhere the case of the 
prosecution that
Section 106
of the Evidence Act applied to the facts on 
record.  The High Court seems to have brought it out on its own, but without 
any justification. We are, therefore, of the view that the conviction of 
Murlidhar, Chhaju Ram and Babu Lal s/o Chhaju Ram under
Section 364
IPC is justified and liable to be confirmed, but their conviction under
Section 
302
/
34
IPC cannot be sustained and they are liable to be acquitted of the said 
charges.
In the result, we partly allow the appeal and make the following order:
Appellants-accused, Murlidhar, Chhaju Ram and Babu Lal son of 
Chhaju Ram are acquitted of the charges under
Section 302
/
34
IPC. Their 
conviction and sentence under
Section 364
IPC stands confirmed.