[Cites
26
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Haryana vs Sunder Lal on 22 July, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 725, (2019) 3 CURCC 575, (2019) 10 SCALE 205, 2020 (139) ALR SOC 13 (SC), (2020) 205 ALLINDCAS 143
Author:
Arun Mishra
Bench:
M.R. Shah
,
Arun Mishra
1

                                                                         NON­REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5754 OF 2019
                                (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO.28807 OF 2018)


     STATE OF HARYANA & ORS.                                       ….APPELLANTS

                                                    VERSUS

     SUNDER LAL                                                    ….RESPONDENT


                                                JUDGMENT
Arun Mishra, J.
1.                  Leave granted.
2.                  The question involved in the present matter is whether possession of

     land has been taken after passing of award on 21.7.2003 in land

     acquisition proceedings initiated vide Notification dated 24.8.2000 issued

     under
Section 4
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 for acquisition of land

     measuring 189.93 acres for the development and utilisation of land for

     residential, commercial and institutional area in Sector 57 of Gurgaon inter

     alia at village Tigra.                On the date of passing of award, according to

     appellants, possession had been obtained and handed over to the

     representative of Haryana Urban Development Authority (for short, ‘HUDA’)
Signature Not Verified
vide Rapat No.583. The compensation has admittedly been collected by the
Digitally signed by
JAYANT KUMAR ARORA
Date: 2019.07.25
13:13:40 IST
Reason:
respondent vide cheque no.191045 dated 31.7.2003.
3.                  The respondent herein filed a writ petition in the year 2015 in the
2
High Court of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh. He has set up the case

that he owned the land measuring two Kanal. The same was acquired by

the issuance of Notification under
Section 4
of the Land Acquisition Act,

1894 and the award was also passed. Compensation has been obtained.

However, the acquisition has lapsed as per provisions contained in
Section

24(2)
of the Right of Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land

Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (for short, ‘the Act of

2013’), as the possession has not been taken.           He has constructed

residential houses and shops.
4.   The High Court by the impugned judgment and order has held that

the two constructed rooms existed admeasuring 15’x12’ and 18’x12’ with

boundary wall in Khasra No.16//23/1/2(2­0).          Though the State has

claimed that the possession had been taken, there is no proof that the

respondent was physically dispossessed.
The Act
of 2013 has come into

force on 1.1.2014. The State may, if needed, acquire the property again for

a public purpose.     The development has not been undertaken so far.

Owners of such land/property are entitled to compensation under the Act of

2013. Direction has been issued to Land Acquisition Collector, Gurgaon to

determine the total amount to be refunded by the respondent within one

month. Aggrieved by the same, the appeal has been preferred by the State

of Haryana.
5.   Dr. Monika Gosain, learned counsel appearing for the appellants has

submitted that possession had been taken. She has attracted the attention
3
of this Court to the Rapat dated 21.7.2003. She has further submitted that

in several decisions, this Court has held that mode of taking possession is

by way of drawing of panchnama on the spot. Admittedly, compensation

has been paid to the respondent in the year 2003 itself. The acquisition has

attained finality and encroachment made thereafter is not going to help the

respondent.
6.   Mr. Siddharth Mittal learned counsel appearing for the respondent

has submitted that there were two rooms in existence, of which possession

has not been taken following the law. Paper possession cannot tantamount

to taking physical possession.   The physical possession remains with the

respondent. As such as mandated by the provisions contained in
Section

24(2)
of the Act of 2013, the acquisition has lapsed.       He has further

submitted that ‘the Policy for Return of Un­utilized Land’ has been framed

under the provisions of
Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in

Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (Haryana Amendment)

Act, 2017
and notified on 14.9.2018, by the State Government. He has also

submitted that on two sides of land in question in the case of similarly

situated landowners, the State Government has already passed release

orders on 30.10.2006 and 21.2.2014.           The respondent cannot be

discriminated with. He has also attracted the attention of this Court to the

photographs (Annexure R­6) and the site plan (Annexure R­5).
7.   The first question to be examined is whether possession had been

taken over by the State Government and handed over to HUDA. Rapat of
4
possession dated 21.7.2003, clearly shows that possession of total 172.52

acres has been taken over in the presence of landowners and interested

persons by offering compensation.          The award was also announced,

possession was taken by the Land Acquisition Collector, Urban Estates,

Gurgaon by walking around the land and marking land using Kassi. Shri

Om Prakash Kanungo, Representative of Estate Officer, Gurgaon was

handed over the possession of the same and the possession was handed

over to HUDA. A watchman was also posted to look after the land and the

announcement was also made of taking possession by beating drums. The

panchnama was signed by the Land Acquisition Collector, Watchman, and

the concerned Patwari.
8.    The drawing of panchnama of taking over of possession is not

disputed. However, it was submitted that since there were two rooms,

possession could not have been taken over in the manner in which it is

stated in the aforesaid panchnama.
9.    It is a settled proposition of law that when the State acquires the large

tract of land and draws the panchnama of taking possession, the same is

enough for taking possession of the land. In the instant case not only the

panchnama had been drawn, State has taken the possession by marking

the land and a watchman was also posted to look after the land.
10.
In
Balwant Narayan Bhagde v. M.D. Bhagwat
, (1976) 1 SCC 700, it

has been opined that the act of Tahsildar in going to the spot and

inspecting the land was sufficient to constitute a taking of possession.
5
Therefore, it was not open to withdraw the land acquired under
Section

48(1)
of the Act. The Court observed:
“28. We agree with the conclusion reached by our brother Untwalia,
      J., as also with the reasoning on which the conclusion is based. But
      we are writing a separate judgment as we feel that the discussion in
      the judgment of our learned Brother Untwalia, J., in regard to
      delivery of ‘symbolical’ and ‘actual’ possession under Rules 35, 36,
      95 and 96 of
Order 21of the Code of Civil Procedure
, is not
      necessary for the disposal of the present appeals and we do not wish
      to subscribe to what has been said by our learned Brother Untwalia,
      J., in that connection, nor do we wish to express our assent with the
      discussion of the various authorities made by him in his judgment.
We think it is enough to state that when the Government proceeds
      to take possession of the land acquired by it under the
Land
      Acquisition Act, 1894
, it must take actual possession of the land
      since all interests in the land are sought to be acquired by it. There
      can be no question of taking ‘symbolical’ possession in the sense
      understood by judicial decisions under
the Code of Civil Procedure
.
      Nor would possession merely on paper be enough.
What the Act
contemplates as a necessary condition of vesting of the land in the
      Government is the taking of actual possession of the land. How
      such possession may be taken would depend on the nature of the
      land. Such possession would have to be taken as the nature of the
      land admits of. There can be no hard and fast rule laying down what
      act would be sufficient to constitute a taking of possession of land.
      We should not, therefore, be taken as laying down an absolute and
      inviolable rule that merely going on the spot and making a
      declaration by the beat of drum or otherwise would be sufficient to
      constitute a taking of possession of land in every case. But here, in
      our opinion, since the land was lying fallow and there was no crop
      on it at the material time, the act of the Tehsildar in going on the
      spot and inspecting the land for the purpose of determining what
      part was waste and arable and should, therefore, be taken
      possession of and determining its extent, was sufficient to constitute
      taking of possession. It appears that the appellant was not present
      when this was done by the Tehsildar, but the presence of the owner
      or the occupant of the land is not necessary to effectuate the taking
      of possession. It is also not strictly necessary as a matter of legal
      requirement that notice should be given to the owner or the
      occupant of the land that possession would be taken at a particular
      time, though it may be desirable where possible, to give such notice
      before possession is taken by the authorities, as that would
      eliminate the possibility of any fraudulent or collusive transaction of
      taking of mere paper possession, without the occupant or the owner
      ever coming to know of it.”
6
11.
In
Tamil Nadu Housing Board v. A. Viswam (Dead) by LRs.
, (1996) 8

SCC 259, this Court has held that recording of the memorandum by the

Land Acquisition Officer (LAO) in the presence of witnesses signed by them

would constitute taking possession of the land. The Court observed:
“9. It is settled law by series of judgments of this Court that one of
       the accepted modes of taking possession of the acquired land is
       recording of a memorandum or Panchnama by the LAO in the
       presence of witnesses signed by him/them and that would
       constitute taking possession of the land as it would be impossible to
       take physical possession of the acquired land. It is common
       knowledge that in some cases the owner/interested person may not
       cooperate in taking possession of the land.”
12.
In
Banda Development Authority, Banda v. Moti Lal Agarwal
, (2011) 5

SCC 394, this Court has held that if acquisition is of a large tract of land, it

is not possible to take possession of each and every parcel of the land and it

would be sufficient that symbolic possession is taken by preparing an

appropriate document in the presence of independent witnesses and

obtaining their signatures. The Court observed:
“37. The principles which can be culled out from the above­noted
       judgments are:
(i) No hard­and­fast rule can be laid down as to what act would
            constitute taking of possession of the acquired land.
(ii) If the acquired land is vacant, the act of the State authority
            concerned to go to the spot and prepare a panchnama will
            ordinarily be treated as sufficient to constitute taking of
            possession.
(iii) If crop is standing on the acquired land or
            building/structure exists, mere going on the spot by the
            authority concerned will, by itself, be not sufficient for taking
            possession. Ordinarily, in such cases, the authority concerned
            will have to give notice to the occupier of the
            building/structure or the person who has cultivated the land
7
and take possession in the presence of independent witnesses
           and get their signatures on the panchnama. Of course, refusal
           of the owner of the land or building/structure may not lead to
           an inference that the possession of the acquired land has not
           been taken.
(iv) If the acquisition is of a large tract of land, it may not be
           possible for the acquiring/designated authority to take physical
           possession of each and every parcel of the land and it will be
           sufficient that symbolic possession is taken by preparing
           appropriate document in the presence of independent
           witnesses and getting their signatures on such document.
(v) If beneficiary of the acquisition is an agency/instrumentality
           of the State and 80% of the total compensation is deposited in
           terms of
Section 17
(3­A) and substantial portion of the
           acquired land has been utilised in furtherance of the particular
           public purpose, then the court may reasonably presume that
           possession of the acquired land has been taken.”
13.   The question also came for consideration in
State of T.N. v.

Mahalakshmi Ammal
, (1996) 7 SCC 269, in which this Court observed that

possession would be taken by drawing memorandum. The Court observed:
“9. It is well­settled law that publication of the declaration under
Section 6
gives conclusiveness to public purpose. Award was made
      on 26­9­1986 and for Survey No. 2/11 award was made on 31­8­
      1990. Possession having already been undertaken on 24­11­1981, it
      stands vested in the State under
Section 16
of the Act free from all
      encumbrances and thereby the Government acquired absolute title
      to the land. The initial award having been made within two years
      under
Section 11
of the Act, the fact that subsequent award was
      made on 31­8­1990 does not render the initial award invalid. It is
      also to be seen that there is stay of dispossession. Once there is stay
      of dispossession, all further proceedings necessarily could not be
      proceeded with as
laid down by
this Court. Therefore, the limitation
      also does not stand as an impediment as provided in the proviso to
Section 11
­
A of the Act
. Equally, even if there is an irregularity in
      service of notice under
Sections 9
and
10
, it would be a curable
      irregularity and on account thereof, award made under
Section 11
does not become invalid. Award is only an offer on behalf of the
      State. If compensation was accepted without protest, it binds such
      party but subject to
Section 28
­A. Possession of the acquired land
      would be taken only by way of a memorandum, Panchnama, which
      is a legally accepted norm. It would not be possible to take any
8
physical possession. Therefore, subsequent continuation, if any,
       had by the erstwhile owner is only illegal or unlawful possession
       which does not bind the Government nor vested under
Section 16
divested in the illegal occupant. Considered from this perspective,
       we hold that the High Court was not justified in interfering with the
       award.”
14.
In
Balmokand Khatri Educational and Industrial Trust, Amritsar v.

State of Punjab
, (1996) 4 SCC 212, it has been observed that the normal

rule of taking possession is drafting the panchnama in the presence of

panchas. This Court observed:
“4. It is seen that the entire gamut of the acquisition proceedings
       stood completed by 17­4­1976 by which date possession of the land
       had been taken. No doubt, Shri Parekh has contended that the
       appellant still retained their possession. It is now well­settled legal
       position that it is difficult to take physical possession of the land
       under compulsory acquisition. The normal mode of taking
       possession is drafting the panchnama in the presence of panchas
       and taking possession and giving delivery to the beneficiaries is the
       accepted mode of taking possession of the land. Subsequent thereto,
       the retention of possession would tantamount only to illegal or
       unlawful possession.
5. Under these circumstances, merely because the appellant
       retained possession of the acquired land, the acquisition cannot be
       said to be bad in law. It is then contended by Shri Parekh that the
       appellant­Institution is running an educational institution and
       intends to establish a public school and that since other land was
       available, the Government would have acquired some other land
       leaving the acquired land for the appellant. In the counter­affidavit
       filed in the High Court, it was stated that apart from the acquired
       land, the appellant also owned 482 canals 19 marlas of land.
Thereby, it is seen that the appellant is not disabled to proceed with
       the continuation of the educational institution which it seeks to
       establish. It is then contended that an opportunity may be given to
       the appellant to make a representation to the State Government. We
       find that it is not necessary for us to give any such liberty since
       acquisition process has already been completed.”
9
15.
In
P.K. Kalburqi v. State of Karnataka
, (2005) 12 SCC 489, this Court

held that if the land was vacant and unoccupied, taking symbolical

possession would be enough.
16.
In
Sita Ram Bhandar Society, New Delhi v. Lieutenant Governor,

Government of NCT, Delhi
, (2009) 10 SCC 501, it was observed that mode of

taking possession is by way of drawing of panchnama.
Similar view has

been reiterated in
Omprakash Verma v. State of Andhra Pradesh
, (2010) 13

SCC 158.
17.
In
M. Venkatesh v. Commissioner, Bangalore Development Authority
,

(2015) 17 SCC 1, again it was reiterated that mode of taking possession is

by drawing a panchnama.       It is further held that the mode of taking

possession adopted by BDA was permissible.
18.
In
State of Madhya Pradesh v. Narmada Bachao Andolan
, (2011) 7

SCC 639, this Court held that it would depend upon the facts that of the

individual case whether possession has been taken or not. We are of the

considered opinion that possession has been taken as is apparent from the

memorandum dated 21.7.2003 placed on record.
19.   Learned counsel for the respondent has submitted that there were two

rooms in existence admeasuring 15’x12’ and 18’x12’ with boundary wall.

He has taken us to the site plan, in which, now 10 shops are shown,

besides that there are three rooms, one kitchen, and verandah. Thus, most

of these structures have been erected subsequently. Even if there were two

outhouses in existence at the time of issuance of Notification under
Section
10
4
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 in the shape of rooms admeasuring

15'x12' and 18'x12' and boundary wall, obviously it was not meant for the

residential purposes, but meant for agricultural purposes. It appears that

once possession had been taken after making a trespass upon the land,

construction has been raised.         Most of these structures were not in

existence as per the finding recorded by the High Court. Thus, the site plan

rather than espousing the cause of the respondent, defeats the same. Once

possession had been taken and compensation has been admittedly collected

by the respondent, it was not open for him to apply for de­notification of

land under
Section 48
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 or for its release.
20.   The submission raised that land of two other incumbents has been

released in 2006 and 2014, is of no avail. There is no concept of negative

equality and the respondent cannot be permitted to take advantage of his

wrong.    The land had been acquired and thereafter respondent has

trespassed upon the land and has raised construction, in completely illegal

manner. He is not entitled to protect it. Based on such encroachment, he

is not entitled to release of the land.
21.   It cannot be said that land acquired is unutilised land, as a matter of

fact, lot of development has taken place as there is encroachment made, as

such, land could not have been utilised and by making unwarranted

interference by the High Court, the acquisition was ordered to be quashed.

We are of the opinion that the prayer made by the respondent to apply for

releasing the land as per the Notification dated 14.9.2018, cannot be
11
entertained. The respondent cannot be given such a right as he has not

come to the Court with clean hands. He is an encroacher and cannot be

said to be entitled to any indulgence.
22.   It is apparent that acquisition has attained finality, the award was

passed, compensation was collected and possession was taken long back in

the year 2003. Resultantly, we find the impugned judgment and order to be

unsustainable, the same is hereby set aside. The appeal is allowed. No

order as to costs.
………………….…..J.
                                                      (Arun Mishra)



                                                      …………………..….J.
                                                       (M.R. Shah)
July 22, 2019.
New Delhi;