[Cites
14
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Jharkhand And Ors. vs M/S Ajanta Bottlers And Blenders Pvt ... on 2 July, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 5285, 2019 (7) SCC 545, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 761, 2020 (1) AJR 158, (2019) 9 SCALE 1, AIR 2020 SC (CIV) 722
Author:
A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench:
Ajay Rastogi
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
1



                                                                      REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.5138 OF 2019
                                   (Arising out of SLP (C) No.449 of 2014)


                         The State of Jharkhand & Ors.             ..…Appellant(s)

                                                  Versus

                         M/S Ajanta Bottlers & Blenders Pvt. Ltd. ….Respondent(s)




                                             JUDGMENT
A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
1.              Leave granted.
2.              This appeal takes exception to the impugned judgment and

         order of the High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi in Writ Petition (T)

         No.7499 of 2012 dated 25th July, 2013, whereby the writ petition

         filed by the respondent to assail the notification dated 6th

         November, 2012, as published in the official gazette on 10th

         November, 2012, issued by the Board of Revenue, Jharkhand in
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHARANJEET KAUR
Date: 2019.07.03
16:59:12 IST
Reason:
exercise of powers conferred under Section 90 of the Jharkhand
2
Excise Act, 1915
came to be allowed on the ground that the State

had no legislative competence to levy tax/fee on the import of

rectified spirit, as it is a non-potable liquor i.e. alcohol not fit for

human consumption. Additionally, the High Court opined that the

appellant-State had failed to justify the impugned levy on rectified

spirit on the basis of services provided by the State in lieu thereof

or being in the nature of quid pro quo. The original notification is

in Hindi, the same reads thus:
“ANNEXURE-3




                               ______




                                (                )



                                                           ( )
                                    ( )
3
( )
(d)
                          ( ) (iii)




                (           )



                                  ( )
                    ( )

          ( )




(     )
4
(              )




                                                  ( )


                         ( )



                     (         )
               (         )




                                          (       )

                                                        "
Free translation thereof has been filed by the appellant as

annexure P-2. However, during the hearing as some doubt was

raised about the accuracy of annexure P-2, we thought it

appropriate to get the document (original in Hindi) translated from
5
the official translator of this Court. That translated version, reads

thus:
“Translated version of Gazette by the Official
                     Translator of the Supreme Court.
ANNEXURE -3
                                        THE
                           JHARKHAND GAZETTE
                              EXTRAORDINARY
           PUBLISHED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF JHARKHAND
-----–----------------------------------------------------
No. 680                19 Kartik, 1934 Shakabd

                      Ranchi, Saturday, 10th November 2012
-------–---------------------------------------------------
REVENUE BOARD
                                       Notification
                                  6th November 2012
---------------–---------------------------------------------------
           No.1/ Policy-40-21/2012-928/ Ra. Pa.- In exercise of
           the power conferred by section 90 of Jharkhand Excise
           Act 1915 (Act-2 1915), the Revenue Board, Jharkhand
           makes the following addition of new rule in Rule 106
           (Tha) after Rules Rule 106 (Ta) in Notification No. 23-
137-2 dated 29th April 1919.
Rule 106 (Tha): Foreign Liquor under sub-head (d) of
           head 'Foreign Liquor' in Para-3 of Notification No. 470
           F. dated 15 January 1919, which manufacturing shall
           be done in accordance with section-2 (15)(iii) of
Excise
           Act
, for its manufacturing, the imported spirit/ rectified
           spirit, which shall be first used for manufacturing of
           E.N.A. through repeated distillation, for foreign liquor
           beverage (at the time of conversion), but before bottling
           of liquor, for this purpose Import fee shall be deposited
           at the rate of Rs. 6/- per L.P. liter on the total quantity
           of imported spirit/rectified spirit.”

                  This notification shall come into force on the date
           of its publication in the official gazette.
No.1/Policy-40-21/2012-927/Ra.Pa.- In exercise
           of the power conferred by
Section 90
of Jharkhand
           Excise Act, 1915 (Act 2, 1915), Board of Revenue,
           Jharkhand makes the addition of new Rule – 106(Da)
6
after Rule 106(Tha) of the Rules prepared under Board
          Notification No.23-137-2 dated 29th April, 1919.

          Rule 106(Da):- With the purpose of manufacturing of
          country liquor/spiced country liquor beverage in the
          State of Jharkhand, at the time of conversion in
          imported alcohol/rectified country spirit and spiced
          country liquor, but before bottling and storage of liquor,
          with the described purpose, the import fee shall be
          deposited at the rate of Re.0.25 (Twenty Five Paise) per
          Bulk Litre on the total amount of imported
          spirit/rectified spirit.
This notification shall come into force on the date
          of its publication in the Official Gazette.
No.1/Policy-40-21/2012-928/Ra.Pa.         –     In
          Exercise of the power conferred by
Section 90
of
          Jharkhand Excise Act, 1915 (Act 2, 1915), the Board of
          Revenue, Jharkhand, makes amendment in the Rule
          106 (Ja) made vide notified notification No.1/Policy-10-
          32/2008-583, dated 15th May 2008 in the Rules made
          vide Board Notification No.23-137-2 dated 29 April
          1919:-
Rule 106(Ja) :- On the import of spirit/rectified
          spirit/ENA beverage from any place/area outside the
          state of Jharkhand, the permit fee at the rate of Re.0.25
          (Twenty Five Paisa) per Bulk Litre will be payable on the
          imported quantity in the State of Jharkhand.
This notification shall come into force on the date
          of its publication in the official gazette.
By the order of Board of Revenue, Jharkhand
                                                    Sd/-illegible
                                               Deputy Secretary,”
3.   As aforesaid, the High Court accepted the challenge to the

above-mentioned notification for the reasons noted hitherto. The

relevant discussion in the impugned judgment in that behalf,

reads thus:
7
“13. The State under List-II is empowered to levy fee
under Entry 66 in respect of any of the matters in the
list but not including fees taken in any Court. Entry 66
read with entry 8 of List II therefore provides
competence to the State to levy fee in respect of
intoxicating liquor i.e. alcoholic liquor fit for human
consumption i.e. to say on the production,
manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale
of intoxicating liquor. The present levy seeks to levy
fee on the import of rectified spirit to be utilized for
the purpose of, firstly for manufacture of ENA
through re-distillation process and then for
manufacture of IMFL. Rectified spirit is not fit for
human consumption and it therefore does not come
within the meaning of intoxicating liquor as contained
in Entry 8 of List II. Levy on the import of rectified spirit
is not a fee on intoxicating liquor i.e. fit for human
consumption. By the impugned notification, the
Board of Revenue in exercise of power conferred
under
section 90
of the Excise Act, 1915 has chosen
to levy fee on the import of rectified spirit which is
used for manufacture of ENA through re-distillation
process and then for the purpose of manufacture of
IMFL at the time before bottling @ Rs. 6.00 per LP
Litre. Industrial alcohol/non-potable spirit i.e. rectified
spirit being not alcoholic liquor fit for human
consumption, cannot be the subject matter of any
regulation or control by the State under Entry 8, 51 and
66 of List II of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.
The State has the power to levy fees under the garb
of grant of privilege from those who deal in liquor or
alcohol fit for human consumption i.e. potable
liquor as distinct from non-potable liquor or
alcoholic liquor unfit for human consumption.

Under Entry 51 of List-II, State has been empowered to
levy excise duty on alcoholic liquor fit for human
consumption manufactured or produced in the State
and countervailing duty at the same rate or lower rates
on similar goods manufactured or produced elsewhere
in India. Even under the instant Entry, the rectified
spirit which is non potable liquor, does not come within
the meaning of alcoholic liquor fit for human
consumption on which the State can levy excise duty
under Entry 51 of List-II. The levy of import fees on
rectified spirit therefore by the State Legislature
before bottling of IMFL by shifting the event of
taxation, cannot be held to be justified as in pith
8
and substance, the levy is on import of rectified
       spirit i.e. non-potable liquor i.e. alcohol not fit for
       human consumption. Levy of fee on non-potable liquor
       i.e. unfit for human consumption or industrial alcohol
       is permissible under Entry 52 of List-I of Seventh
       Schedule of the Constitution. Under Entry 84 of List-I,
       excise duty on tobacco and other goods manufactured
       or produced in India can be levied except on alcoholic
       liquor for human consumption; opium, Indian hemp
       and other narcotic drugs and narcotics. In the wake of
       such clear demarcation of legislative fields between
       Union and State Legislature, the impugned notification
       levying import fees on rectified spirit i.e. non potable
       liquor or alcoholic liquor unfit for human consumption
       by applying the rule of pith and substance, 18 cannot
       come within the legislative competence of the State
       Legislature. The impugned levy therefore is beyond
       the legislative competence of the State Legislature
       and consequentially also beyond the rule making
       power of the Board of Revenue.”
                                             (emphasis supplied)

And again…………….
“16. The respondent State sought to justify the levy as
       a regulatory measure for supervision and control of
       potable liquor to protect public health and morality.
       However, there are no materials brought on record
       by the respondent State to justify that any services
       in lieu thereof are provided in the nature of quid pro
       quo to justify the imposition of such a levy. The
       petitioner is already having various licences granted by
       the Excise Department, Government of Jharkhand in
       Form- 19, 19(B), 20, 25 and 28(A) prescribed by the
       Board of Revenue and is paying the licence fee for grant
       of such licences. Under Form-19 a licence for
       compounding and blending of foreign liquor is given. In
       Form-19(B), petitioner has been granted licence for the
       manufacture of foreign liquor / beer as also for the sale
       of foreign liquor / beer through licencee distributors as
       also to import or transport the same under bond. The
       petitioner has a licence for bottling of potable foreign
       liquor under Form-20 for which it pays fees in advance
       of Rs. 50,000/- for the year. In Form-25 it has been
       granted licence to manufacture denatured spirit at its
       distillery / warehouse. The petitioner also has a licence
       under Form-28(A) to manufacture spirit in distillery not
9
used in the manufacture of potable liquor for which it
          also pays a licence fees. It is the contention of the
          petitioner that it is paying establishment charges on the
          posting of excise official at its premises. Therefore, the
          respondent State have not been able to justify the
          impugned levy on rectified spirit on the basis of
          services provided in lieu thereof. Besides this, the
          petitioner has been paying licence fee for issuance
          of licence under different forms in the nature of a
          regulatory fee. The impugned levy therefore, is not
          justifiable on this account as well.
17. In these circumstances, levy of import fee on
          rectified spirit which is impermissible for the State
          Legislature, also has the effect of impeding the inter-
          State trade and commerce as guaranteed under
Article
          301
of the Constitution of India. At the same time, it is
          within the exclusive legislative competence of
          Parliament to levy any duty or tax on rectified spirit i.e.
          industrial alcohol. Such action therefore, is in teeth of
          the
Article 301
of the Constitution of India.
18. In view of the aforesaid reasons and discussions and
          in view of the settled law laid down by the judgments of
          the Hon'ble Supreme Court referred to herein above, the
          notification dated 10th November 2012 issued by the
          Board of Revenue, Jharkhand in exercise of powers
          conferred under
section 90
of the Jharkhand Excise
          Act, 1915, cannot be sustained in law and it is
          accordingly quashed. Consequentially, the demand
          raised vide notice dated 24th November 2012
          (Annexure-4) for deposit of import fees on rectified
          spirit, is also quashed. Petitioner shall be entitled to
          refund of any such import fees deposited under the
          impugned notification.
Writ petition is accordingly allowed.”
                                             (emphasis supplied)


The correctness of the view so taken by the High Court is the

subject matter of challenge in this appeal, at the instance of the

State. In defending the notification before the High Court, the
10
appellant-State had asserted that the rule inserted by the subject

notification being Rule 106 (Tha), is an impost and is merely

described as an import fee. Because, it is reckoned on the basis of

quantity of pure alcohol content of rectified spirit (which is known

as “London Proof Liter”), imported for the purposes of manufacture

of potable Foreign Liquor after the process of compounding,

blending and reduction of strength of spirit from over proof

strength to under proof strength is complete. Further, the unit for

charging import fee is London Proof Liter (for short, “LPL”)

because, it does not change even after the spirit has undergone

through the process of compounding, blending & reduction of

strength. Indisputably, nothing can be nor will be charged in

advance, so long as the imported rectified spirit is non-potable and

till it is in the form of raw material. In other words, nothing is

charged on industrial alcohol. Thus, it is neither a violation of

provisions of the Constitution nor is it an arbitrary use of power

under Section 90(7) by the Board of Revenue who was competent

to issue the same towards levy of any kind of fee on potable liquor.

In substance, the stand of the appellant-State is that the stated

import fee is not on rectified spirit in its raw form as such, but on

pure alcoholic liter “LPL” in the form of potable liquor. Further, it
11
is a regulatory fee only for supervision and control of production of

potable liquor to protect public health and morality. It was further

asserted that no right inheres in any person for doing business in

intoxicants.   That   right   exclusively   belongs   to   the   State.

Resultantly, it is open to the State to part with those rights for a

consideration on conditions as may be deemed appropriate. There

is no need for the State to establish commensurate services

rendered by it to apply the doctrine of quid pro quo, in respect of

impost of any kind of fee on potable liquors.
4.   The High Court, however, was not impressed by the stand

taken by the State and proceeded to answer the matters in issue

against the State for reasons afore-quoted, in the extracted portion

of the impugned judgment.
5.   The appellant-State has approached this Court to assail the

view so taken by the High Court. More or less, the State has

reiterated its stand as was taken before the High Court. In that,

the charge in terms of the impugned Rule 106(Tha) to the licensees

was neither in the nature of a tax nor excise duty. The impost is a

normal incidence of a trading or business transaction in respect of

the rights exclusively inhering in the State - with regard to
12
production and manufacture of intoxicating liquor covered by

Entry 8 of list II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of

India. The levy is, essentially, to regulate and ensure that the

imported rectified spirit is not diverted and misused as a substitute

for potable alcohol. It is open to the State to deal in intoxicants its

manufacture,     possession,    sale,    transport,   import,   export,

consumption on premises of hotel and restaurants etc. Further,

the State has exclusive rights and privileges of manufacturing and

selling liquor. It is urged that the approach of the High Court is

completely wrong and against the settled legal position.
6.   Per contra, the respondents have supported the conclusions

reached by the High Court and would contend that a close reading

of Rule 106(Tha) clearly indicates that it purports to levy “import

fee” on imported rectified spirit, used for production of Indian

Made Foreign Liquor (for short, “IMFL”) manufactured in the

respondent factory under a valid licence for import and also to

manufacture of the product (IMFL). It is urged that the provision

regarding collection of the fee after the rectified spirit has been

used to first produce ENA and then potable liquor, would not alter

the character of the levy being impost on the imported rectified
13
spirit. The State is not competent to legislate on imported

industrial liquor or levy any charge or tax thereon as such. The

postponement of realization of charges predicated in the impugned

rule would not alter the efficacy of the rule, providing for levy of

import fee on rectified spirit. Relying on the decisions of this Court

it was urged that rectified spirit is highly intoxicating and cannot

be consumed by humans. It is industrial alcohol on which the

State is not competent to legislate or levy taxes in the garb of duty

or fee. The imported rectified spirit, in that form, would not attract

excise duty. That can primarily be imposed on the happening of

production or manufacture of goods produced or manufactured

within the State. It is then urged that the respondent is engaged

in production of “IMFL” for which it has obtained all essential

licences prescribed by the Board of Revenue on payment of

licensing fees for grant of such licenses such as “Form 19” for

compounding and blending of foreign liquor, Form19-B for

manufacture of foreign liquor/beer as also for the sale of foreign

liquor/beer through licensee distributors as also to import or

transport the same, Form 20 for bottling of potable foreign liquor,

Form 25 for manufacture denatured spirit at its distillery/

warehouse, Form 28(A) for manufacture of spirit in distillery not
14
used in the manufacture of potable liquor. In that view of the

matter, it is not open to the State to levy impugned charges in the

garb of import duty, or excise duty, as the case may be, on the

imported rectified spirit, for production of “IMFL”. The respondent

prays that the appeal be dismissed being devoid of merits and the

decision of the High Court be affirmed.
7.   We have heard learned counsel for the parties. Additionally,

they have filed written submissions.
8.   The seminal issue to be answered in this appeal is about the

purport of the notification dated 6th November, 2010 as published

on 10th November, 2012 and whether it is in the nature of

legislation by the State on the subject of industrial alcohol. Alcohol

can generally be classified into the following categories:
“I. Isopropyl alcohol (or IPA or isopropanol) is a
            compound with the chemical formula CH3CHOHCH3. It
            is a colourless, flammable chemical compound with a
            strong odour. As an isopropyl group linked to a hydroxyl
            group, it is the simplest example of a secondary alcohol,
            where the alcohol carbon atom is attached to two other
            carbon atoms. If consumed, Isopropanol is converted
            into acetone in the liver, which makes it extremely toxic.
            Often used for disinfecting skin an antiseptic.
II. Methyl Alcohol (or Methanol): Chemical Formula –
            CH3OH: Not for human consumption. If consumed, can
            cause blindness and death. Methanol acquired the
            name wood alcohol because it was once produced
15
chiefly by the destructive distillation of wood. Today,
            methanol is mainly produced industrially by
            hydrogenation of carbon monoxide.
III. Ethyl alcohol, (also known as Ethanol and abbreviated
             as EtOH), is a colourless, volatile, and flammable liquid
             that is soluable in water. Its chemical formula is C2H6O,
             or can be written as C2H5OH or CH3CH2OH. It has one
             methyl (-CH3) group, one methylene (-CH2-) group, and
             one hydroxyl (-OH-) group.”


The first two categories are poisonous, toxic and fatal for human

consumption, rendering its use only for industrial purposes. It is

stated that Isopropanol and methanol, because of their inherent

chemical properties, cannot be purified and used for the

production of ‘intoxicating liquor’ or ‘potable liquor’ by adopting

‘physical   means’     like   decantation,       filtration,     redistillation,

fractional distillation etc. The third category namely, Ethyl Alcohol

or Ethanol (in India is usually produced from molasses derived

from sugarcane) in its concentrated form and it is also known as

“Rectified Spirit” and its strength measured in LPL signifies the

strength of alcohol by volume, 13 parts of which weigh exactly

equal to 12 parts of water at 51 degrees Fahrenheit.
9.   Be that as it may, rectified spirit after it undergoes certain

‘physical changes’ by adopting ‘physical means’ like re-distillation,

rectification   (repeated     or   fractional    distillation)     to    remove
16
impurities, it becomes purer and is known as Extra Neutral

Alcohol (ENA). Thereafter, by addition and mixing of colouring and

flavouring agents (compounding), as well as after dilution with

water, ENA is left for maturation, to be bottled and used as

‘intoxicating liquor’ or ‘potable liquor’ known as Indian Made

Foreign Liquor (IMFL). Whereas the country liquor, also known as

‘Desi Sharab’ is prepared from rectified spirit or low grade ENA

having alcohol content below 40% (as decided by different State

Governments) which may be coloured (by caramel) and may be

spiced too. Notably, the chemical composition of Ethyl alcohol or

Ethanol (C2H6O or C2H5OH or CH3CH2OH) remains the same in

the entire process, though addition of colouring and flavouring

agents makes it a mild concoction/mixture/solution (in chemical

parlance a solution of alcohol is known as ‘tincture’) which renders

it more palatable to human consumption.
10. We have adverted to the above-mentioned process, noted in

the written submissions filed by the appellant, so as to give proper

interpretation to the impugned notification and the subject rules,

in particular Rule 106(Tha). English version of the said rule noted

in the notification (as translated by the official translator of this
17
Court reproduced in paragraph 2 above), in our opinion, makes it

amply clear that the levy or impost fructifies only upon completion

of distillation process (in two stages- first from rectified spirit to

ENA and then from ENA to IMFL) and in particular converting into

a final product “IMFL”. The collection of impost is, however,

deferred until the bottling of that product. In other words, the levy

is not at the stage of import of rectified spirit within the State; nor

at the stage of initial distillation thereof to Extra Neutral Alcohol

(ENA) and not until the product IMFL is ready for bottling as such.

Thus, the levy under the impugned rule ripens or fructifies only

after the original raw material (imported rectified spirit) has

undergone distillation process at two different stages and

transmute and mutate into an intoxicant or potable alcohol

palatable to human consumption, but its (impost) collection is

effected just before bottling it in that form (potable liquor). Indeed,

the levy predicated in this rule is on the total quantity of imported

rectified spirit utilised for mutating it in the form of IMFL, a new

produce. The last part of the rule stipulates the quantum of

charges to be levied on such utilized imported rectified spirit for

production of the foreign liquor. For that limited purpose, the
18
quantity of imported rectified spirit utilized in the production of

potable liquor, is reckoned.
11. Reading the impugned provision as a whole and line by line

or word by word in this perspective, it must follow that the

substance of the provision is to levy charges on the product IMFL

produced or manufactured by use of imported rectified spirit. In

that sense, the levy is not on the input (imported rectified spirit) of

the final product as such but is on the manufactured or produced

product being potable alcohol palatable to human consumption.

For the purposes of computing the levy, the yardstick of Rs.6 per

LPL on the total quantity of imported rectified spirit utilized for

production of IMFL is reckoned. Thus, the impost is not on the

imported rectified spirit as such but only on the produced foreign

liquor before it is bottled for sale in the wholesale or retail market,

as the case may be. If so understood, the whole edifice of the

argument of respondents regarding the interpretation of the

impugned rule must collapse. For, the challenge to the impugned

rule is on the assumption that it permits the competent authority

to levy charges on the imported rectified spirit and not fit for

human consumption but which has the potency of being used for
19
producing intoxicants or potable liquor though exclusively meant

for industrial purposes. Once that assumption is discounted or

disregarded, nothing more survives for consideration. We say so

because, it is well established that the State may pass any

legislation in the nature of prohibition of potable liquor referable

to Entry 6 and 8 of List II and may also laydown regulations to

ensure that non-potable alcohol is not diverted and misused as a

substitute for potable alcohol. Had it been the case of levy on non-

potable alcohol (imported rectified spirit) per se, only then the

question about the competency of the State Legislature or the

justness of the levy on the doctrine of quid pro quo may become

relevant. However, if it is a case of legislation in respect of potable

alcohol, as has been noted by us hitherto, the State would be

competent to legislate in that regard and levy charges – be it for

regulating the same or impost for parting with its rights regarding

manufacture, storage, export, sale and possession thereof.
12. We may usefully advert to the Constitution Bench decision

(Five Judges) in
Har Shankar and Ors. Vs. The Dy. Excise and
20
Taxation Commissioner and Ors.1
, paragraph Nos.53 to 59,

which read thus:
“53. In our opinion, the true position governing dealings
           in intoxicants is as stated and reflected in the
           Constitution Bench decisions of this Court in Balsara
           case2, Cooverjee case3, Kidwai case4, Nagendra Nath
           case5, Amar Chakraborty case6 and the R.M.D.C. case7,
           as interpreted in Harinarayan Jaiswal case8 and
           Nashirwar case9. There is no fundamental right to do
           trade or business in intoxicants. The State, under its
           regulatory powers, has the right to prohibit
           absolutely every form of activity in relation to
           intoxicants — its manufacture, storage, export,
           import, sale and possession. In all their
           manifestations, these rights are vested in the State
           and indeed without such vesting there can be no
           effective regulation of various forms of activities in
           relation to intoxicants. In American Jurisprudence,
           Vol. 30 it is stated that while engaging in liquor traffic
           is not inherently unlawful, nevertheless it is a privilege
           and not a right, subject to governmental control (p.
538). This power of control is an incident of the
           society’s right to self-protection and it rests upon
           the right of the State to care for the health, morals
           and welfare of the people. Liquor traffic is a source
           of pauperism and crime (pp. 539, 540, 541).
54. It was unnecessary in Krishna Kumar Narula case10
           to examine the question from this broader point of view,
           as the only contention bearing on the constitutional
           validity of the provision impugned therein was not
           permitted to be raised as it was not argued in the High

1 (1975) 1 SCC 737
2 1951 SCR 682 : AIR 1957 SC 414
3 1954 SCR 873 : AIR 1954 SC 318
4 1957 SCR 295 : AIR 1957 SC 414
5 1958 SCR 1240 : AIR 1958 SC 398
6 (1973) 1 SCR 533 : (1972) 2 SCC 442
7 1957 SCR 874 : AIR 1957 SC 699
8 (1972) 3 SCR 784 : (1972) 2 SCC 36
9 (1975) 1 SCC 29
10 (1967) 3 SCR 50 : AIR 1967 SC 1368
21
Court. The discussion of the question whether a citizen
has a fundamental right to do trade or business in
liquor proceeded
in that case
, avowedly, from a desire
to clear the confusion arising from the “different views”
expressed by the two Judges of the High Court. This
may explain why the Court restricted its final
conclusion to holding that dealing in liquor is business
and the citizen has a right to do business in that
commodity. The Court did not say, though such an
implication may arise from its conclusion, that the
citizen has a fundamental right to do trade or business
in liquor. If we may repeat, Subba Rao, C.J. said:
“We, therefore, hold that dealing in liquor is
      business and a citizen has a right to do
      business in that commodity; but the State
      can make a law imposing reasonable
      restrictions on the said right, in public
      interests.”

It is significant that the judgment in Krishna
Kumar Narula case does not negate the right of the
State to prohibit absolutely all forms of activities in
relation to intoxicants. The wider right to prohibit
absolutely would include the narrower right to
permit dealings in intoxicants on such terms of
general application as the State deems expedient.
55. Since rights in regard to intoxicants belong to
the State, it is open to the Government to part with
those rights for a consideration. By
Article 298
of
the Constitution, the executive power of the State
extends to the carrying on of any trade or business
and to the making of contracts for any purpose. As
observed in Harinarayan Jaiswal case, (SCC p. 44, para
13)
      “if the Government is the exclusive owner
      of those privileges, reliance on
Article
      19(1)(g)
or
Article 14
becomes irrelevant.
Citizens cannot have any fundamental
      right to trade or carry on business in the
      properties or rights belonging to the
      Government, nor can there be any
      infringement of
Article 14
, if the
      Government tries to get the best available
      price for its valuable rights.”
22
Section 27
of the Act recognises the right of the
Government to grant a lease of its right to manufacture,
supply or sell intoxicants.
Section 34
of the Act read
with
Section    59(d)
empowers      the   Financial
Commissioner to direct that a licence, permit or pass be
granted under the Act on payment of such fees and
subject to such restrictions and on such conditions as
he may prescribe. In such a scheme, it is not of the
essence whether the amount charged to the licensees is
pre-determined as in the appeals of Northern India
Caterers and of Green Hotel or whether it is left to be
determined by bids offered in auctions held for granting
those rights to licensees. The power of the
Government to charge a price for parting with its
rights and not the mode of fixing that price is what
constitutes the essence of the matter. Nor indeed
does the label affixed to the price determine either
the true nature of the charge levied by the
Government or its right to levy the same.
56. The distinction which the Constitution makes for
legislative purposes between a “tax” and a “fee” and the
characteristics of these two as also of “excise duty” are
well-known. “A tax is a compulsory exaction of money
by public authority for public purposes enforceable by
law and is not a payment for services rendered”. A fee is
a charge for special services rendered to individuals by
some governmental agency and such a charge has an
element in it of a quid pro quo. Excise duty is primarily
a duty on the production or manufacture of goods
produced or manufactured within the country. The
amounts charged to the licensees in the instant case
are, evidently, neither in the nature of a tax nor of
excise duty. But then, the “licence fee” which the
State Government charged to the licensees through
the medium of auctions or the “fixed fee” which it
charged to the vendors of foreign liquor holding
licences in Forms L-3, L-4 and L-5 need bear no quid
pro quo to the services rendered to the licensees.
The word “fee” is not used in the Act or the Rules in
the technical sense of the expression. By “licence
fee” or “fixed fee” is meant the price or
consideration which the Government charges to the
licensees for parting with its privileges and granting
them to the licensees. As the State can carry on a
23
trade or business, such a charge is the normal
             incident of a trading or business transaction.
57. While on this question, we may with advantage cite
             a passage from American Jurisprudence (Vol. 30, pp.
             642, 645) which is based on the decisions in Gundling
             v. Chicago11, Phillips v. Mobile12 and Richard v. Mobile13,
             It says:
“the familiar principle that the imposition
                   of licence fees on useful and honourable
                   occupations must not exceed the cost of
                   issuing the licence, plus the expense of
                   inspecting and regulating the business
                   licensed ... is not necessarily applicable to
                   a liquor license. The liquor traffic is not
                   something which is licensed for the
                   purpose of promoting it. Indeed, licence
                   fees may be exacted in amounts
                   intended to discourage participation in
                   the business. The courts have quite
                   generally refused to hold that the
                   licence fee imposed, merely because it is
                   large, is a tax, where the object is to
                   control, regulate, and restrict, and not
                   to encourage the liquor traffic, the
                   revenue being the result of the system
                   and not the motive for its adoption . . . .
                   The higher the fee imposed for a licence,
                   it is sometimes said, the better the
                   regulation, as the effect of a high fee is
                   to keep out the business those who are
                   undesirable, and to keep within
                   reasonable limits the number of those
                   who may engage in it.”
58. In the view we have taken, the argument that the
             Government cannot by contract do what it cannot do
             under a statute must fail. No statute forbids the
             Government from trading in its own rights or privileges
             and the statute under consideration, far from doing so,
             expressly empowers it by
Sections 27
and
34
to grant

11   44 L Ed 728
12   52 L Ed 578
13   52 L Ed 581
24
leases of its rights and to issue the requisite licences,
             permits or passes on payment of such fees as may be
             prescribed by the Financial Commissioner.
59. The argument that in Cooverjee case the impugned
             power having been exercised in respect of a centrally
             administered area, the power was not fettered by
             legislative lists loses its relevance in the view we are
             taking. It is true that in that case it was permissible to
             the Court to find, as in fact it did, that the fee imposed
             on the licensees was “more in the nature of a tax than
             a licence fee”. As the authority which levied the fee had
             the power to exact a tax, the levy could be upheld as a
             tax even if it could not be justified as a “fee”, in the
             constitutional sense of that term. But the “licence fee”
             or “fixed fee” in the instant case does not have to
             conform to the requirement that it must bear a
             reasonable relationship with the services rendered
             to the licensees. The amount charged to the
             licensees is not a fee properly so-called nor indeed a
             tax but is in the nature of the price of a privilege,
             which the purchaser has to pay in any trading or
             business transactions.”
                                                     (emphasis supplied)
13.
Indeed, if the State legislation was to provide for levy on the

imported rectified spirit per se the same would be without

jurisdiction, as consistently held, including by the Constitution

Bench in
Deccan Sugar & Abkari Co. Ltd. Vs. Commissioner of

Excise, A.P.14
, paragraph No.2 of this decision, which reads thus:
“2. It is settled by the decision of this Court in
Synthetics
             and Chemicals Ltd. v. State of U.P.
that the State
             Legislature has no jurisdiction to levy any excise duty
             on rectified spirit.
The State can levy excise duty only
             on potable liquor fit for human consumption and as
             rectified spirit does not fall under that category the
14   (2004) 1 SCC 243
25
State Legislature cannot impose any excise duty. The
             decision in
Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. v. State of U.P.
has been followed in
State of U.P. v. Modi Distillery15
where certain wastage of ethyl alcohol was sought to be
             taxed. This Court following the decision in Synthetics
             and Chemicals Ltd. came to the conclusion that this
             cannot be done.”
14. The next question is whether the levy is in the nature of tax

or excise duty. If it is a case of excise duty on potable liquor

produced by use of imported rectified spirit, the State has

jurisdiction to legislate in respect of duty on the production or

manufacture of such goods produced or manufactured within the

State. In the present case, we find merits in the submissions of the

appellant State that the impost is neither in the nature of a tax nor

excise duty but it is towards the charges by whatever name, for

regulating the production of potable liquor to preserve public

health and morality including for parting with its rights or

privileges regarding manufacture, supply or sale of potable liquor

or intoxicating liquor and to regulate the use of imported rectified

spirit for production and sale of potable liquor. In such a case, the

State need bear no quid pro quo to the services rendered to the

licencee for production of foreign liquor (IMFA).



15   (1995) 5 SCC 753
26
15. The fact that the manufacturer-respondent has already

obtained requisite licences for import of rectified spirit and

production of foreign liquor (IMFA) on payment of fixed rates does

not mean that the State has surrendered all facets of its rights in

respect of every form of activity in relation to potable liquor – its

manufacture, storage, export, import, sale and possession. The

amended provision is an enabling provision authorising the State

to levy charges or impost for ceding its one or more of the activity

in respect of foreign liquor (IMFL) produced by use of imported

rectified spirit. Such impost can be in addition to the general power

of the State to issue licence on payment of fees for production and

sale of potable liquor. As observed in
Har Shankar
(supra), in

paragraph No.56, the State need bear no quid pro quo to the

services rendered to the licensees of producer of foreign liquor.
16. The respondent, however, placed heavy reliance on the

decision in
State of U.P. & Ors. Vs. Vam Organic Chemicals

Ltd. and Ors.16
, to contend that the State is obliged to justify the

impost based on quid pro quo. We are afraid, this decision is of no

avail to the respondent. In that case, the Court was dealing with


16   (2004) 1 SCC 225
27
challenge to Rule 3(a) therein on the ground that the State

Legislature did not have legislative competence to legislate on

“denatured spirit” which is unfit for human consumption.
In that

context, this Court relied on the decision in
Synthetics and

Chemicals Ltd. and Ors. Vs. State of U.P. and Ors.17
and

answered the issue. If the case under consideration was to be

regarding legislation on imported rectified spirit as such, this

decision would have come handy. However, having opined that the

purport of the impugned Rule 106(Tha), is to permit impost on the

final processed product being foreign liquor “IMFL”, before bottling

as fit for human consumption, the State has jurisdiction to

legislate on that subject and need bear no quid pro quo to the

services rendered to the licencee of manufacturer of foreign liquor

(IMFL).
17. In view of the above, we do not intend to dilate on other

arguments and reported decisions pressed into service by the

respective parties. Suffice it to observe that the challenge to the

amended Rule 106 (Tha), in our opinion, is unfounded and is

based on erroneous assumption that it purports to authorise the


17   (1990) 1 SCC 109
28
State to levy charges on the imported rectified spirit as such.

However, upon proper interpretation of the said rule we hold that

it purports to empower the State to levy charges on the final

processed product being foreign liquor (IMFL) manufactured by

use of imported rectified spirit. This appeal, therefore, ought to

succeed.
18. Accordingly, we allow this appeal and quash and set aside

the impugned judgment and order of the High Court dated 25th

July, 2013 passed in WP(T) No.7499 of 2012. The said writ petition

stands dismissed. All pending interim applications are disposed of.

No order as to costs.
……………………………..J
                                         (A.M. Khanwilkar)




                                         ……………………………..J
                                         (Ajay Rastogi)
New Delhi;
July 02, 2019.