[Cites
23
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Chennai Metropolitan Development ... vs Prestige Estates Project Ltd. on 29 July, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2621
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Indira Banerjee
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
REPORTABLE




                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                        Civil Appeal Nos. 5642-5643 of 2019
                                       (@SLP (C) Nos. 31274-31275 of 2014)




          Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority                           …Appellants
          Rep. by its Member- Secretary & Anr




                                                        Versus

          Prestige Estates Project Ltd.                                        …Respondent




                                                  JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J



          1              These appeals arise from a judgment of a Division Bench of the High Court

          of Judicature at Madras in a Writ Appeal, affirming the judgment of a learned

          Single Judge in proceedings under
Article 226
of the Constitution. The High Court

          set aside a demand raised by the appellant for revised charges on account of (i)
Signature Not Verified
Infrastructure and Amenities1; and (ii) Premium Floor Space Index2.
Digitally signed by
MANISH SETHI
Date: 2019.07.29
16:02:27 IST
Reason:
1
I&A
1
2         The respondent submitted an application on 22 March 2011 for planning

permission to construct a multi-storeyed building complex at Ayyappan Thangal

Village, Thiruperumbudur Taluk. The Housing and Urban Development

Department of the Government of Tamil Nadu, to which the application was

forwarded for approval in terms of the Development Regulations3, accorded its

approval to the recommendation of the Multi-storeyed Building Panel.




3         On 5 January 2012, the State government in a letter to the appellant

approved the recommendation, subject to the following conditions:
“(i) Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority should
                        ensure that the applicant gifts the road widening
                        portions marked in the plan to the Chennai
                        Metropolitan Development Authority along with OSR
                        spaces before issue of Planning Permission.
(ii) The applicant shall furnish ‘No Objection Certificate’
                        from Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and
                        Sewerage Board for using their land in S. Nos. 51/1B2
                        and 1C2 for access before issue of Development
                        Charges advice.
(iii) Subject to other usual condition.”




The letter stated that before the issuance of planning permission, an undertaking

should be obtained from the respondent to fulfill
(i)      The provisions contained in the DR; and
(ii)     The conditions imposed by the Director of Fire and Rescue Service and

         other Departments.
2
Premium FSI
3   DR
2
The appellant, as the planning authority, was requested to take up further action

for issuance of a planning permission.
4       The appellant, which is a planning authority under the provisions of the
Tamil Nadu Town & Country Planning Act
19714, was required to consider the

application for the grant of planning permission under
Section 49
. The Chennai

Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board5 addressed a letter on 6

February 2012 to the respondent stating that it would consider the issuance of its

No Objection Certificate6 subject to the acceptance of the following conditions:
“1. RCC Compound wall shall be constructed on the
                 boundaries of the proposed land adjacent to CMWSSB
                 land with gate provisions of 6m. span at both ends as
                 accesses to reach the other side of the proposed
                 multistoried residential buildings as accepted in your Lr.
                 dt. 28.01.2012.
2. The design and estimate for proposed R.C.C culvert of
                 suitable length and width should be submitted for approval
                 of CMWSSB, before construction of culvert.
3.The proposed R.C.C culverts with clearance of 1.5mtr
                 all-round the pipeline should be constructed at both
                 crossings to reach the property under the supervision of
                 CMWSS Board.
4. Supervision charge @ 21% of the estimated
                 construction cost should be deposited to CMWSSB before
                 construction of culvert.
5. The existing pipeline should not be damaged at any
                 point of time and if any damage is caused at the time of
                 construction of culverts/compound wall, the entire repair
                 cost should be borne by you.
6. If any leak or burst occurs in the pipeline in future within
                 the culvert portion, the culvert will be demolished by the
                 Board for attending leak/burst in future and the same has
                 to be reconstructed at your risk and cost.
4 The Planning Act 1971
5 The Sewerage Board
6 NOC
3
7. You should not have any rights, whatsoever to claim
            the ownership of the above board’s land.
8. The Board reserves the right to enter upon the
            premises for any inspection and to cancel the “No
            Objection Certificate” at any point of time without
            assigning any reason in the interest of public.”
5     On 2 March 2012, the respondent addressed a communication to the

appellant, stating that it had accepted the conditions imposed by Sewerage

Board by its letter dated 18 February 2012 and that a formal NOC was expected

shortly. The appellant was requested to process the planning permission and to

issue a notice of demand for development charges in order to enable the

respondent to arrange for the funds required. The respondent, in its above letter

dated 2 March 2012 stated :
“Now we expect the formal NOC from CMWSSB very
            shortly. In view of the above progress on the NOC, we
            request that the processing of Planning Permit and the
            notice for development charges may kindly be issued to
            assess the fees amount involved and also to make
            arrangement for the funds required. We further assure
            you that before the payment of fees is effected by us the
            formal NOC from CMWSSB will be submitted.”
6     On 7 March 2012, the appellant requested the Sub-Registrar, Chennai

South to furnish the guideline value of urban land for the survey numbers where

development was proposed by the respondent for assessing the Premium FSI

charges in relation to the development proposal. This was furnished by the Sub-

Registrar on 7 March 2012.
4
7      On 27 March 2012, the appellant issued a demand notice requiring the

respondent to deposit the following charges in order to facilitate the processing of

its application:
“
i)      Development             Rs. 63,10,000/-
charge for land and     (Rupees sixty three Lakh and ten
                              building under Sec.     Thousand Only)
                              59 of the T&
CP
                              Act
, 1971
ii)     Balance     Scrutiny    Rs.     50,000/-    (Rupees    fifty
                              Fee                     Thousand only)
iii)    Regularisation          Rs. 25,10,000/- (Rupees twenty
                              charge            for   five lakh and ten thousand only)
                              unauthorized sub
                              division           &
                              amalgamation
iv)     Security     Deposit    Rs. 4,64,15,000/- (Rupees four
                              (For Building)          crore sixty four lakh and fifteen
                                                      thousand Only)
v)      Security Deposit for    Rs. 10,000/- (Rupees Ten
                              Display Board           Thousand Only)
vi)     Security Deposit for    Rs. 27,15,000/- (Rupees twenty
                              STP                     seven lakh and fifteen Thousand
                                                      Only)
vii)    Infrastructure  &       Rs. 8,34,40,000/- (Rupees eight
                              Amenities Charges       crore thirty four lakh and forty
                                                      Thousand Only)
viii)   Premium        FSI      Rs. 44,75,88,000/- (Rupees Forty
                              charge          for     four crore and seventy five lakh
                              78690.55 sq.m.          eighty thousand only)
                                                                                             .”



The appellant also required the respondent to comply with the following


requisitions :
“a. Furnish the letter of your acceptance for the following
                     conditions stipulated by virtue of provisions available
                     under DR 4(i) d of Annexure III:-
5
(i) The construction shall be undertaken as per
      sanctioned plan only and no deviation from the plans
      should be made without prior sanction. Construction
      done in deviation is liable to be demolished.
(ii) In cases of Multi-storied Building both qualified
      Architect and qualified structural Engineer who should
      be a Class-I Licensed Surveyor shall be associated
      and the above information to be furnished.
(iii) A report in writing shall be sent to Chennai
      Metropolitan     Development       Authority   by     the
      Architect/Class-I Licensed Surveyor who supervises
      the construction just before the commencement of the
      erection of the building as per the sanctioned plan,
      similar report shall be sent to CMDA when the building
      has reached up to plinth level and thereafter every
      three     months     at    various   stages     of    the
      construction/development certifying that the work so
      far completed is in accordance with the approved
      plan. The Licensed Surveyor and Architect shall
      inform this Authority immediately if the contract
      between him/them and the owner/developer, has
      been cancelled or the construction is carried out in
      deviation to the approved plan.
(iv) The owner shall inform Chennai Metropolitan
      Development Authority of any change of the Licensed
      Surveyor/Architect. The newly appointed Licensed
      Surveyor/Architect shall also confirm to CDMA that he
      has agreed for supervising the work under reference
      and intimate the stage of construction at which he has
      taken over. No construction shall be carried on during
      the period intervening between exit of the previous
      Architect/Licensed Surveyor and entry of the new
      appointee.
(v) On completion of the construction the applicant shall
      intimate CDMA and shall not occupy the building or
      permit it to be occupied until a completion certificate is
      obtained from CMDA.
(vi) While the applicant makes application for service
      connection such as Electricity, Water Supply,
      Sewerage he should enclose a copy of the completion
      certificate issued by CMDA along with his application
      to the concerned Department/Board/Agency.
(vii) When the site under reference is transferred by way of
      sale/lease or any other means to any person before
      completion of the construction, the party shall inform
      CMDA of such transaction and also the name and
      address of the persons to whom the site is transferred
      immediately after such transaction and shall bind the
      purchaser to those conditions to the Planning
      Permission.
6
(viii)    In the Open space within the site, trees should be
                    planted and the existing trees preserved to the extent
                    possible;
(ix) If there is any false statement, suppression or any
                    misrepresentation of acts in the applicant, planning
                    permission will be liable for cancellation and the
                    development made, if any will be treated as
                    authorized.
(x) The new building should have mosquito proof
                    overhead tanks and wells.
(xi) The sanction will be revoked, if the conditions
                    mentioned above are not complied with.
(xii) Rainwater conservation measures notified by CMDA
                    should be adhered to strictly.
(a) . Undertaking (in the format prescribed in
                        Annexure –XIV to DCR, a copy of it enclosed in
                        Rs. 20/- stamp paper duly executed by all the land
                        owner, GPA holders, builders and promoters
                        separately. The undertakings shall be duly
                        attested by a Notary Public.
(b) Details of the proposed development duly filled in
                     the format enclosed for display at the site. Display
                     of the information at site is compulsory in cases of
                     Multi-storied buildings, Special buildings and
                     Group developments”



The letter further stipulated that :
“7. The issue of planning permission depends on the
              compliance/fulfilment of the conditions/payments
              stated above. The acceptance by the Authority of the
              pre-payment of the Development charge and other
              charges etc. shall not entitle the person to the
              Planning Permission but only refund of the
              Development Charge and other charges (excluding
              Scrutiny Fee) in cases of refusal of the permission for
              non-compliance of the conditions stated above or any
              of the provisions of DR, which has to be complied
              before getting the Planning permission or any other
              reason provided the construction is not commenced
              and claim for refund is made by the applicant.”

                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
7
8     On 28 March 2012, the respondent paid the charges which were

demanded by the appellant on 27 March 2012. In the meantime, on 26 March

2012, the Government revised the guideline values with effect from 1 April 2012.
One of the conditions subject to which the State government had granted its

approval to the respondent was the obtaining of an NOC from the Sewerage

Board. On 28 March, 2012, G.O.Ms No. 86 was issued by the Housing and

Urban Development Department whereby the I & A charges for different

categories and buildings falling under the jurisdiction of the appellant and of the

Commissioner of Town and Country Planning were to stand increased by 50 per

cent over the then prevailing rates. The Sewerage Board issued its NOC on 30

March 2012, subject to the condition that the respondent execute a gift deed in

respect of a piece of land. This requirement was complied with on 27 April 2012.

When the file pertaining to the grant of planning permission to the respondent

was under consideration, guideline values were revised by the State government

with effect from 1 April 2012. A demand notice was issued on 22 August 2012 by

the appellant by which the demand was revised for charges under two heads:
“
i)    Balance   I   &   A   Rs.     4,17,15,000/-
Charges               (Rupees Four Crore
                                                           Seventeen Lakh and
                                                           Fifteen     thousand
                                                           Only)
                               ii)   Balance    Premium    Rs. 90,76,75,000/-
                                     FSI Charge            (Rupees        ninety
                                                           crore seventy six
                                                           lakh and seventy
                                                           five thousand only)
                                                                                   ”
8
9             The demand notice was questioned by the respondent in writ proceedings
before the High Court. A learned Single Judge, by a judgment dated 13

December 2012, allowed the writ petition holding that a right had accrued to the

respondent to obtain planning permission and that it could not be divested by the

subsequent amendment made with effect from 1 April 2012. The demand was

quashed and set aside. The Writ Appeal has been dismissed by a Division Bench

of the High Court on 1 August 2014. The Division Bench held that :
(i)        Insofar as the levy of I & A Charges are concerned, no amendment has

                 been made to the Tamil Nadu Town and Country Planning (Levy of

                 Infrastructure    and   Amenities   Charges)   Rules   20087   and    in

                 consequence, the demand of Rs. 4,17,15,000/- is without the authority

                 of law;
(ii)       The respondent had remitted the I & A charges and Premium FSI

                 charges on 29 March 2012;
(iii)      Office Order No. 7/2012 dated 16 April 2012 made it clear that the I & A

                 charges were applicable for applications for planning permission where

                 the advice for the payment of development charges was sent on or

                 after 28 March 2012. In the present case, since the demand had been

                 remitted prior to 28 March 2012, the pre-revised I & A charges were

                 applicable; and
(iv)       The charges for Premium FSI as revised with effect from 1 April 2012

                 could not be made applicable to the respondent. The NOC of the

                 Sewerage Board was dated 30 March 2012 and the mere fact that it


7   The Rules 2008
9
was received by the appellant on 2 April 2012 was not a valid ground

         for the demand notice and hence the demand could not be justified.
10    Assailing the decision of the High Court, Mr K M Nataraj, learned

Additional Solicitor General of India formulated two issues which need to be

addressed in these proceedings:
“(i)    Whether charges namely Infrastructure &
             Amenities charges and Premium FSI charges are required
             to be collected as per rates prevailing as on the date of
             submission of planning permission application or on the
             date of granting approval of planning permission;
(ii)   Whether the respondent herein has accrued any
             vested right before granting approval of planning
             permission merely because they remitted the charges as
             per demand notice dated 27-03-2012.”



The learned ASG urged that the appellant, as a planning authority, is under a

statutory obligation to levy and collect the charges as applicable when planning

permission is granted. The pendency of an application or the deposit of the

payment earlier by the applicant does not create a vested right. If the planning

permission is not granted, the planning authority would have to refund the

amount deposited. Hence, the crucial date for determining the applicable charges

is the date on which planning permission is granted by the planning authority. In

the present case, the planning permission was granted only in 2013, pursuant to

the interim order of the High Court subject to a further deposit of Rs 10 Crores as

ordered. Insofar as I & A charges are concerned, it was urged that the High Court

erroneously relied on the Office Order dated 16 April 2012 which records that the

old rates would be applicable where the development charges’ advice was sent
10
before 28 March 2012. This, it has been urged, is in conflict with the GO dated 28

March 2012 according to which, I & A charges were to stand increased by 50 per

cent over the then prevailing rates. The learned ASG argued that an amendment

to the Rules was not necessary since the charges are determined and are

leviable under an order issued pursuant to
Section 63B
while according building

permission and hence the order of the High Court needs to be interfered with.
11          On the other hand, Mr Rana Mukherjee, learned Senior Counsel appearing

on behalf of the respondents submitted that:
(i)       As regards I & A charges:


                  (a)     Clause 6 of G.O.Ms No. 86 by which the charges were revised
required that the Commissioner of Town and Country Planning

                          submit a proposal for an amendment to the Rules of 2008. As

                          a matter of fact, no amendment has been carried out; and
(b)      Clause (i) of the Office Order dated 16 April 2012, states that

                           revised I & A charges shall be applicable for demands made

                           on or after 28 March 2012. Hence, the revised charges would

                           not be applicable to the respondent against whom a demand

                           had been raised on 27 March 2012 by the appellant.
(ii)      As regards charges for Premium FSI :
(a) All payment related obligations were completed by the appellant

                        on 29 March 2012 prior to the revision of the guideline values on

                        1 April 2012. Consequently, the revised rates would not be
11
applicable and if any date after payment is to be taken into

                      account that would only enable the government to unlawfully and

                      unfairly delay the issuance of permissions and thereafter raise

                      enormous demands. To obviate this, the cut-off date ought to be

                      treated as the date of payment;
(b) The principle which has been enunciated in the judgment of this

                      Court in Union of India v Mahajan Industries Ltd.8 is

                      applicable; and
(c) The subject matter of the demand pertains to payment levied by

                      the respondent and not a change in the development control

                      rules such as involving a change in floors, setbacks etc.


Moreover, it was urged that the planning permission in the present case was

granted on 30 May 2012 and therefore the withholding of a copy and the basis of

the impugned demand is a mere after thought. The revised demand does not

indicate any reasons or basis.
12       The rival submissions now fall for consideration.


13       Section 48 of the Planning Act 1971 imposes a restraint upon the

construction of buildings and making a material change in the use of land except

with the written permission of the planning authority and in accordance with the

conditions specified in the grant of permission9.



8 (2014) 5 SCC 199
9 48. Restrictions on buildings and lands, in the area of the planning authority.- On or after the date of the
publication of the resolution under sub-section (2) of
section 19
or of the notice in the Tamil Nadu Government
Gazette under
section 26
, no person other than any State Government or the Central Government or any local
authority, shall, erect any building or make or extend any excavation or carry out any mining or other operation,
in, on, over or under any land or make any material change in the use of land or construct, form or layout any
12
Section 49
which provides for an application for permission is in the following


terms:
“49. Application for permission.- (1) Except as
                otherwise provided by rules made in this behalf, any
                person not being any State Government or the Central
                Government or any local authority intending to carry out
                any development on any land or building on or after the
                date of the publication of the resolution under sub-section
                (2) of
section 19
or of the notice in the Tamil Nadu
                Government Gazette under
section 26
, shall make an
                application in writing to the appropriate planning authority
                for permission in such form and containing such
                particulars and accompanied by such documents as may
                be prescribed.
(2) The appropriate planning authority shall, in deciding
                whether to grant or refuse such permission, have regard
                to the following matters, namely:-
(a) the purpose for which the permission is required;
(b)the suitability of the place for such purpose;
(c) the future development and maintenance of the
                planning area

                (3) When the appropriate planning authority refuses to
                grant a permission to any person, it shall record in writing
                the reasons for such refusal and furnish to that person, on
                demand, a brief statement of the same.”



The Planning Act 1971 requires the grant of planning permission before

development or a change in the use of land can take place. The mere filing of an

application does not entitle the applicant to permission. Nor is there a vested right

to the grant of permission.
Section 63B
provides for the levy of I & A charges:
work except with the written permission of the appropriate planning authority and in accordance with the
conditions, if any, specified therein.
13
“63-B. Levy of infrastructure and amenities charges .-(1)
         Every local authority or the planning authority, as the case
         may be, while according building permit under the
         relevant laws or according permission under this Act, as
         the case may be, shall levy charges on the institution of
         use or change of use of land or building or development of
         any land or building in the whole area or any part of the
         planning area so as to meet the impact of development
         and for ensuring sustainable development of urban and
         rural areas by providing adequate infrastructure and basic
         amenities at the rates as determined in accordance with
         such procedure as may be prescribed which shall not be
         less than minimum and not more than the maximum as
         may be prescribed, and different rates may be prescribed
         for different parts of the planning area and for different
         uses.
(2) The infrastructure and amenities charges shall be
         leviable on any person who undertakes or carries out any
         such development or institutes any use or changes any
         such use.
(3) The collection of the infrastructure and amenities
         charges shall be made in such manner as may be
         prescribed.
Explanation.- For the purpose of this Section “relevant
         laws” means in case of-
(i)      the
Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority, the
         Tamil Nadu Town and Country Planning Act, 1971
(T.N.Act 35 of 1972);
(ii)     the
Chennai City Municipal Corporation, the Chennai City
         Municipal Corporation Act, 1919
(T.N.Act 4 of 1919);
(iii)    the
Madurai City Municipal Corporation, the Madurai City
         Municipal Corporation Act, 1971
(T.N.Act 15 of 1971);
(iv)     the
Coimbatore City Municipal Corporation, the
         Coimbatore City, Municipal Corporation Act, 1981
(T.N.Act 25 of 1981);
(v)      the
Tiruchirappalli City Municipal Corporation, the
         Tiruchirappalli City Municipal Corporation Act, 1994
(T.N.Act 27 of 1994);
(vi)     the
Tirunelveli City Municipal Corporation, the Tirunelveli
         City Municipal Corporation Act, 1994
(T.N.Act 27 of 1994);
(vii)    the
Salem City Municipal Corporation, the Salem City
         Municipal Corporation Act, 1994
(T.N.Act 29 of 1994);
(viii)   the Municipalities and Town Panchayats, the Tamil Nadu
         District Municipalities Act, 1920 (T.N.Act 5 of 1920); and
(ix)     the
Panchayat Unions and Village Panchayats, the Tamil
         Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994
(T.N.Act 21 of 1994).”
14
Section 63B
provides for the levy of I & A charges while according a building

permit either under relevant laws or while according permission under the

Planning Act 1971. These charges are leviable on the institution of use or change

of use of land or building or development of any land or building. The rates are

determined in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed. The rates

are not to be less than the minimum and more than the maximum that is

prescribed.
14    Rule 4 of the Rules 2008 contains provisions for the imposition of the I & A

charges:
“4. Infrastructure and Amenities Charges. – The
              infrastructure and amenities charges shall be collected for
              new construction, additions to existing constructions and
              change of use of existing buildings at the rates not
              exceeding the maximum rate and not less than the
              minimum rates indicated in the Table below, in case of
              different categories of buildings referred to in the Table:
THE TABLE

               Sl No.   Type of building                 Minimum rates per   Maximum
                                                         square metre        rates per
                                                                             square
                                                                             metre
               (1)      (2)                              (3)                 (4)
                                                         Rs.                 Rs.
1.       Multistoryed         buildings   500                 1,000
                        accommodating
                        residential or commercial
                        or                Information
                        technology or industrial
                        of       institutional      or
                        combination of such
                        activities
2.       Commercial           building.   200                 500
Information Technology
                        building,              Group
15
development            and
                             Special building (not
                             covered under Sl. No. 1)
3.    Institutional building (not   100                     200
covered under Sl. No.I)
4.    Industrial building (not
                             covered under Sl. No. 1)
                                                                                         .”



15         Rule 5 empowers the Director Of Town and Country Planning to fix the

rates of charges in respect of areas other than the Chennai Metropolitan Planning

Area. In respect of the Chennai Metropolitan Planning Area, the power to fix the

charges, subject to due observance of the minimum and the maximum specified

in Rule 4, is conferred on the Vice-Chairman of the Chennai Metropolitan

Development Authority. Rule 5 (2) provides thus:
“5. Fixation of rates of Charges.-
(2) In respect of the Chennai Metropolitan Planning Area,
                   the Vice Chairman, Chennai Metropolitan Development
                   Authority shall fix the rates of such charges for each of the
                   above categories of buildings which shall not be less than
                   the minimum and not more than the maximum as
                   prescribed in Rule 4, taking into account the various
                   aspects of developments including infrastructure needs.
He may fix different rates for different categories of
                   buildings or for different areas.”



16         The power to levy charges for the Premium FSI is in
Regulation 36
of the

Second Master Plan for Chennai Metropolitan Area 2006 (Regulation)10.
Regulation 36
is in the following terms :
“36. Premium FSI.- The Authority may allow premium
                   FSI over and above the normally allowable FSI, in any
                   case not exceeding 0.5 for special building and group
                   developments, and not exceeding 1.0 for multistoreyed

10   Regulation 2006
16
buildings in specific areas which may be notified, on
                 collection of a charge at the rates as may be prescribed
                 with the approval of the Government. The amount
                 collected shall be kept in an escrow amount for utilizing it
                 for infrastructure development in that area as may be
                 decided by the Government.”
17          Premium FSI is the Floor Space Index over and above that which is

normally allowable and is not to exceed 0.5 for special buildings and group

developments or 1.0 for multi-storeyed buildings in specific areas. The rates for

premium FSI are prescribed with the approval of the Government.




18          On 27 March 2012, the appellant raised a demand on the respondent for

the payment of charges including:
(i)      I & A charges of Rs. 8,34,40,000/-; and

     (ii)     Premium FSI charges for 78690.55 sq.mtrs in the amount of Rs.

              44,75,88,000/-.
While raising the demand, the respondent was informed of the conditions

required to be complied with in order to ensure the grant of planning permission.

The letter specifically stated that while the grant of planning permission depended

upon the fulfillment of the conditions stipulated in the letter, pre-payment of the

development charges and other charges would not entitle the respondent to

planning permission but only to a refund if planning permission were to be

refused.
17
19    On 28 March 2012, the Housing and Urban Development Department of

the Government of Tamil Nadu issued G.O.Ms No. 86 stipulating that:
(i)    The minimum and maximum rates as specified in Rule 4 of

                   the I & A Rules 2008 “shall be done away with”; and
(ii)   The I & A charges for different categories and buildings falling

                   under    the   jurisdiction   of   the   appellant   and   of   the

                   Commissioner of Town and Country Planning were to stand

                   increased by 50 per cent over the then prevailing rates. Thus,

                   for instance, the I & A charges for multi-storeyed residential

                   buildings were sought to be revised for the Chennai

                   Metropolitan Development Planning Areas from Rs. 250 per

                   sq. mtr to Rs. 375 per sq.mtr.
Clause (6) of G.O.Ms contemplates an amendment to the Rules 2008 :
“6) The Commissioner of Town and Country Planning is
            directed to send necessary proposal on amendment to the
            Tamil Nadu Town and Country Planning (Levy of
            Infrastructure and Amenities Charges) Rules, 2008 to
            Government accordingly.”
20    It was in view of the provisions contained in clause (6) extracted above that

the Division Bench in its judgment dated 1 August 2014 recorded, having

enquired of the Advocate General, as to whether any proposal for the

amendment of the rules had been initiated. The Advocate General informed the

High Court that while steps to amend the rules had been initiated, it would take
18
about two months to complete the process of amending them. It was in this view

of the matter and the statement of the Advocate General that the High Court

recorded that as on the date of its judgment, no amendment was made to the

Rules 2008 for the purpose of increasing the I & A charges. Rule 4 as it stands

prescribes the minimum and the maximum rates for the levy of I & A charges.

Rule 5(2) empowers the Vice-Chairman of Chennai Metropolitan Development

Authority to fix the rates for the Chennai Metropolitan Development Planning

Areas, while observing the minimum and the maximum rates set out in Rule 4.

The proposal which was initiated by the government on 28 March 2012

envisaged the elimination of the minimum and maximum rates specified in Rule 4

as a result of which clause (6) of G.O.Ms. 86 incorporates a requirement of

amending the Rules 2008. Absent an amendment to the Rules 2008, the High

Court held that the demand for I & A charges at the revised rate could not be

enforced against the respondent. A revision of the I & A charges could have been

effected by the Vice-Chairman of the appellant in terms of Rule 5(2) without a

formal amendment to the Rules 2008, so long as the minimum and maximum

provided in Rule 4 is not breached. However, it appears that the government took

the view that an amendment to the rules was necessitated since the table

specifying the minimum and maximum in Rule 4 was to be abrogated. It was for

the above reason that the High Court came to the conclusion that a revised

demand for I & A charges could not be enforced in the absence of an amendment

to the Rules 2008.
Section 63B
requires that the minimum and maximum rates

should be prescribed. This will have to be borne in mind by the government.

Subordinate legislation has to be in conformity with parent legislation.
19
21    The High Court also adverted to the Internal Office Circular/Order dated 16

April 2012 of the appellant which specified that while the revised I & A charges

were leviable with effect from the issuance of G.O.Ms. No. 86 on 28 March 2012:
“i.The revised rate of Infrastructure & Amenities charges
              are applicable for the Planning Permission Applications,
              where Development Charges advice was sent on or after
              28.03.2012. In the case of Planning Permission
              Applications for which DC advice dated prior to
              28.03.2012, the pre-revised rates only applicable.”



In terms of the above office order, cases where the “Development Charges

advice” was sent prior to 28 March 2012 would be governed by the pre-revised

rates. The government is bound by its own decision. Consequently, on this

aspect of the matter, we are in agreement with the view of the High Court that the

revised I & A charges were not lawfully demanded from the appellant to whom

the development charges advice had been issued prior to 28 March 2012.
22    The second aspect of the matter which needs scrutiny is in regard to the

levy of Premium FSI charges. The levy of Premium FSI charges under
Regulation 36
is incident to the planning authority allowing Premium FSI over and

above the FSI which is normally allowable. In other words, it is upon and subject

to the grant of Premium FSI that the authority can demand Premium FSI charges.

If no Premium FSI is sanctioned, obviously there would be no occasion to

demand a charge for Premium FSI. Similarly, if planning permission were to be

refused, the deposit which is made by the developer would be refunded. This was

categorically stated in the demand which was raised on the respondent on 27

March 2012.
20
23    Planning permission is granted by the planning authority upon an

application for permission which is made under Section 49 of the Planning Act

1971. In the present case, the planning permission was granted upon an interim

order of the High Court, subject to the deposit of Rs. 10 Crores on 13 March

2013. Though the appellant received the approval of the Housing and Urban

Development Department on 5 January 2012 following the recommendation of

the Multi-storyed Building Panel, the grant of planning permission was still to be

considered by the Planning Authority. The letter dated 5 January 2012 of the

Housing and Urban Development Department contemplates that several steps

were still to be taken including the transfer to the road widening portion to

Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority, the issuance of an NOC by the

Sewerage Board and the fulfillment of all requisite conditions under the

development regulations. Moreover, even after compliance with those conditions,

the appellant had to process the grant of planning permission. The letter of

demand that was issued by the appellant on 27 March 2012 similarly required the

fulfillment of several conditions precedent upon which the application for the grant

of planning permission would be considered.
24    On 27 March 2012, while issuing a demand notice to the respondent, it

was made clear by the appellant that the planning permission was still to be

issued. The submission of the application for permission and the steps taken by

the respondent to comply with the conditions and the deposit of the charges did

not confer a vested right in the respondent for the grant of planning permission.

The grant of planning permission would only ensue upon the appellant
21
scrutinizing the application and determining that the permissions which were

sought were in accordance with the development regulations and all other

planning requirements holding the field. Before the planning permission was

issued, the revised charges for Premium FSI came to be enforced. Once the

revised charges came into force with effect from 1 April 2012, the respondent, as

the applicant for planning permission, was bound to pay the revised charges. As

on 1 April 2012, the respondent had no planning permission in its favour. The

submission of the respondent that planning permission was issued in May 2012

evidently will not advance the case of the respondent. The grant of any

permission post the revision of the Premium FSI charges would necessarily be

subject to the revised charges. Hence, in raising the demand on the basis of the

revised charges on 22 August 2012, the appellant was acting in accordance with

law.
25        The principle which we have adopted accords with a consistent line of

precedent of this Court. In State of Tamil Nadu v Hind Stone11, Justice O

Chinnappa Reddy speaking for a Bench of two learned judges of this Court, while

interpreting the provisions of Rule 2
(A) of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation

and Development) Act
1957 observed :
“13…While it is true that such applications should be dealt
                  with within a reasonable time, it cannot on that account be
                  said that the right to have an application disposed of in a
                  reasonable time clothes an applicant for a lease with a
                  right to have the application disposed of on the basis of the
                  rules in force at the time of the making of the application.
                  No one has a vested right to the grant or renewal of a
                  lease and none can claim a vested right to have an

11   (1981) 2 SCC 205
22
application for the grant or renewal of a lease dealt with in
                  a particular way, by applying particular provisions. In the
                  absence of any vested rights in anyone, an application for
                  a lease has necessarily to be dealt with according to the
                  rules in force on the date of the disposal of the application
                  despite the fact that there is a long delay since the making
                  of the application. We are, therefore, unable to accept the
                  submission of the learned counsel that applications for the
                  grant of renewal of leases made long prior to the date of
                  GOMs No. 1312 should be dealt with as if Rule 8-C did not
                  exist.”



The same principle was followed by another two judge Bench of this Court in
Howrah Municipal Corporation v Ganges Rope Co. Ltd.12
. Justice D M

Dharmadhikari speaking for the court held :
“17…The statutory provisions regulating sanction for
                  construction within the municipal area are intended to
                  ensure proper administration of the area and provide
                  proper civic amenities to it. The paramount considerations
                  of regulatory provisions for construction activities are
                  public interest and convenience. On the subject of
                  seeking sanction for construction, no vested right can be
                  claimed by any citizen divorced from public interest or
                  public convenience.”



This Court held that the provisions contained in the
Howrah Municipal

Corporation Act
1980 contemplate an express sanction before a person can be

allowed to construct or erect a building. Hence, in ordinary course, no vested

right is created merely by the submission of an application for sanction to

construct a building. Adverting to the decision in
Usman Gani J. Khatri of

Bombay v Cantonment Board13
, the Court held thus:
“30. This Court, thus, has taken a view that the Building
                  Rules or Regulations prevailing at the time of sanction
                  would govern the subject of sanction and not the Rules
12   (2004) 1 SCC 663
13   (1992) 3 SCC 455
23
and Regulations existing on the date of application for
                  sanction.”



In
Commissioner of Municipal Corporation, Shimla v Prem Lata Sood14,

Justice S B Sinha
speaking for a two judge Bench observed thus:
“30…even in the order of sanction passed in favour of the
                  respondents by the State, a condition was imposed that
                  before undertaking the development activities by way of
                  erection of the building, the respondents would take the
                  requisite sanction from the Municipal Corporation. Even if
                  such a condition had not been imposed, the provisions of
                  the
Municipal Corporation Act
, as noticed hereinbefore,
                  would operate.
36. It is now well settled that where a statute provides for
                  a right, but enforcement thereof is in several stages,
                  unless and until the conditions precedent laid down
                  therein are satisfied, no right can be said to have been
                  vested in the person concerned. The law operating in this
                  behalf, in our opinion is no longer res integra.”




The same view has been taken by a Bench of three judges of this Court in New

Delhi Municipal Council v Tanvi Trading and Credit Private Limited 15.Justice

J M Panchal speaking for the court held :
“39. It is well settled that the law for approval of the
                  building plan would be the date on which the approval is
                  granted and not the date on which the plans are
                  submitted. This is so in view of para 24 of the decision of
                  this Court in
Usman Gani J. Khatri v. Cantonment
                  Board
[(1992) 3 SCC 455] . It would not be out of place to
                  mention that on 7-2-2007, the Master Plan, 2021 has
                  been approved in which the LBZ guidelines have been
                  incorporated and since the plan submitted by the
                  respondents was not approved up to the date of coming
                  into force of Master Plan of 2021, the LBZ guidelines will
                  apply with full force to the plan submitted by the

14   (2007) 11 SCC 40
15   (2008) 8 SCC 765
24
respondents and the plan which is contrary to the LBZ
                  guidelines could not have been directed to be
                  sanctioned.”
26        Mr Rana Mukherjee, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the

respondent sought to make a distinction on the ground that this principle will

apply as regards regulatory aspects of the development regulations, not in regard

to the demand of Premium FSI charges.
We are unable to accept the contention simply because the demand on account

of Premium FSI charges arises upon the grant of planning permission to avail of

Premium FSI. The respondent, as the developer, is liable to pay the revised

charges which are applicable post 1 April 2012 when planning permission has

been granted. Learned counsel for the respondent also relied on the decision in
Union of India v Mahajan Industries Ltd.16
. The case is clearly distinguishable

since the judgment of this Court adverted to the position which was
laid down in
a

judgment of the Delhi High Court that the “crucial date” for calculating conversion

charges has to be the date of the receipt of the application for conversion.

Significantly, the counsel for the Union of India did not contest the correctness of

the view of the High Court in that regard. The factual situation in the present case

is clearly distinguishable.
27        For the above reasons, we allow these appeals in part by setting aside the

impugned judgment and order of the High Court insofar as it quashed the


16   (2005) 10 SCC 203
25
demand raised by the appellant on 22 August 2012 for the levy of Premium FSI

charges.
28    The appellant, in our view, was justified in demanding Premium FSI

charges at the revised rates and would be entitled to enforce its demands.

However, we maintain the order of the High Court insofar as the demand for I & A

charges is concerned.
29    The appeals are disposed of. There shall be no order as to costs.
…..…………..........................................J.
                                        [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]



                                        ..……..…………………………...............J.
                                        [Indira Banerjee]


New Delhi;
July 29, 2019
26