[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Peer Gulam Jilani vs Peer Gulam Naseer on 24 July, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2551
Author:
Ashok Bhushan
Bench:
Navin Sinha
,
Ashok Bhushan
1


                                                                          REPORTABLE
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             CIVIL APPEAL NOS.10770-10772 OF 2013

          PEER GULAM JILANI                                       ...APPELLANT(S)

                                               VERSUS

          PEER GULAM NASEER AND ORS.                              ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                          J U D G M E N T
ASHOK BHUSHAN,J.
These appeals have been filed against the judgment

          dated 05.07.2012 of the High Court of Rajasthan at

          Jaipur Bench dismissing three Second Appeals filed by

          the appellant by confirming the judgment and order of

          the First Appellate Court as well as of the trial court.
2.             Brief facts of the case giving rise to civil suit

          between the parties and these appeals need to be noted

          are:
2.1 In   the   year   1838      Khwaja    Haji    Muhammed

                             Najmuddeen    Sahib       founded    the   Dargah   in
Signature Not Verified
Fatehpur, District Sikar, Rajasthan. During
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2019.07.25
10:25:53 IST
Reason:
his lifetime, he nominated his son Maulana
2
Naseeruddeen Sahib as his successor to the

office of Sajjadah Nashin and Mutawalli of the

Dargah. Maulana Naseeruddeen Sahib during his

lifetime nominated Gulam Najmuddeen Sahib, who

was aged 3 years at that time as Sajjadah

Nashin   and      Mutawalli          after     him.     Gulam

Najmuddeen      Sahib       after    attaining       majority

nominated Gulam Sarwar Sahib as his successor

to the seat of Sajjadah Nashin and Mutawalli

of the Dargah. Gulam Sarwar Sahib became the

third Sajjadah Nashin and Mutawalli of the

Dargah. Gulam Sarwar Sahib while functioning

as   Sajjadah    Nashin      and     Mutawalli       framed   a

Constitution (Zabta) in the year 1932 of the

Dargah by laying down Rules for nomination of

Sajjadah Nashin and Mutawalli, for management

of Dargah and other Rules and Principles for

Dargah. Original Zabta was in Urdu which has

been filed as Ex.2 along with translated copy

in English and Hindi in the suit. Gulam Sarwar

Sahib, the third Sajjadah Nashin and Mutawalli

nominated    Nurul      Hasan       as   the   4th   Sajjadah
3
Nashin and Mutawalli during his lifetime by a

    Will dated 02.12.1951.
2.2 Nurul   Hasan,       the     4th    Sajjadah   Nashin   and

    Mutawalli got registered the Dargah in the

    Muslim Wakf Board of Rajasthan, copy of Zabta

    was also submitted at the time of registration

    of the Deed. The Zabta before being submitted

    in   the    Wakf     Board         for   registration   was

    acknowledged       by       4th    Sajjadah    Nashin   and

    Mutawalli, petitioner and other members of the

    Khandan. Fourth Sajjadah Nashin and Mutawalli,

    Nurul Hasan made declaration executing Will on

    12.09.1979 nominating his grandson (daughter’s

    son) - Gulam Naseer, the respondent No.1 to

    these      appeals,        as      Sajjadah    Nashin   and

    Mutawalli. The Will was also got registered on

    16.11.1979      at      Sub-Registrar,         Ajmer.   On
03.08.1982, 4th Sajjadah Nashin and Mutawalli

    passed away. Before his death, he also made

    declaration and confirmation of nomination in

    favour of respondent No.1.
4
2.3 After the death of 4th Sajjadah Nashin and

   Mutawalli    when   certain    disturbance       in   the

   management    of    Dargah    was    created    by    the

   appellant and some other persons, a Suit No.96

   of 1982 (Peer Gulam Naseer vs. Shri Abrar Ahmad

   and 10 others) was filed by the respondent

   through his guardian and father Maujam Ali.

   The   suit    was    filed     for    the      permanent

   injunction. A temporary injunction was granted

   in the suit. Interim injunction granted by the

   trial court although was set aside by the

   Appellate Court but ultimately was restored by

   the High Court on 28.10.1988 in Civil Revision

   Petition No. 657 of 1986. Against the judgment

   of the High Court, SLP(C)No.14030 of 1989 was

   filed, which was dismissed.
Review Petition
also came to be dismissed. Another Suit No. 12
of 1989(
Peer Gulam Jilani vs. Gulam Naseer
and

   05 others) was filed by the appellant praying

   for   permanent       injunction       against        the

   respondent.
5
2.4 Another Suit No.59 of 1986 (Gulam Naseer vs.

    Gulam Jilani and 23 others) was filed by the

    respondent. Suit No.96 of 1982 filed by the

    respondent No.1 was registered as Suit No.13

    of 1989 in the Court of District Judge.



2.5 The trial court decided all the three suits by

    a common judgment dated 17.04.2003. Suit No.96

    of   1982   filed   by   the   respondent    No.1   was

    decreed     and   defendants    of   the    suit    were

    restrained by way of permanent injunction.

    Suit No.96 of 1995 filed by the appellant for

    permanent injunction against the respondent

    was dismissed whereas Suit No.59 of 1986 filed

    by the respondent was decreed. The trial court

    upheld the nomination of the respondent by 4th

    Sajjadah Nashin and Mutawalli by declaration

    and Will dated 12.09.1979, declaration was

    held proved by the trial court. The trial court

    also held that the respondent No.1 was fully

    eligible to be nominated as Sajjadah Nashin

    and Mutawalli.
6
2.6 Aggrieved against the judgment of trial court

         dated 17.04.2003, the appellant filed three

         appeals under
Section 96
of the CPC, which

         appeals were heard and dismissed by the First

         Appellate    Court   vide   its    judgment        dated

         04.09.2004. Aggrieved against the judgment of

         the First Appellate Court dated 04.09.2004

         three   second   appeals    were    filed     by     the

         appellant, which were dismissed by the High

         Court   by    the    impugned      judgment        dated

         05.07.2012. The appellant aggrieved against

         the judgment of the High Court dismissing the

         three second appeals has come up in these

         appeals.
3.   We have heard Shri V.K. Shukla, learned senior

counsel appearing for the appellant. Smt. Aishwarya

Bhati, learned senior counsel, has appeared for the

respondent.
4.   Learned counsel for the appellant submits that

affairs of Dargah are to be managed by the Constitution
7
(Zabta), English translation of which                   is filed as

Annexure-P1 in these appeals. He submits that as per

Rules   1   and   2   of   the    Zabta,     Sajjadah    Nashin   and

Mutawalli has to be from the family. The respondent

No.1 does not belong to the family of the founder of

the Wakf and he being daughter’s son of 4th Sajjadah

Nashin & Mutawalli, Nurul Hasan cannot be treated to

be from the family and could not have been appointed.

It is submitted that the appellant being brother of

Nurul Hasan Sahib, 4th Sajjadah Nashin and Mutawalli,

he is from the family of the founder and was accepted

as Sajjadah Nashin and Mutawalli by Murids. He submits

that the use of words “Sagir Sinn” in Rule 2, which

means minor son fully re-enforces the submission of the

appellant    that     it   is    only    male   descendant   in   the

family, who can be nominated as Sajjadah Nashin and

Mutawalli. It is submitted that the respondent No.1 was

not being eligible for the appointment Sajjadah Nashin

and Mutawalli, all the courts below committed error in

not appointing the appellant as Sajjadah Nashin and

Mutawalli, and in holding that the respondent No.1 was

eligible    for     appointment         as   Sajjadah    Nashin   and
8
Mutawalli.
5.   Learned counsel for the respondent refuting the

submissions of the learned counsel for the appellant

submits   that     all    the     three    Courts    have   correctly

interpreted      the     Zabta.    It     is    submitted   that     the

appellant     is       incorrectly        interpreting      the    word

‘Khandan’ used in Zabta. The word ‘Khandan’ is an

expansive     word,      which     shall       clearly   include     the

respondent No.1 in the ‘Khandan’. It is submitted that

the word ‘Khandan’ used in Zabta refers to a spiritual

Sect ‘Silsila’ and all those who were included in the

spiritual Sect are eligible for appointment as Sajjadah

Nashin and Mutawalli. It is further submitted that the

respondent both by being daughter’s son as well as from

lineage of Shahabuddeen Sahib great grandfather of the

respondent No.1, who was real brother of Khwaja Haji

Najamuddeen, the founder of Dargah is                     included in

‘Khandan’.    The      restricted       meaning     of   ‘Khandan’   as

sought to be given by the appellant is incorrect. It

is, further, submitted that the interpretation of word

‘Sagir Sinn’ as occurring in Rule 2 of Zabta is again
9
incorrect. It is submitted that the word ‘Sagir Sinn’

occurring in     Zabta has been wrongly translated in

English as minor son. The word ‘Sinn’ is a Persian word

which means ‘age, year’ and does not mean son as sought

to be interpreted by the appellant. He submits that

Rule 2 meant that Sajjadah Nashin and Mutawalli can

declare on his internal spiritual light any person of

minor age as his successor. The word ‘Sagir Sinn’ never

meant as minor son. It is submitted that all the Courts

below have rightly interpreted the Zabta and there is

no merit in the submission of the appellant.
6.   We have heard learned counsel for the parties and

perused the records.
7.   The only argument which has been raised before us

for consideration by the appellant is alleged mis-

interpretation    of   Zabta   by   Courts   below.   Learned

counsel for the appellant interpreting Rules of Zabta

contends that person to be nominated as Sajjadah Nashin

and Mutawalli has to be from family of founder and

further he has to be a lineal descendant from founder.
10
The ineligibility of the respondent is canvassed on the

ground that he was daughter’s son of 4th Sajjadah Nashin

and Mutawalli, who nominated him and he is not a son

as lineal descendant. The submission is that he does

not belong to ‘Khandan’ of founder.             The trial court

has framed several issues in suits which were decided

by it. The Issue No.7 which relates to the submission

raised before us is as follows:
“7) Whether Nurul Hasan has no authority to
        nominate his successor, who is a stranger to
        the family ?”
8.   The    pedigree of   founder       of Dargah    was on   the

record. Gulam Naseer’s father, Maujam Ali traced his

lineage from Shahabuddeen, the real brother of Khwaja

Haji Najamuddeen, founder of the Dargah. The trial

court      while   considering        the   Issue   No.7,   after

considering the evidence on record including the oral

evidence returned the following findings in paragraph

Nos. 89, 93 and 98:
“89…………It is not mentioned in the Japta that
        the succession to the office of Sajjadah
        Nashin and Mutawalli should be from the
        descendants or Haji Najmuddin Saheb or
        Maulana Naseerudin Saheb rather it is
        mentioned in the Japta that a trained person
11
of this “Khandan” should be appointed to this
post. The further, reference of the words
“Muntkhib”, “Bait” and “Khilafat” in the
Japta clarifies the position that the word
“Khandan” does not refer strictly to the
family, as it is used for the blood
relations. But the “Khandan” means “sect”.
No other conclusion can follow from the
interpretation of the worse “Muntkhib”,
“Bhait” and “Khilafat”. I can not accept the
interpretation of the word “Khandan” to be
the family succession, as it has been
disclosed by Gulam Jilani DW1. If the
intention of the maker of the Japta was that
the succession to this office shall be
hereditable, no one prevented him from making
a clear provision in this regard.
93. The use of the words “Sulemani Sect” and
“Silsila” in the Japta points out that its
maker never intended to make succession to
this office hereditable. However, it does not
mean that the descendants of Hazi Najmuddin
or Maulana Naseerudin have been totally
excluded for being chosen as the Sajjadah
Nashin and Mutawalli. Their descendant may
also be nominated to this office. In
nutshell, the proposed Sajadah-Nashin and
Mutawalli may be a stranger or he may be a
descendant from the founder of the Wakf in
question. The condition is that he should
confirm to the standards mentioned in the
Regulations discussed in the Japta and the
outgoing Sajjadah Nashin and Mutawalli should
confer Khilafat on him by doing the Bait on
the hand and he should also nominate/declare
him as his successor after his death because
it is supposed to continue the spiritual
line, commonly known as “SILSILA”.
98. Let us now proceed on another assumption
12
that only a descendant from Khawaja Najmuddin
     or Maulana Nasiruddin can be appointed to
     this post and this stranger has no role to
     play in Gulam Naseer PW2 has stated that his
     father is the descendant of Shahabuddin, who
     was the real brother of Khwaja Najmuddin,
     Maujam Ali PW1 has also confirmed his
     testimony. In this connection two Sajras
     Ex.101 and 102 have been placed on record.
In this connection Gulam Jilani DW1 has
     stated that:
“Ahmad baksh saheb ke pote hone ke
         nate vadi unke putra najimuddin saheb
         va unke pote maulana Nasruddin saheb
         ke bhi pote lagte hai”


     Gulam Jilani DW1 has also stated that the
     property rights of the descendants from one
     grandfather are different but the descendants
     constitute one “Khandan”. The above admission
     from the mouth of defendant clearly show that
     the plaintiff also belongs to the “Khandan”
     of Najmuddin Saheb and Maulana Naseeruddin
     Saheb.”
9.   We may extract the relevant portion of Rules 1 and

2 of Zabta on which much emphasis was given by the

learned counsel for the appellant. Relevant part of

Rule 1 is as follows:
“The Sajjadah Nashin and Mutawalli of this
     abode (Dargah) of exalted highness ought to
     be a trained person from the line of this
     family and formally entered into Bai-
     at(murid) in this very spiritual Sect
     (silsila) and should be enlightened with the
     knowledge   and  sanctity   and  also   well
13
acquainted with and acting upon the mystic
     path as propagated by the Sulemani Najmi
     family so that he may accordingly educate to
     those who are descrous to search the truth
     and believes himself to be a trustee of the
     poor and the innocent. In case of any
     negligence he shall be answerable to God.”
10. Relevant portion of Rule 2 on which learned counsel

for the appellant has given emphasis is to the following

effect:
“If the Sajjadah Nashin by virtue of
     revealing his internal spiritual light
     declares any minor son as his successor, in
     that case till attaining majority and
     knowledge,”
11. Rule 1 of the Zabta cannot be read in a manner as

suggested by the counsel for the appellant. Had the

Zabta intended to lay down line of succession through

lineal    descendants,    it    would   have   been    clearly

provided. The succession to the Sajjadah Nashin and

Mutawalli   is   not   hereditary   succession   but    it   is

selection by Sajjadah Nashin and Mutawalli. Following

portion of Rule 1 makes it clear:
“It shall be obligatory upon the Sajjadah
     Nashin and Mutawalli to select his successor
     during his life time keeping in view the
     conditions prescribed in the aforesaid lines
14
so that no faction or dispute arises
     thereafter. If the Sahib-e-Sajjadah expires
     before such a selection, it would then be the
     duty of the main members of this venerable
     family and virtuous murids to select such a
     person who is gifted with the aforesaid high
     qualities and thereby to entrust him with all
     the affairs of the Dargah, and the rights of
     such a Sajjadah Nashin would be the same as
     those of his predecessor-Sajjadah Nashin and
     in case there are several such qualified
     persons the decision will be taken in
     accordance with the customs and traditions
     prevailing in this Dargah since the very
     beginning.”
12. The   Zabta   of   Dargah    refers   to   spiritual   Sect

“Silsila” and the word family (Khandan)had not been

used in the limited sense as sought to be contended by

the appellant.
13. Rule 1 of the Zabta cannot be read as laying down

any hereditary succession to the office of Sajjadah

Nashin and Mutawalli nor Rule 1 can be read to lay down

succession to lineal descendants as sought to contend.
The respondent who was daughter’s son of 4th Sajjadah

Nashin and Mutawalli and who has also traced his lineage

from Shahabuddin real brother of founder of Dargah,

cannot be said to be person not belonging to ‘Khandan’.
15
All the three Courts below have rightly held him to be

fully eligible. Furthermore, Sajjadah Nashin who has

been given right to select his successor, his selection

and nomination has also to be given weight. There is no

dispute between the parties that even a person of minor

age can be selected as Sajjadah Nashin and Mutawalli.
14. Coming to the second submission of the learned

counsel for the appellant that use of word ‘Sagir Sinn’

in Rule 2 means ‘minor son’. There are two reasons due

to which this submission cannot be accepted. Firstly,

in the Courts below appellant never raised an issue or

contention that word ‘Sagir Sinn’ used in Rule 2 means

‘minor son’. When no such issue or submission was

raised,   appellant   cannot    be   allowed    to   raise   this

submission in this Court for the first time.
15. Secondly, to satisfy ourselves, we have also looked

into the Hindi translation, which is actual translation

of Urdu words in the Zabta. In the counter-affidavit,

the   respondent   has   brought     on   the    record      Hindi

translation which is in Devnagri translation of actual
16
Urdu words. The word used is “Sagir Sinn”. The word

“Sagir Sinn” is a combination of two words ‘Sagir Sinn’.

Word ‘Sinn’ is a Persian word. In English Persian

Dictionary    by   A.N.    Wollaston,     word    age    has   been

mentioned     as   ‘Sinn’.   Following    is     stated   in   the

Dictionary:
“                            ”


16. In      another       Persian-English        Dictionary      by
S. Steingass one of the meanings to the Persian word

‘sinn’   is    year,      age,   period    of    life.     Various

combination of other different words using word ‘sinn’

has also been defined like ‘sinni balugh, sinni tamiz,

sinni shaikhukhiyat to the following effect:
“...sinn, A tooth; nib of a pen; an
     indentation; a horn; year, age, period of
     life; a wild bull; greedy eating; name of a
     mountain near Madinah; also of a place sinni
     balugh(balughat, taklif), Age of puberty,
     mature age;- sinni tamiz(tamyiz, shu'ur), The
     age of discretion;- sinni shabab, Youth;-
     sinni shaikhukhiyat, Mature age; old age;-
     sinn u sal, Age, (many) years.”
17. The word ‘Sagir Sinn’ also gives the meaning of

“minor age”. In no manner the word “Sagir Sinn” can be
17
read as minor son as contended by the appellant.
18. All the three Courts have not committed any error

in reading the Zabta and coming to the conclusion that

respondent was eligible to be nominated as Sajjadah

Nashin and Mutawalli. We do not find any merit in these

appeals which are accordingly dismissed.
......................J.
                                   ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )



                               ......................J.
                                   ( NAVIN SINHA )
New Delhi,
July 24, 2019.