[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Lucknow Development Authority Vice ... vs Gopal Das (D) Thr.Lrs. on 24 July, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 4317, 2019 (8) SCC 172, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 715, (2019) 137 ALL LR 225, (2019) 203 ALLINDCAS 143, (2019) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 582, (2019) 9 SCALE 800, (2020) 146 REVDEC 326, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 2985
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
L. Nageswara Rao
REPORTABLE

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5820 OF 2019
            (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 10151 OF 2014)


LUCKNOW DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY &
ANR.                                                        .....APPELLANT(S)

                                         VERSUS

GOPAL DAS (DECEASED) THROUGH LRs &
ORS.                                                     .....RESPONDENT(S)




                               JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
Leave granted.
2)       The     appellant-Lucknow    Development   Authority1   is   aggrieved

         against the judgment and order passed by the Division Bench of

         Lucknow Bench of the Allahabad High Court on January 15, 2014

         whereby the order dated July 29, 2011 passed by LDA was

         quashed.       The appellants were also made liable to pay costs of

         Rs.1,00,000/- with the direction to recover the costs from the

         authorities who have been instrumental in passing the impugned

         order.
1    for short, ‘LDA’
Page 1 of 8
3)       The facts leading to the present appeal are that LDA acquired total

         land measuring 168.592 hectares (666 Bigha, 7 Biswa, 8 Biswansi,

         8 Kachwansi) vide notification dated November 12, 1981 under
Section 4
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 for development of

         Sitapur Road City Extension Scheme for residential purposes.

         Notification under
Section 6
read with
Section 17
was issued on

         December 3, 1981 and the award was published on January 15,

         1986.
4)       The land of the respondents measuring 1.200 hectares forming

         part of land acquired was sought to be released from acquisition

         from the State Government under Section 17 of the Uttar Pradesh

         Urban Planning and Development Act, 19732.               The land was

         released from acquisition on May 23, 2011 whereby an order of

         restoration of land in question of Khasra Nos. 416 and 417 was

         passed in favour of the respondents along with an order of

         payment of development fee in terms of
Section 17
of the Act.

         The      respondents   were   directed   to   deposit   an   amount   of

         Rs.1,57,22,056/- within one week being Rs.1,38,780/- as the cost

         of acquisition and Rs.1,55,83,276/- as the amount of development

         fee vide separate letter dated July 29, 2011. It is the said order

         which has been set aside by the High Court vide order impugned in

         the present appeal. The High Court held as under:
2    for short, ‘Act’
Page 2 of 8
“33. In view of the aforesaid interpretation of word,
            "development", it shall be obligatory on the part of the
            development authorities like LDA in the present case, to
            make some development in accordance to statutory
            mandate over the land and its vicinity to make it entitle to
            impose development charges in terms of proviso of sub-
section (1) of
Section 17
of the Act. Further, the
            development charges co-relate with the expenditure
            incurred with regard to development activities. The
            development activities should be in the vicinity where
            citizens' plots, flats or houses exist. In the present case,
            from the lay out plan and material on record, it appears
            that no development activities have been done towards
            west side of the railway line. Whatever development has
            been done, it seems to have been done in the Sector-A of
            the Scheme towards eastern side of railway line. Neither
            any material has been brought on record nor there is any
            pleading on record that electricity, sewer line, road
            constructed by the LDA is utilized by the petitioner. There is
            no material on record which may prove that electricity
            connection has also been provided to the petitioner's
            premises from the infrastructure of the LDA. National
            Highway No.24 is the old road connecting Lucknow and
            Sitapur and it does not seem to be part of the development
            project of the LDA.
34. …Nothing has been brought on record to establish the
            expenditure incurred on development work done over the
            land in dispute or in its close vicinity in terms of
Section 8
and
9
of the Act from which the petitioner may be
            benefited. In absence of any benefit provided to the
            petitioner by the development work done by the
            development authority or the Lucknow Development
            Authority as the case may be, the petitioner or a citizen
            may not be subjected to payment of development charges.”
5)   Such    development     charges    at   the   time   of   restoration   are

     contemplated in terms of proviso to
Section 17(1)
of the Act, which

     reads as under:
“17. Compulsory acquisition of land.-(1) If in
                 the opinion of the State Government, any land is
                 required for the purpose of development, or for any
Page 3 of 8
other purpose, under this Act, the State Government
               may acquire such land under the
Provisions of
               the Land Acquisition Act,1894
:
Provided that any person, from whom any land is so
               acquired, may after the expiration of a period of five
               years room the date of such acquisition apply to the
               State Government for restoration of that land to him
               on the ground that the land has not been utilised
               within the period for the purpose, for which it was
               acquired and if the State Government is satisfied to
               that effect it shall order restoration of the land to him
               on re-payment of the charges which were incurred in
               connection with the acquisition together with interest
               at the rate of twelve per cent per annum and such
               development charges, if any, as may have been
               incurred after acquisition.
(2) Where any land has been acquired by the State
               Government, that Government may, after it has taken
               possession of the land transfer the land to the
               Authority or any local authority for the purpose for
               which the land has been acquired on payment by
               Authority or the local Authority of the compensation
               awarded under that Act and of the charges incurred by
               the Government in connection with the acquisition.”
6)   Learned counsel for the appellants submits that the land in

     question is 138575.25 sq. feet i.e. 12878.741 sq. meters and is

     situated between railway line of Aishbagh-Mailani Section and

     National Highway No. 24. Since the land in question is part of a

     planned scheme of LDA, all necessary external infrastructural

     developments like construction of road, electricity, water and sewer

     lines have been made available in the area. It is also pointed out

     that development under the Act means development of the entire

     area as a whole and not only the land of the one or two

     landowners.   The land in question is part of Master Plan and the
Page 4 of 8
development of the area cannot be seen in piecemeal.                   In the

impugned order before the High Court, the competent authority

has recorded the following facts:
“11. …Under the scheme of Sitapur City Extension Scheme
      in question, the land admeasuring 168.529 hect. was
      acquired in the year 1981.           This land is completely
      developed land and under this land approx.. 97.1% of the
      land is planned land. All the public facilities like Roads,
      Electricity, Water, Sewer etc. has been made available over
      this land by the authority. In between Railway Line and
      National Highways there is total 34-1-0-0 bigha land which
      is covered with road (National Highway), hence it comes
      within the category of developed land. Since before, the
      facilities of roads, electricity and water are available here.
      The total acquired land except 19-6-0-0 bigha has been
      allotted. However, the land in question is reserved for
      future development, and any decision in this regard are not
      available in the record. The land in question comes under
      the scheme of Sitapur City Extension Scheme. Any zonal
      Plan of land situated in between Railway Line and National
      Highway is not approved, but by clubbing this area, the
      “Road Network Plan” of complete scheme in which all the
      sectors have been shown is approved. The aforesaid plan
      exists at present and there are no necessity to renew the
      lay-out plan of Schemes of the Authority.
12. …In accordance to Report of the Authority, approx. 34
      Bigha land between National Highway Lucknow Sitapur
      Road and Railway Line has been acquired which is an
      Pattinuma, and out of which 15 Bigha land has been
      allotted and approx. 19 Bigha land is remain as it is. The
      land of the petitioner Shri Gopal Das is included in this 19
      Bigha land and out of this aforesaid 19 Bigha land, over the
      land of 12 Bigha there are personal buildings etc. are
      existed being the encroachment. In this way when the land
      of the petitioner has not been planned and has not been
      allotted and in part of the land his paint business is
      running, then it does not reveal justified in any manner
      that the land has been used by the Lucknow Development
      Authority. Because the land in question of petitioner has
      been acquired by the Lucknow Development Authority for
      the use of residential provisions, but the same has not
      been used for the said provisions. Therefore on the basis
Page 5 of 8
of all the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the balance of
          convenience is revealed in favour of the petitioner.
Therefore, in such circumstances, the transfer of land in
          question is to be considered in favour of petitioner under
Section 17
of the Uttar Pradesh Urban Planning and
          Development Act, 1973.”
7)   The learned counsel for the appellants submits that the land in

     question is situated between railway line and National Highway,

     which is measuring 34 Bighas, out of which 15 Bighas has been

     allotted and remaining 19 Bighas of land including 12 Bighas of the

     respondents has not been allotted. It is the said averment made in

     Para 15 which was taken into consideration by the High Court and

     returned a finding that the development charges could not be

     claimed as there is no development work on the land of the

     respondents. It is the said finding which is sought to be supported

     by Mr. V.K. Garg, learned senior counsel appearing for the

     respondents.
8)   Learned counsel for the respondents pointed out that in respect of

     some other land, part of the same acquisition has been released in

     terms of Section 24 of the Fair Compensation and Transparency in

     Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.

     Therefore, the respondents cannot be treated in a discriminatory

     manner.
9)   We do not find that the findings recorded by the High Court are

     sustainable in law.   As per the averments made in the counter
Page 6 of 8
affidavit filed before the High Court and also in the impugned

     order, it is stated that 97.1% of the total land acquired is planned

     land.   Small portion of 19 Bighas including the land of the

     respondents has not been planned for the reason that there were

     buildings on such area. Therefore, when the appellants state that

     the land of the respondents has not been planned or allotted is in

     the context that the area has not been plotted. It does not mean

     that the appellants have not carried out any development on the

     land in question.       It is not some part of the land acquired is

     required to be taken into consideration, to find out as to whether

     any development has been carried out in the land acquired. The

     findings of the High Court that the land in question or the vicinity

     has not been developed is not the correct reading of the impugned

     order passed as it has been clearly stated that 97.1% of the land

     acquired has been developed. The development is to be examined

     in respect of the land acquired.      It is categorical stand of the

     appellants that they have constructed road, provided electricity,

     water and laid sewer lines and, therefore, the respondents cannot

     avoid payment of development charges while seeking restoration

     of land in terms of
Section 17
of the Act.
10) In view thereof, we find that the judgment passed by the High

     Court setting aside the claim of development charges is not

     sustainable.   Consequently, the appeal is allowed and the said

     finding is set aside.
Page 7 of 8
11) We find that the order quantifying the development charges of

     Rs.1,57,22,056/- was raised without giving any opportunity of

     hearing   to   the   respondents.        Consequently,          the    demand

     letter/order dated July 29, 2011 is set aside with liberty to the

     appellants to communicate the amount incurred on acquisition and

     development charges in accordance with law. It shall be open to

     the respondents to seek remedy, if any, under the
Right to Fair

     Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation

     and Resettlement Act, 2013
in accordance with law.
.............................................J.
                                                      (L. NAGESWARA RAO)




                                         .............................................J.
                                                             (HEMANT GUPTA)

NEW DELHI;
JULY 24, 2019.
Page 8 of 8