[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S R K Industries Unit Ii Llp vs S.C/S.T Shipbreakers Association on 16 July, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2631
Author:
R. F. Nariman
Bench:
Surya Kant
,
Sanjiv Khanna
,
R. F. Nariman
‘REPORTABLE’
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5609 OF 2019
                               (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 27765 of 2018)


                   M/s. R. K. INDUSTRIES (UNIT-II) LLP                         Appellant(s)

                                                        VERSUS

                   S.C/S.T SHIPBREAKERS ASSOCIATION & ORS.                     Respondent(s)



                                                  J U D G M E N T
R. F. NARIMAN, J.
Leave granted.
The challenge in the instant appeal is by a person who

                   was not a party before the High Court.                  The reason why we

                   have    heard   Mr.     Shekhar      Naphade,   learned     senior    counsel

                   appearing on behalf of the appellant, and why we have given

                   his    client   leave    to    appeal,    is    only   to    set   right   the

                   interpretation to The Gujarat Maritime Board (Conditions &

                   Procedures      for    granting       permission   for      Utilizing      Ship

                   Recycling       Plots)        Ship     Recycling       Regulations,        2015

                   (hereinafter referred to as ‘2015 Regulations’ for brevity).
The skeletal facts necessary to decide this case are

                   as follows:
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
Date: 2019.07.27
10:38:12 IST
Reason:                    In February, 2017, the Gujarat Maritime Board issued a

                   tender for auction of eight vacant plots at Alang-Sosiya
1
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5609 OF 2019
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 27765 of 2018)

Ship    Recycling      Yard,       District      Bhavnagar,     for    the    reasons

best known to it, as it chose to do so despite the fact that

on this date, 20 vacant plots were available for auction.

Considering the 2015 Regulations supra, the Gujarat Maritime

Board    decided      that     out    of     these     plots,   four     should   be

reserved for ST category, two for SC category and two would

go to the General category.                   Respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3

before    us,    viz.       the    S.C./S.T.       Shipbreakers        Association,

filed Special Civil Application No. 5509 of 2017 before the

High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad on 14.03.2017 in which it

challenged the allocation of plots to SC and ST candidates

stating       that    the     Regulations,        if    properly      read,    would

necessarily mean that the reservation of 14 per cent and 7

per    cent    for    ST    category       and    SC   category       respectively,

should be of the total number of plots that are available

and not merely those that are sought to be auctioned.                             If

this were to be so, then all the eight plots would have to

be reserved for SC and ST candidates inasmuch as the total

reservation quota as a percentage of the total number of

plots    had    not    been       reached.       On    22.04.2017,      the   tender

notice issued by the Gujarat Maritime Board was stayed by

the     High    Court,       and     by    the     impugned      judgment      dated

16.04.2018, the High Court held that not only would all the

eight plots that were subject matter of the auction notice

be reserved for the ST and SC candidates but that, even for
2
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5609 OF 2019
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 27765 of 2018)

the remaining number, i.e., if 20 plots were to be taken as

a block, all 20 would have to be reserved for ST and SC

candidates inasmuch as the quota for these candidates, going

by the percentage of total plots, had not been reached.                In

this view of the matter, the High Court quashed the tender

notice and directed the Gujarat Maritime Board as follows:
“12. In view of the above and for the reasons stated
    above, Special Civil Application No. 5509 of 2017 is
    allowed.   It is held and directed that respondent
    GMB shall make reservation of 7% plots belonging to
    SC Category and 14% of plots to ST Category out
    of /considering the Total Plots and not Vacant Plots
    as on today (as contended on behalf of the GMB).
The   respondent    GMB    is   also   directed   to
    simultaneously hold the auction of all the vacant
    plots and apply the reservation as directed herein
    above i.e., including all the vacant plots bigger
    size   plots   and   /   or   smaller  size   plots.
Consequently, the impugned tender at Annexure F
    (collectively) issued by the respondent no. 2 in
    February 2018 for 8 plots at Alang-Sosiya Ship
    Recycling Yards is hereby quashed and set aside and
    the respondent GMB is directed to invite fresh
    tenders/bids in light of the present judgment and
    order. The said exercise shall be completed at the
    earliest but not later than six months from today.
    Rule is made absolute to the aforesaid extent.    No
    costs.”


        Shri Shekhar Naphade, learned senior counsel appearing

on behalf of the appellant herein, has attempted to argue

his peculiar facts before us in which he sought to challenge

the fact that the plot licensed to him has itself been set

up for auction, together with the fact that since he wishes

to amalgamate with the neighbouring plot, this amalgamation

would   become   impossible    if   all   vacant   plots   were   to   be
3
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5609 OF 2019
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 27765 of 2018)

reserved for ST and SC categories, as was required by the

impugned judgment.            We may state that we are not going into

the    individual       facts       of    Shri     Naphade’s       client’s       case.

Suffice it is to state that we are granting his client a

limited permission to file a special leave petition against

the impugned judgment challenging its correctness.                              It will

be    open    for    him,     in    separate       proceedings,         to    challenge

action taken against his client by the Gujarat Maritime Bard

up to date, including action taken by the Maritime Board

pursuant to our judgment.                  All contentions in this behalf

are left open both to his client as well as to the Gujarat

Maritime Board.
Shri        Naphade        has     assailed        the         High     Court’s

interpretation         of    the    2015        Regulations       by    painstakingly

taking       us   though      the    history          of   various       regulations,

pointing out the difference between the earlier regulations

and the present Regulation, and ultimately pointing out that

clause   5.4      of   the    2015       Regulations       must    be    read    as   an

adjunct to clauses 5.1 and 5.2.                   As a result of this, clause

5.4   cannot      be   read    torn       out    of    context     along      with    the

definition of “plot” contained in the Regulations so as to

arrive at the result arrived at by the High Court.                              In his

submission, therefore, having regard to the fact that the

earlier Regulation of 2006 specifically spoke of reservation

“out of total plots” which language is missing from the
4
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5609 OF 2019
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 27765 of 2018)

current Regulation, it is clear that the context of the

current Regulation requires reservation only of the plots

that are sought to be auctioned.
To   this,        Shri    Gursharan      Virk,    learned         counsel

appearing for the Gujarat Maritime Board, argued that the

issue today is really academic inasmuch as Shri Naphade’s

client should not be allowed permission to file the special

leave petition at all.           The Board has since taken a decision

to follow the Gujarat High Court’s judgment.                  He also argued

before us that if the Gujarat High Court’s judgment were not

followed, incongruous results might follow.                   He gave us an

example,    by   which,     assuming     that   only    three     plots     were

vacant and were auctioned, it would be impossible to work

out a reservation of 14 per cent and 7 per cent of these

three plots.       So, obviously, what is meant by reservation is

reservation only out of the total plots.                     Even otherwise,

according to him, the appellant ought not to be granted any

relief given the fact that he has woken only at this late

stage.
We   have    also    heard    Mr.     Rajendra    Singhvi,        learned

counsel appearing for respondent Nos. 1-3, who has argued

that the tender notice of February, 2017, could be said to

fall   between     two    stools.       It   could    only   be   upheld    if,

according   to     him,    the   High   Court’s      judgment     were    right,

because it is only if reservation is taken of total plots –
5
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5609 OF 2019
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 27765 of 2018)

six out of eight plots would be reserved.              If the contrary

construction    is    adopted,   it   is     obvious   that,   at   best,

perhaps, one plot could be reserved.             The Gujarat Maritime

Board,   therefore,    though    it   ought    to   have   reserved   all

eight, has really followed the principle of reservation from

out of total number of plots, which is the correct principle

to be followed in the facts of this case.
Having heard learned counsel for all the parties, we

may first go to The Gujarat Maritime Board (Conditions and

Procedure for granting permission for Utilising Shipbreaking

Plots) Regulations, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as 1994

Regulations’ for brevity).        In these Regulations, paragraph

9 laid down reservation for ST and SC candidates as follows:
“9. Out of plots which were vacant as on 3 rd August,
    1992 or fell vacant thereafter, or any new plot which
    is developed thereafter 7 per cent of these plots
    shall be reserved for granting permission to Co-
    operative Societies all of whose members belong to
    Scheduled Castes, and 14% plots shall be reserved for
    Co-operative Societies all of whose members belong to
    Scheduled Tribes.      All the terms and conditions
    specified in the Government of Gujarat, Roads &
    Buildings Department Vernaculars Resolution No. 2 LPW-
    1290-25435-GH dated 3rd August, 1992 shall be treated
    as forming part of these Regulations ---------------
    Scheduled Caste/ Scheduled Tribe applicants included
    in the list from category ---- in Regulation 4, shall
    be permitted to utilize plots on reservation basis on
    fulfillment of ------- terms and conditions specified
    in those Regulations and in the Schedule hereto and
    thereafter,   --------   other  applicants  of   SC/ST
    categories, permission for utilizing the plots shall
    be granted on tender-cum-auction basis.”


         A perusal of paragraph 9 of the 1994 Regulations
6
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5609 OF 2019
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 27765 of 2018)

would show that reservations were to be based only on three

categories     of    plots   viz.,    those      that   were    vacant    on

03.08.1992; or those that fell vacant thereafter; or any new

plot which is developed thereafter.                 A reading of these

Regulations would show, therefore, that reservation at this

juncture, was not from out of the total number of plots but

only of the three categories mentioned hereinabove.
The 1994 Regulations were supplanted by the Gujarat

Maritime     Board   (Conditions     and       Procedures    for   granting

permission    for    Utilising   Shipbreaking       Plots)     Regulations,

2006   (hereinafter     referred     to   as    ‘2006   Regulations’     for

brevity) by clause 9 by which reservations for plots were

made as follows:
“9. Out of total plots 7 per cent of these plots
    shall be reserved for granting permission to Co-
    operative Societies of all of whose members belong to
    Scheduled Castes, and 14% plots shall be reserved for
    Co-operative Societies of all of whose members belong
    to Scheduled Tribes.    All the terms and conditions
    specified in the Government of Gujarat, Roads &
    Buildings Department Vernacular Resolution No. LPW-
    1290-25435-GH dated 3rd August, 1992 and Government of
    Gujarat, Port & Fisheries Department Resolution No.
    WKS-1099-CM, MLA 82 (17) GH dated 4/1/2000 shall be
    treated as forming part of these Regulations.

    Explanation for the purpose of these Regulations
    before calculating 7% for the Co-operative Societies
    belonging to the members of Scheduled Caste and 14%
    for the Cooperative Societies belonging to the
    members of Scheduled Tribe categories, the Chief
    Executive Officer & Vice Chairman shall reserve 10
    plots for granting permission for ship recycling
    activities on ship to ship basis as provided in
    Regulation herein above.”
7
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5609 OF 2019
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 27765 of 2018)

       The    scheme   of    these   Regulations    would   clearly   show

that there has been a vital change in the reservation policy

insofar as vacant plots to be auctioned are concerned.                  The

vital change is contained in the opening words of clause 9

which states “’Out of total plots’………………………………….”

       This     situation     obtained    until     the     present   2015

Regulations were enacted, substituting the 2006 Regulations.

By these Regulations, a new Chapter 5 was inserted.               What is

relevant for our purpose are paragraphs 5.1 to 5.4 which

read as under:
“5.1 The Chief Executive Officer may grant permission
          to use plots for ship recycling in respect of-
          a. a plot which is newly developed
          b. a plot which his vacant
          c. a plot which has fallen vacant on account of
              cancellation/termination of the permission.

      5.2 Procedure : All such plots, shall be offered for
          use for ship recycling after following the
          procedure of Tender-cum-Auction.
5.3 Tender-cum-Auction:
The upset price for tender cum auction will be
          Rs.540/- per sqm per year.       The terms and
          conditions of the tender document shall be fixed
          by the Board.
5.4 Allocation for the Reserved Categories:
7% and 14% of the plots shall be reserved for
          Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes respectively
          for granting permission for utilization of ship
          recycling plots.”


       The bone of contention between the parties is, what is

the   meaning    of    the   expression   “the     plots”   contained    in

paragraph 5.4.         The High Court has held that “the plots”
8
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5609 OF 2019
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 27765 of 2018)

must be read with the definition of “plot” contained in the

Regulations, which is contained in paragraph 15 as follows:
15.“Plot” means piece of land adjacent to waterfront
          or otherwise earmarked by the Board for the
          purpose of ship recycling having dimensions
          specified in the permission letter.     This shall
          include existing plot or plots that may be
          developed in future within the ship recycling yard
          under the Gujarat Maritime Board.”


        If this interpretation is to be accorded, then the

High Court is right in stating that the expression “the

plots” would include total plots and not merely plots to be

auctioned.
It   is   important           to    first   notice     the    context   of

paragraph 5.4 of the 2015 Regulations.                  The marginal note of

clause 5.4 indicates the drift of the provision as follows:
“Allocation for the reserved categories”.
If one would ask oneself the question as to what is to

be allocated, the answer is to be found in clause 5.1 and

5.2.     What is to be allocated, therefore, is only plots

which are newly developed; plots which are already vacant;
and    plots      which        have        fallen   vacant     on     account   of

cancellation/termination of the permission.                         Clause 5.2 is

even more explicit in its language.                   In that it states “All

such    plots”    are     to    be     auctioned.       Once    clause    5.4   is

interpreted keeping in view the context of clauses 5.1 and

5.2, it is obvious that the expression “the plots” contained
9
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5609 OF 2019
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 27765 of 2018)

in clause 5.4 has reference only to plots that are to be

auctioned, which are mentioned in clauses 5.1 and 5.2.                       Once

this is so, the expression “plots” must take colour from the

context   in    which    it    is   placed.     Indeed,     the    definition

clause    is    itself      expressly      subject   to    context      to    the

contrary.
This being the case, it is a little difficult to agree

with the High Court that reservation is to take place only

out of the total plots and not the plots to be auctioned.

In   point     of   fact,     the   2015   Regulations     are     an   express

departure from the earlier Regulations of 2006, which, in

turn, were a departure from the earlier Regulations of 1994.

The argument of Mr. Virk that if only three vacant plots

were to be auctioned, reservation of 21% of this figure

would be impossible is an argument which flies in the face

of the express language of the 2015 Regulations, coupled

with the fact that the preceding 2006 Regulations, which had

the words “Out of the total plots…….” is missing in the 2015

Regulations.        In the case of reservation of vacant plots of

a smaller number that are put to auction, it is for the

Board to work the reservation policy contained in the 2015

Regulations     in   a   non-arbitrary       fashion,     giving    effect    to

reservation as authored by us hereinabove.                  This being so,

we set aside the judgment of the High Court.                 However, it is

made clear that there being no challenge by any General
10
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5609 OF 2019
(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 27765 of 2018)

candidate to the reservation made out of the eight plots of

six   plots    in      favour   of     SC    and       ST    candidates,         this

reservation     will     continue     only       for   the       purpose    of    the

auction of eight plots.              All future tenders/auctions will

abide by the interpretation given by us in our judgment

today.
With these observations the appeal is allowed.

       The protection granted by our order dated 29.03.2019

will continue for a period of four weeks.                    The appellant, as

has   been    stated    hereinabove,        is    free      to    adopt    whatever

proceedings is available to him in law.                     Any challenge made

by the appellant in proceedings hereafter would be heard on

its own merits.        All the contentions therein are open to the

appellant as well as the Gujarat Maritime Board.
………………………………………………………………………., J.
[ R. F. NARIMAN ]



                                ………………………………………………………………………., J.
[ SANJIV KHANNA ]



                                ………………………………………………………………………., J.
[ SURYA KANT ]


New Delhi;
July 16, 2019.
11