[Cites
16
, Cited by
24
]
Supreme Court of India
Amit Kumar Roy vs Union Of India . on 3 July, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 3161, 2019 (7) SCC 369, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 425, 2019 LAB IC 3142, 2019 (5) ABR 164, (2019) 2 SERVLJ 488, (2019) 3 ESC 670, (2019) 3 SCT 364, 2019 (4) KCCR SN 257 (SC), (2019) 5 ALL WC 4454, (2019) 5 SERVLR 184, (2019) 8 SCALE 553, 2019 (9) ADJ 76 NOC, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 2385
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
1



                                                                              REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                         Civil Appeal Nos 4605 - 4606 of 2019 (D No 27372/2015)


          Amit Kumar Roy                                                  ..Appellant


                                                    VERSUS


          Union of India & Ors                                            ..Respondents


                                                       With

                             Civil Appeal No 4607 of 2019 (D No 27196/2015)




                                                JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J

          Civil Appeal Nos 4605-4606 of 2019 (D No 27372/2015):
1              These appeals arise from a decision of the Armed Forces Tribunal 1 dated

          11 April 2012 together with its order dated 25 May 2012, declining to review the

          initial decision.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MANISH SETHI
Date: 2019.07.03
17:06:35 IST
Reason:
1 AFT
2
2      The appellant was enrolled on 12 January 2004 as an Airman in the Indian

Air Force2. His regular engagement was to come to an end on 11 January, 2024.
An advertisement was issued by the Bank of India on 7 August 2010 inviting

applications for filling up 2,000 posts of Probationary Officers. While posted at the

Three Base Repair Depot, the appellant responded to the advertisement and

applied for the post of General Banking Officer in the pay scale of Rs 14,500-

25,700 in August 2010. The appellant did so without completing the mandatory

period of service of seven years. Moreover, he did not obtain the prior permission

of his unit authorities. This was (according to the Air Force authorities) in breach

of the provisions of Air Force Order 14/2008 which was then in force.           The

appellant applied for the issuance of a No Objection Certificate 3 and a Discharge

on 30 May 2011. By then he had appeared at the written test held by the Bank

on 16 March 2011 and for an interview at which he was declared to be

successful.      His application for an NOC and discharge was forwarded to the

competent authority at Air Headquarters by the Headquarters Maintenance

Command on 4 July 2011. On 28 July 2011, the appellant received an order of

appointment as a Probationary Officer with the Bank. On 16 August 2011, he

moved the AFT4 at its Regional Bench in Chandigarh seeking directions for the

grant of an NOC and for discharge from the IAF to join a civil post with the Bank

of India. On 18 August 2011, the AFT issued an interim direction to the IAF

authorities to provisionally issue an NOC and to discharge the appellant so as to

enable him to take up the new assignment before 24 August 2011. This was

subject to the condition that in the event of his OA being dismissed, the appellant

2 IAF
3 NOC
4 OA 1182/2011
3
would have to give up his appointment and join the IAF within a reasonable

period of time failing which he would be liable to action as a deserter absent

without leave. On 2 September 2011 after the rejection of an application for

review filed by the Air Force authorities before the AFT and faced with a contempt

petition, Air Headquarters issued a provisional NOC to the appellant permitting

him to take up the appointment in a civil post of a General Banking Officer (JMG

Scale-I) with the Bank of India. A discharge order was issued on 20 September

2011 on a provisional basis on the conditions stipulated by the AFT.                 The

appellant joined Bank of India on 24 September 2011.
3       A Civil Appeal5 was filed by the Union of India in this Court to assail the

interim order of the AFT. On 12 March 2012 this Court directed the Air Force

authorities to dispose of the application submitted by the appellant on 30 May

2011 for an NOC and discharge. The application was rejected on 26 March 2012.

The order of rejection, in so far as is material, is extracted below:
“(a) You had applied for the civil post directly without obtaining
                prior permission of your Commanding Officer that too before
                completion of mandatory period of seven years of service in
                the IAF in violation of AFO 14/2008.
(b) Both the above acts amount to indiscipline.
(c) The pay scale of the civil post applied by you is Rs
                14,500-25,700 which is not equivalent to Group –“A” as per
                Air HQ/S 40726/PA(RC) dated 22 May 2009 read with AFO
                14/2008. As per referred letter dated 22 May 2009 the post is
                equivalent to Group –“C” Govt Post for which an airman
                belonging to a trade not having critical manning is eligible to
                apply only on completion of 15 years of service. On
                completion of 18 years of service, one can apply for any post,
                irrespective of critical manning in respective trade, provided
                he had rendered unwillingness/denied extension of service.
5 Civil Appeal D No 38467/2012
4
(d) You belonged to Air Frame Fitter trade which is having
              critical manning.
(e) At the time of applying for the said post, your trade was
              having critical manning, also you had not completed 15 or 18
              years of service which is mandatory for applying for Group
              –“C” Govt posts and equivalent posts in PSUs.”



On 9 April 2012, when his OA came up before the AFT the Air Force authorities

had already passed an order rejecting his application. Hence on 11 April 2012

the OA was dismissed as having become infructuous, though with the observation

that the “interim order dated 18 August 2011 will have its force”. The appellant’s

review application was dismissed on 25 May 2012.                   On 2 June 2012, the

appellant filed writ proceedings 6 before the High Court of Punjab and Haryana.
He was protected by an interim order dated 15 June 2012, against being treated

as a deserter. On 22 June 2012 Air Headquarters cancelled the provisional NOC

dated 2 September 2011 and the provisional discharge issued in compliance with

the order of the AFT dated 11 April 2012 noting that an order of reinstatement in

the service of the IAF was issued on 18 June 2012, to take effect from 16 July

2012. The appellant was called upon to join duties at his last unit, Three Base

Repair Depot, failing which it was stated that he would be liable to disciplinary

action.
4      Since the appellant had not received a clean discharge certificate, his

services were terminated by Bank of India on 30 April 2014. Challenging his

termination, the appellant moved writ proceedings 7 in which by an order dated 17

September 2014, the termination was stayed.
In view of the decision of this Court
6 CWP 11861/2012
7 CWP 19402/2014
5
in
Union of India v Major General Shri Kant Sharma8
, the High Court held that

it had no jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition filed by the appellant under
Article 226
and while leaving it open to him to pursue an alternate remedy before

the AFT.
5       The appellant now seeks to challenge the decision of the AFT rendered on

11 April 2012 together with its order dated 25 May 2012 declining to review its

decision.     The AFT came to the conclusion that the OA had been rendered

infructuous since in the meantime, in pursuance of the orders of this Court a

speaking order had been passed by the Air Force authorities on 26 March 2012

rejecting the application for an NOC. In the review order, the AFT declined

permission to the appellant to amend the OA.
6       Mr Gopal Sankaranarayanan, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf

of the appellant submitted that:
(i)     The appellant has a fundamental right under
Article 19(1)(g)
to choose his

place of employment. The provisions of
Article 19(1)(g)
in their application to the

members of the Air Force are not any different from their application to any other

branch of government;
(ii)    There was sufficient compliance by the appellant with the provisions

contained in paragraph 17 of AFO 14/2008;
(iii)   On the purported non-parity of pay scales:
(a)   The Air Force Order dated 23 July 2015 indicates that pay scales for

              Assistant Managers in Scale I of public sector banks have been
8 (2015) 2 SCC 519
6
revised to meet with the equivalence criteria vis-à-vis Group A

                  government posts and that approval has been accorded to the

                  procedure for the discharge of Airmen selected for nationalised

                  banks;
(b)       The appointment order dated 15 April 2013 issued to the appellant

                 indicates a basic pay of Rs 14,500 – 25,700;
(c)       Pay scales of banks are revised every four to five years as against

                 central pay scales which are revised once in ten years; and
(d)       Consequently the pay scales in the banking industry are well in

                 excess of those offered in the IAF;
(iv) As regards the issue of the ‘criticality of trade’:
(a)       The appellant was appointed to a post equivalent to a Group A post

                 and was entitled to a waiver of the condition;
(b)       The order passed by the Air Force authorities on 22 July 2013 did not

                 mention criticality of trade as the reason for denying permission;
(c)       In
Corporal Gaurav Badhwar v Union of India9
, the Delhi High Court

                 has held:
“..assessment of criticality in a trade would ordinarily be within
                  the domain of the employer, but where it is pleaded that due
                  to dying nature of the work due to modernization in the
                  equipment of the employer, some category of employees are
                  being rendered without work and are being adjusted in other
                  activities, and for which we highlight the evasive denial by the
                  respondents to the pleas of Cpl Gaurav Badhwar in para 16
                  of the writ petition that 25% to 30% Instrument Fitters are
                  being made to work in the Bar, Canteen and other
                  establishments where they perform duties wholly unrelated to
                  their skills of Instrument Fitters, it would be a case requiring it
                  to be held that the employer has failed to make good the
                  defence of there being criticality in the trade.”
(iv)         As on February 2019, over five years have elapsed since the appellant

commenced employment with the bank.                          The career advancement policy

9 (2015) SCC Online Del 7275
7
necessitates a liberal approach. The omission of the appellant to apply through

proper channels was only a procedural irregularity and not an illegality. The

appellant applied for discharge on 17 April 2013, which was followed by a fresh

application on 13 July 2013. The failure to seek prior permission, it has been

urged is an irregularity and does not cause prejudice to the IAF. The equitable

intervention of this Court has been sought for the grant of a ‘clean’ NOC and

discharge certificate which would enable him to continue to serve the bank in

which he is employed.
7       On the other hand, Mr R Balasubramanian, learned senior counsel

appearing on behalf of the Union of India and the Air Force authorities submitted

that:
(i)     The appellant has proceeded on a misconceived assumption that though

he is a member of the Air Force, he is entitled to leave employment at his will in

view of the fundamental right guaranteed by
Article 19(1)(g).
The submission

ignores the specific provisions of
Article 33
of the Constitution;
(ii)    There is a fallacy in the submission that a person enrolled in the armed

forces of the Union (in this case the IAF) is entitled to leave service at will. A

person who is enrolled is governed by the discipline of the force.
Sections 13
,
14
and
15
of the Air Force Act 1950 would make it abundantly clearly that there is a

statutory obligation to serve during the period of engagement, a breach of which

would invite disciplinary action;
8
(iii)       These statutory provisions are complemented by the Air Force Rules, more

particularly, Rules 7 and 9 which have been framed under the provisions of
Section 189
of the Act;
(iv)        Air Force Order 14/2008 which held the field at the material time regulated

the terms on which persons enrolled in the IAF may apply for civilian employment;
and
(v)         In interpreting the provisions of law, it would be necessary for this Court to

have regard to :
   The need to maintain manning levels;
   The requirement of operational preparedness;
           Training costs incurred in incorporating technological advancements;
           Interests of the IAF; and
           Importance of training of a particular trade or category.


In this backdrop, it was urged that there is no general or vested right to leave

service during the period of engagement and any application has to be

considered on a case to case basis. Mr Balasubramanian submitted that the

appellant who was enrolled in the IAF breached his statutory obligation and left

service without prior permission, rendering him liable for disciplinary action.
8           The rival submissions will be considered.
9
Article 33
of the Constitution provides as follows:
“33. Parliament may, by law, determine to what extent any of
                  the rights conferred by this Part shall, in their application to,—
(a) the members of the Armed Forces; or (b) the members of
                  the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order; or
(c) persons employed in any bureau or other organisation
                  established by the State for purposes of intelligence or
9
counter intelligence; or (d) person employed in, or in
             connection with, the telecommunication systems set up for
             the purposes of any Force, bureau or organisation referred to
             in clauses (a) to (c), be restricted or abrogated so as to
             ensure the proper discharge of their duties and the
             maintenance of discipline among them.”
The Air Force Act
1950 has been enacted by Parliament legislating under
Articles

245(1)
and
246(1)
of the Constitution. The specific legislative entry in the VII th

Schedule is Entry 2 of the Union list which reads thus:
“Naval, military and Air Forces; any other armed forces of the
             Union.”
The Air Force Act
1950 imposes restrictions on the fundamental rights of the

members of the IAF with a view to ensure ‘proper discharge of duties and the

maintenance of discipline among them’.
Section 13
stipulates the procedure

which is to be followed before the enrolling officer, where any person desires to

be enrolled.
Section 13
provides as follows:
“13. Procedure before enrolling officer.—Upon the
             appearance before the prescribed enrolling officer of any
             person desirous of being enrolled, the enrolling officer shall
             read and explain to him, or cause to be read and explained to
             him, in his presence, the conditions of the service for which
             he is to be enrolled; and shall put to him the questions set
             forth in the prescribed form of enrolment, and shall, after
             having cautioned him that if he makes a false answer to any
             such question he will be liable to punishment under this Act,
             record or cause to be recorded his answer to each such
             question.”
Section 14
provides for the mode of enrolment:
“14. Mode of enrolment.—If, after complying with the
             provisions of
section 13
, the enrolling officer is satisfied that
             the person desirous of being enrolled fully understands the
10
questions put to him and consents to the conditions of
                  service, and if such officer perceives no impediment, he shall
                  sign and shall also cause such person to sign the enrolment
                  paper, and such person shall thereupon be deemed to be
                  enrolled.”
Section 15
deals with the validity of enrolment:
“15. Validity of enrolment.—Every person who has for the
                  space of three months been in receipt of pay as a person
                  enrolled under this Act and been borne on the rolls of any unit
                  shall be deemed to have been duly enrolled, and shall not be
                  entitled to claim his discharge on the ground of any
                  irregularity or illegality in his enrolment or on any other ground
                  whatsoever; and if any person, in receipt of such pay and
                  borne on the rolls as aforesaid, claims his discharge before
                  the expiry of three months from his enrolment, no such
                  irregularity or illegality or other ground shall, until he is
                  discharged in pursuance of his claim, affect his position as an
                  enrolled person under this Act or invalidate any proceedings,
                  act or thing taken or done prior to his discharge.”



Before enrolment, the enrolling officer has to make the person who desires to be

enrolled cognizant of the conditions of service.
Section 14
mandates that before

signing on the enrolment, the individual has to consent to the conditions of his

service. A person who has for a period of three months been in receipt of pay as a

person enrolled under the Act and has been borne on the rolls of any unit is

deemed to have been duly enrolled. On being attested under
Section 16
10
, the

individual subscribes to an oath or affirmation to bear allegiance to the

Constitution, to serve in the Air Force and to obey all commands of an officer set

over him, even to the peril of his life 11. Tenure in the Air Force is subject to the
10 16. Persons to be attested.—The following persons shall be attested, namely:— 14 (a) all persons enrolled as
combatants; (b) all persons selected to hold a non-commissioned or acting non-commissioned rank; and (c) all
other persons subject to this Act as may be prescribed by the Central Government.

11 17. Mode of attestation.—(1) When a person who is to be attested is reported fit for duty, or has completed
the prescribed period of probation, an oath or affirmation shall be administered to him in the prescribed form by
his commanding officer in front of his unit or such portion thereof as may be present, or by any other prescribed
persons. (2) The form of oath or affirmation prescribed under this section shall contain a promise that the person
11
pleasure of the President12. A person subject to the
Air Force Act
1950 may be

retired, released or discharged from service “by such authority and in such

manner as may be prescribed”.13


10
Section 189
empowers the Central government to make rules for the

purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of the Act. Rule 7 provides thus:
“7 Enrolling officers and form of enrolment.—

                  (1) The following officers shall be enrolment officers for the
                  purposes of
sections 13
and
14
, namely:—
(a) all recruiting officers;
(b) all assistant recruiting officers;
(c) the Officer Commanding a unit of the Air Force.

                  (2) The Form of enrolment set forth in the First Schedule is
                  prescribed for the purposes of
sections 13
and
14
.”



Rule 9 is in the following terms:
“9 Oath or affirmation to be taken on attestation.—

                  (1) The oath or affirmation to be taken on attestation shall be
                  in one of the following form or in such other forms to the same
                  purport as the attesting officer ascertains to be in accordance
                  with the religion of the person to be attested or otherwise
                  binding on his conscience. Form of Oath I ..................do
                  swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and
                  allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established
                  and that I will as in duty bound honestly and faithfully serve in
                  the Air Force of the Union of India, and go wherever ordered
                  by air, land or sea, and that I will observe and obey all
                  commands of the President of the Union of India and the

to be attested will bear true allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, and that he will serve in
the Air Force and go wherever he is ordered by land, sea or air, and that he will obey all commands of any officer
set over him, even to the peril of his life. (3) The fact of an enrolled person having taken the oath or affirmation
directed by this section to be taken shall be entered on his enrolment paper and authenticated by the signature of
the officer administering the oath or affirmation.
12 18. Tenure of service under the Act.—Every person subject to this Act shall hold office during the pleasure of
the President.
13 22. Retirement, release or discharge.—Any person subject to this Act may be retired, released or discharged
from the service by such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed.
12
commands of any officer set over me even to the peril of my
             life. Form of Affirmation I ..................do solemnly affirm that I
             will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India
             as by law established and that I will as in duty bound,
             honestly and faithfully serve in the Air Force of the Union of
             India and go wherever ordered by air, land or sea, and that I
             will observe and obey all commands of the President of the
             Union of India and the commands of any officer set over me
             even to the peril of my life.
(2) The oath or affirmation prescribed in this rule shall,
             whenever practicable be administered by the commanding
             officer of the person to be attested or in the presence of such
             commanding officer by a person empowered by him to
             administer it in the manner described in
section 17
. If it is not
             so administered, it may be administered by a magistrate, a
             recruiting officer or an assistant recruiting officer.”



Rule 13 stipulates that:
“13 Release.—A person subject to the Act may be released
             from the Air Force in accordance with these rules, or in
             accordance with any orders or instructions made in that
             behalf by or under the authority of the Central Government.”



11    The statutory form of enrolment as a combatant is in Form AI of the First

Schedule. Part II of Form AI incorporates an obligation to serve in the Air Force

for a specified period. As we have already noted, on his enrolment in 2004, the

engagement of the appellant was for a stipulated period of twenty years. Rule 14

provides for the authorities who are empowered to authorise a discharge. There

is a table which deals with persons enrolled under the Act who have, as the case

may be, been attested or are not attested. Rule 15 is reproduced below:
“15     Authorities empowered to authorise discharge .—(1) Each of the
      authorities specified in column 3 of the Table below shall be the authority competent
      in respect of persons subject to the Act specified in column 1 thereof for the causes
      specified in column 2 and in the manner specified in column 4, to discharge such
      persons from the service.
(2) Any power conferred by this rule on any of the aforesaid authorities may also be
      exercised by any other authority superior to it.
13
Class           Cause of         Competent         Special
                discharge        authority to      instructions
                                 authorize
                                 discharge
Persons         (a) At his own   Commanding        To be carried
enrolled        request on       Officer           out in
under the Act   transfer to                        accordance
who have        the pension                        with the
attested.       establishment                      conditions of
                                                   enrolment
                (b) On           Commanding        To be carried
                fulfilling the   Officer           out in
                conditions of                      accordance
                his enrolment                      with the
                                                    conditions of
                                                   enrolment
                (c) Having       Commanding        To be carried
                been found       Officer           out only on
                medically                          the
                unfit for                          recommendati
                further                            ons of an
                service.                           Invaliding
                                                   Board
                (d) On                             ……
                transfer to
                the pension
                establishment
                or on
                discharge
                with gratuity
                otherwise
                than at his
                own request
                or under item
                (c).
                (e) Having       Air Officer I/c   An Airman
                been found       Administratio     reported as
                inefficient in   n                 inefficient will,
                his rank or                        as far as
                trade and                          vacancies
                being                              allow be
                unwilling to                       permitted to
                accept                             remuster and /
                reduction or                       or accept
                remustering                        reduction in
                                                   any rank and
                                                   trade for
                                                   which he is
                                                   reported as
                                                   suitable. If no
                                                   such vacancy
                                                   exists or if he
                                                   declines to
                                                   accept such
14
remustering or
                                                     reduction he
                                                     will be
                                                     discharged
                                                     under this
                                                     item
                (f) At his own    Director of        ……..
                request           Personnel
                before            (Airmen)
                fulfilling the
                conditions of
                his enrolment
                (g) His
                services no
                longer
                required :-
                (i) Due to        Director of        ……..
                reduction in      Personnel
                establishment     (Airmen)
                or to
                reorganizatio
                n
                (ii) Unsuitable   Air Officer I/c    ………
                for retention     Administratio
                in the Air        n
                Force
                (h) All other     Do
                classes of
                discharge
Persons         (i) At his own    (i) Air or other   The
enrolled        request           officer i/c of     competent
under the Act   before            Command            authority
who have not    fulfilling the                       mentioned in
been attested   conditions of                        the preceding
                the enrolment                        column will
                                                     exercise this
                                                     power only
                                                     when he is
                                                     satisfied as to
                                                     the bona fides
                                                     of the
                                                     application
                                                     and that the
                                                     total strength
                                                     of the Air
                                                     Force will not
                                                     there by be
                                                     unduly
                                                     reduced
                                  (ii)Director or
                                  Personnel
                                  (Airmen) in
                                  case of units
                                  directly under
15
Air Head-
                                            quarters
                        (j) Unlikely to     Commanding          Applicable to
                        make in             Officer             airmen under
                        efficient                               going training
                        Airman                                  for airmen
                        (k) All other       Commanding
                        classes of          Officer
                        discharge




12    Now it is in this background that it would be necessary to advert to the
provisions of AFO 14/2008. Clause 1, in so far as is material, provides thus:
“Airmen/NCs(E), who have completed seven years of service
             from the date of enrolment, are permitted to apply for civil
             posts under Central/State Government and public Sector
             Undertaking including Para-Military Forces.         Non-Govt.
             Organization (NGOs) Trusts, even if funded by the Govt. shall
             not be covered in the permission category of civil posts. The
             categories of posts, corresponding length of service and
             eligibility are to be determined as given below:
Category        Length of         Permissible
                                                   Service           Categories of Civil
                                                                     posts
             (a)                   I               7 Yrs             (A)     Group ‘A’ or
                                                                     equivalent        posts
                                                                     (maximum of the pay
                                                                     scale not less than Rs
                                                                     13,500, as revised
                                                                     from time to time.
Clause 1 stipulates a requirement of the completion of seven years service to

apply for civilian employment. It also defines the permissible categories of civilian

posts for which armed forces personnel may apply.


Clause 2 stipulates that:
“All applications for above categories of posts will be directly
             forwarded to the prospective employers by the units after
             verifying the eligibility including criticality of manpower.
             Application of Airman belonging to critical trades shall be
16
rejected at unit level. However, the condition of criticality will
             not be applicable to the applicants of category 1A and III
             above, in whose case the applications will be forwarded
             despite criticality in their trades. The criticality of trades will
             be updated by Air HQ twice a year, in June and December
             and would be intimated to the Stns./Unit through their
             respective Command HQs. Unit directly under Air HQ would
             be intimated the criticality of the trades by Air HQ. Airman who
             are on deputation to ARC are also eligible to apply for civil
             posts as per Para 1 above and their applications to be
             processed through PHS C/O AFCAO, where unit copy of
             service documents of ARC deputationists are held.
             Forwarding of applications shall not be construed as
             acceptance to grant NOC, which shall be issued as per the
             procedure
laid down in
subsequent paras of this AFO.”



Under clause 2, the units will verify the criticality of manpower before forwarding

the applications.
Clause 5 lays down guidelines which must be followed where online applications

have been invited by government departments or, as the case may be, by public

sector undertakings. Here again, the individual has to seek permission from the

station/unit commanders before applying on-line. Clause 5 is in the following

terms:
“Forwarding of On-line Applications. Several prospective
             employers in Govt Departments/PSUs invite applications for
             civil employment through their web sites on the internet.
             Station/Unit Commanders are to ensure that the applicant
             meets the eligibility conditions enumerated in preceding
             Paras 1-3. The following guidelines are to be followed for ‘on-
             line’ registration of applications for civil posts :-
(a) Individual to seek permission from his respective
             Station/Unit Commanders to apply for any civil post ‘on-line’
             alongwith duly filled application and advertisement
             downloaded from the website.
(b) An undertaking is to be furnished by the individual, stating
             that information furnished by him to the Stn/Unit authorities
             will be submitted to the employer ‘on-line’ and no classified
             information will be communicated.
(c) Before granting permission, the unit administration is to
             examine the contents of the application keeping security
             consideration in mind.”
17
Under clause 6, NOCs (other than those under Category III) will be issued by Air

HQs on a case to case basis subject to the exigencies of service and the overall

cadre requirement in a particular rank or trade. Clause 6 is as follows:
“No Objection Certificate (NOC) for applicants under Cat III
              will be issued two ears before completion of their engagement
              by their respective AOC/Stn Cdr/CO as per the format placed
              at Appendix ‘E’ while all other NOCs will be issued by Air
              HQs (Dte of PA) on case to case basis, subject to the
              exigencies of service and with the overriding condition
              being the overall cadre requirement in a particular
              rank/trade as per format given at Appendix ‘C’.”
              (Emphasis supplied)

Clause 7 provides:
“Application for NOC is to be submitted by the individual after
              receiving call letter for the interview/verification of documents
              or after the result of written test where selection is based on
              success in written test only. However, in all cases NOC is to
              be obtained by the individual invariably before submitting
              application for discharge on being selected for the civil post.”



Finally, clause 13 stipulates that:
“Permission to apply for civil post is a privilege and hence
              issuance of NOC can not be claimed as a matter of right. No
              provisional or conditional NOC is to be issued by the
              Stations/Units.”



13     AFO 14/2008 held the field at the material time and governs the facts of the

present case. Under the terms of the AFO, a requirement of completing seven

years of service from the date of enrolment has been mandated for permission to

be granted to apply for a civil post under the Central or state governments or

public sector undertakings, including paramilitary forces. AFO 14/2008 stipulates

that a Category I individual with a length of service of seven years may apply for

civilian employment in a Group A or equivalent post carrying the stipulated pay
18
scale as revised from time to time. Applications have to be forwarded to the

prospective employer by the units, after verification of eligibility including the

criticality of manpower.    Where the Airman belongs to a critical trade, the

application shall be rejected at the unit level. Where online applications have

been invited the station or, as the case may be, unit commanders are required to

ensure fulfilment of the conditions of eligibility specified in paragraph 1 to 3.
Permission is required from the station/unit commanders to submit an on-line

application for a civil post. NOCs (other than those in Category III) are to be

issued by Air HQs on a case to case basis having regard to the exigencies of

service.
14    In the present case, the appellant in breach of the provisions contained in

AFO 14/2008 applied for the post of a Probationary Officer with the Bank of India,

participated in the written test and appeared at the interview without intimation or

approval. There was, therefore, a failure of the appellant to comply with his

obligations both in terms of his engagement as an enrolled member of the force

and in relation to the requirements which were to be fulfilled under the terms of

AFO 14/2008.
15    We are unable to accept the submission of Mr Sankaranarayanan that the

appellant had an unqualified right under
Article 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution to

leave the service of the Air Force. The provisions of the
Air Force Act
, those

contained in the rules and the terms of engagement of the appellant belie such an

assertion.   AFO 14/2008 emphasises aspects such as the criticality of the trade

and the exigencies of service. They need to be verified and assessed before
19
permission is granted. A person who has been enrolled as a member of the Air

Force does not have an unqualified right to depart from service at his or her will

during the term of engagement. Such a construction, as urged on behalf of the

appellant, will seriously impinge upon manning levels and operational

preparedness of the armed forces. With the rapid advancement of technology,

particularly in its application to military operations, there has been a

reconfiguration of the human and technological requirements of a fighting force.

The interests of the service are of paramount importance. A balance has been

sought to be drawn between the interests of the service with situations involving

requests by persons enrolled to take civilian employment.        This balance is

reflected in the provisions contained in the Air Force orders, in this case AFO

14/2008. A person enrolled cannot assert a general right to act in breach or

defiance of those orders.
16    In the present case, we are now left with the alternative submission

invoking the   equitable jurisdiction of this Court    under
Article 142
of the

Constitution. The appellant moved the AFT after submitting the application 30

May 2011. He had an interim order of the AFT dated 18 August 2011 in his

favour for provisional discharge and for an NOC. This was implemented on 20

September 2011, following which the appellant was struck off the strength of the

IAF with effect from 21 September 2011 and joined the Bank of India on 24

September 2011. This order of the AFT was not disturbed in the civil appeal filed

by the Union of India, but this Court by an order dated 12 March 2012, directed

the Air Force authorities to dispose of the application submitted by the appellant

on 30 May 2011. After the application was rejected, an interim order enured to the
20
benefit of the appellant. In this backdrop nearly eight years have elapsed since

the appellant left service. No purpose will be served in directing the reinduction of

the appellant into the IAF save and except to subject him to disciplinary action.

Having regard to the facts and circumstances which we have noted above, we

are of the view that the ends of justice would be met by directing that a final NOC

and discharge be issued to the appellant no later than within a period of three

months of the receipt of a copy of this order. At the same time, we are of the view

that this should not be an unconditional direction. We accordingly issue an order

in the above terms, subject to the appellant depositing with the Union of India a

sum quantified at Rs 3 lakhs within two months of the receipt of a copy of this

judgment. A final NOC and discharge certificate shall be issued only after the

above amount is deposited and within one month thereafter. The civil appeals are

disposed of in the above terms. There shall be no order as to costs.


Civil Appeal No 4607 of 2019 (D No 27196/2015):
17       No other point has been separately urged in this appeal. Hence, the civil

appeal shall stand disposed of in similar terms. There shall be no order as to

costs.
.....................................................J
                                              [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]



                                              .....................................................J
                                               [Hemant Gupta]

New Delhi;
July 03, 2019