[Cites
12
, Cited by
22
]
Supreme Court of India
Reckitt Benckiser (India) Private ... vs Reynders Label Printing India Private ... on 1 July, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 393, (2019) 3 RECCIVR 516, (2019) 4 ALLMR 955, (2019) 4 ARBILR 88, (2019) 4 CIVLJ 186, (2019) 5 ALL WC 4263, 2019 (7) SCC 62, (2019) 9 SCALE 72
Author:
A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench:
Ajay Rastogi
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
1


                                                                          REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                              PETITION FOR ARBITRATION (CIVIL) NO. 65 OF 2016

                         Reckitt Benckiser (India) Private Limited    …..Petitioner(s)

                                                    :Versus:

                         Reynders Label Printing India
                         Private Limited and Anr.                     ....Respondent(s)




                                                 JUDGMENT
A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
1.     The singular question involved in this application filed

                         under
Sections 11(5)
,
11(9)
and
11(12)(a)
of the Arbitration

                         and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short “the Act”) seeking

                         appointment of a sole arbitrator, is whether respondent No.2 ­

                         a company established under the laws of Belgium, having its

                         principal place of business at Nijverheldsstraat 3, 2530
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2019.07.01
Boechout, Belgium, could be impleaded in the proposed
16:26:12 IST
Reason:
arbitration proceedings despite the fact that it is a non­
2
signatory party to the agreement dated 1 st May, 2014,

        executed between the applicant and respondent No.1 ­ a

        company established under the
Companies Act, 2013
­ merely

        because it (respondent No.2) is one of the group companies of

        which respondent No.1 also is a constituent. The legal position

        as to when a non­signatory to an arbitration agreement can be

        impleaded and subjected to arbitration proceedings is no more

        res integra.
In the case of
Chloro Controls India Private

        Limited Vs. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc. and

        Ors.,1
a three­Judge Bench of this Court opined that

        ordinarily, an arbitration takes place between the persons who

        have been parties to both the arbitration agreement as well as

        the substantive contract underlying it. Invoking the doctrine

        of “group of companies”, it went on to observe that an

        arbitration agreement entered into by a company, being one

        within     a   group    of    corporate      entities,   can,   in      certain

        circumstances,         bind    its       non­signatory    affiliates.
That

        exposition has been followed and applied by another three­
1
(2013) 1 SCC 641
3
Judge Bench of this Court in
Cheran Properties Limited Vs.

        Kasturi and Sons Limited and Ors.2 In
paragraph 23 of this

        decision, the Court, after analysing the earlier decisions and

        including the doctrine expounded in
Chloro Controls India

        Private Limited
(supra), concluded as follows:
“23. As the law has evolved, it has recognised that modern
               business transactions are often effectuated through multiple
               layers and agreements. There may be transactions within a
               group of companies. The circumstances in which they have
               entered into them may reflect an intention to bind both
               signatory and non­signatory entities within the same group.
               In holding a non­signatory bound by an arbitration
               agreement, the court approaches the matter by attributing to
               the transactions a meaning consistent with the business
               sense which was intended to be ascribed to them. Therefore,
               factors such as the relationship of a non­signatory to a party
               which is a signatory to the agreement, the commonality of
               subject­matter and the composite nature of the transaction
               weigh in the balance. The group of companies doctrine is
               essentially intended to facilitate the fulfilment of a mutually
               held intent between the parties, where the circumstances
               indicate that the intent was to bind both signatories and
               non­signatories. The effort is to find the true essence of the
               business arrangement and to unravel from a layered
               structure of commercial arrangements, an intent to bind
               someone who is not formally a signatory but has assumed
               the obligation to be bound by the actions of a signatory.”
2.     In the present case, it is not in dispute that the

        respondents are constituents of a group of companies known

        as    “Reynders      Label    Printing     Group”.     The    constituent
2
(2018) 16 SCC 413
4
companies of the said group of companies can be described in

       the form of a chart appended to the written submission filed

       by respondent No.1 as Annexure R­1/1, which reads thus:
Reynders Label Printing Group

       Reynesco Invest NV                                        Reynesco NV


Reynders    Reynders         Reynders             Reynders       Reynders     Reynders
Ttiketten   Etiquetters      Pharmaceutical       Label Printing Etiquettes   Etiketten
NV (R­2)    Cosmetiques SA   Labels NV            India Pvt.     France SA    Polska Sp z.o.o.
Ltd. (R­1)
3.    Keeping in mind            the exposition in
Chloro Controls
(supra) and
Cheran Properties
(supra), the crucial question is

       whether it is manifest from the indisputable correspondence

       exchanged between the parties, culminating in the agreement

       dated 1st May, 2014, that the transactions between the

       applicant and respondent No.1 were essentially with the group

       of companies and whether there was a clear intention of the

       parties to bind both         the signatory as well as non­signatory

       parties (respondent No.1 and respondent No.2, respectively).

       In other words, whether the indisputable circumstances go to

       show that the mutual intention of the parties was to bind both
5
the signatory as well as the non­signatory parties, namely,

respondent No.1 and respondent No.2, respectively, qua the

existence of an arbitration agreement between the applicant

and the said respondents.
4.   In the wake of the amended
Section 11(6)
read with
Section 11(6A)
of the Act, the enquiry by this Court must

confine itself to the examination of existence of an arbitration

agreement. No more and no less. For that, we must revert to

the assertion made by the applicant in the present application.

Be it noted that respondent No.1 has not filed any counter

affidavit to refute the assertions made by the applicant in the

application under consideration. Respondent No.1, however,

through its counsel has urged that respondent No.2 has no

concern with the subject agreement dated 1st May, 2014. That

agreement is only between the applicant and respondent No.1

and as a result thereof, it would give rise to a domestic

commercial arbitration and not an international commercial

arbitration. Respondent No.1 has also made it amply clear

through its counsel that it will have no objection, whatsoever,
6
if the Court were to appoint a sole arbitrator for resolving the

         dispute between the applicant and respondent No.1, who

         would conduct the arbitration proceedings in accordance with

         the Act, in Delhi, as a domestic commercial arbitration

         between the applicant and respondent No.1 alone.
5.      Be that as it may, reverting to the averments in the

         application under consideration, it is mentioned that the

         dispute arises out of the agreement dated 1 st May, 2014,

         executed between the applicant and respondent No.1, but

         respondent No.2 has been impleaded because it is the parent/

         holding company of respondent No.1. The agreement, in the

         form of clause 13,3 contains an arbitration agreement between
3
“13. Dispute Resolution
          13.1 Prior to the beginning of any arbitration process the parties hereby undertake to
      attempt in good faith to resolve any dispute by way of negotiation between senior
      executives of the parties who have authority to settle such dispute. A copy of any
      Escalation Notice shall be given to the Regional Senior Vice President (or equivalent person
      of seniority) of each party or their Affiliates (which copy shall state that it is an Escalation
      Notice pursuant to this Agreement). Provided, however, that the negotiations shall be
      completed within thirty (30) days of the date of the Escalation Notice or within such longer
      period as the parties may agree in writing prior to the expiration of the initial thirty­day
      period.
13.2 In the event the dispute is not resolved within a period of 30 days from the
      commencement of such dispute, the dispute shall be referred to arbitration and the parties
      shall mutually appoint a Sole arbitrator who shall conduct the proceedings in accordance
      with
Indian Arbitration Act, 1996
as amended from time to time or any re­enactment
      thereof. The arbitration shall be held in Delhi and the proceedings shall be conducted in
      English.
13.3 The existence of a dispute with respect to this Agreement between the parties
      shall not relieve either party from performance of its obligations under this Agreement that
      are not the subject of such dispute.”
7
the parties. In terms of clause 9 4 thereof, respondent No.2 has

       assumed the liability to indemnify the applicant in case of any

       loss, damage etc., caused to the applicant on account of acts

       and omissions of respondent No.1. Respondent No.2 is an

       integral party to the stated agreement which contains an

       arbitration agreement in the form of clause 13.2. The

       applicant has relied upon e­mails exchanged which, according

       to the applicant, provide the record of an arbitration

       agreement within the meaning of
Section 7(4)(b)
of the Act.

       According to the applicant, the respondents had approached

       the applicant with an offer to print labels for the applicant,

       including for booklets and leaflets and labels required for

       Mucinex, exported to USA. The ‘Drug Facts’ and other details
4
“9. Indemnity
        9.1 The Supplier and the Supplier group shall indemnify RB against any claims, losses,
    damages and expenses howsoever incurred or suffered by RB (and whether direct or
    consequential or economic loss) arising out of or in connection with
(i)     defective workmanship, quality or materials;
(ii)    an infringement or alleged infringement of any intellectual property rights
    caused by the use, manufacture, or supply of the products; and
(iii)   negligent performance or failure or delay in performance of the terms of this
    Agreement by this Supplier.
9.2     Supplier shall indemnify and hold harmless RB and their respective officers,
    directors, agents, and employees against any and all claims:
i.      Arising out of an alleged breach of the terms and conditions of other provision of
    this Agreement.
ii.     based upon any allegations that the material produced by RB using Product was
    defective (including, but not limited to, manufacturing or refining defects);
        These provisions shall survive termination or expiry of this Agreement.”
8
which were to be printed on the back­label were in accordance

with the laws of USA and the respondents were aware of the

fact that Mucinex supply is meant for USA market. The

applicant relied upon the minutes of the meeting held on 29 th

May, 2013, between the officials of the applicant and the

officials of respondent No.1. Pursuant thereto, the respondents

made a presentation to the applicant about their capability to

print labels for the applicant, including the booklet and leaflet

labels as desired and made several representations about the

quality of their product. The applicant asserts that the

respondents had held exhaustive negotiations in relation to

the execution of agreement whereby the respondents were to

provide packaging material to the applicant and its affiliates.
Based on negotiations, the applicant, by e­mail dated 23rd

April, 2014, circulated a draft of the agreement along with the

code of conduct and anti­bribery policy of the applicant. The

applicant asserts that the respondents replied to the same

through Mr. Frederik Reynders (promoter of respondent No.2

which is the parent company of respondent No.1) by his e­mail
9
of 23rd April, 2014 at 12:00 PM. The said e­mail sent by Mr.

Frederik Reynders was responded to by the applicant on 23 rd

April, 2014 at 12:10 PM. Further, Mr. Frederik Reynders, by

his e­mail of 23rd April, 2014 at 4:09 PM, attached a copy of

the draft with some attached comments from the headquarters

of the respondents in Belgium (respondent No.2 herein).
According to the applicant, the comments related to clause 9

of the draft agreement relating to the indemnity of respondent

Nos.1 & 2.   It is then stated that in the same e­mail, Mr.

Frederik Reynders gave a counter proposal, concerning clause

9.1 of the draft agreement, of providing a document of

insurance to inform the applicant about their maximum

coverage. On this basis, it is asserted that respondent No.2

was aware of the fact that indemnity is being extended to the

applicant and that respondent No.2 was the disclosed

principal on whose behalf the respondent No.1 was executing

the agreement. It is further asserted that the arbitration

agreement was an integral part of the agreement executed

between the applicant and respondent No.1, on its behalf and
10
on behalf of its disclosed principal, namely, respondent No.2.
The applicant has then asserted that respondent No.1

addressed an e­mail dated 6 th June, 2014, to the applicant

enclosing a signed copy of the agreement and further stating

that hard copy would be delivered to the applicant. The

relevant averments in the application
referred to above
have

been articulated in paragraphs 7.7 to 7.12, which read thus:
“7.7 The Applicant states that the Respondents had
     approached it with its offer to print labels for the applicant,
     including booklet and leaflet labels (required for Mucinex
     exported to USA). The Drug Facts and other details which
     were to be printed on the back label were in accordance with
     the laws of USA and the Respondents were aware of the fact
     that the Mucinex supply is meant for USA market. True
     typed copy of the Minutes of Meeting held on November 22,
     2013 between the officials with the respondent No.1 are
     annexed as ANNEXURE A­2 (at pages 133 to 134).
7.8 The Respondents subsequently made a presentation
     about their capability to print labels for the Applicant,
     including booklet and leaflet labels (required for Mucinex
     exported to USA). During personal meeting and in the
     presentation, the Respondents represented that they are the
     market leaders in label printing across the globe and they
     provide creativity and innovation for self­adhesive labels.
Further, the Respondents represented that Reynders label
     printing in India offers tailor made solutions to fit all needs
     of the Respondent including perfect adhesion on vials
     conforming to ISO 15010), every single label is printed as per
     specifications) and numbering of each label, to ensure
     quality control. The Respondents offered to print booklet &
     leaflet labels “to put extra information on a packaging where
     the available space for text or images is rather limited”. The
     Respondents further specifically emphasised that such
     booklet labels contain a multi­page booklet, glued at the
11
back, having application in pharmaceutical industry. For the
purpose of adhering and maintaining strict quality control
measures, the Respondents represented that inspection of
printed labels is conducted through a system consisting of
“500 100% camera controlled inspection system, online
numbering on back side and units for offline numbering”.
Further, in relation to quality assurance, the Respondents
represented to the Applicant that they provide standard
quality assurance and in addition, they also provide quality
check by camera control. True typed copy of the Presentation
dated NIL made by the Respondents is annexed as
ANNEXURE A­3 (at pages 135 to 156).
7.9 In the interregnum, the Applicant entered into a
Supply Agreement dated April 16, 2014 with its affiliate in
India viz., RB Healthcare. True typed copy of the Supply
Agreement executed between the Applicant and RB
Healthcare dated 16.04.2014 is annexed as ANNEXURE A­4
(at pages 157 to 189).
7.10 The Applicant and Respondents held detailed
negotiations in relation to execution of an agreement,
whereby the Respondents were to provide packaging material
to the Applicant and its affiliates. Based on negotiations, the
Applicant by email dated April 23, 2014, circulated a draft of
the Agreement along with the Code of Conduct and Anti­
Bribery policy, of the Applicant. True typed copy of the email
23.04.2014 addressed by the Applicant to the Respondents
is annexed as ANNEXURE A­5 (at pages 190 to 191). The
applicant also requested the Respondents to attach a copy of
the executed specifications of Mucinex labels and signed
copy of the pricing/costing agreement for Mucinex Labels. It
is relevant to state that Clause 9 of the draft Agreement,
specifically stated “The Supplier and the Supplier group shall
indemnify RB against any claims, losses, damages and
expenses howsoever incurred or suffered by RB (and whether
direct or consequential or economic loss) arising out of or in
connection with……negligence performance or failure or delay
in performance of the terms of this agreement by the
Supplier”.
7.11 In response, the Respondents through Mr. Frederik
Reynders (promoter of Respondent No.2 which is a
parent of Respondent No.1) by his email responded on
12
April 23, 2014 at 12:00 pm. True typed copy of the email
dated April 23, 2014 addressed by Mr. Frederik Reynders to
the Applicant is annexed as ANNEXURE A­6 (at page 192).
The said email sent by Mr. Frederik Reynders was
responded by the Applicant on April 23, 2014 at 12:10
pm. True typed copy of the email dated April 23, 2014
addressed by the Applicant to Mr. Frederik Reynders is
annexed as ANNEXUXRE A­7 (at page 193). Further, Mr.
Frederik Reynders by his email of April 23, 2014 at
04.09 pm attached a copy of the draft Agreement with
“some comments of our HQ in Belgium (Respondent No.2
herein)”. True typed copy of the email dated April 23, 2014
with the commented Agreement sent by Mr. Frederik
Reynders to the Applicant is annexed as ANNEXURE A­8 (at
page 194). The comments related to Clause 9 of the draft
Agreement relating to Indemnity extended by the Respondent
Nos.1 and 2. In the same email, Mr. Reynders also stated
that for Clause 9.1 of the draft Agreement, “I will
provide you with an document of our Insurance to
inform you about our maximum coverage”. From the
above, it is clear that Respondent No.2 was aware of the fact
that indemnity is being extended to the Applicant and the
fact that Respondent No.2 is the disclosed principal, on
whose behalf the Respondent No.1 is executing the
Agreement. In this regard, it is relevant to state that the
arbitration agreement is an integral part of the Agreement
executed between the Applicant and the Respondent No.1.
Hence, the arbitration agreement also has been executed by
Respondent No.1 on its behalf and on behalf of its disclosed
principal i.e. the Respondent No.2.
7.12 After further discussions, the Respondent No.1, on
its behalf of and on behalf of its parent and disclosed
principal – Reynders Belgium) of Respondent No.2,
executed the Agreement on May 1, 2014 and sent the
same to the Applicant. In this context it is stated that the
Respondent No.1 had addressed an email dated June 6,
2014 to the Applicant enclosing the signed copy of the
Agreement and further stating that hard copy shall be
delivered to the Applicant. True typed copy of the email
dated June 6, 2014 sent by the Respondent No.1 to the
Applicant is annexed as ANNEXURE A­9 (at page 195). The
13
Agreement was subsequently executed by the Applicant and
     a hard copy, was sent to the Respondents.”

                                          (emphasis supplied)
6.   We deem it apposite to reproduce the correspondence,

referred to in the aforesaid paragraphs of the application

under consideration, for examining the case made out by the

applicant as to whether respondent No.2 can be said to have

assented or had an intention to become party to the

arbitration agreement by its conduct, without being a

signatory to the agreement dated 1st May, 2014. Annexures­5

to 9 referred to by the applicant read thus:
“ANNEXURE A­5

     From: Joshi, Sonu [mail to:
[email protected]
]
     Sent:      woensdag 23 april 2014 10:38
     To:        Frederic Reynders
     Subject:   Commercial Agreement sigh­off­RB & Reynders

     Dear Frederik,
     As per our Global procurement policies and procedures, it is
     mandatory for RB to sign­off a commercial agreement,
     document on code of conduct and Anti­Bribery policies with
     all of our suppliers. Accordingly, please find the following
     documents for immediate sign­off.
1. Code of Conduct
2. Anti­Bribery and
3. Commercial agreement (Packing material Supply
     Agreement) Along with the above, please attach a copy of the
     signed­off specs of Mucinex labels and the signed copy of our
     pricing/costing agreement on the Mucinex labels.
14
Please go through the commercial agreement, provide all
relevant details i.e. Company Name, Address, Supply/Mfg.
location, Details of Products manufactured/supplied, Agreed
payment terms etc. and send us the duly signed (by the
authorized signatory) & company stamped copy along with
the signed & stamped copies of the Code of Conduct and
Anti Bribery policies.
For any information or clarifications, please contact me.
Request you to email/send us all the documents latest by
30th April 2014 and if earlier it would be really appreciated.

Regards,

Sonu Dev Joshi
Manager Procurement –Packing Material
RB
Plot – 48, Institutional Area, Sector­32, Gurgaon – 122001
Direct­91­124­4028197; Mobile +91 85273­99487
www.reckittbenckiser.com



                                                 ANNEXURE A­6

On 23­Apr­2014, at 12:00 pm., “Frederik Reynders”
<
[email protected]
> wrote:
Dear Sonu,
We will provide you with all complete documents before 30th.
A lead time of 14 days is highly requested and recommended
a leaflet label after receival of PO till delivery at RB factory in
Baddi.
Please confirm.
Best regards,

Frederik Reynders
Reynders_Label Printing India Pvt. Ltd.
www.reynders.com


                                                 ANNEXURE A­7
15
From: Joshi, Sonu [mail to:
[email protected]
]
Sent:      woensdag 23 april 2014 12:10
To:        Frederic Reynders
Cc:        Kari Vandenbussche

Subject: Re: Commercial Agreement       sign­off   – RB   &
Reynders

Hi Frederik

Thanks.
We (me and you) will discuss on the lead­times, align on
some buffer days and publish the official lead times to
BADDI planning team.
The unofficial or real/crash/squeeze lead time must remain
between the three of us.
Regards

Sonu Dev Joshi
Manager­PM Procuremen
RB


                                           ANNEXURE A­8

From:         Frederic Reynders [mail to:
[email protected]
]
Sent:         Wednesday, April 23, 2014 4:09 PM
To:           Joshi, Sonu
Cc:           Kari Vandenbussche

Subject: RE: Commercial Agreement sign­off – RB &
Reynders

Dear Sonu,

Please find attached the contract with some comments of
our HQ in Belgium. We will discuss & agree on a realistic
and necessary lead time between the 3 of us.
For 9.1. I will provide you with an document of our
insurance to inform you about our maximum coverage.
16
Waiting for your feedback. Feel free to call in case of any
     questions.
Frederik Reynders
     Reynders_Label Printing India Pvt. Ltd.
www.reynders.com




                                                 ANNEXURE A­9

     From:    Kari Vandenbussche [mail to:
[email protected]
]
     Sent:      Friday, June 06, 2014 4:38 PM
     To:        Joshi, Sonu
     Cc:        Frederic Reynders
Subject: FW: Commercial Agreement sign­off – RB &
     Reynders

     Dear Mr. Sonu Joshi,
     Attached you find the signed agreement with Company
     stamp, hard copies will be delivered today at your R&B office
     in Gurgaon.
Best regards,

     Kari Vandenbussche
     Site Manager
     Plot no. F 686 – Chopanki Ind. Area
     Chopanki 301019 – Bhiwadi – Rajasthan
     T + 91 987 1024 467
     M + 91 987 102 4467
     F + 91 149 330 5403
     www.reynders.com”
                                             (emphasis supplied)
7.   Respondent No.2 has filed its counter affidavit and

emphatically refuted the assertions made by the applicant that
17
respondent No.2 is the parent or holding company of

respondent No.1. It is stated that respondent No.1 and

respondent No.2 both are part of Reynders Label Printing

Group. This group is an internationally operating group of

seven printing companies and each of these companies has its

own separate legal entities and operates in different offices

independently.   Further,   these   companies    only   share   a

common parent entity, namely, Reynesco NV which is also the

holding   company   of   both    respondent   companies.   First,

respondent No.2 had no presence or operation whatsoever in

India and was not involved in the negotiation, execution

and/or performance of the agreement. There is no privity of

contract between the applicant and respondent No.2. Second,

respondent No.2 in its counter affidavit has clearly stated that

Mr. Frederik Reynders was not the promoter of respondent

No.2. However, Mr. Frederik Reynders was an employee of

respondent No.1. The signatory to the stated agreement, Mr.

Kari Vandenbussche, had neither exercised any managerial

functions for respondent No.2, nor was he an authorized
18
representative or a director of respondent No.2 with any

authority to appoint the said respondent. The relevant extract

of the counter affidavit reads thus:
“THE ANSWERING RESPONDENT DID NOT PARTICIPATE
     IN THE NEGOTIATIONS PERTAINING THE AGREEMENT
15. It is incorrect to state that the answering
     Respondent was at any point in time involved in the
     negotiations with respect to the Agreement. The
     answering Respondent did not make any presentation or
     representations to the Applicant. From the documents
     annexed by the Applicant, there is nothing to show that
     the answering Respondent ever made any presentation
     to the Applicant or was present at any meeting prior to
     the date of the alleged Agreement.
16. Contrary to what has been alleged by the
     Applicant, the answering Respondent did not provide
     any comments on the draft of the Agreement. The
     answering Respondent submits that it is not aware of the
     e­mail dated 23.04.2014, as alleged by the Applicant.
     Respondent No.1 did not forward e­mail dated
     23.04.2014 or any such e­mail to the answering
     Respondent seeking comments of the answering
     Respondent on the draft of the Agreement. The reference
     to HQ in Belgium is not a reference to the answering
     Respondent. As explained above, the answering
     Respondent is but one of seven subsidiaries of the
     holding company Reynesco NV.
17. The answering Respondent submits that it was not
     party to any negotiations pertaining to the Agreement. The
     signatory to the Agreement, Mr. Karl Vandenbussche,
     and Mr. Frederik Reynders, who is alleged to have
     carried out the negotiations with respect to the
     Agreement, were not representing (or purporting to
19
represent) or acting in any way for the answering
Respondent, and they had no authority to bind the
answering Respondent.
18. The answering Respondent has no connection to the
present dispute not having been a party in any capacity to
the negotiation, execution, or enforcement of the Agreement.
RESPONDENT NO.1 HAD NO AUTHORITY TO BIND THE
ANSWERING RESPONDENT AND DID NOT EXECUTE THE
AGREEMENT ON BEHALF OF THE ANSWERING
RESPONDENT.
19. The signatory to the Agreement is Mr. Karl
Vandenbussche, who at no point time exercised any
managerial functions for the answering Respondent. Mr.
Vandenbussche     has   never   been   an   authorized
representative or a director of the answering
Respondent, having any authority to bind the answering
Respondent.
20. Further, Mr. Frederik Reynders, who is alleged to
have carried out the negotiations with respect to the
Agreement, has incorrectly been described as the
promoter of the answering Respondent. Mr. Frederik
Reynders was not and has never been an employee,
officer or representative of the answering Respondent.
21. The Applicant contends that the fact that Mr. Frederik
Reynders was acting on behalf of the answering Respondent
and the answering Respondent is the parent company of
Respondent No.1 binds the answering Respondent to the
Agreement and consequently the arbitration Agreement. It is
submitted that the answering Respondent is not the
parent company of Reynders India and at no point in
time was Mr. Frederik Reynders ever employed by the
answering Respondent or for that matter Reynesco NV.
Clearly, Mr. Frederik Reynders was not acting for the
answering Respondent, and had no authority to bind the
answering Respondent. From the communication and
documents annexed by the Applicant, there is nothing to
show that Mr. Vandenbussche or Mr. Frederik Reynders
represented themselves to be the agents of the answering
20
Respondent or authorized persons acting for the answering
     Respondent.
22. It is submitted that the answering Respondent has no
     connection to the present dispute not having been a party in
     any capacity to the negotiation, execution, or enforcement of
     the Agreement. Therefore, the Applicant’s submission that
     the Agreement was executed by Respondent No.1 on behalf
     of Respondent No.2, is incorrect. As demonstrated above, the
     answering Respondent was never a participant in the
     negotiations between the Applicant and Respondent No.1.”

                                                 (emphasis supplied)
8.   The applicant has filed a rejoinder affidavit in which it is

vaguely stated that Mr. Frederik Reynders, during the stage of

negotiation of the agreement, was taking directions from the

representatives of respondent No.2. In paragraphs 10 to 12 of

the said affidavit, in response to the stand taken by

respondent No.2, the applicant has stated thus:
“10. The contents of Para 15 are wrong and denied. It is a
     matter of record (Annexure – A3 at Page 135 of the
     Application) that the Respondents had approached the
     Applicant at the time of negotiation of Agreement under the
     common banner of ‘Reynders Label Printing’ and in that
     capacity had made a presentation to the Applicant. In fact,
     the Respondents market themselves as a label printing
     company, the printing being executed through various sites
     around the world.
11. The contents of Para 16­18 are incorrect and denied. It is
     a matter of record that Respondent No.2 had actively
     participated in the negotiation of the Agreement. It is a
     matter of record (Annexure A­8 at Page 194 of Application)
     that Respondent No.1 was taking directions from
     Respondent No.2 during the stage of negotiations of the
21
Agreement. In fact, Respondent No.2 through Mr. Kristof
     Vandenbroucke had shared comments on the Agreement.
The same Mr. Kristof Vandenbroucke subsequently
     participated in the escalation meeting held in
     Amsterdam for amicable resolution of the disputes that
     have arisen between the parties. Without prejudice to the
     same, it is submitted that it is inconsequential whether or
     not Respondent No.2 participated in negotiations of the
     Agreement. As elaborated in the Preliminary Submissions,
     there is irrefutable evidence that Respondent No.2 has
     assented to the Agreement.
12. The contents of Para 19­22 are wrong and denied. It is a
     matter of record (Annexure A­8 at Page 194 of the
     Application) that Mr. Frederik Reynders, during the
     stage of negotiations of the Agreement, was taking
     directions from representatives of Respondent No.2. In
     any case, as demonstrated hereinabove, Respondent No.2
     has admitted to its liability under the Indemnity Clause, its
     limited objection being the extent of its liability thereunder.
     Additionally, Respondent No.2 had participated in the
     escalation meetings held in Amsterdam under the
     Arbitration Clause. Clearly the paragraphs under reply are
     an afterthought.”
                                                  (emphasis supplied)
9.    In the backdrop of the averments in the application and

the correspondence exchanged between the parties adverted to

by the applicant, it is obvious that the thrust of the claim of

the applicant is that Mr. Frederik Reynders was acting for and

on behalf of respondent No.2, as a result of which the

respondent No.2 has assented to the arbitration agreement.

This basis has been completely demolished by respondent
22
No.2 by stating, on affidavit, that Mr. Frederik Reynders was

in no way associated with respondent No.2 and was only an

employee of respondent No.1, who acted in that capacity

during the negotiations preceding the execution of agreement.

Thus, respondent No.2 was neither the signatory to the

arbitration agreement nor did have any causal connection with

the process of negotiations preceding the agreement or the

execution thereof, whatsoever. If the main plank of the

applicant, that Mr. Frederik Reynders was acting for and on

behalf of respondent No.2 and had the authority of respondent

No.2,   collapses,   then   it        must   necessarily   follow   that

respondent No.2 was not a party to the stated agreement nor

had it given assent to the arbitration agreement and, in

absence thereof, even if respondent No.2 happens to be a

constituent of the group of companies of which respondent

No.1 is also a constituent, that will be of no avail. For, the

burden is on the applicant to establish that respondent No.2

had an intention to consent to the arbitration agreement and

be party thereto, maybe for the limited purpose of enforcing
23
the indemnity clause 9 in the agreement, which refers to

respondent No.1 and the supplier group against any claim of

loss, damages and expenses, howsoever incurred or suffered

by the applicant and arising out of or in connection with

matters    specified     therein.     That     burden    has     not      been

discharged by the applicant at all. On this finding, it must

necessarily follow that respondent No.2 cannot be subjected to

the   proposed     arbitration        proceedings.      Considering        the

averments in the application under consideration, it is not

necessary for us to enquire into the fact as to which other

constituent   of   the       group    of   companies,     of    which      the

respondents form a part, had participated in the negotiation

process.
10. Suffice it to observe that respondent No.2 was never

involved in the negotiation process concerning the stated

agreement     dated    1st    May,     2014.    On   this      finding,    the

application must fail as against respondent No.2 and as a

consequence whereof, the provisions for making reference to

the sole arbitrator, on the                assumption that it is an
24
international commercial arbitration, cannot be taken forward.

        As respondent No.1 is a company having been established

        under the provisions of the
Indian Companies Act
and having

        its registered office in India, the applicant can pursue its

        remedy against respondent No.1 for appointment of a sole

        arbitrator to conduct arbitration proceedings, as a domestic

        commercial arbitration.
11. Indeed, the applicant had vehemently relied upon the

        circumstances and correspondence post­contract but that

        cannot be the basis to answer the matter in issue. The

        respondent No.2 has justly relied upon the exposition in
Godhra Electricity Co. Ltd. and Anr. Vs. State of Gujarat

        and Anr.,5
to buttress the argument that post­negotiations in

        law would not bind the respondent No.2 qua the arbitration

        agreement limited between applicant and respondent No.1. In

        any case, even this plea is based on the assumption that Mr.

        Frederik Reynders was associated with and had authority to

        transact on behalf of respondent No.2, which assertion has
5
(1975) 1 SCC 199
25
been refuted and rebutted by respondent No.2. It is clearly

stated that Mr. Frederik Reynders was neither connected to

nor had any authority of respondent No.2, but was only an

employee of respondent No.1 and acted only in that capacity.
12. For the view that we have taken, it is unnecessary to

dilate on other contentions. Suffice it to observe that the

application must fail against respondent No.2 and on that

conclusion, no relief can be granted to the applicant who has

invoked the jurisdiction of this Court on the assumption that

it is a case of international commercial arbitration. Despite

that, respondent No.1 through counsel has urged that as the

subject agreement between the applicant and respondent No.1

contains an arbitration clause (clause 13) and since disputes

have arisen between them, the respondent No.1 would agree to

the appointment of a sole arbitrator by this Court for

conducting arbitration proceedings between the applicant and

respondent No.1, as domestic commercial arbitration. This

stand has been reiterated in the written submissions filed on

behalf of respondent No.1, filed after the conclusion of the oral
26
arguments. Resultantly, even though no relief can be granted

to the applicant as against respondent No.2, we proceed to

pass the following order in the interest of justice.
13. The arbitration application is dismissed as against

respondent No.2. However, we appoint Mr. Justice Badar

Durrez Ahmed (Former Chief Justice, Jammu & Kashmir High

Court) as the sole arbitrator to conduct domestic commercial

arbitration   at   New   Delhi,   between   the   applicant   and

respondent No.1 on the terms and conditions as specified in

the Act of 1996.
14. Application stands disposed of in the above terms. No

costs. All pending interim applications are also disposed of.
…………………………..….J.
                                       (A.M. Khanwilkar)




                                       …………………………..….J.
                                       (Ajay Rastogi)
New Delhi;
July 01, 2019.