[Cites
15
, Cited by
46
]
Supreme Court of India
Vasavi Engineering College Parents ... vs The State Of Telangana on 1 July, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 4731, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 762, (2019) 3 SCT 482, (2019) 6 ANDHLD 218, 2019 (7) SCC 172, (2019) 9 SCALE 95
Author:
Navin Sinha
Bench:
Navin Sinha
,
Arun Mishra
REPORTABLE

                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                          CIVIL APPEAL NO(s).5133 OF 2019
                         (arising out of SLP(C)No.30090 of 2018)

          VASAVI ENGINEERING COLLEGE
          PARENTS ASSOCIATION                             ...APPELLANT(S)

                                        VERSUS
          STATE OF TELANGANA AND OTHERS                ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                         WITH
                          CIVIL APPEAL NO(s).5135 OF 2019
                         (arising out of SLP(C)No.32626 of 2018)

          THE STATE OF TELANGANA REPRESENTED
          BY ITS PRINCIPAL SECRETARY,
          HIGHER EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
          AND OTHERS                         ...APPELLANT(S)

                                        VERSUS
          VASAVI ACADEMY OF EDUCATION                   ...RESPONDENT(S)

                          CIVIL APPEAL NO(s).5134 OF 2019
                         (arising out of SLP(C)No.31983 of 2018)


          STATE OF TELANGANA                              ...APPELLANT(S)

                                        VERSUS
          SREE EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY & OTHERS
Signature Not Verified                                   ...RESPONDENT(S)
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2019.07.01
16:30:39 IST
Reason:




                                            1
                                 JUDGMENT

NAVIN SINHA, J.
Leave granted.
2.   This court, in
Islamic Academy of Education and

another vs. State of Karnataka and Ors.
, (2003) 6 SCC 697,

directed the establishment in each State, of a Committee to

regulate the fee structure in unaided minority and non­minority

educational institutions. The Telangana Admission and Fee

Regulatory Committee (for Professional Courses offered in Private

Unaided   Professional   Institutions)   Rules,   2006    (hereinafter

referred to as “the Rules”) were framed under Section 15 read

with
Sections 3
and
7
of the Telangana Educational Institutions

(Regulation of Admission and Prohibition of Capitation Fee) Act,

1983 (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”). Under Rule 4(v), the

Committee   is   required   to    communicate     the   fee   structure

determined by it to the State Government for notification. The fee

structure so notified, inter alia for the B.E. and B.Tech courses,

for the block period 2016­17 to 2018­19, on a challenge made by

the respondent institutions did not meet the approval of the

learned Single Judge.       The matter was remanded to the
2
Committee. On a reconsideration, the Committee granted some

escalation, which was again challenged. Opining that the fixation

was not proper, the learned Single Judge proceeded to fix the fee

structure to his satisfaction.      Aggrieved, the State of Telangana

and   the    Fee    Regulatory      Committee         assailed    the   same

unsuccessfully     before   the    Division       Bench.        The   parent’s

association has also assailed the impugned orders directly before

this Court, after having been granted leave to do so. Thus, the

appeals.
3.    Shri K. Radhakrishnan, learned senior counsel appearing

for the State of Telangana, submitted that the Telangana

Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee constituted under the

Rules (hereinafter referred to as “TAFRC”) has framed detailed

guidelines   under    which       the       private   unaided    professional

institutions were required to submit fee proposals for the block

period 2016­17 to 2018­19. The guidelines lay down an elaborate

procedure with regard to the requisite information required to be

submitted by an institution in support of the proposal, the factors

to be considered by the TAFRC, the manner of consideration in

arriving at a balanced fee structure, keeping in mind the interest
3
of the students as also the educational institutions, to ensure that

there was no profiteering or capitation fee.              The Committee is

headed by a retired High Court Judge, and comprises various

domain experts from different fields with necessary expertise. The

recommendations of the TAFRC with regard to the fee structure

therefore ought not to have been interfered with by the High

Court in exercise of the powers of judicial review by substituting

its own view over that of the TAFRC to redetermine the proper fee

structure. The fee structure for the three­year block period vide

GOM No.21 dated 04.07.2016 was initially determined by the

TAFRC at Rs. 86,000/­ and Rs. 91,000/­ for the respondent

institutions, which after remand by the High Court was uniformly

redetermined at Rs.97,000/­ per student on 04.02.2017. The

TAFRC    did    not   act    arbitrarily   by    declining    to   take into

consideration    relevant     materials,    or    relied     on    extraneous

materials   collected       behind   the    back     of    the     respondent

institutions.   The     TAFRC     acted    in    consultation       with   the

respondent institutions, including seeking clarifications from

them.   The High Court did not find that the TAFRC had acted

contrary to the provisions of the Act, the Rules, the guidelines or
4
in violation of any basic principles of accounting and procedures.

The fact that after remand the TAFRC may have adopted a

different methodology to determine 10% inflation and 15%

furtherance for the entire block period cannot be construed as

arbitrariness. Merely because in the opinion of the High Court

another view could also have been taken, cannot justify the

usurpation of the jurisdiction of the TAFRC by the High Court.
4.   The mere fact that the determination of the fee structure by

the TAFRC has been held to be of a quasi­judicial nature,

amenable to challenge under
Article 226
of the Constitution, did

not vest in it the nature of an adversarial dispute between the

TAFRC and the respondent institutions.       The disallowance of

certain claims, the genuineness of which, did not meet the

approval of the expert committee, does not render the fee fixation

arbitrary.
5.   Learned senior counsel Shri F.S. Nariman, appearing on

behalf of the respondent institutions, submitted that the three­

year block period was now over, and the actual expenses are

available.   The respondent institutions, on the fee structure as

approved by the TAFRC, would land up with a huge financial
5
deficit. The fee structure of Rs.1,60,000/­ and Rs.1,37,000/­ as

fixed by the High Court would almost allow a break even for the

respondent institutions. The TAFRC, for the accepted expenditure

of the base year in the previous block period recommended a fee

structure of Rs.1,15,400/­.   Ironically, despite having accepted

increased audited expenditure of Rs.29.26 crores, astonishingly

the fee structure of Rs.97,000/­ only has been recommended.

10% inflation and 15% furtherance in accordance with the

methodology of the TAFRC for the block period justifies fees of

Rs.1,58,675/­ per student.    The claim of the institutions was

reasonable considering the expenses of equivalent government

colleges in the State and the subsidy they get from the State,

unlike which the respondent institutions have only fees to fund

their expenses. The State was also not reimbursing the necessary

fee with regard to those students whose parents did not have an

annual income of Rs.2 lakh per year.
6.   The submission on behalf of the parents association was

that the mere giving of an undertaking to abide by the final

decision cannot operate as an estoppel preventing challenge to

the fee structure as determined by the High Court.
6
7.   We have considered the respective submissions.           A brief

recapitulation of the essential provisions and facts would be

necessary for better appreciation.
8.   Rule 3(i) provides for the constitution of the TAFRC which

shall have a term of three years from the date of constitution

under Rule 3(iii).      The TAFRC as prescribed under Rule 3(ii) is

headed by a retired High Court Judge and other members as

provided therein. The 2006 Rules were modified on 22.07.2015 by

GOMs. No.26. The present constitution of the Committee is as

follows:
The Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee (AFRC)

               shall consist of the following: ­
(i)        Retired High Court Judge                  Chairman
(ii)       One academic expert on technical          Member
                 education
(iii)      One academic expert on medical            Member
                 education
(iv)       One finance expert                        Member
(v)        One legal expert                          Member
(vi)       One Vice­Chancellor                       Member
(vii)      One representative from Govt. Finance     Member
                 Department
(viii)     The    Chairman,    Telangana     State   Member
                 Council of Higher Education
(ix)       One representative of All India Council   Member
                 of    Technical     Education/Medical
                 Council of India/Bar Council of
7
India/National Council for Teacher
               Education (as the case may be)
(x)      Any special invitee as decided by the           Member
               Chairman
(xi)     The    Principal   Secretary/Secretary          Member
               representing the Education/Health,              Secretary
               Medical & Family Welfare Department
9.   Rule 4 deals with fee fixation and provides for examination

by the TAFRC of the proposed fee structure submitted by an

educational institution. Rule 4(ii) vests power in the TAFRC to

decide whether the proposed fee structure submitted was justified

or not and amounted to profiteering or capitation fee. Rule 4(ii)

and 4(iv) require the TAFRC to take into consideration the

following factors for prescribing the fees.
“4(ii) The AFRC shall decide whether the fees proposed by
     the     institution   is   justified   and   does   not   amount      to
     profiteering or charging of capitation fee.
4(iv) The AFRC shall take into consideration the following
     factors while prescribing the fee:
a) the location of the professional institution;
b) the nature of the professional course;
c) the cost of available infrastructure;
d) the expenditure on administration and maintenance;
8
e) a reasonable surplus required for the growth and
      development of the professional institution;
f) the revenue foregone on account of waiver of fee, if any, in
      respect of students belonging to schedule castes, schedule
      tribes   and   whenever    applicable   to   the   socially   and
      educationally backward classes and other economically
      weaker sections of Society, to such extent as shall be
      notified by the Government from time to time.
g) any other relevant factor.”
10.   The guidelines framed by the TAFRC under Rule 3(vii) for

submission of the proposed fee structure by an institution are

detailed and elaborate. It is therefore considered necessary to

reproduce the same for better understanding and appreciation of

the functioning of the TAFRC.
“TELANGANA ADMISSION AND FEE REGULATORY
           COMMITTEE (TAFRC) GUIDELINES
           For Furnishing fee proposals by Private Un­aided
           Professional Institutions in the State of Telangana for
           the block period 2016­2017 to 2018­2019.
 As per the provisions of Prohibition of Capitation Fee
          Act, the collection of capitation fee by Private Unaided
          Professional Institutions by whatever name is illegal.
         The Institutions shall submit audited statements of
          income and expenditure, audited balance sheets and
          requirements for the developmental needs for the
          immediately preceding year 2014­15 and also
9
particulars of expenditure incurred on salaries and
  infrastructure and other particulars (with supporting
  bills, vouchers or receipts etc.) with projected figures
  for 2015­16.
 Any fee proposals in respect of Private Unaided
  Professional Institutions have to be evaluated keeping
  in view the above noted cardinal principles.
 It is therefore necessary that the fee proposals
  furnished by the Private Unaided Professional
  Institutions have to be evaluated based on the income
  and expenditure of the institutions as well as the
  Societies/Trusts under which umbrella the said
  institutions are established.
 The fee proposals the following principles will be
  considered for adoption keeping in view the interest of
  both the institutions as well as the student community.

a. All the required financial information should be
   submitted as per the Mercantile (Accrual) System of
   Accounting. Financial information submitted in any
   other system of accounting will not be treated as the
   information provided by the institution and the same
   will not be considered for the purpose of evaluation.
b. If an institution previously followed any other system of
   accounting and for the purpose of fee fixation has
   migrated to the Mercantile (Accrual) System of
   Accounting, all the expenditure which pertains to the
   financial years 2014­15 and 2015­16(projected) only
   shall be taken into account while preparing the
   financial statements/information to be submitted to the
   Telangana Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee
   (TAFRC).
c. The fee shall be fixed based on the revenue expenditure
   including depreciation on the Assets of the institution.
  In order to fix the fee structure for the block period
  2016­17 to 2018­19 information given the following
  schedules will be taken into consideration.
Reference      Details to be furnished in the
                      schedule
10
Schedule­1    Details of Fee Collections for all the
              Programmes in the Institution for
              the Financial Year 2014­2015 &
              2015­16.
Schedule­2    Income & Expenditure Statement
              of the Institution for the financial
              years 2014­2015 & 2015­16.
Schedule­3    Income & Expenditure Statement
              of the Society for the financial
              years 2014­2015 & 2015­16.
Schedule­4    Eligible Teaching Staff Salaries &
              Arrears paid by the institution
              (including     complete     employee
              details)
Schedule­5    Other Teaching Staff Salaries &
              Arrears paid by the institution
              (including     complete     employee
              details)
Schedule­6    Regular      Non­Teaching        Staff
              Salaries & Arrears paid by the
              institution   (including    complete
              employee details)
Schedule­7    Contract      Non­Teaching       Staff
              Salaries & Arrears paid by the
              institution   (including    complete
              employee details)
Schedule­8    Statement of Administrative &
              Other Expenses of the institution
              for the Financial Year 2014­2015 &
              2015­16.
Schedule­9    Statement of Finance Costs of the
              institution for the financial Years
              2014­2015 & 2015­16.
Schedule­10   Fixed     Assets     Schedule       for
              Depreciation
Schedule­11   Statement of Revenue Grants
              Received & Utilised by the
              Institution for the Financial Years
              2014­2015 & 2015­16.
Schedule­12   Status of Utilisation of Amounts
11
collected under NRI Quota
       Schedule­13    Status of Utilisation of 10%
                      allowed towards furtherance of
                      education.
Schedule­14    Details of Fixed Deposits of the
                      institution.
Schedule­15    Details of Loans Received from
                      Societies,          Banks/Financial
                      Institution by the Institution.
       Schedule­16    Details of Loans Received from
                      Others by the Institution (Private
                      Loans)
       Schedule­17    Statement of Corpus/Capital Fund
                      of the Institution
       Schedule­18    Statement      of  Capital     Grants
                      Received & Utilised by the
                      Institution
       Schedule­19    Balance Sheet for Institution
       Schedule­20    Balance Sheet for Society
       Schedule­21    Legal Expenditure
       Schedule­22    Other      Information      (Students
                      Results etc.)
B) With regards to the expenditure it is broadly categorized
   as follows:
A) Salary Expenditure:
i) Salary expenditure on teaching faculty for 2014­15 &
   2015­16, who are fully qualified as per norms,
   including the age of retirement, Teacher student ratio
   and cadre strength as per the AICTE norms.
ii) Salary expenditure of teaching faculty for 2014­15 &
   2015­16, who are not fully qualified regarding
   qualifications, age, and staff beyond prescribed teacher
   student ratio etc.
iii) Salary expenditure of non­teaching staff for 2014­15
   & 2015­16, who are on regular scales and within the
   prescribed teaching and non­teaching ratio, including
   the age of retirement.
12
iv) Salary expenditure of non­teaching staff for 2014­15
   & 2015­16, who are on consolidated/contract
   emoluments or reemployed beyond the age of
   retirement and staff engaged beyond the prescribed
   teaching and non­teaching ratio.
v) The retirement age shall be 65 years for teaching
   faculty and 58 years for non­teaching staff and 60
   years for last grade servants.
vi) Arrears of previous years’ salary should not be
   included in the gross salary and should be shown
   separately.
1) In order to consider the expenditure on teaching and
   non­teaching staff, the cadre strength fixed by the
   respective competent authorities like AICTE/NCTE and
   Bar Council of India etc., have to be adopted. Persons
   who are appointed over and above this strength shall
   be shown in the other related proforma.
2) Faculty norms shall be as per notification issued by
   respective competent authorities like AICTE, NCTE etc.
3) In case services of any of the employee is utilized for
   more than one programme, such names shall be shown
   only in one programme.
4) The teaching faculty should be qualified. Non­qualified
   teaching faculty will not be counted/considered for the
   purpose of expenditure.
5) PAN number for teaching faculty is a must. In respect
   of non­teaching and other staff also, PAN data shall be
   furnished,                 where                   monthly
   salary/emoluments/honorarium/remuneration                is
   Rs.25,000 or more. If no PAN/wrong PAN data of them
   is given, the expenditure to that extent will be ignored.
6) Aadhar Card Number has to be indicated both for
   teaching faculty/non­teaching faculty.
7) Payment of salaries through cheque/bank will only be
   considered for expenditure purpose in respect of
13
teaching faculty. Cash payments shall be subject to
     production of evidence.
8)     In case of non­teaching staff, the monthly
     honorarium/salary/remuneration, as the case may be,
     is more than Rs.25,000/­ shall be made through
     cheque/bank. Cash payments shall be subject to
     production of evidence.
9) Audited financial statements for the period 01/04/2015
   to 30/11/2015 and projected financial statements for
   the period 01/12/2015 to 01/03/2016 will be the basis
   for calculating the expenditure for the Institution.
10) Audited financial statements for the financial year
   2014­15 & 2015­16 will be the basis for calculating the
   expenditure for the Institution.
11) Audited financial statements for the financial years
   2014­15 & 2015­16 shall also be furnished along with
   the fee proposals.
12) Acknowledgement of Returns of income filed with the
   Income Tax Department for the Assessment Years
   2014­15 & 2015­16 pertaining to the financial years
   2013­14 & 2014­15 together with Form­10B Audit
   Report shall be submitted along with the fee proposal.
13) Audit report shall contain the signature of the Auditor,
   his name, ICAI membership number along with the
   following information: ­
i)     PAN Number of the Auditor.
ii)    E­mail id of the Auditor.
iii)   Cell No. of the Auditor.
If the Auditor is a partner of the firm; following
     additional details shall be given:
a) Firm ICAI Registration Number
b) PAN Number of the Firm.
c) E­mail id of the Firm.
14
NOTE:­
(a) If the above said details are not furnished, auditor’s
    report will not be considered and the fee proposal will
    be summarily rejected.
(b)TAFRC has a right to direct the presence of Auditor or
   seek confirmation from him/her and the corresponding
   costs, if any, shall be met by the Institution concerned.
   It is the responsibility of the Institution to secure the
   presence of the auditor when required.
 In case any institution runs more than one programme
  all the expenditure can be bifurcated and reflected in
  respective Schedules and the bifurcated expenditure
  shall be certified by Chartered Accountant. If clear
  bifurcation is not given the proposal shall be rejected.

 The entire particulars would be obtained online.
  However, the institution shall provide a hardcopy of
  uploaded    information    duly    signed   by   the
  Auditor/Secretary/Correspondent/Director/Principal
  (wherever it is required) by paying prescribed
  programme wise processing charges.
 To be credited to the “Telangana Admission and Fee
  Regulatory Committee (TAFRC)” bearing A/c No.
  62436164496, IFSC Code SBHY0020070, State Bank of
  Hyderabad, Shantinagar Branch, Hyderabad.
 If a society/trust runs more than one institution, the
  data/information shall be furnished institution wise.

  Note: All the above schedules can be used for different
  programmes by changing the no. of years of course as
  deemed fit. For example, 4 years of duration for under­
  graduate courses (3 years for Lateral Entry) and 2 years
  for PG Programmes etc.
  Note:
 Any expenditure that does not directly relate to the
  student’s education shall not be considered.
15
 Projected expenditure like advertisement of the
  institution in the ensuing block period, purchase of
  equipment, new recruitment to be made during the
  block period shall be met from the funds earmarked for
  the furtherance of the education.
 Percentage of increase between financial year 2014­15
  and 2015­16 will be taken into account to consider
  expenditure expenditure pertaining to the financial year
  2015­16. However, the Audited Income & Expenditure
  for the period 01/04/2015 to 30/11/2015 and
  Projected Income & Expenditure for the period
  01/12/2015 to 31/03/2016 must be submitted.
 Schedules for salary payment for the teaching staff will
  be included for
(i)    Those with qualifications
(ii)   Those without qualifications.
 Interest on the loan given by the societies to the
  institutions in respect of internal funds will not be
  taken into consideration.
 When an institution is running more than one
  course/programme, the income and expenditure
  statement and Balance sheet shall be bifurcated and
  bifurcated statement certified by the Auditor shall be
  furnished along with the fee proposals. If it is not done,
  the proposals will be summarily rejected.
 Annual TDS Returns filed in Forms 24Q and 26Q
  under
Income Tax Act
shall be submitted along with
  the proposal.
 Either rent or depreciation will be allowed on the
  buildings. In respect of rents the Institution shall
  obtain Rent Fixation Certificate from the concerned
  Executive Engineer of R&B Department and registered
  rental Agreement also should be provided.
16
 Any expenditure for which the corresponding income is
  there shall be disallowed if no corresponding income is
  shown.
 Filling up of the column relating fee proposed (course
  wise) for the block period of 2016­17 to 2018­19 in the
  general information sheet is mandatory.
Procedure to be adopted for filling the proforma:
i) The Codes allotted by the respective conveners to the
   institution shall be used, for example EAMCET code for
   Engineering Colleges.
ii) Financial details shall be furnished in Rupees only.
iii) The per student fee proposed should be programme­
     wise and for the block period 2016 – 2019 to be shown
     in the General Information sheet.
iv) Audited financial statements for the year 2014­15, for
    the period 01/04/2015 to 30/11/2015, and also the
    projected figures for the period 01/12/2015 to
    31/03/2016 must be submitted duly attested by
    Secretary/Correspondent of the Society/Trust shall
    also to be furnished along with the information relating
    to the institution together with the fee proposals.
Scanned copy of the statements shall be furnished
    online along with the relevant data.
v) If the institution furnishes incomplete data or fails to
   remit the processing charges as prescribed, such
   proposals will not be considered and ignored.

   The institute has to submit the following documents
   along with the fee proposals:
1. Formats duly filled in and signed by the
      Secretary/Correspondent/Director/Principal of the
      Institution;
2. Proof of depositing the processing charges;
17
3. Audited financial Statements for the period 2014­15
   and for the period 01/04/2015 to 30/11/2015 and
   also the projected figures for the period 01/12/2015
   to 31/03/2016 must be submitted and duly certified
   by Secretary/Correspondent of the Society/Trust.
4. Details of sanctioned intake given by the competent
   Authority for each course wise to be submitted.
5. Details of current status of affiliation, programme
   wise has to be submitted.
6. Other information/documents, if any (specify)
7. The following directions of Hon’ble High court of A.P.,
   in the D.B. Judgment dt.29.10.2011 in WP’s
   No.16547/2010 and batch reported in 2012 (3) ALT
   686 (D.B.) is brought to the notice of the
   Institutions: ­

    “......an institution which is unresponsive or does
    not     submit      statements    of  income    and
    expenditure, audited balance sheets, and
    requirements for developmental needs for the
    immediately preceding year; particulars of
    expenditure        incurred    on    salaries   and
    infrastructure and other particulars as may be
    specified (with supporting bills, vouchers or
    receipts, etc.,) shall not be permitted to collect
    any fee....”



Accordingly, in case of failure to furnish specified data
as mentioned above or submission of proposal with
incomplete data the institution/college will not be
entitled for determination of fee and will not be allowed
to collect any fee from the students for the block period
2016­17 to 2018­19 in terms of the said judgment.”
18
11.   The TAFRC initially fixed an annual fee of Rs.86,000/­ and

Rs.91,000/­ respectively by notification dated 04.07.2016 for the

block period for the respondent institutions, in consultation with

their representatives, including the seeking of clarifications from

them. The fact that determination of the fee structure was quasi­

judicial in nature, any disagreement by an institution with the fee

structure as determined by the TAFRC cannot ipso facto be

termed arbitrary to create a lis, but may call for further scrutiny

in an appropriate case, in exercise of judicial review.   Initially the

Single Judge opined that the determination of the fee structure

for the block period suffered from defects and remanded the

matter by order dated 14.11.2016, whereafter the TAFRC fixed a

uniform structure of Rs.97,000/­ annually per student for the

block period notified on 04.02.2017 which was again challenged

by the respondent institutions.
12.   The   High   Court    in    disagreement    with    the    fresh

recommendations of the TAFRC, took upon itself to redetermine

the fee structure for the block period at Rs.1,60,000/­ and

Rs.1,37,000/­ respectively, by a process of fresh mathematical

calculation and accounting, which lay in the exclusive domain
19
and jurisdiction of the TAFRC.        This despite the fact that the

TAFRC had already acted in consultation with the representatives

of the institutions including the seeking of clarifications.    The

calculation sheet had also been made available to the institutions.

The fact that earlier 10% inflation and 15% furtherance was

calculated on the basis of the gross expenditure statement, which

had now been changed by setting off the income against

expenditure to make the net expenditure the basis of assessment,

as compared to previous years, has been held by the High Court

to be a change in methodology by the TAFRC without prior

intimation and reasons, holding the same to be unjustified. But,

the High Court did not return any finding that the TAFRC had

acted contrary to the provision of the Act, Rules, guidelines,

principles of natural justice or basic principles of economics and

accounting, yet it chose to arrive at its own conclusions on a view

which appeared to it to be more fairer, desirable or more logical.

The High Court, has itself held that the procedural fairness and

bonafides of the TAFRC could not be doubted. Furthermore, an

amount of Rs.4,53,54,741.00 was found to be income with no

corresponding expenditure figures and which had been taken into
20
consideration for determination of the fee structure, was sought

to be re­agitated after remand without corresponding expenditure

figures, leading to the rejection of the same again. The conclusion

that inflation and furtherance had to be allowed separately for

each financial year of the block period for that reason is wholly

unsustainable.
13.   The   High   Court   also   set   aside   the   disallowance   of

Rs.1,39,20,000/­ with regard to 58 additional teachers in excess

of the 356 teachers required according to the norms of the All

India Council of Technical Education (hereinafter referred to as

“AICTE”) opining that it pertained to the jurisdiction of the AICTE

and not the TAFRC. The High Court overlooked that the TAFRC

inter alia consisted of domain experts from the AICTE also and

the fact that the TAFRC on 22.10.2016 in response to the data

submitted by the respondent institutions had already intimated in

context of the disallowance that the relevant staff were not having

the requisite qualifications. The actions of the TAFRC in this

regard were well within its jurisdiction apparent from the

guidelines extracted hereinabove, more particularly B(A) dealing

with permissible expenditure with regard to teacher strength,
21
qualifications etc as per AICTE norms. The importance of quality

teachers, duly qualified, without overcrowding hardly needs to be

emphasised. A teacher is the bedrock of the foundation on which

the future of the nation is built.     The High Court erred in its

casual approach.
14.   The High Court has laid much emphasis on the fact that it is

the prerogative of an educational institution to determine its fee

structure according to its needs, and that the TAFRC cannot act

to scrutinise the same like a Chartered Accountant. It needs no

reiteration that an element of justified flexibility has to be given to

an educational institution in determination of the fee structure.

But flexibility cannot be equated with elasticity to suit the desire

or claims of an institution.    Rule 4 (ii) vests jurisdiction in the

TAFRC to decide whether a proposed fee structure submitted by

an institution was justified or not and whether it amounted to

profiteering or capitation fee. To prune the jurisdiction of the

TAFRC by restraining it from examining and scrutinising the

statement of accounts to decide the justification of the proposed

fee structure, and confining its role to mere perusal and

comments, will amount to taking away its regulatory jurisdiction
22
completely. The object of the TAFRC is to ensure a justified fee

structure which does not reflect profiteering and capitation fee.

Profiteering is the making of an unreasonable profit taking

advantage    of     a    situation   by     escalating    prices    which   are

disapprovingly much or grossly exaggerated income generated

through manipulation of price by the use of a dominant position.

On the contrary, the 10% inflation and 15% furtherance allowed

by the TAFRC are aspects of a reasonable return or financial gain,

which is but a process of managing or running the institution

allowing a reasonable return for further growth as distinct from

unnecessary profitability. While a Regulatory Authority will not

allow profiteering, it will have to take into consideration the

necessity of a financial gain required inherent to the nature of the

activity as provided in Rule 4(ii)(e). We do not think the TAFRC

has faulted on that score.
15.    The detailed and elaborate nature of the information sought

by the TAFRC from an educational institution regarding the

proposed fee structure submitted to it under the prescribed

guidelines has already been noticed hereinabove. The TAFRC has

also   interacted       with   the   representative      of   the   respondent
23
institutions        and   sought    clarifications   before    the      final

determination by it. The proposition that the TAFRC is precluded

from acting like a chartered accountant inhibiting scrutiny by it

for justification of a proposal submitted to it by an institution is

too wide a proposition fraught with possibilities which may inhibit

the statutory functions of the TAFRC itself making it a toothless

tiger. In other words, the examination of the proposal will have to

be done by the TAFRC in a manner commensurate and

appropriate to an educational institution and not by rigid

adherence to the abstract principles of chartered accountancy in

general, and which may call for some flexibility.
16.   In our considered opinion, the crux of the controversy is the

jurisdiction and the extent to which the court can examine the

determination of the fee structure by the TAFRC and approved by

the State government, in exercise of the powers of judicial review.

The TAFRC, a statutory body headed by a retired High Court

Judge, consists of domain experts from various fields including

two from the finance sector, one of which is from the Government.

Rule 3(vii) vests the TAFRC with the power to frame its own

procedure      in    accordance    with   regulations   notified   by    the
24
Government in that regard and pursuant to which the guidelines

for fee fixation have been framed by it. The recommendations of

the TAFRC being the resultant of a quasi­judicial decision­making

process, it will undoubtedly be amenable to the jurisdiction of the

court for scrutiny by judicial review, so as to ensure adherence to

the constitutional principles of reasonableness, fairness and

adherence to the law under
Article 14
of the Constitution.
17.   Judicial review, as is well known, lies against the decision­

making process and not the merits of the decision itself. If the

decision­making process is flawed inter alia by violation of the

basic principles of natural justice, is ultra­vires the powers of the

decision maker, takes into consideration irrelevant materials or

excludes relevant materials, admits materials behind the back of

the person to be affected or is such that no reasonable person

would have taken such a decision in the circumstances, the court

may step in to correct the error by setting aside such decision and

requiring the decision maker to take a fresh decision in

accordance with the law. The court, in the garb of judicial review,

cannot usurp the jurisdiction of the decision maker and make the
25
decision itself. Neither can it act as an appellate authority of the

TFARC.
In
Fertilizer Corporation Kamgar Union (Regd.),

Sindri v Union of India
, (1981) 1 SCC 568, it was observed:
“35. ….We certainly agree that judicial interference with
      the administration cannot be meticulous in our
      Montesquien system of separation of powers. The court
      cannot usurp or abdicate, and the parameters of judicial
      review must be clearly defined and never exceeded. If the
      directorate of a government company has acted fairly, even
      if it has faltered in its wisdom, the court cannot, as a
      super auditor, take the Board of Directors to task. This
      function is limited to testing whether the administrative
      action has been fair and free from the taint of
      unreasonableness and has substantially complied with the
      norms of procedure set for it by rules of public
      administration.”
18.   Judicial   restraint   in   exercise   of   Judicial   review   was

considered in the
State of (NCT) of Delhi vs. Sanjeev
, (2005) 5

SCC 181 as follows:­

      “16.…One can conveniently classify under three heads
      the grounds on which administrative action is subject to
      control by judicial review. The first ground is “illegality”,
      the second “irrationality”, and the third “procedural
      impropriety”.
These principles were highlighted by Lord
      Diplock in Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for
      the Civil Service (commonly known as CCSU case). If
      the power has been exercised on a non­consideration or
      non­application of mind to relevant factors, the exercise
      of power will be regarded as manifestly erroneous. If a
      power (whether legislative or administrative) is exercised
      on the basis of facts which do not exist and which are
26
patently erroneous, such exercise of power will stand
      vitiated.”
19.   It needs no emphasis that complex executive decisions in

economic    matters    are   necessarily   empiric   and   based   on

experimentation.      Its validity cannot be tested on any rigid

principles or the application of any straitjacket formula. The court

while adjudging the validity of an executive decision in economic

matters must grant a certain measure of freedom or play in the

joints to the executive.      Not mere errors, but only palpably

arbitrary decisions alone can be interfered with in judicial review.

The recommendation made by a statutory body consisting of

domain experts not being to the satisfaction of the State

Government is an entirely different matter with which we were not

concerned in the present discussion.       The court should therefore

be loath to interfere with such recommendation of an expert body,

and accepted by the government, unless it suffers from the vice of

arbitrariness, irrationality, perversity or violates any provisions of

the law under which it is constituted.     The court cannot sit as an

appellate authority, entering the arena of disputed facts and

figures to opine with regard to manner in which the TAFRC ought
27
to have proceeded without any finding of any violation of rules or

procedure.    If a statutory body has not exercised jurisdiction

properly the only option is to remand the matter for fresh

consideration and not to usurp the powers of the authority.
In
Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd. vs. Reserve

Bank of India
, (1992) 2 SCC 343, it was observed:
“31. The function of the court is to see that lawful
      authority is not abused but not to appropriate to itself the
      task entrusted to that authority. It is well settled that a
      public body invested with statutory powers must take care
      not to exceed or abuse its power. It must keep within the
      limits of the authority committed to it. It must act in good
      faith and it must act reasonably. Courts are not to
      interfere with economic policy which is the function of
      experts. It is not the function of the courts to sit in
      judgment over matters of economic policy and it must
      necessarily be left to the expert bodies. In such matters
      even experts can seriously and doubtlessly differ. Courts
      cannot be expected to decide them without even the aid of
      experts.”
20. In the context of Indian jurisprudence, the Constitution is the

supreme law. All executive or legislative actions have to be tested

on the anvil of the same. Such actions will have to draw their

sustenance as also their boundaries under the same. Any action

falling foul of the constitutional guarantees will call for corrective
28
action in judicial review to ensure adherence to the constitutional

ethos. But so long as the fabric of the constitutional ethos is not

set asunder, the court will have to exercise restraint, more

particularly in matters concerning domain experts, else the risk of

justice being based on individual perceptions which may render

myths as realities inconsistent with the constitutional ethos.

Courts often adjudicate disputes that raise the question of how

strictly should they scrutinise executive or legislative action.

Therefore, courts have identified certain questions as being

inappropriate   for   judicial   resolution   or   have   refused   on

competency grounds to substitute their judgement for that of

another person on a particular matter. The need for judicial

restraint with regard to recommendations of expert committees,

more particularly in matters relating to finance and economics,

was considered in
BALCO Employees’ Union (Regd.) vs. Union of

India
, (2002) 2 SCC 333, it was held:
“65...Nevertheless, contention is sought to be raised that
      the method of valuation was faulty, some assets were
      not taken into consideration and that Rs 551.5 crores
      offered by M/s. Sterlite did not represent the correct
      value of 51% shares of the Company along with its
      controlling interest. It is not for this Court to consider
      whether the price which was fixed by the Evaluation
      Committee at Rs.551.5 crores was correct or not. What
29
has to be seen in exercise of judicial review of
      administrative action is to examine whether proper
      procedure has been followed and whether the reserve
      price which was fixed is arbitrarily low and on the face of
      it, unacceptable.
xxx               xxx             xxx
98. In the case of a policy decision on economic matters,
      the courts should be very circumspect in conducting any
      enquiry or investigation and must be most reluctant to
      impugn the judgment of the experts who may have
      arrived at a conclusion unless the court is satisfied that
      there is illegality in the decision itself.”
21.   Similar view was taken in
Government of Andhra Pradesh

vs. P. Laxmi Devi
, (2008) 4 SCC 720, observing as follows:
“80. ….As regards economic and other regulatory
      legislation judicial restraint must be observed by the
      court and greater latitude must be given to the
      legislature while adjudging the constitutionality of the
      statute because the court does not consist of economic
      or administrative experts. It has no expertise in these
      matters, and in this age of specialisation when policies
      have to be laid down with great care after consulting the
      specialists in the field, it will be wholly unwise for the
      court to encroach into the domain of the executive or
      legislative (sic legislature) and try to enforce its own
      views and perceptions.”
22.   The need for judicial restraint in economic and financial

matters based on reports of domain experts was again considered

in Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation Ltd.
30
vs. CSEPDI­Trishe Consortium, (2017) 4 SCC 318, holding as

follows:
“36…. At this juncture we are obliged to say that in a
      complex fiscal evaluation the Court has to apply the
      doctrine of restraint. Several aspects, clauses,
      contingencies, etc. have to be factored. These
      calculations are best left to experts and those who have
      knowledge and skills in the field. The financial
      computation involved, the capacity and efficiency of the
      bidder and the perception of feasibility of completion of
      the project have to be left to the wisdom of the financial
      experts and consultants. The courts cannot really enter
      into the said realm in exercise of power of judicial
      review. We cannot sit in appeal over the financial
      consultant’s assessment. Suffice it to say, it is neither
      ex facie erroneous nor can we perceive as flawed for
      being perverse or absurd.”
23.
Islamic Academy of Education
(supra) was a sequel to
T.M.A.

Pai Foundation & Ors. vs State of Karnataka & Ors.
, (2002)

8 SCC 481, which was being understood in different perspectives

leading to several litigations. The fixation of fee by the TAFRC is

not an adversarial exercise but is meant to ensure balance in the

fee structure between the competing interest of the students, the

institution and the requirement and desire of the society for

accessible quality education. It is but a part of the high concept

of fairness in opportunities and accessibility to education, which

is an avowed constitutional goal. But to equate it to the extent of
31
a right to challenge and interference only on basis of a different

view being possible, cannot be a justification to interfere with the

recommendation of an expert committee. It is nobody’s case that

the TAFRC has acted contrary to principles of accounting and

economics or any fundamental precincts of the same.
In this

context, the following observations in
Modern School vs. Union

of India
, (2004) 5 SCC 583, are considered relevant in the

necessary extract

      “20. We do not find merit in the above arguments. Before
      analysing the rules herein, it may be pointed out, that as of
      today, we have Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
      (GAAP). As stated above, commercialisation of education
      has been a problem area for the last several years. One of
      the methods of eradicating commercialisation of education
      in schools is to insist on every school following principles of
      accounting applicable to not­for­profit organisations/non­
      business organisations….
xxx xxx xxx
51. Indisputably, the standard of education, the curricular
      and co­curricular activities available to the students and
      various other factors are matters which are relevant for
      determining of the fee structure. The courts of law having
      no expertise in the matter and/or having regard to their
      own limitations keeping in view the principles of judicial
      review always refrain from laying down precise formulae in
      such matters. Furthermore, while undertaking such
      exercise the respective cases of each institution, their plans
      and programmes for the future expansion and several other
      factors are required to be taken into consideration. The
      Constitution Bench in Islamic Academy of Education which
      as noticed hereinbefore subject to making of an appropriate
32
legislation directed setting up of two Committees, one of
      which would be for determining fee structure. This Court,
      both in T.M.A. Pai Foundation and Islamic Academy of
      Education had upheld the rights of the minorities and
      unaided private institutions to generate a reasonable
      surplus for future development of education.”
24.   Before concluding the discussion, in view of the reasons

stated by the High Court for fixation of the appropriate fee

structure by itself, reference may usefully be made to the

observations in
D.N. Jeevaraj vs. Chief Secretary, Government

of Karnatka
, (2016) 2 SCC 653, as follows:
“43. To this we may add that if a court is of the opinion
      that a statutory authority cannot take an independent or
      impartial decision due to some external or internal
      pressure, it must give its reasons for coming to that
      conclusion. The reasons given by the court for disabling
      the statutory authority from taking a decision can always
      be tested and if the reasons are found to be inadequate,
      the decision of the court to by­pass the statutory authority
      can always be set aside. If the reasons are cogent, then in
      an exceptional case, the court may take a decision without
      leaving it to the statutory authority to do so. However, we
      must caution that if the court were to take over the
      decision taking power of the statutory authority it must
      only be in exceptional circumstances and not as a
      routine……”
25.   The High Court relied on (
1986) 2 SCC 679 Comptroller

and Auditor General of India, Gian Prakash, New Delhi and
33
another vs. K.S. Jagannathan and another
and (2000) 8 SCC

395 Badrinath vs. Government of Tamil Nadu and ors. to

justify the taking over of the decision­making process by itself

from the TFARC on four grounds.           In our opinion, both the

judgments are completely distinguishable on their own facts and

have no relevance to the question for consideration in the present

case.
K.S. Jagannathan
(supra) concerned promotion to the

Subordinate Accounts Service.
Badrinath (supra) related to a

claim for promotion to super­time scale. Both the cases have no

relevance    to   the   present   controversy   concerning   economic

recommendations made by a statutory committee consisting of

domain experts, and approved by the Government.              We are,

therefore, of the considered opinion in the facts of the present

case, as demonstrated from the available records that none of the

four grounds set out by the High Court can be considered as

making out an exceptional case to warrant usurpation of the

decision making jurisdiction of the TFARC by the High Court.
26.     We, therefore, hold that the High Court exceeded its

jurisdiction in interfering with the recommendation of the TAFRC
34
for reasons discussed.      The orders of the High Court are set

aside. The recommendation of the TAFRC dated 04.02.2017 for

the block period 2016­2017 and 2018­2019 is restored.
27.   In view of the interim order dated 27.06.2017 passed by the

High Court, the bank guarantees furnished by the respondent

institutions and directed to be kept alive are required to be

activated and action taken accordingly in accordance with law for

protection of the interest of the students.
28.   The appeals are allowed. No costs.
………………………. J.
(Arun Mishra)


                                              ………………………. J.
(Navin Sinha)
New Delhi,
July 01, 2019.
35