[Cites
3
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Sulekha Rani vs Union Of India on 16 July, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1095, 2019 (8) SCC 143, (2019) 3 SCT 738, (2019) 3 SERVLJ 20, (2019) 4 JCR 31 (SC)
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Indira Banerjee
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
1

                                                                                   REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                            Civil Appeal No 1280 of 2019




                Smt Sulekha Rani                                               Appellant(s)


                                                      VERSUS


                Union of India and Ors                                         Respondent(s)




                                                  JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J


                1        Admit.
2        This appeal arises from a judgment of the Armed Forces Tribunal 1 at its

                Principal Bench, New Delhi. While dismissing the Original Application filed by the

                appellant, the AFT has rejected her claim for grant of pension in respect of the

                service rendered by her deceased spouse in the Indian Army.



                3        The spouse of the appellant was enrolled in the Army on 23 April 1994. He

                was posted at the Siachen Glacier from 13 September 1998. He was in SHAPE 1
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
medical category. On 30 August 2000, he was downgraded to low medical category
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2019.07.24
18:39:36 IST
Reason:
1 AFT
2
P2. He was then shifted to a counter insurgency area in Jammu and Kashmir on 19

November 2000. On 31 August 2001, he was discharged from service. About 6

years after the discharge, he died on 30 September 2007, leaving behind him the

appellant and their children. A proceeding was initiated before the AFT for the grant

of pension. This was denied to the appellant.
4      The grievance of the appellant is that no Invalidation Medical Board was held

prior to the discharge of her spouse. He was in SHAPE 1 medical category before

being posted for 7 months at the Siachen Glacier. Relying on the decision of this

Court in
Dharamvir Singh v UOI2
, it has been submitted that a member of the force

is presumed to be in sound physical and mental condition upon entering service if

there is no contrary record at the time of entry. The submission is based on the

following extract from the decision:
“24.2. A disease which has led to an individual’s discharge or
               death will ordinarily be treated to have been arisen in service,
               if no note of it was made at the time of the individual’s
               acceptance for service in the Armed Forces.”

               29.2. A member is to be presumed in sound physical and
               mental condition upon entering service if there is no note or
               record at the time of entrance.
In the event of his
               subsequently being discharged from service on medical
               grounds any deterioration in his health is to be presumed due
               to service [Rule 5 read with Rule 14(b)]



Reliance is also placed upon the decision of this Court in
Union of India v Rajpal

Singh3 (“Rajpal Singh”
). In that case, the Respondent, a Junior Commissioned

Officer (JCO), was placed in the permanent low medical category for a period of

2(2013) 7 SCC 316
3 (2009) 1 SCC 216
3
two years before he was discharged. Before the expiry of this period, he was sent a

notice to show cause as to why he should not be discharged from service as no

sheltered appointment was available and his unit was deployed in a field area. A

two judge Bench of this Court held his discharge invalid on the ground that the

Respondent had not been subjected to an Invalidating Board under Rule 13(3)(I)(ii)

of the Army Act, 19504.
5       On the other hand, Mr Aman Lekhi, ASG submitted in the present case that a

notice to show cause was issued to the spouse of the appellant on 2 March 2001.

The show cause notice was in the following terms:
“1. You have been placed in low medical category BEE (P)
               with effect from 30 Aug 2000. You are willing to serve in
               present medical category but no sheltered appointment is
               available for you in the unit. Therefore, it is proposed that you
               should be discharged from service having placed in medical
               category lower than AYE and not upto the required standard
               under the provisions of Army Order 46/80 Rule 13(3) III (v) of
               Army Rules 1954.”



In response to this notice, a reply was addressed on 7 April 2001 stating that

though he wished to continue in the service of the Army, since he was being

discharged from service due to non-availability of a sheltered appointment in the

unit, he may be discharged in a manner that would enable him to obtain other

service in the civilian section. On the basis of this response, it was urged that the

Jawan had in fact accepted his discharge and as a result, there was no necessity to

appoint an Invalidation Board.           The order of discharge (it was urged) was not

appealed against in accordance with the provisions of law. The learned ASG has

submitted that the decision in
Dharam Singh
(supra) deals with the provisions of

4 “
Army Act
”
4
Rule 14(b) and hence may not have application. Moreover it was urged that the

spouse of the appellant had an Ectopic Kidney and his condition was not caused or

aggravated by military service.         It has been urged that the affliction was of a

constitutional nature and was not attributable to service in the Army.
6       In the present case, it is not in dispute before this Court that no Invalidation

Medical Board was held. The show cause notice upon which reliance has been

placed is dated 2 March 2001 and reference is made to Rule 13(3) (III) (v).



7       Rule 13 deals with Authorities empowered to authorize discharge. It provides

thus:
“13. Authorities empowered to authorize discharge. (1) Each
              of the authorities specified in column 3 of the Table below
              shall be the competent authority to discharge from service
              person subject to the Act specified in column 1 thereof on the
              grounds specified in column 2.
(2) Any power conferred by this rule on any of the aforesaid
              authorities shall also be exercisable by any other authority
              superior to it.
[(2A) Where the Central Government or the Chief of the Army
              Staff decides that any persons subject to the Act should be
              discharged from service, either unconditionally or on the
              fulfillment     of  certain    specified   conditions,    then,
              notwithstanding anything contained in this rule, the
              Commanding Officer shall also be the competent authority to
              discharge from service such person or any person belonging
              to such class in accordance with
the said decision
.]
                (3) In this table “commanding officer” means the officer
              commanding the corps or department to which the person to
              be discharged belongings except that in the case of junior
              commissioned officer and warrant officers of the Special
              Medical Section of the Army Medical Corps, the “commanding
              officer” means the Director of the Medical Services, Army, and
              in the case of junior commissioned officer and warrant officers
              of Remounts, Veterinary and Farms, Corps, the
              “Commanding officer” means the Director Remounts,
              Veterinary and Farms.”
5
In so far as is material to the discussion before us, Rule 13(3)(III) provides as

follows:
Category         Grounds                of    Competent authority   Manner of discharge
                 discharge                    to        authorise
                                              discharge
Persons          (iii) Having been found      Commanding Officer    To be carried out only on
enrolled under   medically     unfit  for                           the recommendation of
the Act    who   further service.                                   an Invalidating Board.
have      been
attested
                 (iii) (a) Having been        Commanding Officer    The individual will be
                 found     to   be   in                             discharged from service
                 permanent low medical                              on the recommendations
                 category SHAPE 2/3                                 of   Release    Medical
                 by a medical board                                 Board.
                 and when—

                 (i)    no      sheltered
                 appointment             is
                 available in the unit, or

                 (ii) is surplus to the
                 organisation.
                 (v) All other classes of     Brigade/Sub-area      The Brigade or Sub-area
                 discharge.                   Commander             Commander           before
                                                                    ordering the discharge
                                                                    shall,        if       the
                                                                    circumstances of the
                                                                    case permit give to the
                                                                    person whose discharge
                                                                    is     contemplated     an
                                                                    opportunity      to  show
                                                                    cause       against    the
                                                                    contemplated discharge.



8     Rule 13(3) (III) (v) is in the nature of a residuary provision. It covers all other
classes of discharge or, in other words, discharge which does not fall under the

preceding categories. The specific provision in regard to medical unfitness is

provided in Rule 13(3)(III)(iii) where a person has been found medically unfit for

further service. The manner of discharge provided is, “only on the recommendation

of an Invalidating Board”. The provision contained in Rule 13(3)(III)(iii)(a) which
6
provides for a discharge on the recommendations of the Release Board was

inserted on 29 May 2010 and hence, has no application to the present case.



9     In
Rajpal Singh
(supra), while interpreting 13 (3)(I) of the Rules, the Court

noted that only cases which are not covered under a specific head can be covered

under a residual head:
“24. … It is plain that a discharge on the ground of having
              been found "medically unfit for further service" is specifically
              dealt with in Column (I) (ii) of the Table, which stipulates that
              discharge in such a case is to be carried out only on the
              recommendation of the Invalidating Board. It is a cardinal
              principle of interpretation of a Statute that only those
              cases or situations can be covered under a residual
              head, which are not covered under a specific head. It is,
              therefore, clear that only those cases of discharge would
              fall within the ambit of the residual head, viz. I (iii) which
              are not covered under the preceding specific heads. In
              other words, if a JCO is to be discharged from the service on
              the ground of "medically unfit for further service", irrespective
              of the fact whether he is or was in a low medical category, his
              order of discharge can be made only on the recommendation
              of an Invalidating Board. The said rule being clear and
              unambiguous is capable of only this interpretation and no
              other.                                  (emphasis supplied)




The Court further noted that when the discharge was on the ground of medical

unfitness, the Rule prescribes a particular procedure for discharge. Thus, an order

of discharge passed without subjecting the officer to an Invalidating Board would be

contrary to the statutory rule:
“27. In view of the foregoing interpretation of the relevant rule,
              we are in complete agreement with the High Court that where
              a JCO is sought to be discharged on the ground of medical
              unfitness for further service, his case has to be dealt with
              strictly in accordance with the procedure contemplated in
              Clause I (ii) in Column 2 of the Table appended to Rule 13.
7
The Rule prescribes a particular procedure for discharge
             of a JCO on account of medical unfitness, which must be
             followed and, therefore, any order of discharge passed
             without subjecting him to Invalidating Board would fall
             foul of the said statutory rule.”
                                                 (emphasis supplied)



10    After considering the facts and material before us, we are of the view that the

discharge of the appellant’s spouse without convening an Invalidation Medical

Board suffers from an illegality. The respondents have relied upon the response

purportedly addressed by the Jawan to the notice to show cause issued to him.
The provisions Rule 13(3) (III) (v) upon which reliance has been placed had no

application to the case. It would not operate in an area which is covered by medical

unfitness.
11    Having weighed the nature of the relief that should be granted to the

appellant, we are of the view that the case of the appellant for grant of family

pension deserves to be accepted. We direct that for the purposes of computing the

family pension, the service of the deceased spouse of the appellant should be

deemed to have continued until 30 September 2007. No arrears of wages shall be

payable between the date of discharge and the date of death. The arrears of family

pension shall be paid to the appellant within a period of three months from the date

of receipt of a certified copy of this order. The appellant is accordingly held to be

entitled to family pension on the above basis.
8
12    We allow the appeal in the above terms and set aside the impugned

judgment of the Armed Forces Tribunal dated 16 March 2016. In the circumstances

of the case there shall be no order as to costs.
……………………….…...…....................J.
                                           [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]



                                          ….…………………….…...…....................J.
                                          [Indira Banerjee]

NEW DELHI;
16 July 2019.