[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Chaman Lal (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Kamlawati (D) Thr. L.Rs. on 16 July, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2555, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2439
Author:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench:
K.M. Joseph
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
1

                                                            REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE    JURISDICTION

                               CIVIL APPEAL No(s). 2633 OF 2012



     CHAMAN LAL (D) THR. LRS.                                      Appellant(s)



                                             VERSUS


     KAMLAWATI (D) THR. LRS.                                       Respondent(s)




                                         JUDGMENT
SANJAY KISHAN KAUL,J.
1.      The subject matter of dispute is half of the land

                 measuring 3 Biswas and 11 Bighas out of Khasra No. 1252,

                 Khata No. 318/563 in Dholewal, Ludhiana.      The land was

                 purchased by Chaman Lal (late appellant) from one Mansa

                 Ram on 30.7.1949.   A gift deed was executed on 10.3.1958

                 by Chaman Lal in favour of late Smt. Gurdev Kaur, his

                 stepmother.   The controversy relates to the fact whether

                 suit was in respect of half portion of the total land or
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEELAM GULATI
Date: 2019.08.01
10:57:28 IST
Reason:          the whole land was gifted to late Smt. Gurdev Kaur.
2
2.      It cannot really be disputed that the possession

of the land remained with late Smt. Gurdev Kaur.          It

appears that no mutation was made till the jamabandi of

1969-70 when the whole land was mutated in the name of

Smt. Gurdev Kaur, who soon thereafter, sold the land to

Smt. Kamla Wati on 15.3.1971.      The consequent mutation

was made on 24.10.1972.
4.       The dispute arose from the filing of suit for

partition by late Sh. Chaman Lal on 22.08.1987.       In the

suit claim was sought to be laid that what was gifted

was only half of the total land.       Late Smt. Gurdev Kaur

was arrayed as the 1st defendant and Smt. Leelawati as

the IInd defendant.
5.      Pendente lite the land was re sold by defendant

No.2 to defendant Nos. 3 & 4, on 4.1.1995 and 6.1.1995

who were thus impleaded as the defendants.       It is these

defendants who are respondents 1 & 2 before us and are

really contesting parties.
6.      The trial court in terms of judgment and decree

dated    20.11.1998   decreed    the   suit   directing   the

partition into half share each.         The first appellate

court affirmed the decree vide     judgment and order dated

28.8.1999.    However, the second appellate court being
3
the Punjab and Haryana High Court interfered with these

concurrent     findings          in       terms      of     judgment      dated

02.04.2002.     Late Chaman Lal preferred a special leave

petition against the said order being SLP(C) No. 2713 of

2003.    The appeal was allowed on 6.10.2003 on the short

ground that the Second Appeal has been decided without

framing any substantial question of law as was mandatory

requirement    under
Section         100
of    the    Code   of   Civil

Procedure, 1908.          The matter was thus remitted back to

the High Court which has again allowed the appeal in

terms of the impugned judgment dated 23.01.2008.
7.      We may notice prior to proceeding on merits of

the matter that the order of this Court dated 6.10.2003

was     predicated    on     a    legal         position      which      stands

subsequently clarified by a Constitution Bench judgment

of this Court in Pankajakshi (D) through Lrs. &
Ors. vs.

Chandrika & Ors.
(2016 (6) SCC 157) opining that insofar

as the Punjab and Haryana High Court is concerned, a

different legal position would prevail and a substantial

question of law is not to be determined, in view of the

State amendments, as a pre-requisite before interfering

with the orders of the trial court.
8.      Be   that    as    it     may,      the      aforesaid      is   being

referred to, so as to complete the facts as also by
4
reason of the learned counsel for respondent nos. 1 & 2

drawing our attention to certain facts recorded in the

earlier Second Appeal order dated 02.04.2002 which may

be somewhat germane to the controversy in question.                We

may notice that crucial development during the pendency

of the Second Appeal, prior even to first order, was

that   a   translation    was    got    done   from   the   concerned

branch of the High Court of the document in question

being the gift deed.         A transliteration was also got

done of this document.           In that context it has been

observed    in   the     order       dated   02.04.2002     that   the

concerned learned judge had summoned the person who had

translated the document being gift deed(Exh. P1) in the

Court and had read the document in open court in the

presence of learned counsel for the parties.                 This was

compared with the punjabi version of the document.                  It

was thus opined        that the translation effected by the

translation branch is absolutely correct, resulting in a

finding that late Sh. Chaman Lal did make a gift               of the

entire land.     In the same proceeding it is also recorded

that the correctness of the version of this document’s

translation is not disputed.
9.     Learned counsel for the appellant has sought to

contend that it was not within the domain of the power
5
of the Second appeal judge, who has interfered with the

concurrent findings given the narrow scope in which such

a   second    appeal   has   to   be       examined   more   so    in   the

context      of
Section    41
of    the   Punjab     Court      Act,

1918(hereinafter referred to as the ‘Punjab Court Act’)

read with Section 42 of the Punjab Court Act.                     The said

provisions read as under:
“41. Second appeals-(1) An appeal shall lie to
          the High Court from every decree passed in
          appeal by any Court subordinate to the High
          Court on any of the following grounds, namely :
(a) the decision being contrary to law or to some
          custom or usage having the force of law :
(b) the decision having failed to determine some
          material issue of law or custom or usage having
          the force of law :
(c) a substantial error or defect in the
          procedure provided by
the Code of Civil
          Procedure
1908 [V of 1908], or by any other law
          for the time being in force which may possibly
          have produced error or defect in the decision
          of the case upon the merits;
Explanation-A   question    relating  to   the
             existence or validity of a custom or usage
             shall be deemed to be a question of law within
             the meaning of his section:
(2) An appeal may lie under this section from
             an appellate decree passed ex parte.
             (3) [Repealed by Section 2B of Punjab Act 6 of
             1941]
42. Second appeal on no other ground-
(1) No second appeal shall lie except on the
          grounds mentioned in
Section 41
.
2.No second appeal shall lie in any suit of the
             nature cognizable by Courts of small Causes
             when the amount or value of the subject matter
6
of the original               suit    does     not     exceed       five
             hundred rupees.”
10.     On    the     other      hand,       learned        counsel       for     the

respondent nos. 1 & 2 seeks to contend that the High

Court was well within its jurisdiction to have a genuine

translation done of the document, being the gift deed,

that    being       the      real    bone          of     contention.             The

proceedings, as
referred to above
, have been relied upon

for    the   purposes      of    the       acknowledgment           of    both    the

parties      that    the   translation            is    accurate.          In    this

context, reference has been made to the provisions of

clauses (a) & (c) of sub
section 1
of Section 41 of the

Punjab Court Act to contend that the exercise of power

would fall within the said jurisdiction.
11.     On consideration of the matter, we find that the

High    Court       cannot      be   said         to    have      exceeded        its

jurisdiction, as has to be exercised within the ambit of

Section 41 of         the Punjab Court Act.                 We say so as the

fulcrum of the dispute was the gift deed itself being

the document in question.                   The document was originally

penned down in Urdu with the Persian dialect and was

thereafter translated to the Punjabi language.                            The next

translation         was      done      in         English      as        also     the

transliteration.           Thus there would be a reliance on an
7
inaccurate     document           if       the        translation        and        the

     transliteration was not accurate. This is the objective

     which   was    sought        to    be       subserved             by   getting       an

     authenticated translation done in the High Court and the

     concession/submission of the appellants herein recorded

     in order dated 02.04.2002 in respect of the translation,

     albeit the order being set aside.                      The acknowledgment of

     both the parties to the accuracy of the translation and

     the transliteration could not be doubted thereafter.                                 If

     the substratum being the document has been inaccurately

     translated     then       there    would         be    a     fundamental       legal

     infirmity     in    the    interpretation              to     be    given     and    in

     determining the controversy in question.                               We are thus

     not inclined to accept this preliminary objection sought

     to be raised by learned senior counsel for the appellant

     on the right of the High Court to look into the question

     on merits.
12.     We are fortified in our aforesaid view by earlier

     judicial     pronouncements.                We        may     note     that    these

     judgments     are    in    the    context         of        the    provisions       for

     second appeal under Section 100 of the said Code as it

     existed prior to the amendment of 1976, which is almost

     pari materia to the existing provision which applies to

     Punjab (as noticed in Pankajakshi (D) through
LRs & Ors.1
1 (supra)
8
in para 24).                Per se construction of documents (unless

    documents of title) to prove a question of fact do not

    involve an issue of law unless it can be shown that the

    material evidence contained in that was misunderstood by

    the court of fact.2               In the facts of the present case we

    are, in fact, dealing with a document of title, i.e.,

    the Gift Deed.               Thus, there can be little doubt that if

    the translation of the document itself is not correctly

    done, an aspect which was addressed to by the High Court

    by    getting          the   translation       done,   which   was   accepted,

    then      the         correct    translation       would   have   to   be   re-

    construed.
It is this principle, which was recognized

    in Sir Chunilal V. Mehta & Sons Ltd. v. Century Shipping

    and Manufacturing Co. Ltd.3 while observing in para 2 as

    under:
“2. ….Indeed it is well settled that the construction of

    a    document          of    title   or   of   a   document    which   is   the

    foundation of the rights of parties necessarily raises a

    question of law.”
13.        Returning to the factual controversy in issue and

    the analysis of the same by the High Court, the perusal

    of the gift deed                shows that what is sought to be gifted
2 (1963) 2 SCR 208
3 1962 Supp (3) SCR 549
9
does not mention any lesser land than the whole land. If

the plea of the appellant was to be accepted, then there

should have been some area stated to have been gifted

while the other would have been held back. This is not

so.    Of course, the submission of the learned senior

counsel   for   the    appellant         is   that   the    area   remained

undivided     and    that    is    why    the     partition     was   being

sought.
14.    We may also notice that when the reference is made

to Rs.800/-, it is in the context of half the value of

Rs.1600/-,      a methodology adopted which is prevalent in

this   part     of     the    country           while   recording      such

translation wherefor accuracy of the figures, half the

amount is mentioned to ensure that the actual figure is

correctly     reflected.          Not    only    that   the    translation

would show that the donee is “deemed to be the owner in

possession of my gifted land”.                Thus, whatever land was

gifted, the possession was handed over.                    In the facts of

the present case the possession of the complete land is

undisputedly initially with the Ist defendant then with

the IInd defendant and thereafter with the IIIrd and

IVth defendants.
15.    We may also take note of the fact that jamabandi

for the first time was done in the name of late Gurdev
10
Kaur for 1969-70.         Prior to that the whole land remained

in the name of late Chaman Lal, the original owner.                     It

is not as if the jamabandi was done for half the land in

favour of late Chaman Lal and half in favour of late

Gurdev Kaur.      If at all a grievance would have arisen on

behalf    of    late    Chaman    Lal    that     could   have   been    an

occasion for it.         The first time the matter is sought to

be raised is 17 years later and after about 16 years of

the land in question being sold to the IInd defendant.

Thus, the conduct of the parties also suggests that the

parties understood that whole land was gifted and the

possession of the whole land was handed over.
16.      Learned counsel for the appellant also sought to

draw     an    inference    in     favour    of     the   appellant      by

submitting that what had weighed with the trial court

and the first appellate court was that the document of

gift was stamped on the basis that the value of the gift

was Rs.800/- and not Rs.1600/-.
17.      In    this    behalf    learned    senior    counsel    for    the

respondent has pointed out to us that the
Indian Stamp

(Punjab Amendment) Act, 1958
received the assent of the

Governor of Punjab on 23.04.1958 and was published in

the Gazette on 25.4.1958.               Transaction in question was

prior to that date.         That plea       will thus not hold much
11
water.
18.      We are, thus, unequivocally of the view that the

  status of the property is not liable to be disturbed

  after such a prolong period of time in the context of

  the facts and the legal position which has emerged since

  10.3.1958.    The gift deed can be read in one manner, and

  only in one manner.
19.      We are thus not inclined to entertain the present

  appeal.
20.      The appeal is dismissed.   Parties to bear their

  own costs.
................J.
                                      (SANJAY KISHAN KAUL)




                                      ................J.
                                           (K.M. JOSEPH)
NEW DELHI;
JULY 16, 2019