[Cites
19
, Cited by
12
]
Supreme Court of India
The Director, Steel Authority Of India ... vs Ispat Khadan Janta Mazdoor Union on 5 July, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 3976, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 421, 2019 LAB IC 4251, 2019 (12) ADJ 7 NOC, (2019) 162 FACLR 627, (2019) 3 CURLR 180, (2019) 3 ESC 724, (2019) 3 SCT 493, (2019) 4 LAB LN 578, (2019) 5 SERVLR 226, 2019 (7) SCC 440, (2019) 9 SCALE 181, 2020 (1) KCCR SN 6 (SC), AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 2946
Author:
Ajay Rastogi
Bench:
Ajay Rastogi
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                              CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 8081­8082 OF 2011

         THE DIRECTOR
         STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD.                           …..Appellant(s)


                                   VERSUS




         ISPAT KHANDAN JANTA MAZDOOR UNION …..Respondent(s)

                                                  WITH

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 8084 OF 2011

                                        JUDGMENT
Rastogi, J.
1.              These appeals arise from the judgment dated 6 th September,

         2010 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Madhya

         Pradesh in Writ Petition No. 10963 of 2009 and 12485 of 2009

         setting aside the award passed by the Central Government
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SATISH KUMAR YADAV
Date: 2019.07.05
16:50:05 IST
Reason:
Industrial Tribunal(CGIT), Jabalpur dated 16th September, 2009

         answering the reference in the affirmative form and directing the
1
contract labourers who were in the employment of SAIL from

1993 till 1996(17th March, 1993 to April 1996) to be reinstated,

and their cases be considered for regularisation in accordance

with Para 125 of the Judgment of this Court in
Steel Authority

of India Ltd. and Others Vs. National Union Waterfront

Workers and Others1
declining to grant them back wages.
2.      The case involves a chequered history and almost after four

rounds of litigation, the matter has reached at a stage where the

reference was made by the appropriate Government under
Section 10(1)
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 to decide the

industrial dispute raised by the Union, namely, Ispat Khadan

Janta Mazdoor Union vide notification dated 27th January, 2003

followed with 22nd February, 2005.
3.      The seminal facts in brief which may be relevant for the

present purpose are that the appellant Steel Authority of India

Limited (hereinafter being referred to as “SAIL”) is a Government

of India undertaking and is a State within the meaning of
Article

12
of the Constitution of India and has steel plants in different

1   2001(7) SCC 1
2
parts of India.       SAIL has one of the captive lime stone and

dolomite mines in Kuteshwar in the District of Katni of Madhya

Pradesh. Limestone and Dolomite are necessary ingredients for

manufacture of steel. The SAIL did blasting work as this work

had    been     departmentalised    vide      Notification   dated    15 th

December, 1979 w.e.f. 22nd June, 1980. The contract labour of

the contractors at Kuteshwar Lime Stone Mines were doing the

same jobs as enumerated in schedule of the prohibition

Notification No. S.O. 707 dated 17th March, 1993 issued under
Section 10(1)
of the Contract Labour(Regulation & Abolition) Act,

1970(hereinafter referred to as “
CLRA Act
”).
4.    It   is   not   disputed   that   the     establishment    of   the

appellant(SAIL) is the registered establishment in terms of
Section 7
of the CLRA Act and the contractors through whom the

contract labour was engaged were also holding a valid licence

under
Section 12
of the CLRA Act and the workmen engaged as

contract labour by the contractor in the establishment of the

appellant(SAIL) were paid their due wages in terms of the tri­

partite agreement entered into from time to time not less than the
3
rates so prescribed by the authority under the
Minimum Wages

Act, 1948
.
5.   The appropriate Government at a later stage issued a

prohibition notification of employment of contract labour for the

establishment wherein their services hired by the appellant SAIL

under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act dated 17 th March, 1993, the

extract of which is referred to hereunder:­

        “4. The Notification No.S.O.707 dated 17­3­93 was
        issued and published by the Government of India
        whereby prohibited with effect from the date of
        publication of this notification, the employment of
        Contract Labour in the works specified in the following
        schedule in the Lime Stone and Dolomite Mines in the
        country namely:
SCHEDULE

             a. Raising of minerals including breaking
                sizing sorting of Lime Stone Dolomite and,

             b. Transportation of limestone and dolomite
                which includes loading and unloading from
                trucks,    dumpers,     conveyors       and
                transportation from mine site to factory.”
6.   Pursuant to a prohibition notification issued by the

appropriate Government under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act, the

relationship of contractor and contract labour stands ceased and

by legal fiction, contract comes to extinct and the indisputed fact
4
which has come on record is that no fresh agreement, in the

interregnum period, was executed and the existing agreement to

whom the appellant & contract labour is a signatory was

extended from time to time by the competent authority and the

contract labour was allowed to continue on the same terms and

conditions till their services were terminated by the contractor in

the month of April, 1996.
7.     Prior to the judgment of the Constitution Bench of this

Court[
Steel Authority of India Ltd. and Others
(supra)], the

three Judge Bench of this Court in
Air India Statutory

Corporation and Others Vs. United Labour Union and

Others2
discussed the legal consequence of the prohibition

notification under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act prohibiting

employment of contract labour, it was held that on abolition of

contract labour system from any establishment under
Section 10
of the Act by the appropriate Government, the logical and

legitimate consequences were that the erstwhile regulated

contract labourer covered by the sweep of such abolition for the

activities concerned would be entitled to be treated as direct

2   1997(9) SCC 377
5
employee of the employer on whose establishment they were

earlier working and they would be entitled to be treated as

regular employees from the day on which the contract labour

system in the establishment for the work which they were doing

gets abolished.
8.   The effect of the prohibition notification under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act issued by the appropriate Government at the

later stage, came to be examined by the Constitution Bench of

this Court in
Steel Authority of India Ltd. and Others
(supra)

wherein it was held that there is no provision under
CLRA Act
whether expressly or necessary implication which provides for

automatic absorption of contract labour on issuance of a

notification by the appropriate Government under
Section 10(1)
,

prohibiting   employment of contract labour in any process,

operation or other work in any other establishment and overruled

the judgment in
Air India Statutory Corporation and Others
(supra) making it clear that neither
Section 10
nor any other

provision in the
CLRA Act
provides for automatic absorption of

contact labour on issuance of a notification by the appropriate

Government    under
Section   10(1)
of   the   CLRA   Act   and
6
consequently the principal employer is not required by operation

of    law    to    absorb      the       contract    labour   working    in    the

establishment.        The exposition of law will be discussed at the

later stage.
9.     It reveals from the record that after the Constitution Bench

Judgment of this Court, the matter was agitated by the workers

union before the appropriate Government and after failure of the

conciliation proceedings, the case of 3404 workmen was referred

for   adjudication        by   the       appropriate    Government      vide    its

notification      dated     27th     January,       2003   followed   with     22nd

February,         2005    to       the     Central     Government     Industrial

Tribunal(CGIT) is reproduced hereunder:­
1. “The Government of India, Ministry of Labour vide its
          Notification No.L­29011/97/2002­IR(M) dated 27­1­
          2003 has referred the following dispute for
          adjudication by this tribunal:­

            “I. “Whether the action of the Mines Manager,
            Koteshwar Lime Stone Mines of Steel Authority of India
            Ltd. in terminating services of 3404 (3380+24­ as per
            list attached) mine workers in April 1996 who ceased
            to be contract labour after prohibition of employment
            of contract labour in Lime Stone Mine vide Notification
            No.S.O.707 dated 17­3­93 was legal, fair and justified?
            If not, what relief the concerned workmen or heirs in
            case of deceased worker are entitled to?
7
II. Whether the action of the Mines manager,
           Koteshwar Lime Stone Mines of Steel Authority of India
           ltd. in denying terminal benefits of gratuity
           retrenchment compensation and exgratia applicable to
           VRS seeking employees is fair and justified. If not, to
           what relief these workers/heirs are entitled to?

           III. Whether the action of the management of the Mines
           Manager, Koteshwar Lime Stone Mines of Steel
           Authority of India Ltd. in disregarding Clause­8 of
           Memorandum of Agreement signed between the Steel
           Authority of India, New Delhi and their Unions
           including HMS and employing workers through
           contractors on jobs of permanent and perennial nature
           in Mines between 5­20 years even without ensuring
           statutory wages and service conditions was legal, fair
           and justified? If not, to what relief concerned
           workmen/heirs are entitled?”



      CORRIGENDUM


               “Whether the employment of the workmen
               mentioned in this Ministry’s order of even
               number       dated     27­1­2003    through
               contractors is sham and bogus and whether
               in effect there is direct employment by the
               company? If so, to what relief the workmen
               concerned are entitled?”
10.   The learned Tribunal(CGIT), as a fact finding authority,

taking note of the pleadings on record framed the following

issues:­


           “I. Whether the reference R/40/03 is maintainable?

           II. Whether the employment of the workmen through
           contractors is sham and bogus and whether the said
           employment is considered to be direct employment by
           the management?
8
III.Whether the action of the Mines Manager,
         Kuteshwar Lime Stone Mines of the Steel Authority of
         India Ltd. in terminating the services of 3404(3380+24)
         as per list attached mine workers in April 1996 who
         ceased to be contract labour after prohibition of
         employment of contract labour in lime stone vide
         Notification No.S.O.707 dated 17­03­93 was legal, fair
         and justified?
IV.Whether the said contact workers/heirs are entitled
         the terminal Benefits of gratuity, retrenchment
         compensation and ex­gratia applicable to VRS from
         SAIL?
V. Whether Lime Stone Mines violated the provision of
         Clause­8 of the memorandum of agreement signed
         between the SAIL, New Delhi and their Unions and
         employing workers through contractors on jobs of
         permanent and perennial nature was justified, legal
         and fair?
VI.Whether the workmen/heirs are entitled to the
         wages to the post in which they were engaged with
         parity of wages with that of regular employees of the
         management with all consequential benefits?

         VII.Any other relief, the workmen/heirs are entitled
         to?”
11.   The parties to the reference were called upon to lay evidence

in support of their respective claim and after taking note of the

evidence(oral & documentary), the Tribunal recorded the facts in

seriatim emerging from the records as under:­



      (1) The evidence shows that the respective contractors
          employed the contract labours for their own and they
          were the appointing authority.
9
(2) Wage slips, wagesheets and the evidence of the
          witnesses clearly show that the contractors were
          paying wages to the contract labours.
(3) Exhibit M/8 filed in R721/05 and the evidence of the
          witnesses show that the contractor dismissed the
          employee and also transferred some of the employees
          from the place of work and had disciplinary authority.


      (4) The contract papers entered into between the
          management and the contractors and the evidence of
          the witnesses clearly show that contractors had full
          control and supervision over the work.           The
          management had only to see that the labour laws were
          being implemented and specified approved grade of
          lime stone was being supplied.
(5) The contract papers and the evidence show that the
          contractors had full control over the skilled and
          professional work.
(6) It is further clear from the contract papers that the
          SAIL had right to reject the limestone, if it was not
          within the specified approved grade as per terms and
          conditions of the agreement.
(7) The contract agreements further show that there was
          penal clause, if there was any breach of contract.
12.   The Tribunal taking note of the evidence including oral and

documentary adduced in support of the reference held that the

contract between the Management(SAIL) and the contractors was

genuine and not sham and bogus and the contract workers were

allowed to continue even after the prohibition notification under
Section 10(1)
dated 17th March, 1993 under the
CLRA Act
on the
10
same terms and conditions and the services of the contract

labourer were terminated by the Contractor in April, 1996.
13.   It may be noted that status of the workers after the issuance

of notification dated 17th March, 1993 has also been examined by

the Tribunal and held as follows:­

      (1) The contract   labours   after   notification   cease   to
          function.
(2) The contract labours were still working in the
          establishment from 1993 to April 1996 under the
          umbrella of the contractors who may be called as agent
          of the Principal employer or were intermediary between
          the contract labours and the Principal Employer after
          the publication of notification.
(3) The contract between the Principal Employer and the
          contractors after publication of the notification ceases
          to exist and became not genuine.
(4) The wages were being paid to the contract labour by
          the so called contractors in the same way as from
          before.
(5) The principal Employer was in need of the workers for
          the specified works even after the publication of the
          notification as same workers were continuing in work
          till April, 1996.
(6) There is no evidence on the record to show that the
          principal employer adopted the procedure of
          regularization and had intended to employ regular
          workers as has been directed by the Hon’ble Apex
          Court at Para 125 sub­para­6 in the Constitution
          Bench Judgment in the case of SAIL versus National
          Union Water Front Workers (Supra) after the contract
          was found genuine before the notification.
11
(7) There was no automatic absorption of contract labour
           on issuing the notification prohibiting the employment
           of contract labours.
(8) Contract labours were found employees          of     the
           respective contractors before notification.
14.   At the same time, in para 85 of the Award, the Tribunal

further held that after issuance of the prohibition notification

dated 17th March, 1993 in the instant case, the principal

employer(SAIL) was prohibited to employ any contract labour in

any process, operation or other work in the establishment and

when     the   contract    with   the    contractors     after    prohibition

notification became void and not genuine and the extension of

the period of contract of the respective contractors which has

been allowed to continue in the establishment by operation of law

became ab­initio void and sham and bogus.                  Para 85 of the

Award is as under:­


          “85.     It is an established fact that the notification
          dated 7­3­93 came to the effect prohibiting the
          employment of contract labours from the date of its
          publication. As such, in the light of the constitutional
          bench judgment in SAIL versus National Water Front
          Workers Union & others (Supra) the contract of
          Principal employer with contractor in regard to the
          contract labour comes to an end beyond shadow of
          doubts and the contract with regard to the contract
          labours subsequently after the notification dated 17­3­
12
1993 becomes not genuine. The Principal employer
        was prohibited to employ any contract labour in any
        process, operation or other work in the establishment
        in any process, operation or other work in the
        establishment to which the notification relates at any
        time thereafter. It is evident that when the contract of
        the contractors after notification became itself void and
        not genuine, the extension of the period of contract of
        the respective contractors would be ab­initio void and
        sham and bogus. Thus it is established that the
        contract of Principal employer with contractors in
        regard to the contract labours became subsequently
        sham and bogus after the notification No. S.O. 707
        dated 17­3­1993 coming into the effect from the date of
        its publication.”
15.   The Tribunal finally held that the employment of the

contract labourer through contractors was not sham and bogus

before notification dated 17th March, 1993, but after publication

of the said notification, by operation of law, the contract through

contractors could not be considered to be genuine but became

void and sham as the contract labour was allowed to continue in

the establishment till April 1996. It was further observed that

the Union is at liberty to take recourse of the penal consequences

as mandated under
Section 23
to
25
of the CLRA Act. Rest of the

issues framed by the Tribunal(Issue nos. 3,4, 5 & 6) have been

consequently decided accordingly under the Industrial Award

dated 16th September, 2009.
13
16.   The appellant(SAIL) and the workers Union both filed writ

petitions in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh.                The Union

assailed the award dated 16th September, 2009.              At the same

time, SAIL challenged the finding which was recorded in

reference to the consequence of the prohibition notification as

observed in Para 85 to that extent in the writ petition.
17.   The High Court in its limited scope of judicial review

examined the matter as a Court of Appeal reappreciated the

evidence   threadbare      and    based     on    the    same      set   of

evidence(oral/documentary) reversed the finding of fact recorded

by the Tribunal and observed that the contract to be sham and

bogus and observed as under:­

        “41.    As we have found the contract to be not
        genuine but mere camouflage in the facts and
        circumstances and considering prohibition notification
        under
Section 10(1)
of CLRA Act, inevitable conclusion
        is that the contract labours have to be treated as
        employees of the principal employer.
42.      Considering the large number of workers
        involved in the instant case and the notification issued
        under
Section 10
of CLRA Act, the regular workmen
        have to be ultimately employed by the SAIL. We
        decline to grant the backwages to the workers in the
        instant case. It would not be appropriate to saddle the
        huge liability of back wages. However, we direct that
        the SAIL to start the process of regular employment.
        The workers who were in the employment from 1993
        till 1996 are ordered to be reinstated, and their cases
14
be considered for regularization in accordance with the
        directions issued by the Apex Court in para 125 of
Steel Authority of India Ltd. and others vs. National
        Union Waterfront Workers and others
(supra).”
18.   The judgment of the High Court dated 6th September, 2010

is a subject matter of challenge before us in these appeals.
19.   Sh. Ranjit Kumar and Sh. Parag P. Tripathi, learned senior

counsel for the appellant submit that the CGIT in its award dated

16th September, 2009 has not only extensively considered the oral

and documentary evidence placed on record but also took note of

the judgment of the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Steel

Authority of India Ltd. and Others
(supra) and being the

appropriate industrial adjudicator, after going into merits and the

evidence led by the respective parties to the contract between

management SAIL and contractors, arrived to the conclusion that

the contract was genuine and not sham and bogus under its

award dated 16th September, 2009 and the finding of fact

recorded by the Tribunal has attained finality and unless the

approach of the Tribunal was wholly perverse in the sense that

the Tribunal has acted on no evidence, it was not justified for the

High Court to interfere over the award of the industrial
15
adjudicator sitting as a Court of First Appeal to reappreciate the

evidence and even if on the basis of the material on record, two

views are possible and one view has been expressed by the

Tribunal it was not open for the High Court to substitute its view

under the limited scope of judicial review under Sections 226 and

227 of the Constitution of India. In the given circumstances, the

finding of fact which has been reversed by the High Court under

its impugned judgment holding the contract is not genuine but a

mere camouflage, is legally not sustainable and deserves to be

interfered by this Court.
20.   Learned   counsel     further   submits   that   normally   the

industrial adjudicator is the final Court of facts and on its

extensive discussion based on the material available on record, it

was held that there is no employer and employee relationship

between the appellant and respondent workmen and, therefore,

the question of compliance of
Section 25(n)
of the Act does not

arise and it was the contractor who had terminated their services

in April 1996 and it was the contractor who had full control and

supervision over the work of the labourers. It has also concluded

after examining the witness and appraisal of the documentary
16
evidence on record that the wage slips and identity cards were

issued to them by the respective contractors and it were the

contractors who paid wages to the contract labour and few of the

witnesses have also supported payment through contractors.
21.   Thus, the conclusion which has been arrived at by the

Tribunal that the contractors were exercising exclusive control

over the contract labours and tools and equipment were supplied

by the contractors as per the terms of the contract and payment

was made by respective contractors to the contract labourers and

not by the principal employer and it was the contractors who

terminated the services of the contract labourers because they

proceeded on illegal strike in April 1996 and all the agreements

between the management and the contractors entered into are of

prior to the notification dated 17th March, 1993 prohibiting

employment of contract labour and subsequently it was only

extended by the competent authority from time to time until the

services   of   the   contract   labour   were   terminated,   holding

disciplinary powers against the contract labour being supported

by the cogent evidence on record was not open for the High Court
17
to sit as a Court of Appeal and reappraised the evidence under its

impugned judgment.
22.    Learned counsel placed reliance on the judgment of this

Court in
Dena Nath and Others Vs. National Fertilisers Ltd.

and Others3
and submits that mere violation of the prohibition

notification under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act would not entail

absorption of the contract labour and at the best could be

considered as further continuation to be illegal resulting in penal

consequences envisaged under
Section 23
to
25
of the Act.
23.    Per contra, Sh. Colin Gonsalves, learned senior counsel for

the respondent, on the other hand, while supporting the finding

recorded by the High Court in the impugned judgment further

submits that the Tribunal has committed a manifest error in not

appreciating the documentary/oral evidence on record and thus

on reappraisal of the evidence, the High Court was convinced

that the finding of fact recorded by the Tribunal under its award

dated 16th September, 2009, being perverse, based on no

evidence, has rightly interfered and recorded a finding that the

3   1992(1) SCC 695
18
contract was sham and bogus and in consequence thereof in

terms of the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court, the

workmen became employee of the principal employer (SAIL) in

the instant case and entitled for the wages payable to the regular

employee    of   the   appellant    SAIL   and   be   considered   for

regularisation of service.
24.   Learned counsel further submits that the employees are

entitled for the back wages which has been wrongly denied by the

High Court without any justiciable reasons and as they are

contesting their claim immediately after their services were

terminated, the delay in fact has caused because of 3­4 rounds

of litigation and was also due to the fact that earlier it was held

by this Court in
Air India Statutory Corporation and Others
case (supra) that immediately on the issuance of a prohibition

notification under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act, the contract

labour   become    entitled   for   automatic    absorption   in   the

establishment wherein he was working prior to passing of the

notification under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act, which has been

although overruled by the Constitution Bench of this Court in
19
Steel Authority of India Ltd. and Others
(supra) at a later point

of time but at least there are no latches on the part of the

employees and they are entitled for wages for the period they

have worked and discharged their duties in the establishment of

SAIL and denial of their actual wages by the High Court in the

impugned judgment is legally not sustainable.
25.   Learned counsel further submits that High Court has taken

note of various tests for determining nature of contract which has

been laid down from time to time by the judicial pronouncements

i.e. supervision and control, effective and absolute control,

disciplinary action, payment of wages etc., the primary tests as

the determining factor in arriving to a conclusion as to whether

any contract entered in contradistinction to the tests laid down,

if any, between the contractor and the contract labour that

indeed is sham and bogus. The High Court on appraisal of the

evidence recorded its satisfaction on all the tests cumulatively

and rightly held that the contract between the contract labour

and the contractor was sham and bogus and once the finding has

been recorded under the impugned judgment, the consequence is

restoring the relationship of the principal employer and of
20
contract labour as an employer and employee and this makes the

respondent entitled for their regularisation of service and the

difference of salary which has been paid to their counterparts

who were regular in employment of the appellant establishment

which indeed could not have been denied to the respondent. In

the given facts and circumstances, no error has been committed

by the High Court in the impugned judgment which may call for

any interference.
26.   Learned counsel for the respondent contended that the

judgment in
Dena Nath and Others
(supra) is not applicable for

the reason that it was of much prior to the Constitution Bench

Judgment of this Court and it has no application for the further

reason that it was a case where the effect of failure of compliance

of
Section 7
and
12
of the CLRA Act was a question and there

was no such prohibition notification under
Section 10(1)
of the

CLRA Act which came into consideration. Thus, what has been

expressed by this Court may not be of any assistance to the

appellant.
21
27.   We have considered the rival submissions made by the

parties and with their assistance perused the materials available

on record.
28.   Before we proceed to examine the question raised in the

instant appeals any further, it may be apposite to take note of the

indisputed facts which has come on record and take a note of the

facts recorded by the High Court in the impugned judgment.
29.   It is not disputed that the appellant SAIL is a Government of

India undertaking and a State within the meaning of
Article 12
of

the Constitution of India and has its steel plants in the different

parts of India.   SAIL has one of the captive lime stone and

dolomite mines in Kuteshwar in the District of Katni of Madhya

Pradesh. Limestone and Dolomite are necessary ingredients for

manufacture of steel. The SAIL did blasting work as this work

had been departmentalised by Notification dated 15 th December,

1979 w.e.f. 22nd June, 1980 and various tripartite agreements

were executed between the principal employer(SAIL), contractor

and contract labour and from time to time wages to which the

contract labour was entitled for in terms of tripartite agreement
22
which indisputedly was higher in comparison to the minimum

wages notified by the appropriate Government from time to time

under the
Minimum Wages Act, 1948
was paid to each of the

contract labour who had worked in the establishment of the

appellant.
30.   It is also not disputed that the contract labour which is

represented through union had worked in the schedule work

which has been prohibited by the appropriate Government under

its notification issued under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act, dated

17th March, 1993 and there is no challenge to the prohibition

notification dated 17th March, 1993 at least in the instant

proceedings.
31.   After 3­4 rounds of litigation, a reference was made by the

Government of India, Ministry of Labour vide its notification

dated 27th January, 2003 followed by 22nd February, 2005

wherein respective claims with supporting oral and documentary

evidence were placed by the contesting parties. CGIT under its

award dated 16th September, 2009 recorded a finding of fact

holding that the contract was not sham and bogus and if, at all,
23
there was any violation in continuation of the contract labour

after issuance of the prohibition notification dated 17th March,

1973 that entail penal      consequences as referred to under
Sections 23
to
25
of the CLRA Act and further held that the

respondent workmen were not entitled for reinstatement and

answered the reference accordingly under its award dated 16 th

September, 2009. The finding of fact in return came to be

overturned by the High Court in its limited scope of judicial

review under
Article 226
& 227
of the Constitution of India under

the impugned judgment dated 6th September, 2010.
32.   Before we may advert to examine the question in the instant

appeals any further, it will be apposite to take note of the legal

effect of the prohibition notification issued by the appropriate

Government in exercise of power under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA

Act and its exposition by the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Steel Authority of India Ltd. and Others
(supra) overruling the

judgment in
Air India Statutory Corporation and Others
(supra). The legal consequence of
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act,

has been noticed in paragraph 68, 88, 105 and 125 as follows:­
24
“68. We have extracted above
Section 10
of the CLRA
Act which empowers the appropriate Government to
prohibit employment of contract labour in any process,
operation or other work in any establishment, lays
down the procedure and specifies the relevant factors
which shall be taken into consideration for issuing
notification under sub­section (1) of
Section 10
. It is a
common ground that the consequence of prohibition
notification under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act,
prohibiting employment of contract labour, is neither
spelt out in
Section 10
nor indicated anywhere in the
Act. In our view, the following consequences follow on
issuing a notification under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA
Act:
(1)   contract     labour    working    in the
    establishment concerned at the time of issue
    of notification will cease to function;
(2) the contract of principal employer with the
    contractor in regard to the contract labour
    comes to an end;
(3) no contract labour can be employed by
    the principal employer in any process,
    operation or other work in the establishment
    to which the notification relates at any time
    thereafter;
(4) the contract labour is not rendered
    unemployed as is generally assumed but
    continues in the employment of the
    contractor as the notification does not sever
    the relationship of master and servant
    between the contractor and the contract
    labour;
(5) the contractor can utilise the services of
    the    contract   labour    in    any    other
    establishment in respect of which no
    notification under
Section 10(1)
has been
    issued where all the benefits under the
CLRA
    Act
which were being enjoyed by it, will be
    available;
25
(6) if a contractor intends to retrench his
     contract labour, he can do so only in
     conformity with the provisions of the
ID Act
.

The point now under consideration is: whether
automatic absorption of contract labour working in an
establishment, is implied in
Section 10
of the CLRA Act
and follows as a consequence on issuance of the
prohibition notification thereunder. We shall revert to
this aspect shortly.
88. If we may say so, the eloquence of the
CLRA Act
in
not spelling out the consequence of abolition of
contract labour system, discerned in the light of
various reports of the Commissions and the
Committees and the Statement of Objects and Reasons
of the Act, appears to be that Parliament intended to
create a bar on engaging contract labour in the
establishment covered by the prohibition notification,
by a principal employer so as to leave no option with
him except to employ the workers as regular employees
directly.
Section 10
is intended to work as a permanent
solution to the problem rather than to provide a one­
time measure by departmentalizing the existing
contract labour who may, by a fortuitous circumstance
be in a given establishment for a very short time as on
the date of the prohibition notification. It could as well
be that a contractor and his contract labour who were
with an establishment for a number of years were
changed just before the issuance of prohibition
notification. In such a case there could be no
justification to prefer the contract labour engaged on
the relevant date over the contract labour employed for
a longer period earlier. These may be some of the
reasons as to why no specific provision is made for
automatic absorption of contract labour in the
CLRA
Act
.
105. The principle that a beneficial legislation needs to
be construed liberally in favour of the class for whose
benefit it is intended, does not extend to reading in the
provisions of the Act what the legislature has not
provided whether expressly or by necessary
implication, or substituting remedy or benefits for that
provided by the legislature. We have already noticed
above the intendment of the
CLRA Act
that it regulates
the conditions of service of the contract labour and
26
authorizes in
Section 10(1)
prohibition of contract
labour system by the appropriate Government on
consideration of factors enumerated in sub­section (2)
of
Section 10
of the Act among other relevant factors.
But, the presence of some or all those factors, in our
view, provides no ground for absorption of contract
labour on issuing notification under sub­section (1) of
Section 10
. Admittedly, when the concept of automatic
absorption of contract labour as a consequence of
issuing notification under
Section 10(1)
by the
appropriate Government, is not alluded to either in
Section 10
or at any other place in the Act and the
consequence of violation of
Sections 7
and
12
of the
CLRA Act is explicitly provided in
Sections 23
and
25
of the CLRA Act, it is not for the High Courts or this
Court to read in some unspecified remedy in
Section
10
or substitute for penal consequences specified in
Sections 23
and
25
a different sequel, be it absorption
of contract labour in the establishment of principal
employer or a lesser or a harsher punishment. Such an
interpretation of the provisions of the statute will be far
beyond the principle of ironing out the creases and the
scope of interpretative legislation and as such, clearly
impermissible. We have already held above, on
consideration of various aspects, that it is difficult to
accept that Parliament intended absorption of contract
labour on issue of abolition notification under
Section
10(1)
of the CLRA Act.
125.The upshot of the above discussion is outlined thus:
(1)(a) Before 28­1­1986, the determination of the
question whether the Central Government or the State
Government is the appropriate Government in relation
to an establishment, will depend, in view of the
definition of the expression “appropriate Government”
as stood in the
CLRA Act
, on the answer to a further
question, is the industry under consideration carried
on by or under the authority of the Central
Government or does it pertain to any specified
controlled industry, or the establishment of any
railway, cantonment board, major port, mine or oilfield
or the establishment of banking or insurance
company? If the answer is in the affirmative, the
Central Government        will be    the appropriate
Government; otherwise in relation to any other
establishment the Government of the State in which
27
the establishment was       situated,   would    be   the
appropriate Government;
(b) After the said date in view of the new definition of
that expression, the answer to the question referred to
above, has to be found in clause (a) of Section 2 of the
Industrial Disputes Act; if (i) the Central Government
company/undertaking concerned or any undertaking
concerned is included therein eo nomine, or (ii) any
industry is carried on (a) by or under the authority of
the Central Government, or (b) by a railway company;
or
(c) by a specified controlled industry, then the Central
Government will be the appropriate Government;
otherwise in relation to any other establishment, the
Government of the State in which that other
establishment is situated, will be the appropriate
Government.
(2)(a) A notification under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA
Act prohibiting employment of contract labour in any
process, operation or other work in any establishment
has to be issued by the appropriate Government:
(1) after consulting with the Central Advisory
    Board or the State Advisory Board, as the
    case may be, and

    (2) having regard to
(i) conditions of work and benefits
         provided for the contract labour in
         the establishment in question, and
(ii) other relevant factors including
         those mentioned in sub­section (2)
         of
Section 10
;
(b) Inasmuch as the impugned notification issued by
the Central Government on 9­12­1976 does not satisfy
the aforesaid requirements of
Section 10
, it is quashed
but we do so prospectively i.e. from the date of this
judgment and subject to the clarification that on the
basis of this judgment no order passed or no action
taken giving effect to the said notification on or before
28
the date of this judgment, shall be called in question in
any tribunal or court including a High Court if it has
otherwise attained finality and/or it has been
implemented.
(3) Neither
Section 10
of the CLRA Act nor any other
provision in the Act, whether expressly or by necessary
implication, provides for automatic absorption of
contract labour on issuing a notification by the
appropriate Government under sub­section (1) of
Section 10
, prohibiting employment of contract labour,
in any process, operation or other work in any
establishment. Consequently the principal employer
cannot be required to order absorption of the contract
labour working in the establishment concerned.
(4) We overrule the judgment of this Court in
Air India
case [(1997) 9 SCC 377] prospectively and declare that
any direction issued by any industrial adjudicator/any
court including the High Court, for absorption of
contract labour following the judgment in
Air India
case [(1997) 9 SCC 377] shall hold good and that the
same shall not be set aside, altered or modified on the
basis of this judgment in cases where such a direction
has been given effect to and it has become final.
(5) On issuance of prohibition notification under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act prohibiting employment
of contract labour or otherwise, in an industrial
dispute brought before it by any contract labour in
regard to conditions of service, the industrial
adjudicator will have to consider the question whether
the contractor has been interposed either on the
ground of having undertaken to produce any given
result for the establishment or for supply of contract
labour for work of the establishment under a genuine
contract or is a mere ruse/camouflage to evade
compliance with various beneficial legislations so as to
deprive the workers of the benefit thereunder. If the
contract is found to be not genuine but a mere
camouflage, the so­called contract labour will have to
be treated as employees of the principal employer who
shall be directed to regularise the services of the
contract labour in the establishment concerned subject
to the conditions as may be specified by it for that
purpose in the light of para 6 hereunder.
29
(6) If the contract is found to be genuine and
        prohibition notification under
Section 10(1)
of the
        CLRA Act in respect of the establishment concerned
        has been issued by the appropriate Government,
        prohibiting employment of contract labour in any
        process, operation or other work of any establishment
        and where in such process, operation or other work of
        the establishment the principal employer intends to
        employ regular workmen, he shall give preference to
        the erstwhile contract labour, if otherwise found
        suitable and, if necessary, by relaxing the condition as
        to   maximum       age   appropriately,    taking   into
        consideration the age of the workers at the time of
        their initial employment by the contractor and also
        relaxing the condition as to academic qualifications
        other than technical qualifications.”
33.   The exposition of the judgment of the Constitution Bench of

this Court made it clear that neither
Section 10
nor any other

provision in the
CLRA Act
provides for automatic absorption of

contract labour on issuing a notification by the appropriate

Government     under
Section    10(1)
of   the   CLRA        Act,   and

consequently the principal employer is not required or is under

legal obligation by operation of law to absorb the contract labour

working in the establishment.
34.   This court in
Steel Authority of India Ltd. and Others
(supra) further held that on a issuance of notification under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act, prohibiting employment of

contract labour in any process, operation or other work, if an
30
industrial dispute is raised by any contract labour in regard to

condition of service, it is for the industrial adjudicator to consider

whether the contractor has been interposed either on the ground

of having undertaken to produce any given result for the

establishment or for supply of contract labour for work of the

establishment    under   a   genuine    contract,   or   as   a   mere

ruse/camouflage to evade compliance with various beneficial

legislations so as to deprive the workers of statutory benefits. If

the contract is found to be sham, nominal or camouflage, then

the so­called labour will have to be treated as direct employee of

the principal employer and the industrial adjudicator should

direct the principal employer to regularise their services in the

establishment subject to such conditions as it may specify for

that purpose in the facts and circumstances of the case.
35.   On the other hand, if the contract is found to be genuine

and a prohibition notification has been issued under
Section

10(1)
of the CLRA Act, in respect of the establishment, the

principal employer intending to employ regular workmen for the

process, operation or other work of the establishment in regard to

which the prohibition notification has been issued, it shall give
31
preference to the erstwhile contract labour if otherwise found

suitable, if necessary by giving relaxation of age as it appears to

be in fulfilment of the mandate of
Section 25(H)
of the Industrial

Disputes Act, 1947.
36.   It may be noted that the learned counsel for the respondent

has placed reliance on the judgments of this Court in Silver

Jubilee Tailoring House and Others Vs. Chief Inspector of

Shops and Establishments and Another4; Hussainbhai,

Calicut Vs. Alath Factory Thezhilali Union, Kozhikode and

Others5;      Indian   Petrochemicals   Corporation    Ltd.   and

Another Vs. Shramik Sena and Others6 and these cases have

been considered by the Constitution Bench of this Court in Steel

Authority of India Ltd. and Others(supra) of which a detailed

reference has been made by us.
37.   Tests which are to be applied to find out whether the person

is an employee or an independent contractor in finding out

whether the contract labour agreement is sham, nominal or a
4 1974(3)   SCC 498
5 1978(4)   SCC 257
6 1999(6)   SCC 439
32
mere      camouflage     has   been    examined      by   this      Court   in
International Airport Authority of India Vs. International

Air Cargo Workers’ Union and Another7
by the two­judge

Bench of this Court. The relevant paras are as under:­

           “38. The tests that are applied to find out whether a
           person is an employee or an independent contractor
           may not automatically apply in finding out whether the
           contract labour agreement is a sham, nominal and is a
           mere camouflage. For example, if the contract is for
           supply of labour, necessarily, the labour supplied by
           the contractor will work under the directions,
           supervision and control of the principal employer but
           that would not make the worker a direct employee of
           the principal employer, if the salary is paid by a
           contractor, if the right to regulate the employment is
           with the contractor, and the ultimate supervision and
           control lies with the contractor.
39. The principal employer only controls and directs
           the work to be done by a contract labour, when such
           labour is assigned/allotted/sent to him. But it is the
           contractor as employer, who chooses whether the
           worker is to be assigned/allotted to the principal
           employer or used otherwise. In short, worker being the
           employee of the contractor, the ultimate supervision
           and control lies with the contractor as he decides
           where the employee will work and how long he will
           work and subject to what conditions. Only when the
           contractor assigns/sends the worker to work under the
           principal employer, the worker works under the
           supervision and control of the principal employer but
           that is secondary control. The primary control is with
           the contractor.”
38.    These are the broad tests which have been
laid down by
this

Court in examining the nature and control of the employer and


7 2009   (13) SCC 374
33
whether the agreement pursuant to which contract labour has

been engaged through contractor can be said to be sham,

nominal and camouflage.
39.   It was not disputed in the instant case that the contract

labourer who were working under a tripartite agreement were

allowed to continue under the self­same agreement executed

prior to the prohibition notification dated 17 th March, 1993 and

extended from time to time by the competent authority even after

issuance of the prohibition notification and the services of the

contract workers were terminated by the contractor through

whom they were engaged after they proceeded on strike in April,

1996.
40.   The Tribunal in its award dated 16 th September, 2009 has

recorded a finding of fact based on oral and documentary

evidence placed by the respective parties on record in reference to

the fact whether the contract was sham and bogus which was a

primary cause of adjudication and it was observed that the

contractors employed the contract labour on their own and they

were the appointing authority. Witnesses Mangal and Kodulal
34
(contract labourer) were examined and in their cross­examination

they have stated that before the issuance of notification dated

17th March, 1993, they were workers of the contractor and

payment was made to them by the contractors, wage slips also

show that the wages were being paid by the contractors. Other

witnesses also in cross­examination have supported that half of

the PF amount of the workers were deposited by their respective

contractors.   Exh. W/39 to W/54 submitted by the contract

labours are the photocopies of the identity cards, pay slips, PF

slips etc. These pay slips and identity cards do not show that all

3079 workers were working after the notification dated 17 th

March, 1993 without break because number of these documents

are of prior to the notification. It further observed that all the

agreements between the management and the contractors are

entered into prior to the notification dated 17th March, 1993

prohibiting employment of contract labour and only extended

thereafter from time to time. It goes to show that there was no

fresh contract thereafter ever entered between the parties. Exh.

M/8 filed in R­721/05 and the evidence of the witnesses shows

that the contractor had terminated the services of the contract

labour in April 1996 and transferred some of the contract
35
labourers from the place of work and was the disciplinary

authority.
41.   It was further observed that the contractors had full control

over the skilled and professional work and the SAIL had right to

reject the limestone, if it was not within the specified approved

grade as per terms and conditions of the agreement and after

extensive appreciation of the oral/documentary evidence on

record, CGIT recorded a finding of fact holding that the contract

was not sham and bogus at least up to the date of issuance of the

prohibition notification dated 17th March, 1993. Although in

paragraph 85 of the award the Tribunal has recorded a finding

that after the issuance of prohibition notification dated 17 th

March, 1993 by operation of law, it became sham and bogus but

in our considered view, such a finding recorded in para 85 of the

Award dated 16th September, 2009 is not sustainable in law for

the simple reason that mere issuance of the prohibition

notification   under
CLRA     Act
will   not   make     the

contract/agreement to be void ab initio or bad in law and if the

employees are allowed to continue in terms of the earlier

agreement after the prohibition notification under
CLRA Act
has
36
come into force, it may be illegal and continuance of service in

the absence of any contract which stands extinguished by virtue

of prohibition notification has to face the penal consequences as

embedded under the scheme of
CLRA Act
.
42.   The High Court has taken note of the various provisions of

Mines Creche Rules, 1966, Maternity Benefits Act, Mines Act,

1952 and Metalliferous Mines Regulations, 1961 and other

statutory measures which are applicable over the establishment

of the appellant including various welfare schemes which provide

safety and security of the workers. To say so, every establishment

is under obligation to implement the mandate of law but that

could not be a determining factor/denominator to test the

contract agreement entered between the parties in arriving to a

conclusion that such an agreement is sham, nominal or

camouflage as held by the High Court in its impugned judgment.
43.   The High Court appears to be primarily persuaded with the

issuance of a prohibition notification under
Section 10(1)
of the

CLRA Act as one of the salient factor to indicate that the

committee constituted under the Act, after examining various
37
factors including perennial nature of work, under the
CLRA Act
has recommended for abolition of contract labour and accepted

by the Central Government coupled with the continuation of

employment of contract labour after issuance of the prohibition

notification under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act in holding that

the action of the establishment was opposed to the public policy

principles enshrined under
Section 23
of the Indian Contract Act

and taking work from the contract labour was in violation of the

statutory notification dated 17th March, 1993 and that appears to

be the reason which persuaded to hold that the finding recorded

by the Tribunal that contractors had full control and supervision

over the work in view of the functioning of the scheme of mines

was unsustainable, instead holding the total control and

supervision was that of management of the appellant and the

contract was sham and bogus and also the fact that in all the

agreements executed between the parties, there was a provision

of abolition of contract labour in the matter of work of a perennial

in nature and certain other conditions of agreement in recording

its satisfaction that the contract was sham and bogus.
38
44.
In our considered view, the finding recorded by the High

Court under the impugned judgment is not sustainable for the

reason that effect of the prohibition notification under
Section

10(1)
of CLRA Act has been settled by the Constitution Bench of

this Court in
Steel Authority of India Ltd. and Others
(supra)

and this Court has made it clear that neither
Section 10
nor any

provision in the
CLRA Act
provides for automatic absorption of

contract labour on issuance of prohibition notification by the

appropriate Government under
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act and

the Tribunal in the first place being the fact finding authority has

extensively examined the documentary and oral evidence which

came on record and also the relationship of principal employer,

contractor and contract labour and the fact that their services

were terminated by the contractor after the contract labour

proceeded on a strike in April 1996.
45. The Tribunal also considered various other factors in

extenso regarding the wage slips, identity cards and the nature of

work being discharged by the contract labour subsequent to the

prohibition notification dated 17th March, 1993 and other

documentary evidence which came on record and recorded the
39
finding in return that the contract between the contractor and

the employee was not sham and bogus and the workmen were

not entitled for their absorption in service of the principal

employer.
46.   To test it further, apart from the statutory compliance which

every principal establishment is under an obligation to comply

with, its non­compliance or breach may at best entail in penal

consequences which is always for the safety and security of the

employee/workmen which has been hired for discharge of the

nature of job in a particular establishment. The exposition of law

has been further considered in International Airport Authority

of India case(supra) where the contract was to supply of labour

and necessary labour was supplied by the contractor who worked

under the directions, supervision and control of the principal

employer, that in itself will not in any manner construe the

contract entered between the contractor and contract labour to

be sham and bogus per se.
47.   Thus, in our considered view, if the scheme of the
CLRA Act
and    other   legislative   enactments    which   the    principal
40
establishment has to comply with under the mandate of law and

taking note of the oral and documentary evidence which came on

record, the finding which has been recorded by the CGIT under

its award dated 16th September, 2009 in absence of the finding of

fact recorded being perverse or being of no evidence and even if

there are two views which could possibly be arrived at, the view

expressed by the Tribunal ordinarily was not open to be

interfered with by the High Court under its limited scope of

judicial review under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India

and this exposition has been settled by this Court in its various

judicial precedents.
48.   It is true that judgment in
Dena Nath and Others
(supra)

is in reference to failure of compliance of
Section 7
and
12
and

not in reference to
Section 10(1)
of the CLRA Act but if we look

into the scheme of
CLRA Act
which is a complete code in itself,

non­compliance or violation or breach of the provisions of the
CLRA Act
, it result into penal consequences as has been referred

to in
Sections 23
to
25
of the Act and there is no provision which

would entail any other consequence other than provided under
Section 23
to
25
of the Act.
41
49.   In our considered view, the Tribunal under its award dated

16th September, 2009 has rightly arrived to the conclusion that

the contract was not sham and bogus and there shall be no

automatic absorption of contract labour on issuance of a

prohibition notification under the
CLRA Act
and the High Court

of Madhya Pradesh has committed a manifest error in reversing

the finding of fact in return under its impugned judgment dated

6th September, 2010 which, in our view, is not sustainable and

deserves to be set aside.
50.   The appeals are accordingly disposed of and the impugned

judgment of the High Court dated 6 th September, 2010 is hereby

set aside. The respondent is at liberty to avail remedy for alleged

breach of the provisions of the
CLRA Act
, if so advised, in

accordance with law. No costs.
51.   Pending application(s), if any, also stand disposed of.
…………………………………J.
                                      (A.M. KHANWILKAR)

                                      …………………………………J.
                                      (AJAY RASTOGI)
New Delhi
July 05, 2019
42
43