[Cites
15
, Cited by
14
]
Supreme Court of India
Randhir Kaur vs Prithvi Pal Singh . on 24 July, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2665, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2552
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
L. Nageswara Rao
REPORTABLE

                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

               CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5822 OF 2019
       (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 32979 OF 2016)


RANDHIR KAUR                                           .....APPELLANT(S)

                                    VERSUS

PRITHVI PAL SINGH & ORS.                             .....RESPONDENT(S)




                         JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
Leave granted.
2)   The appellant is plaintiff who has sought specific performance of

     agreement to sell dated November 5, 2004 in respect of land

     measuring 193 kanals 18 marlas at the rate of Rs.1,27,000/- per

     acre.    A sum of Rs.12,50,000/- and Rs.1,00,000/- was paid to

     defendant Nos. 1 and 2 as earnest money at the time of execution

     of agreement to sale.     The date of registration of sale deed was

     fixed as January 30, 2005. The suit for specific performance was

     filed on April 3, 2006.
3)   The learned trial court vide judgment and decree dated April 13,
Page 1 of 14
2010 decreed the suit.    The appeal against said judgment and

         decree remained unsuccessful when such appeal was dismissed on

         August 11, 2012. However, in the second appeal, the decree for

         specific performance of the agreement was declined but instead

         decree for recovery of Rs.13,50,000/- paid by the appellant along

         with interest at the rate of 12% was granted. The High Court held

         that plaintiff was ready and willing to perform the agreement and

         that Dhanwant Singh was not the attorney to act on behalf of the

         appellant.
4)       Learned counsel for the appellant-plaintiff argued that in view of

         the judgment of this Court in Pankajakshi (D) through LRs &

         Ors. v. Chandrika & Ors.1, substantial question of law may not

         be required to be framed but in second appeal, the finding of fact

         recorded cannot be interfered with even in terms of Section 41 of

         the Punjab Courts Act, 19182.
5)       It is argued that the High Court has not recorded any finding which

         satisfies the tests laid down in Section 41 of the Punjab Act. It is

         further argued that though the first power of attorney dated

         September 29, 1999 was not in respect of land in question but in

         the subsequent power of attorney dated September 14, 2005, the

         appellant has ratified all the acts of the Attorney Dhanwant Singh

         including the purchase of movable and immovable property


1    (2016) 6 SCC 157
2    for short, ‘Punjab Act’
Page 2 of 14
anywhere in her name.      It is argued that the agreement dated

     November 5, 2004 was entered into by the appellant through her

     son Dhanwant Singh in whose favour registered power of attorney

     was executed on September 14, 2005.          It is the said Dhanwant

     Singh who has paid the amount to the defendants. The plea of the

     defendants that Dhanwant Singh was not authorised to act on

     behalf of his mother is wholly untenable as the defendants having

     received the amount from Dhanwant Singh. The finding that sum

     of Rs.13,50,000/- was paid by the appellant through Dhanwant

     Singh has been accepted by the High Court when the Court

     recorded the following findings:
“17. Adverting to the facts of the case in hand, agreement of
             sale dated November 05, 2004 (Ex.P-1) was executed by
             appellants/defendants No. 1 and 2 on their behalf as well as on
             behalf of defendants No. 3 and 4, on receipt of a sum of `13.5
             lacs as earnest money. Though, amount of earnest money has
             been disputed by learned counsel for appellants-defendants No.
             1 and 2 but there is no cogent and convincing evidence in this
             regard. So, it cannot be safely concluded that agreement of sale
             (Ex.P-1) was executed by defendants No.1 and 2 on receipt of a
             sum of Rs.13.5 lacs as an earnest money. Execution of
             document has also not been otherwise disputed by appellants-
defendants and respondent-plaintiff. Otherwise also, no amount
             of oral evidence can be taken into consideration and pales into
             insignificance, in view of a recital contained in document.”
6)   In view of the findings recorded, it is argued that the High Court

     committed material illegality in declining the relief of specific

     performance on the ground that Dhanwant Singh was not

     authorised to act on behalf of the appellant and, that the appellant

     has not appeared as a witness herself.
Page 3 of 14
7)      It is also argued that defendants have not raised any plea in the

        written statement that Dhanwant Singh was not the authorised

        representative of the plaintiff to enter into agreement on her

        behalf.
8)      On the other hand, Mr. Neeraj Kumar Jain, learned senior counsel

        appearing for the defendants, submitted that first power of

        attorney dated September 29, 1999 registered on January 18,

        2000 does not relate to land in question nor it empowers

        Dhanwant Singh to purchase any other land. The power of attorney

        executed in favour of Dhanwant Singh on September 14, 2005

        empowering him to purchase movable or immovable property but

        such power of attorney relates to purchase in future and not in

        respect of the agreement already executed.       It is argued that

        plaintiff has never intimated the defendants about Dhanwant

        Singh, as being the attorney of the plaintiff. The High Court was

        justified in interfering in the second appeal as the decision of the

        courts below was contrary to law as the findings recorded by the

        trial court and the appellate court is not based upon facts on

        record.
9)      This Court in Kirodi (since deceased) through his
LR v. Ram

        Parkash & Ors.3
has held that judgments in Chand Kaur(D)




3    2019 SCC OnLine SC 759
Page 4 of 14
through LRs.
v. Mehar Kaur(D) through
LRs4 and Surat

       Singh(D) v. Siri Bhagwan & Ors.5
, are contrary to the

       Constitution Bench judgment in Pankajakshi case, therefore, not

       correct law. It, thus, transpires that in terms of the Constitution

       Bench judgment, substantial questions of law are not required to

       be framed in second appeal but, the jurisdiction of the High Court

       is not to reverse the finding of facts in terms of Section 41 of the

       Punjab Act. The jurisdiction of the High Court in second appeal is

       circumscribed by the provisions of Section 41 of the Punjab Act.

       The first ground is that decision being contrary to law or to some

       custom or usage having the force of law. The argument of Mr. Jain

       is that decision of the first appellate court is contrary to law as the

       plaintiff has failed to prove readiness and willingness to perform

       the agreement.        The readiness and willingness to perform a

       contract is a finding of fact on the basis of oral and documentary

       evidence led by the parties. The first appellate court has recorded

       the following findings on the question of readiness and willingness

       of the plaintiff:
“19. … Now what is to be seen if both the parties
                 appeared to be at fault because when the agreement to
                 sell has been provide and the defendant Nos. 1 and 2
                 have also shown that they are entering into an
                 agreement on behalf of defendant Nos. 3 and 4 being
                 their power of attorney but till date the defendant Nos. 1
                 and 2 failed to produce any power of attorney in their
                 favour on behalf of defendant Nos. 3 and 4 and
                 defendant Nos. 3 and 4 had contested the bonafide of
4   2019 SCC OnLine SC 426
5   (2018) 4 SCC 562
Page 5 of 14
defendant Nos. 1 and 2 to enter into an agreement to
               sell on their behalf when there is no general power of
               attorney in favour of defendant Nos. 1 and 2. It appears
               that both the parties were playing hide and seek. Thus,
               the defendants now cannot take the plea that they had
               no knowledge that plaintiff Randhir Kaur had executed
               any power of attorney in favour of Dhanwant Singh. The
               plaintiff approached the Advocate, purchased the stamp
               for filing the suit and filed the suit for specific
               performance and there is no counter claim on behalf of
               the defendants and the plaintiffs were entitled either to a
               money decree or forfeiture of their earnest money as per
               agreement because there was no readiness and
               willingness on the part of the plaintiff. Therefore, it has
               to be held that the plaintiff was ready and willing to
               perform her part of contract.”
10)   The first and the foremost question arises in respect of scope of

      interference in second appeal in Punjab and Haryana is governed

      by Section 41 of the Punjab Act. Prior to amendment in
the Code

      of Civil Procedure
vide
CPC (Amendment) Act, 1976
w.e.f. February

      1, 1977, the scope of interference in second appeal under the

      Punjab Act as well as under
the Code of Civil Procedure
as it

      existed before the amendment was on similar grounds. Section 41

      of the Punjab Act and
Section 76
of CPC as it existed prior to April

      1, 1977 reads as under:
Section 41 of Punjab Act
Section 76
of CPC
       Second appeals—(1) An appeal         100 (1).    Save where otherwise
       shall lie to the High Court from     expressly provided in the body of
       every decree passed in appeal by     this Code or by any other law for
       any Court subordinate to the         the time being in force, an appeal
       High Court on any of the             shall lie to the High Court from
       following grounds, namely :          every decree passed in appeal by
(a) the decision being contrary to   any court subordinate to a High
       law or to some custom or usage       Court on any of the following
       having the force of law;             grounds, namely:
(b) the decision having failed to    (a) the decision being contrary to
       determine some material issue of     law or to some usage having the
Page 6 of 14
law or custom or usage having        force of law;
the force of law;                    (b) the decision having failed to
        (c) a substantial error or defect    determine some material issue of
        in the procedure provided by the     law or usage having the force
of
        Code of Civil Procedure
1908 [V      law;
        of 1908], or by any other law for    (c) a substantial error or defect in
        the time being in force which        the procedure provided by this Code
        may possibly have produced           or by any other law for the time
error or defect in the decision of   being in force, which may possibly
        the case upon the merits;            have produced error or defect in the
                                             decision of the case upon the
                                             merits.
(2) An appeal may lie under this (2) An appeal may lie under this
        section from an appellate decree Section from an appellate decree
        passed ex parte.                 passed ex parte.
11)    The effect of the Constitution Bench judgment in Pankajakshi is

       that in second appeal, the scope of interference within the Punjab

       and Haryana High Court would be the same as
Code of Civil

       Procedure
existed prior to 1976 amendment. The provisions of

       Section 41 of the Punjab Act and of
Section 100
of the CPC are pari

       materia.
12)    Some of the judgments of this Court dealing with the scope of the

       old
Section 100
are required to be discussed.             In a judgment

       reported in Deity Pattabhiramaswamy v. S. Hanymayya &

       Ors.6 – Three Judges, while examining the scope of
Section 100
of

       CPC, held as under:
“15. The finding on the title was arrived at by the learned
              District Judge not on the basis of any document of title
              but on a consideration of relevant documentary and oral
              evidence adduced by the parties. The learned Judge,
              therefore, in our opinion, clearly exceeded his jurisdiction
              in setting aside the said finding. The provisions of Section
6   AIR 1959 SC 57
Page 7 of 14
100 are clear and unambiguous. As early as 1891, the
          Judicial   Committee     in Durga   Chowdhrani v. Jawahir
          Singh [17 IA 122] stated thus:
“There is no jurisdiction to entertain a second
              appeal on the ground of erroneous finding of fact,
              however gross the error may seem to be”. The
              principle laid down in this decision has been
              followed in innumerable cases by the Privy Council
              as well as by different High Courts in this country.
Again the Judicial Committee in
Midnapur Zamindari
              Co. v. Uma Charan
[29 CWN 131] further elucidated
              the principle by pointing out:
“If the question to be decided is one of fact it does
             not involve an Issue of law merely because
             documents which are not instruments of title or
             otherwise the direct foundation of rights but are
             merely historical documents, have to be construed.”
16.    Nor does the fact that the finding of the first
          appellate court is based upon some documentary evidence
          make it any the less a finding of fact (See
Wali
          Mohammad v. Mohammad Baksh
, 11 Lahore 199). But,
          notwithstanding      such     clear    and     authoritative
          pronouncements on the scope of the provisions of
Section
          100
of the CPC, some learned Judges of the High Courts
          are disposing of second appeals as if they were first
          appeals. This introduces, apart from the fact that the High
          Court assumes and exercises a jurisdiction which it does
          not possess, a gambling element in the litigation and
          confusion in the mind of the litigant public. This case
          affords a typical illustration of such interference by a
          Judge of the High Court in excess of his jurisdiction under
Section 100
of the CPC. We have, therefore, no alternative
          but to set aside the decree of the High Court on the
          simple ground that the learned Judge of the High Court
          had no jurisdiction to interfere in second appeal with the
          findings of fact given by the first appellate Court based
          upon an appreciation of the relevant evidence. In the
          result, the decree of the High Court is set aside and the
          appeal is allowed with costs throughout.”
13)   Later, in a judgment, reported in Kshitish Chandra Bose v.
Page 8 of 14
Commissioner of Ranchi7 - three Judges, of this Court held that

       the High Court has no jurisdiction to entertain second appeal on

       findings of fact even if it was erroneous. The Court held as

       follows:-
“11. On a perusal of the first judgment of the High Court
              we are satisfied that the High Court clearly exceeded its
              jurisdiction under
Section 100
in reversing pure
              concurrent findings of fact given by the trial court and the
              then appellate court both on the question of title and that
              of adverse possession.
In the case of
Kharbuja
              Kuer v. Jangbahadur Rai
[AIR 1963 SC 1203 : (1963) 1
              SCR 456] this Court held that the High Court had no
              jurisdiction to entertain second appeal on findings of fact
              even if it was erroneous. In this connection this Court
              observed as follows:
“It is settled law that the High Court has no
                    jurisdiction to entertain a second appeal on the
                    ground of erroneous finding of fact.
As the two courts approached the evidence from
                       a correct perspective and gave a concurrent
                       finding of fact, the High Court had no jurisdiction
                       to interfere with the said finding.”

              To the same effect is another decision of this Court in the
              case     of
R.    Ramachandran         Ayyar v. Ramalingam
              Chettiar
[AIR 1963 SC 302 : (1963) 3 SCR 604] where
              the Court observed as follows:
“But the High Court cannot interfere with the
                   conclusions of fact recorded by the lower appellate
                   court, however erroneous the said conclusions may
                   appear to be to the High Court, because, as the Privy
                   Council observed, however, gross or inexcusable the
                   error may seem to be there is no jurisdiction under
Section 100
to correct that error.”
14)    In another judgment reported in
Gurdev Kaur & Ors. v. Kaki
&




7   (1981) 2 SCC 103
Page 9 of 14
Ors.8, the rationale behind permitting second appeal on question

       of law after the amendment was considered. It was held that after

       the 1976 amendment, the scope of
Section 100
has been

       drastically curtailed and narrowed down. The Court held as under:
“71.      The fact that, in a series of cases, this Court
                    was compelled to interfere was because the true
                    legislative intendment and scope of
Section 100
CPC
                    have neither been appreciated nor applied. A class of
                    judges while administering law honestly believe that,
                    if they are satisfied that, in any second appeal
                    brought before them evidence has been grossly
                    misappreciated either by the lower appellate court or
                    by both the courts below, it is their duty to interfere,
                    because they seem to feel that a decree following
                    upon a gross misappreciation of evidence involves
                    injustice and it is the duty of the High Court to
                    redress such injustice. We would like to reiterate that
                    the justice has to be administered in accordance with
                    law.
xx             xx            xx
73.     The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council
                    as early as in 1890 stated that there is no jurisdiction
                    to entertain a second appeal on the ground of an
                    erroneous finding of fact, however gross or
                    inexcusable the error may seem to be, and they
                    added a note of warning that no court in India has
                    power to add to, or enlarge, the grounds specified in
Section 100
.”
15)    The Division Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court in a

       judgment reported in
Sadhu v. Mst
. Kishni9 set aside the

       judgment of the learned Single Bench in an intra court appeal in

       terms of the provisions of law as it existed prior to 1976, and held

       as under:
8   (2007) 1 SCC 546
9   1980 AIR (Punjab) 85
Page 10 of 14
“12.     The scope of second appeal as envisaged by
section 100
of the Civil Procedure Code and
section
                 41
of the Punjab Courts Act has been a matter of
                 judicial scrutiny a number of times by this court as
                 well as by the final court, that is, the Suprems Court
                 of India. The learned counsel for the appellant has
                 actually made a reference in this regard to Detty
                 Paitabhiramaswami v. S. Hanymayya [AIR 1959 SC
57.], Madamanchi Ramappa v. Muthaluru Bojjappa
                 [AIR 1962 SC 1933.], Bithal Dass Khanna v. Hafiz
                 Abdul Hai [1969 S.C. Notes 481.]
and
Afsar
                 Shaikh v. Soleman Bibi
[(1976) 2 SCC 142 : AIR
                 1976 SC 163.] . These pronouncements; in a
                 nutshell, lay down that there is no jurisdiction to
                 entertain a second appeal on the ground of a
                 erroneous finding of fact, however gross or
                 inexecusable the error may seem to be. Nor does the
                 fact that the finding of the first appellate Court is
                 upon some documentary evidence make it any the
                 less a finding of fact. A Judge of the High Court has,
                 therefore, no jurisdiction to interfere in second
                 appeal with the findings of fact given by the first
                 appellate court based upon an appreciation of the
                 relevant evidence. Their Lordships have further
                 observed that the only ground on which such an
                 appeal can be said to be competent is where there is
                 an error in law or procedure and not merely on an
                 error on a question of fact.
xx            xx            xx
14.     In view of the above discussion, we are
                 clearly of the view that the learned Single Judge
                 exceeded his jurisdiction in setting aside the findings
                 of the fact on issue No. 2. The provisions of section
                 100 being clear and unambiguous, there was no
                 scope for interference with those findings. We thus
                 allow the appeal and set aside the judgment of the
                 learned Single Judge and affirm the judgment and
                 decree passed by the District Judge. The parties are,
                 however left to bear their own costs.”
16)   A perusal of the aforesaid judgments would show that the

      jurisdiction in second appeal is not to interfere with the findings of
Page 11 of 14
fact on the ground that findings are erroneous, however, gross or

      inexcusable the error may seem to be.        The findings of fact will

      also include the findings on the basis of documentary evidence.
The jurisdiction to interfere in the second appeal is only where

      there is an error in law or procedure and not merely an error on a

      question of fact.
17)   In view of the above, we find that the High Court could not

      interfere with the findings of fact recorded after appreciation of

      evidence merely because the High Court thought that another view

      would be a better view. The learned first appellate court has

      considered the absence of clause in the first power of attorney to

      purchase land on behalf of the Plaintiff; the fact that the plaintiff

      has not appeared as witness.
18)   A perusal of the findings recorded show that the learned first

      appellate court has returned a finding that the plaintiff was ready

      and willing to perform the contract and that the defendants cannot

      take plea that they were not aware that Dhanwant Singh was

      power of attorney holder. Therefore, the findings recorded by the

      first appellate court cannot be said to be contrary to law which may

      confer jurisdiction on the High Court to interfere with the findings

      of fact recorded by the first appellate court.
19)   Learned counsel for the respondents have not raised any argument

      that the first appellate court has failed to determine some material
Page 12 of 14
issue of law which may confer jurisdiction on the High Court to

      interfere with the findings of fact nor there is any substantial error

      or defect in the procedure provided by
the Code of Civil Procedure
or by any other law for the time being in force which may possibly

      have produced error or defect in the decision on merits. Therefore,

      the High Court was not within its jurisdiction to interfere with the

      findings of fact only for the reason that plaintiff has failed to prove

      power of attorney in favour of Dhanwant Singh.
20)   The agreement to purchase the land was entered into by the

      plaintiff through her son Dhanwant Singh when a sum of

      Rs.13,50,000/- was paid to the defendants. The defendants could

      accept a sum of Rs.13,50,000/- from Dhanwant Singh but they

      disputed the authority of Dhanwant Singh to enter into agreement

      to purchase on behalf of his mother.           Dhanwant Singh had

      appeared in the office of the Sub Registrar for execution of the sale

      deed on January 31, 2005 with the plea that he has brought the

      balance sale consideration but the defendants have not turned up.

      In fact, the defendants relied upon their presence before the Sub

      Registrar on January 28, 2005 i.e. even before January 30, 2005,

      i.e. the date on which the execution of sale deed was fixed.

      January 30, 2005 was Sunday. Therefore, in terms of provisions of
Section 10
of the General Clauses Act, 1897, it will be the next

      working day i.e. January 31, 2005 which will be deemed to be the

      date for performance of the agreement and on the said date,
Page 13 of 14
Dhanwant Singh appeared with balance sale consideration and

      marked himself present.
21)   In respect of financial capacity, it has come on record that the sale

      deeds (Exh. P-15 and Exh. P-16) were executed by Randhir Kaur

      prior to January 30, 2005 for making payment to the defendants to

      execute the sale deed as per terms and conditions of the

      agreement.       Therefore, the High Court was not within its

      jurisdiction to interfere in second appeal only for the reason that

      on the date of agreement, there was no specific power of attorney

      in favour of son of the plaintiff, Dhanwant Singh.
22)   In view of the above, the judgment of the High Court is set aside

      and the decree passed by the lower appellate court is restored.

      The appellant is granted two months’ time to pay balance sale

      consideration to defendant Nos. 1 and 2 and upon receiving the

      amount, the defendants shall execute the sale deed in favour of

      the plaintiff.   If the defendants fail to receive the amount, the

      plaintiff will be at liberty to deposit the amount with the executing

      court and seek execution of the decree in accordance with law.
23)   The appeal is allowed. No costs.
.............................................J.
                                                      (L. NAGESWARA RAO)



                                         .............................................J.
                                                             (HEMANT GUPTA)
NEW DELHI;
JULY 24, 2019.
Page 14 of 14