[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The Peerless Gen.Fin And Investment ... vs Commnr. Of Income Tax on 9 July, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 511, (2019) 12 SCALE 359
Author:
R.F. Nariman
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
Rohinton Fali Nariman
REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1265 OF 2007

                         THE PEERLESS GENERAL FINANCE
                         AND INVESTMENT COMPANY LTD.                   APPELLANT(S)

                               VERSUS

                         COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX                   RESPONDENT(S)



                                                 JUDGMENT
R.F. Nariman, J.
1)    The question raised in this appeal is as to whether receipts

                         of subscriptions in the hands of the assessee-Company for the

                         previous years relevant to the assessment years 1985-86 and 1986-

                         97 should be treated as income and not capital receipts inasmuch

                         as the assessee has in its books of accounts shown this sum as

                         income.
2)    The assessee-Company has floated various schemes which

                         require subscribers to deposit certain amounts by way of
Signature Not Verified   subscriptions in its hands, and, depending upon the scheme in
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
question, these subscribed amounts at the end of the scheme are
Date: 2019.07.13
13:18:02 IST
Reason:
ultimately repaid with interest. The scheme at hand also contains
1
forfeiture clauses as a result of which if, mid-way, a certain amount

is forfeited, then the said amount would immediately become

income in the hands of the assessee. This is an admitted position

before us.
3)     In the present case, the assessee was asked to bring to tax

such amounts as income for the two years in question, inasmuch

as, according to the Assessing Officer, it had treated the whole

amount as income, 3% of which is not disputed to be income before

us for the years in question. The Assessing Officer treated these

amounts as income inasmuch as under the accounting system

followed by the assessee, these amounts were credited to the profit

and loss account for the years in question as income. The

Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) dismissed the appeal from

the original assessment orders and confirmed the same. The

Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, on the other hand, allowed the

appeals by relying upon the judgment of this Court in
Peerless

General Finance and Investment Co. Limited and Another vs.

Reserve Bank of India
, (1992) 2 SCC 343 in which, according to the

Appellate Tribunal, this Court finally decided the question in the

assessee’s own case stating that such amounts cannot be treated

to be income but are in the nature of capital receipts. These were

not only because of the interpretation of an RBI Circular of 1987, but
2
also because, on general principles, such amounts must be treated

to be capital receipts or otherwise they would violate the provisions

of the
Companies Act
. It further went through the various clauses

contained in the scheme at hand, and found that in point of fact no

subscription certificate had, in fact, been forfeited, as a result of

which it was clear that there would be no income in the hands of the

assessee for these two years. It also dealt with certificates that were

surrendered prior to the stated time, and stated that in such cases

as well whatever would remain as surplus in the hands of the

assessee would be treated as income. It went on to state that there

would be no estoppel in law against the assessee making a claim

that these amounts were in the nature of capital receipts and not

income, and also relied upon certain judgments of this Court to

buttress the proposition that this Court had also held that what is the

true position in law cannot be deflected by what the assessee may

or may not do in its treatment of the matter at hand in its accounts.

So doing, the appeal against the Commissioner of Income Tax was

allowed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal. In the first round, the

High Court, by its judgment dated 09.09.1999, stated that since no

question of law arose, the reference applications before it were

dismissed. This Court, by an order dated 03.12.2002, set aside the

High Court judgment and referred the following questions to the
3
High Court:
“(a) Whether the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd.
         vs. Reserve Bank of India
(1992) 2 SCC 343 lays
         down as an absolute proposition of law that all
         receipts of subscription in the hands of the
         assessee for the previous years relevant to the
         assessment years 1985-86 and 1986-87 must
         necessarily be treated as capital receipts?
(b) If the answer to the first question is in the
         negative, on the facts and in the circumstances of
         the case, and having regard to the fact that the first
         year’s subscriptions were consciously offered as
         revenue receipt for taxation by the assessee in the
         returns of income filed in respect of assessment
         years 1985-86 and 1986-87, whether the Tribunal
         was justified in accepting the assessee’s contention
         that the first years’ subscription was capital receipts
         and hence not taxable?
(c) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances
         of the case and having regard to the observations
         of Hon’ble Supreme Court to the effect that the
         directions of Reserve Bank of India dated 15 th May,
         1987 had been made applicable from 15th May,
         1987 and would only apply to the deposits made on
         or after 15th May, 1987, the tribunal was justified in
         law as well as on the facts in holding that the said
         directions of the Reserve Bank of India were
         retrospective and must be applied in all pending
         proceedings?”
4)    When remanded to the High Court, by the impugned

judgment dated 06.10.2005, the High Court of Calcutta allowed the

appeal against the Appellate Tribunal holding that a perusal of the

subscription scheme of the appellant company would show that
4
since forfeiture of the amounts deposited is possible, this amount

should be treated as income and not as a capital receipt. Further, it

relied heavily upon the fact that the assessee had itself treated such

amounts as income and credited them to its profit and loss account

for the years in question and would, therefore, be estopped by the

same. On going through the judgment of this Court, namely,
Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Limited
(supra) it

went on to state that since
the said judgment
dealt with an RBI

Circular of 1987, which itself was only prospective, any law declared

as to the effect of Clause 12 of that Circular would be prospective in

nature and would, therefore, not apply to the assessment years in

question.
5)     Mr. S. Ganesh, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the

appellant-Company has argued before us that the High Court is

incorrect on all counts. According to him, the fact that forfeiture may

take place under the clauses of the scheme has to be read with an

interim order which he has brought to our notice by way of a

supplementary affidavit dated 05.04.2017 in which it is made clear

that, post the date of the order i.e. 03.09.1979, no amount can be

forfeited under any of the schemes by the appellant-Company. He

stated that, as a matter of fact, the supplementary affidavit states
5
that for the years in question and, in particular, for every year after

1979, no sum has in fact been forfeited by the Company under any

of the schemes in question. He then argued that it was incorrect to

go only by the accounting system of the assessee since it is well

settled that the real position in law, qua deposits that are made by

subscriptions, on first principle, would show that they are in the

nature of capital receipts and cannot be possibly be said to be

income, as they would enure to the benefit of the subscribers of the

scheme and would have to be paid back at the end of the scheme

together with interest thereof. He also argued that, in any event,

that the judgment in Peerless General Finance and Investment Co.
Limited
(supra) was not merely grounded on an interpretation of

Clause 12 of the RBI Circular of 1987 but it also specifically held

that, as a general proposition, receipts of this nature would be

capital and adverted to both the judgments of N.M. Kasliwal, J and

K. Ramaswamy, J. in this behalf. He also argued that even for the

period in question, this judgment would squarely apply as if such

receipts were to be treated as income it would violate the
Companies Act
. He also argued that it would be incorrect to raise

any question of estoppel against the appellant-Company and cited

judgments of this Court to buttress this proposition.
6
6)     On the other hand, Mr. Arijit Prasad, learned Senior Counsel,

appearing    for   the   Revenue     has    countered    Mr.   Ganesh’s

submissions. He read copiously from the Commissioner of Income

Tax (Appeals) orders in order to buttress his submission that the

ground reality of the situation in the facts of this case is that in point

of fact the appellant-Company itself treated these amounts as

income. Had it not done so, it would not have been able to face its

subscribers for payments in future. He also argued based on Ram

Janki Devi and Another vs. M/s Juggilal Kamlapat, (1971) 1 SCC

477 that the true form of the transaction must be looked at. He also

cited
Poona Electric Supply Co. Ltd., Bombay vs. Commissioner of

Income-tax, Bombay
AIR 1966 SC 30 to the effect that the ground

reality must govern and not mere theoretical considerations.
Also,

according to the learned Senior Advocate, the issue at hand did not

arise directly before this Court in the
Peerless General Finance and

Investment Co. Limited
(supra) and, therefore, any observations

made therein would not bind on the facts of this case. Further, in

any event, the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) was correct

in stating that this judgment dealing only with an RBI circular 1987,

being prospective in nature, would not apply to the assessment

years at hand.
7
7)     Having heard the learned counsel for both parties, we must

first set out the answers given to the three questions by the High

Court, in its judgment under appeal. The answers given are as

follows:
“10.1 The questions referred to us, therefore,
           having regard to the principles discussed above,
           are answered in the following manner:
(a) that the decision of the Apex Court in
Peerless
               General Finance and Investment Company Ltd.
(supra) did not lay down any absolute
               proposition of law that all receipts of
               subscription at the hands of the assessee for
               the previous year relevant to the assessment
               years 1985-86 and 1986-87 must necessarily
               be treated as capital receipts.
(b) Having regard to the facts and circumstances of
               the case the learned Tribunal was wrong in
               treating the first year’s subscription relevant to
               the assessment years 1985-86 and 1986-87 as
               capital receipts and hence not taxable; and
(c) the decision of the Apex Court in the second
Peerless
case that the deposits made after 15 th
               May 1987 were to be treated in the manner
               directed in the 1987 directions are applicable to
               all pending proceedings so far as such deposits
               relate to the period after 15 th May 1987,
               particularly, in relation to the assessee.”
8)     What is clear, even on general principle, on the facts of this

case, is that subscriptions were received in the years in question

from the public at large under a collective investment scheme, and
8
these subscriptions were never at any point of time forfeited.
Indeed, the supplementary affidavit filed before this Court states this

as a fact, being based on an interim order of the High Court dated

03.09.1979 which obtained during the assessment years in

question.   This being the case, and surrendered certificates not

being the subject-matter of the appeal before us, it is clear that even

on general principles, deposits by way of amounts pursuant to these

investment schemes made by subscribers which have never been

forfeited can only be stated to be capital receipts.
9)     This Court, in
Peerless General Finance and Investment Co.

Limited
(supra), was faced with a situation in which the RBI had,

pursuant to this Court’s earlier judgment in
Reserve Bank of India

vs. Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd. And Others
(1987) 1 SCC 424, taken steps to remedy the concerns raised by

this Court in that judgment. The steps taken were under powers

conferred by
Section 45 J
&
45 K
of the Reserve Bank of India Act,

as a result of which directions were issued by the RBI dated

15.05.1987.
These directions, in turn, were the subject matter of

challenge by the
Peerless General Finance and Investment Co.

Limited
(supra) i.e. the second
Peerless
case.         The aforesaid

directions are set out in full in para 9 of
the said judgment
. We are
9
concerned with para 12 which states as follows:-
“12. Every residuary non-banking company shall
          disclose as liabilities in its books of accounts and
          balance sheets the total amount of deposits
          received together with interest, bonus, premium or
          other advantage, accrued or payable to the
          depositors.”

It is true that the focus of this Court was a challenge, on various

grounds, to the aforesaid directions. However, this Court did state,

Kasliwal, J., in particular, holding:
“The amount contributed by the depositors being a
         capital receipt and not a revenue receipt cannot
         under any circumstances be shown in the balance
         sheet otherwise than at its full value. Moreover,
         being a capital receipt, it cannot be credited to the
         profit and loss account since Part II of Schedule VI
         to the Companies Act, 1956 requires that the
         amounts to be shown in the profit and loss account
         should be confined to the income and expenditure
         of the company. Thus, crediting a part of the first
         and subsequent year’s deposit instalments to the
         profit and loss account and not showing them fully
         as a liability in the balance sheet would be a
         contravention of the provisions of the
Companies
         Act
.”


The learned Judge further went on to hold:
“The method followed by the companies in carrying
         on the aforesaid business is that a certain portion of
         the subscriptions received by it is transferred to the
         profit and loss account, shown as income, and the
         same is used to defray inevitable working capital
         requirements of the company, namely, payment of
         agent’s commission, management expenses, staff
         salaries and other overheads.          However, the
         balance of the subscriptions (excluding the
10
appropriated part) is transferred to a fund each year
           and the corpus of the fund is invested in turn in
           interest-bearing investment. The Peerless Company
           initially used to transfer approximately 95 per cent of
           the first year’s subscriptions to the profit and loss
           account and used to invest the subscriptions
           received from the second year onwards.”


K. Ramaswamy, J., in a separate concurring judgment, also turned

down the challenge to the said guidelines and, in doing so, held as

follows:
“The deposit or loan is a capital receipt but not a
           revenue receipt and its full value shall be shown in
           the account books or balance sheet as liability of
           the company. It cannot be credited to the profit and
           loss account.    Part II of Schedule VI of the
           Companies Act, 1956 requires that the amount
           shown in the profit and loss account should be
           confined to the income and expenditure of the
           company. Para (12) of the Directions is, thus, in
           consonance with the
Companies Act
.”
10)    While it is true that there was no direct focus of the Court on

whether subscriptions so received are capital or revenue in nature,

we may still advert to the fact that this Court has also, on general

principles, held that such subscriptions would be capital receipts,

and if they were treated to be income, this would violate the
Companies Act
.       It is, therefore, incorrect to state, as has been

stated by the High Court, that the decision in
Peerless General

Finance and Investment Co. Limited
(supra) must be read as not
11
having laid down any absolute proposition of law that all receipts of

subscription at the hands of the assessee for these years must be

treated as capital receipts. We reiterate that though the Court’s

focus was not directly on this, yet, a pronouncement by this Court,

even if it cannot be strictly called the ratio decidendi of the

judgment, would certainly be binding on the High Court.          Even

otherwise, as we have stated, it is clear that on general principles

also such subscription cannot possibly be treated as income. Mr.

Ganesh is right in stating that in cases of this nature it would not be

possible to go only by the treatment of such subscriptions in the

hands of accounts of the assessee itself.
In this behalf, he cited a

decision of the Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court in
Commissioner of Income Tax vs. Sahara Investment India Ltd.
,

reported as Volume 266 ITR page 641 in which the Division Bench

followed
Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Limited
(supra), and then held as follows:
“In Peerless General Finance and Investment
         Co. Ltd. v. Reserve Bank of India
(1992) 75
         Comp Cas 12, the Supreme Court on similar
         facts held that the deposits were capital receipts
         and not revenue receipts (vide paragraphs 67 &
         68 of the aforesaid judgment). That case also
         pertains to a finance company which used to
         collect deposits, and credited part of its deposits
         to the profit and loss account, as in the present
         case. Hence, the ratio of
the said decision
, in our
         opinion, applies to this case also.
12
It is well settled in income-tax law that book
keeping entries are not decisive or determinative
of the true nature of the entries as held by the
Supreme Court in
CIT vs. India Discount Co. Ltd.
[1970] 75 ITR 191 and in
Godhra Electricity Co.
Ltd v. CIT
[1997] 225 ITR 746 (SC). It has been
held in those decisions that the court has to see
the true nature of the receipts and not go only by
the entry in the books of account.
We agree with the Tribunal that these
deposits are really capital receipts and not
revenue receipts.         In Chowringhee Sales
Bureau P. Ltd. V. CIT [1973] 87 ITR 542 (SC)
which was followed in Sinclair Murray and Co.
P. Ltd. V. CIT
[1974] 97 ITR 615, the Supreme
Court observed (page 619):
“It is the true nature and quality of the receipt
and not the head under which it is entered in the
account books that would prove decisive. If a
receipt is a trading receipt, the fact that it is not
so shown in the account books of the assessee
would not prevent the assessing authority from
treating it as trading receipt.
It has been held by the Supreme court that the
primary liability and onus is on the Department
to prove that a certain receipt is liable to be
taxed vide
Parimisetti Seetharamamma v. CIT
[1965] 57 ITR 532 (SC).
Sri Chopra then relied on the decision of the
Supreme Court in
CIT v. Lakshmi Vilas Bank
Ltd.
[1996] 220 ITR 305. In our opinion that
decision is also distinguishable because
in that
case
the deposit was forfeited and the result of
the transaction was that the bank became full
owner of the security and the amount lying in
deposit with it became its own money. In the
present case there is no such finding that the
deposit was forfeited or that at the end of the
13
transaction the security deposit became the
         property of the assessee or that changed from a
         capital receipt to a revenue receipt. Hence, that
         decision is clearly distinguishable.”

This Court, on 21.07.2015, in appeal against
the said judgment
held

as under:
“After reading of the decision of the High Court,
         we find that the High Court has rightly relied upon
         the judgment of this Court in
“Peerless General
         Finance & Investment Co. Ltd. & Anr. v. Reserve
         Bank of India”
(1992) 2 SCC 343.
Since the case
         is squarely covered by the judgment, we do not
         find any merit in these appeals and petitions
         which are accordingly, dismissed.”


It is also correct to state that there can be no estoppel against a

settled position in law [See
Commissioner of Income-Tax,

Bombay vs. C. Parakh & Co. (India) Ltd.
29 ITR 661 at 665 and
Commissioner of Income-Tax, Madras vs. V.MR.P. Firm, Muar
(1965) 56 ITR 67.
11)     Shri Arijit Prasad, learned senior counsel, appearing on

behalf of the Revenue, however, strongly relied upon the

observations in Ram Janki Devi and another v. M/s. Juggilal

Kamlapat, (1971) 1 SCC 477. In particular, he relied upon

paragraph 12 of the judgment which reads as follows:-
“The case of a deposit is something more than a
14
mere loan of money. It will depend on the facts of
         each case whether the transaction is clothed with
         the character of a deposit of money.          The
         surrounding circumstances, the relationship and
         character of the transaction and the manner in
         which parties treated the transaction will throw
         light on the true form of the transaction.”
12)    This judgment has no direct relevance to the facts of the

present case. The vexed question
in that case
was as to whether

a particular transaction in question was a loan or a deposit. It was

in that context that paragraph 12 laid down that whether a loan of

money could be called a deposit, would depend upon the facts of

each case, having regard to the surrounding circumstances etc.

In the present case, there is no such question raised by Revenue.
The question raised is completely different, and as has been held

by us above, the character of the transaction being clearly a

capital receipt in the hands of the assessee cannot possibly be

taxed as income in the assessee’s hands.
13)    Shri Prasad then relied upon the judgment of this Court in
Poona Electric Supply Co. Ltd., Bombay v. Commissioner of

Income-tax, Bombay City I, Bombay
, AIR 1966 SC 30. In

particular, he relied upon a quotation from a Bombay High Court

judgment which was approved by this Court, as follows: -
15
“The principle of real income is not to be
         subordinated as to amount virtually to a
         negation of it when a surrender or concession
         or rebate in respect of managing agency
         commission is made, agreed to or given on
         grounds of commercial expediency, simply
         because it takes place some time after the
         close of an accounting year. In examining any
         transaction and situation of this nature the court
         would have more regard to the reality and
         specialty of the situation rather than the purely
         theoretical or doctrinaire aspect of it. It will lay
         greater emphasis on the business aspect of the
         matter viewed as a whole when that can be
         done without disregarding statutory language.”

The “theoretical” aspect of the present transaction is the fact that

the assessee treated subscription receipts as income. The reality

of the situation, however, is that the business aspect of the matter,

when viewed as a whole, leads inevitably to the conclusion that

the receipts in question were capital receipts and not income.
14)    In the circumstances, we set aside the judgment of the High

Court and restore that of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal. The

appeal is allowed. There shall be no order as to costs.
…..………….......................... J.
(ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN)


                               .............................................. J.
                               (SANJIV KHANNA)
 New Delhi;
July 09, 2019.
16