[Cites
4
, Cited by
125
]
Supreme Court of India
West Bengal Central School Service ... vs Abdul Halim . on 24 July, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 4504, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2188, 2019 LAB IC 4699, 2019 (12) ADJ 11 NOC, (2019) 3 ESC 753, (2019) 3 SCT 741, (2019) 4 CAL HN 172, (2019) 6 SERVLR 514, (2019) 9 SCALE 573, AIR 2020 SC (CIV) 82
Author:
Indira Banerjee
Bench:
Indira Banerjee
,
R. Banumathi
1
                                                                          REPORTABLE

                                           THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.5824 OF 2019
                                    (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 30035 OF 2016)


                         West Bengal Central School Service
                         Commission & Ors.                                 … Appellants


                                                       VERSUS


                         Abdul Halim & Ors.                              … Respondents




                                                    JUDGMENT
Indira Banerjee, J.
Leave granted.
2.       Heard Mr. Rana Mukherjee, learned senior counsel for the

                         Appellants and Mr. Debal Banerji, learned senior counsel for the

                         Respondent No.1.
3.       This appeal is against a final Judgment and order dated

                         27.6.2016 of a Division Bench of Calcutta High Court dismissing an

                         appeal being FMA No.3324/2015 filed by the Appellants against an

                         order dated 19.4.2010 passed by the Single Judge allowing Writ
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR             Petition No.21512(W) of 2009 filed by Respondent No.1 inter alia
Date: 2019.07.24
17:09:36 IST
Reason:
cancelling the candidature, empanelment and selection of the
2
Respondent No.1 for the post of Assistant Teacher in Arabic (Pass) in

Jiaruddintola High School, a Bengali medium school in District Malda

in West Bengal, hereinafter referred to as “School”.
4.       The West Bengal Central School Service Commission issued an

advertisement No.01/AT/08 dated 26.8.2008 inter alia in the issue of

the   Bengali    daily    “Aajkaal”    published    on    27.8.2008,    inviting

applications for the posts of Assistant Teacher as specified in the said

advertisement.
5.       It appears that there were vacancies inter alia in the posts of

two categories of teachers, that is, the pass category for which the

essential minimum educational qualification was Bachelor’s Degree

in the Pass course from any UGC recognized university having the

concerned subject as a combination subject of at least 300 marks at

the degree level or 200 marks in the old 2-year Degree course, and

the Honours/Post Graduate category for which the essential

minimum       qualification    was     Bachelor’s   Degree   with    Hons.   or

alternatively Master’s Degree in the concerned subject from any

UGC      recognized      university.   For   both   the    above    categories

qualification in Teachers’ Training such as B.T, B.Ed, P.G.B.T etc. was

desirable.
6.       In exercise of power conferred by Clause (d) of Sub-section (2)

read with Sub-section (1) of
Section 17
of the West Bengal School

Service Commission Act, 1997 and in supersession of the West

Bengal    School   Service     Commission      (Selection    of    Persons   for

Appointment to the Post of Teachers) Rules, 2006, the Government of
3
West Bengal framed the West Bengal School Service Commission

(Selection of Persons for Appointment to the Post of Teachers) Rules,

2007 (hereinafter referred to as the “Rules”).         Rule 5 of the Rules

provides as follows:-
“ 5. Additional essential qualification of candidate.- A
        candidate willing to be selected as a Teacher in any School or
        Madrasah, having Bengali or English or Hindi or Nepali or Oriya
        or Santhali or Telegu or Urdu as the medium of instruction,
        must have Bengali or English or Hindi or Nepali or Oriya or
        Santhali or Telegu or Urdu, as the case may be, as first or
        second or third language at any of the Secondary or Higher
        Secondary or Graduation level -
(a)   at Secondary level or the Board or Board of Madrasah or
        equivalent; or
(b) at Higher Secondary level of the Council or equivalent; or
(c) at any subsequent higher level of education in that
        language paper.”


     The said advertisement No. 01/AT/08 inter alia set forth the

eligibility   criteria   for   the    teaching      posts    advertised.
Paragraph/Note 2 of the said advertisement read:-
“Medium of instruction…… Vacancies are mainly in
        Bengali     medium    schools   (excluding   Madrasahs).
        Candidates applying for School (excluding Madrasah) with
        particular language as medium must have that language
        of the medium as first or second or third language at
        Secondary level of the West Bengal Board of Secondary
        Education/West Bengal Board of Madrasah Education or
        from any equivalent Board or at Higher Secondary Level of
        the West Bengal Council of High Secondary Education or
        from any equivalent Board/Council or must have
        succeeded at any subsequent higher level of education in
        that language paper.”
7.      Pursuant to the aforesaid advertisement the Respondent No. 1

applied for the post of Assistant Teacher of Arabic in a Bengali

medium school in the format prescribed.               It appears that the
4
Respondent No.1 was educated outside the State of West Bengal and

he did not have Bengali as a subject either at the Secondary level or

at the Higher Secondary level or at the graduation or post graduation

level.
8.            It is the case of the Respondent No.1 that he had successfully

completed a one year Certificate Course in Bengali conducted by the

University of Delhi, Department of Modern Indian Languages and

Literary Studies.        The syllabus for the said Certificate Course, which

was a part time course comprised of:-
1. Paper -I : Grammar and Translation                                 - 100 Marks
2. Paper -II : Composition and History of Literature                  - 100 Marks
3. Paper III : Oral (Reading, Writing and Conversation) - 100 Marks
9.            The break up of marks in the three papers is as follows:-
Paper – I :            Grammar and Translation                             100 Marks
         (a)           Elementary Grammar                                 50 Marks
         (b)           Translation from English to Language concerned     25 Marks
         (c)           Translation from the Language concerned to         25 Marks
                       English



Paper – II:               Composition and History of Literature             100 Marks
         1)               Paragraph writing                               15 Marks
         2)               Story writing                                   15 Marks
         3)               Letter writing                                  15 Marks
         4)               Comprehension                                   25 Marks
         5)               History of Literature                           30 Marks



Paper- III: Oral          Reading, Writing and Conversation               100 Marks
5
10.    The Respondent No.1 has annexed Statement of Marks

awarded to him by the University of Delhi in the Certificate Course

examination in Bengali.     It appears that he obtained aggregate of

155 Marks out of 300 Marks.          The Respondent No.1 obtained 57

Marks on 100 in the 1st Paper, 53 Marks on 100 in the 2 nd paper and

45 on 100 in the 3rd paper (Oral).
11.    It appears that after applying pursuant to the aforesaid

advertisement along with copies of all certificates including the

certificate course in Bengali, the Respondent No.1 was issued admit

card to appear for the 9th Regional Level Selection Test scheduled to

be held on 21.12.2008.
12.    The Respondent No.1 was successful in the Written Test after

which a letter dated 25.5.2009 was issued to the Respondent No.1

asking him to appear for a personality test scheduled to be held on

6.7.2009. The letter inviting the Respondent No.1 for the personality

test read:-
“7. You are requested to appear for the Personality Test
       on the assumption that you fulfil the requirements of
       educational qualifications etc. in terms of Advertisement
       made by the Commission in connection with the
       Examination.
………………..
Please note that your candidature is liable to be rejected
       at any stage, if you are found ineligible according to the
       terms of Advertisement No.01/AT/08 dated 26.08.08, the
       WBSSC Act, 1997, the WBSSC (Selection of Persons for
       Appointment to the Post of Teachers) Rules, 2007 and in
       terms of provisions of
Indian Penal Code
without assigning
       any reason as well as in terms of ITEM NOS. 17, 18 and 19
       of the Application Form meant for 9th RLST (AT), 2008.”
6
13.    The Respondent No.1 was asked to produce all documents in

support of his eligibility in original, which he did, at the time of the

personality test. The Respondent No.1 was, thereafter, empanelled

for the post of Assistant Teacher in Arabic on the basis of results of 9 th

Regional Level Selection Test (AT) 2008.       The Appellant thereafter

invited the Respondent No. 1 for counselling on 21.8.2009 for

recommendation of his candidature for the post of Assistant Teacher

in Arabic of the Pass category.
14.    On the date of counselling i.e., 27.8.2009 the Respondent

No.1 opted for appointment as an Assistant Teacher in Arabic In

Jiaruddintola High School, District- Malda.
15.    After counselling, while the Respondent No.1 was awaiting

appointment    letter,   he   received   an   impugned    communication

cancelling his recommendation/empanelment and his selection to the

School on the ground that he had opted for a Bengali medium school

though he did not have Bengali as a subject either at the Secondary

or the Higher Secondary or the graduation level.
16.    The Respondent No.1 filed Writ Petition No.2151(W) of 2009 in

Calcutta High court, challenging the impugned communication on the

ground that he was eligible for the post, since he had successfully

completed the Certificate Course in Bengali from the Delhi University.
17.    When the writ petition was taken up for hearing, no one

appeared on behalf of the Appellants.         Nor had any affidavit in

opposition been filed on behalf of the Appellant.     The learned Single

Judge allowed the writ petition ex parte observing that the case of the
7
Respondent No.1 in Paragraphs 15 and 16          of the writ petition

remained uncontroverted.
18.    The Single Judge held that the Statement of Marks dated

9.5.2008, issued by the University of Delhi, showed that the

Respondent No.1 had successfully completed the Certificate Course

in Bengali, obtaining 155 out of 300 Marks, and further proceeded to

hold   that in view of Paragraph 2 of the advertisement referred to

above and, in particular, the last Clause, which read “must have

succeeded at any subsequent higher level of education in the

language paper”, the Respondent No.1, who had passed Certificate

Course in Bengali from University of Delhi, was justified in contending

that the Commission had wrongfully cancelled his selection for the

post of Assistant Teacher of Arabic in the school.   The Single Judge,

therefore,   directed the Appellant No.2 to offer appointment to the

Respondent No.1 within a week.
19.    Being aggrieved by the judgment and order dated 19.4.2010

passed by the Single Judge, the Appellants filed an appeal being

F.M.A.T. No.1296 of 2010, later numbered as FMA 3324 of 2015, which

was dismissed by impugned order dated 27.6.2016 which is under

appeal.
20.    The Division Bench rejected the argument advanced on behalf

of the Appellants that a one year part time Certificate Course in

Bengali from the University of Delhi was not a course contemplated in

Rule 5(c) of the 2007 Rules.     The Division Bench found that the

Respondent No.1 indisputably did not come under Rule 5(a) or Rule
8
5(b).   The question was whether he came under Rule 5(c).             The

Division Bench answered the aforesaid question in favour of the

Respondent No.1 holding as follows:-
“Since the Rules do not specifically state that Certificate
        Course is not a course which is subsequent to higher level
        of education and the respondent No.1/writ petitioner
        fulfilled the parameters of Rule 5(c), the learned Single
        Judge was justified is passing the order impugned”
21.     The Division Bench, by its order under appeal, directed

Appellant No.2 to recommend Respondent No.1 for appointment as

Assistant Teacher of Arabic (pass) in Bengali to the school.
22.     The Division Bench and the Single Bench have erred in

arriving at the finding that the Respondent No.1 had fulfilled the

requirements of Paragraph 2 of the Advertisement and/or Rule 5(c) of

the Rules.
23.     With the greatest of respect, the Division Bench as also the

Single Judge failed to appreciate that the question of eligibility of the

Respondent No.1 for the post of Assistant Teacher of Arabic, in terms

of Paragraph 2 of the Advertisement and/or Rule 5(c) of the 2007

Rules, necessitates an enquiry into and determination of the factual

issue of whether Bengali taught in the Certificate Course conducted

by the Department of Modern Indian Languages and Literary Studies

of the University of Delhi was of a level higher than the level of

Bengali taught at the Higher Secondary level of the West Bengal

Council of Higher Secondary Education or any equivalent Board.
9
24.    A part time Certificate Course in a language, conducted by a

University for graduates, is not necessarily of a level higher than the

Higher Secondary level of the West Bengal Council of Higher

Education or equivalent Board or for that matter, higher than the

Secondary level of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education or

an equivalent Board
25.    A Certificate Course could very well be a basic course for

graduates who are beginners in the language.      The syllabus for the

Certificate Course in Bengali shows that out of three papers of 100

marks each, in which candidates are tested there is one Oral Paper of

100 marks for ‘Reading’ ‘Writing’ and ‘Conversation’, which are

generally tested at the primary or at best the middle school level.
Moreover the Certificate Course is not meant for candidates who

have studied Bengali earlier.
26.    The reasoning of the Division Bench that the Single Bench was

justified in allowing the writ petition, since the rules do not

specifically state that the Certificate Course is not a course which is

subsequent to higher level of education is patently misconceived.    It

is preposterous to expect that statutory rules for appointment of

teacher in the State of West Bengal, would not only have to prescribe

the minimum qualifications, but also specify which of the certificates

issued by Boards or Universities all over the country could not be

considered as of standard equivalent to the standard of Bengali

taught by a University at the under graduate level.
10
27.      It is well settled that the High Court in exercise of jurisdiction

under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India does not sit in appeal

over an administrative decision. The Court might only examine the

decision making process to ascertain whether there was such

infirmity in the decision making process, which vitiates the decision

and calls for intervention under
Article 226
of the Constitution of

India.
28.      In any case,     the High Court exercises its extraordinary

jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India to enforce a

fundamental right or some other legal right or the performance of

some legal duty.     To pass orders in a writ petition, the High Court

would necessarily have to address to itself the question of whether

there has been breach of any fundamental or legal right of the

petitioner, or whether there has been lapse in performance by the

respondents of a legal duty.
29.      The High Court in exercise of its power to issue writs,

directions or orders to any person or authority to correct quasi-judicial

or even administrative decisions for enforcement of a fundamental or

legal right is obliged to prevent abuse of power and neglect of duty

by public authorities.
30.      In exercise of its power of judicial review, the Court is to see

whether the decision impugned is vitiated by an apparent error of

law.     The test to determine whether a decision is vitiated by error

apparent on the face of the record is whether the error is self-evident

on the face of the record or whether the error requires examination
11
or argument to establish it. If an error has to be established by a

process of reasoning, on points where there may reasonably be two

opinions, it cannot be said to be an error on the face of the record, as

held by this Court in
Satyanarayan vs. Mallikarjuna
reported in

AIR 1960 SC 137.       If the provision of a statutory rule is reasonably

capable of two or more constructions and one construction has been

adopted, the decision would not be open to interference by the writ

Court. It is only an obvious misinterpretation of a relevant statutory

provision, or ignorance or disregard thereof, or a decision founded on

reasons which are clearly wrong in law, which can be corrected by

the writ Court by issuance of writ of Certiorari.
31.    The sweep of power under
Article 226
may be wide enough to

quash unreasonable orders.          If a decision is so arbitrary and

capricious that no reasonable person could have ever arrived at it,

the same is liable to be struck down by a writ Court. If the decision

cannot rationally be supported by the materials on record, the same

may be regarded as perverse.
32.    However,       the   power   of   the   Court   to   examine   the

reasonableness of an order of the authorities does not enable the

Court to look into the sufficiency of the grounds in support of a

decision to examine the merits of the decision, sitting as if in appeal

over the decision.          The test is not what the Court considers

reasonable or unreasonable but a decision which the Court thinks

that no reasonable person could have taken, which has led to

manifest injustice.     The writ Court does not interfere, because a
12
decision is not perfect.
33.      In entertaining and allowing the writ petition, the High Court

has lost sight of the limits of its extraordinary power of judicial review

and has in fact sat in appeal over the decision of the respondent

No.2.
34.      In this case, it is not in dispute that the Respondent No.1 who

had been educated outside the State of West Bengal, did not have

Bengali as a         subject at the Secondary, Higher Secondary,

graduation or post graduation level.     The interpretation of the last

Clause of Paragraph 2 of the advertisement and/or Rule 5 (c) of the

Rules, which reads “must have succeeded in higher level of

education in that language paper” by the authorities as success in

the language paper at the graduation level or the post graduation

level,    or alternatively an examination in the language paper of a

level which is equivalent to the level of the language as taught in

the graduation level and not any part time course conducted by a

University is a plausible if not possible interpretation which ought

not to have been interfered with by the Writ Court.
35.      This Court cannot but take judicial notice of the fact that

universities do not usually allow students to opt for a language

subject at the graduation level if the subject was not cleared at the

Higher Secondary level.     As observed above documents annexed by

the Respondent No.1 reveals that candidates who have studied the

language at some level before the graduate level are debarred from

admission to the Certificate Course, which makes it obvious that the
13
course is of elementary level.
36.    Significantly, the Respondent No.1 has not produced any

document or certificate of the Delhi University certifying that the

certificate course in Bengali is of a standard equivalent to Bengali

language at the post Higher Secondary level.
37.    The judgment and order under appeal cannot be sustained

and the same is set aside. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed with no

order as to costs.
.................................J.
                                             (R. BANUMATHI)



                                           .................................J.
                                             (INDIRA BANERJEE)
  JULY 24, 2019
  NEW DELHI