[Cites
15
, Cited by
15
]
Supreme Court of India
Surinder Pal Soni vs Sohan Lal (D) Thru Lr on 23 July, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2193, (2019) 137 ALL LR 779, (2019) 204 ALLINDCAS 162, (2019) 2 CLR 546 (SC), (2019) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 512, (2019) 3 ALL RENTCAS 22, (2019) 3 RECCIVR 883, (2019) 4 CIVILCOURTC 120, (2019) 4 ICC 355, (2019) 4 PAT LJR 56, (2019) 9 SCALE 564, (2020) 146 REVDEC 602
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Indira Banerjee
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
REPORTABLE


                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       Civil Appeal No 5360 of 2019
                                @Special Leave Petition (C) No 26508 of 2018



          Surinder Pal Soni                                                      .... Appellant

                                                      Versus


          Sohan Lal (D) Thru LR & Ors                                           ....Respondents




                                                 JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
1
MANISH SETHI
Date: 2019.07.23
16:32:19 IST
A learned Single Judge of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana allowed a
Reason:
Civil Revision instituted by the respondents and in the process dismissed the
1
application of the appellant for the execution of a decree in a suit for specific

performance. Accepting the objections of the judgment debtor, the High Court

directed a refund of earnest money in substitution of the decree for specific

performance.
2     In 2006, the appellant instituted a suit for specific performance of an

agreement to sell dated 8 December 2003. The appellant sought to enforce an

agreement for the sale of land bearing 12 kanals and 9 marlas, representing a half

share out of the land bearing Khewat Khatauni No. 565/525, Khasra No. 94/18 (7-8),

19(8-0), 20/1 (6-3), 21/1 (1-7) and 94/21/3 (2-0) situated in village Billa, Tehsil and

District Panchkula. On 20 March 2012, the Civil Judge (Senior Division), Panchkula

decreed the suit except for land bearing 2 kanals mentioned in the sale deed in

exhibit-D3. Insofar as is material, the decree provided thus :
"Resultantly, a decree for possession by way of specific
             performance of the agreement to sell Ex. P1 dated
             08.12.2003 is passed in favour of the plaintiff in respect of
             remaining suit land, i.e., except the land of 2 kanals
             mentioned in sale deed Ex. D3, on making balance sale
             consideration amount to the L.Rs. of defendant No.1, after
             deducting the consideration of aforesaid 2 kanals land. The
             L.Rs of the defendant No.1 are directed to execute the sale
             deed in respect of the remaining suit land within a period of
             two months from today in receipt of remaining balance sale
             consideration after deduction of consideration of 2 kanals
             land and in case of failure of the L.Rs. of defendant No.1 to
             do so, the plaintiff is entitled to get the sale deed executed
             and registered quo the aforesaid land through the Court
             agency."
2
3        Both the appellant and the respondent filed appeals against the judgment of

the Trial Court. On 23 April 2012, the Additional District Judge, Panchkula issued

notice in the appeal and on the application for stay filed by the respondent.

4        On 15 June 2012, the appellant filed proceedings before the Civil Judge

(Senior Division), Panchkula for seeking the execution of the decree passed in his

favour, pending the first appeal.
5        On 19 May 2014, the respondent filed objections to the execution petition.


6        On 17 January 2015, the Additional District Judge upheld the judgment and

order of the Trial Court while dismissing both sets of appeals filed respectively by the

appellant and the respondent.
7        On 23 February 2015, the executing court rejected the objections of the

respondents to the execution of the decree and allowed the appellant’s execution

petition. The respondent then filed a civil revision before the High Court which

resulted in the judgment of the learned Single Judge dated 1 June 2018 by which

the order of the executing court was set aside. The High Court held that there was a

failure on the part of the appellant to deposit the balance of the sale consideration

within a period of two months from the date of the decree and as a consequence the

decree had been rendered inexecutable by virtue of the provisions of Section 28 1 of
1  28. Rescission in certain circumstances of contracts for the sale or lease of immovable property, the
specific performance of which has been decreed.— (1) Where in any suit a decree for specific performance of a
contract for the sale or lease of immovable property has been made and the purchaser or lessee does not, within the
period allowed by the decree or such further period as the court may allow, pay the purchase money or other sum
which the court has ordered him to pay, the vendor or lessor may apply in the same suit in which the decree is made,
to have the contract rescinded and on such application the court may, by order, rescind the contract either so far as
regards the party in default or altogether, as the justice of the case may require.
3
the
Specific Relief Act
19632. The High Court noted that of the total sale

consideration of Rs. 8,35,000/- under the terms of the agreement to sell, the

appellant in 2004 had paid an amount of Rs. 5,85,000/- while the balance of Rs.

1,15,864/-, consequent upon the partial decree in the suit had been deposited on 19

February 2015 after the dismissal of the first appeals on 17 January 2015. The High

Court opined thus:
“A perusal of the operative portion of the decree under
                  execution shows that though the lower court has not
                  specifically fixed any time for deposit of the amount of
                  balance sale consideration but it has been provided in
                  unambiguous terms that the sale deed is to be executed
                  within two months from the date of judgment upon deposit of
                  balance sale consideration.”



8        According to the High Court, the time frame for the deposit of the balance sale

consideration was implicit in the decision of the Trial Court which had ordered the

execution of the sale deed within two months from the date of the judgment upon

deposit of the remaining sale consideration. The High Court held that the judgment

and decree had not been stayed during the pendency of the first appeals and the

mere filing of an appeal did not amount to a stay under Order 41 Rule 5 of the Code


          (2) Where a contract is rescinded under sub-section (1), the court— (a) shall direct the purchaser or the
lessee, if he has obtained possession of the property under the contract, to restore such possession to the vendor or
lessor; and (b) may direct payment to the vendor or lessor of all the rents and profits which have accrued in respect of
the property from the date on which possession was so obtained by the purchaser or lessee until restoration of
possession to the vendor or lessor, and, if the justice of the case so requires, the refund of any sum paid by the
vendee or the lessee as earnest money or deposit in connection with the contract.
(3) If the purchase or lessee pays the purchase money or other sum which he is ordered to pay under the
decree within the period referred to in sub-section (1), the court may, on application made in the same suit, award the
purchaser or lessee such further relief as he may be entitled to, including in appropriate cases all or any of the
following reliefs, namely:— (a) the execution of a proper conveyance or lease by the vendor or lessor; (b) the delivery
of possession, or partition and separate possession, of the property on the execution of such conveyance or lease.
(4) No separate suit in respect of any relief which may be claimed under this section shall lie at the instance of a
vendor, purchaser, lessor or lessee, as the case may be.
(5) The costs of any proceedings under this section shall be in the discretion of the court.
2
Specific Relief Act
4
of Civil Procedure 19083. Hence, it was not open to the appellant to seek the

execution of the decree on account of the lapse of the period stipulated in the

decree for its execution. The High Court has relied upon the provisions of
Section 28
of the Specific Relief Act. It also observed that no application for the enlargement of

time had been filed by the appellant. The correctness of this view falls for

determination in the present appeal.
9       Mr A Tewari, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant urged the

following submissions :
(i)     The judgment and decree of the Trial Court dated 20 March 2012 has merged

        with the decree of the First Appellate Court 4 dated 17 January 2015. The

        doctrine of merger applies whether the judgment of a subordinate court is

        reversed, modified or upheld by a court superior to it (
Chandi Prasad v

        Jagdish Prasad5
);
(ii)    The decree for specific performance is in the nature of a preliminary decree

        and the court passing it does not become functus officio (
Sardar Mohar

        Singh v Mangilal6
). Since the decree of the appellate court dated 17 January

        2015 makes no mention of the transaction becoming time barred, limitation

        would commence from 17 January 2015;
3
CPC
4 “Appellate Court”
5 (2004) 8 SCC 724
6 (1997) 9 SCC 217
5
(iii)   The appellate court did not impose a time limit and, in consequence, the

        decree dated 17 January 2015 became enforceable from the date on which it

        was issued;
(iv)    The power which is entrusted to the court under
Section 28
of the Specific

        Relief Act is equitable in nature and it is open to the court to grant additional

        time for the performance of any condition
laid down in
the decree (
Sardar

        Mohar Singh
) (supra). What is of prime importance is to gauge the readiness

        and the willingness of the decree holder. The judgment debtor did not seek

        the rescission of the contract under the provisions of
Section 28
of the

        Specific Relief Act;
(v)     The balance of equities lies in favour of the appellant who has paid Rs.
5,85,000/- out of the total sale consideration in 2004 and only an amount of

        Rs. 1,15,864/- remained to be paid after the judgment of the Trial Court; and
(vi)    The provisions of Order 41 Rule 5 do not detract from the doctrine of merger.




10      On the other hand, Mr Gopal Jha, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the

respondents submitted that :
(i)     The doctrine of merger applies to a situation when the limitation for the filing

        of an execution application is to be computed;
(ii)    The decree of the Trial Court was conditional since it contained a direction for

        the execution of the sale deed of the suit land except 2 kanals within a period
6
of 2 months on receipt of the balance sale consideration. The decree

        contained three conditions, each of which had to be fulfilled;
(iii)   In the present case, the decree of the Trial Court was not modified by the

        appellate court;
(iv)    No application was filed by the appellant for the extension of time to effect

        deposit nor was any amount deposited while filing the execution application.
The High Court while dismissing the appeal of the judgment debtor did not

        grant an extension of time to the decree holder for the deposit of the balance;
(v)     The decree holder has not shown reasonable grounds for extension of time

        and the filing of an appeal does not constitute a valid ground particularly in the

        absence of a stay under Order 41 Rule 5; and
(vi)    The respondent deposited the balance of the sale consideration on 19

        February 2015 without an application under
Section 148
of the CPC for the

        extension of time.
For the above, it was submitted that the appellant having failed to comply with the

conditions specified in the decree dated 20 March 2012, the High Court was justified

in allowing the respondent’s civil revision and holding that the decree had been

rendered inexecutable.
11      The rival submissions fall for our consideration.
7
12      By its judgment dated 20 March 2012, the Trial Court decreed the suit for

specific performance filed by the appellant save and except for the land

admeasuring 2 kanals. The decree of the Trial Court envisaged performance of the

agreement to sell dated 8 December 2003 in respect of the land which formed the

subject matter of the suit, except for 2 kanals. The judgment debtor was directed to

execute the sale deed in respect of the remaining portion of the suit land
(i)     within a period of 2 months;
(ii)    on receipt of the balance sale consideration; and
(iii)   upon deducting the consideration for 2 kanals of land.




The decision of the Trial Court was carried in appeal both by the decree holder and

by the judgment debtor. The Appellate Court issued notice on the appeal and the

application for stay filed by the judgment debtor, while the decree holder moved for

execution of the decree. The judgment debtor had filed objections to the execution

of the decree. The Appellate Court dismissed both sets of appeals by confirming the

judgment and decree of the Trial Court.
13      Upon the decision of the Appellate Court, there was a merger of the judgment

of the Trial Court with the decision which was rendered in appeal. Consequent upon

the passing of the decree of an Appellate Court, the decree of the Trial Court merges

with that of the Appellate Court. The doctrine of merger is founded on the rationale

that there cannot be more than one operative decree at a given point in time. The
8
doctrine of merger applies irrespective of whether the Appellate Court has affirmed,

modified or reversed the decree of the Trial Court.
In
Kunhayammed v State of

Kerala7
, while explaining the doctrine of merger, this Court held thus:
“12. The logic underlying the doctrine of merger is that there
               cannot be more than one decree or operative orders
               governing the same subject-matter at a given point of time.
               When a decree or order passed by an inferior court, tribunal
               or authority was subjected to a remedy available under the
               law before a superior forum then, though the decree or order
               under challenge continues to be effective and binding,
               nevertheless its finality is put in jeopardy. Once the superior
               court has disposed of the lis before it either way — whether
               the decree or order under appeal is set aside or modified or
               simply confirmed, it is the decree or order of the superior
               court, tribunal or authority which is the final, binding and
               operative decree or order wherein merges the decree or order
               passed by the court, tribunal or the authority below. However,
               the doctrine is not of universal or unlimited application. The
               nature of jurisdiction exercised by the superior forum and the
               content or subject-matter of challenge laid or which could
               have been laid shall have to be kept in view.”



Further, while explaining the position that emerges on the grant of special leave to

appeal by this Court, it was observed:
“41. Once a special leave petition has been granted, the
               doors for the exercise of appellate jurisdiction of this Court
               have been let open. The order impugned before the Supreme
               Court becomes an order appealed against. Any order passed
               thereafter would be an appellate order and would attract the
               applicability of doctrine of merger. It would not make a
               difference whether the order is one of reversal or of
               modification or of dismissal affirming the order appealed
               against. It would also not make any difference if the order is a
               speaking or non-speaking one…”




7 (2000) 6 SCC 359
9
This position of law has been recently affirmed and reiterated by a three judge

Bench decision of this Court in
Khoday Distilleries Ltd v Sri Mahadeshwara

Sahakara Sakkare Karkhane Ltd8
.
14      The decision in
Kunhayammed
(supra) was followed by a three judge Bench

decision of this Court in
Chandi Prasad
(supra), which held thus:
“23. The doctrine of merger is based on the principles of
                propriety in the hierarchy of justice delivery system. The
                doctrine of merger does not make a distinction between an
                order of reversal, modification or an order of confirmation
                passed by the appellate authority. The said doctrine
                postulates that there cannot be more than one operative
                decree governing the same subject matter at a given point of
                time.
24. It is trite that when an Appellate Court passes a decree,
                the decree of the trial court merges with the decree of the
                Appellate Court and even if and subject to any modification
                that may be made in the appellate decree, the decree of the
                Appellate Court supersedes the decree of the trial court. In
                other words, merger of a decree takes place irrespective of
                the fact as to whether the Appellate Court affirms, modifies or
                reverses the decree passed by the trial court…”
15      More recently, the decision in
Chandi Prasad
(supra) was followed by a two

judge Bench of this Court in
Shanthi v T D Vishwanathan9
rendered on 24 October

2018 in the following terms :
“7. …When an appeal is prescribed under a statute and the
                appellate forum is invoked and entertained, for all intents and
                purposes, the suit continues. When a higher forum entertains
                an appeal and passes an order on merit, the doctrine of
                merger would apply. The doctrine of merger is based on the
                principles of the propriety in the hierarchy of the justice
                delivery system. The doctrine of merger does not make a
                distinction between an order of reversal, modification or an

8 (2019) 4 SCC 376
9 Civil Appeal No. 10442 of 2011, 2018 SCC OnLine SC 2196
10
order of confirmation passed by the appellate authority. The
               said doctrine postulates that there cannot be more than one
               operative decree governing the same subject matter at a
               given point of time.”
16    Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents submitted that

under
Order 41 Rule 5 of the CPC
, an appeal does not operate as a stay of the

proceedings under a decree or order appealed from except so far as the Appellate

Court may order, nor shall execution of the decree be stayed only by reason of an

appeal having been preferred from the decree. The Appellate Court is however

vested with the authority to stay the execution of the decree for sufficient cause. The

submission is that since the decree was not stayed pending the disposal of the

appeal, there was no impediment in its execution and, upon the failure of the

appellant to deposit the balance in the execution proceedings, the decree becomes

inexecutable. Learned Counsel submitted that in such a situation, application of the

doctrine of merger stands obviated.
17    We are unable to accept the submission. The doctrine of merger operates as

a principle upon a judgment being rendered by the Appellate Court. In the present

case, once the Appellate Court confirmed the judgment and decree of the Trial

Court, there was evidently a merger of the judgment of the Trial Court with the

decision of the Appellate Court. Once the Appellate Court renders its judgment, it is

the decree of the Appellate Court which becomes executable. Hence, the

entitlement of the decree holder to execute the decree of the Appellate Court cannot

be defeated.
11
18     The issue can be looked at from another perspective in terms of the

provisions of
Section 28
of the Specific Relief Act.
Section 28
provides :
“28. Rescission in certain circumstances of contracts for the
               sale or lease of immovable property, the specific performance
               of which has been decreed.— (1) Where in any suit a decree
               for specific performance of a contract for the sale or lease of
               immovable property has been made and the purchaser or
               lessee does not, within the period allowed by the decree or
               such further period as the court may allow, pay the purchase
               money or other sum which the court has ordered him to pay,
               the vendor or lessor may apply in the same suit in which the
               decree is made, to have the contract rescinded and on such
               application the court may, by order, rescind the contract either
               so far as regards the party in default or altogether, as the
               justice of the case may require.”
19     Interpreting the provisions of
Section 28
of the Specific Relief Act, a three

judge Bench of this Court held in
Sardar Mohar Singh
(supra):
“4. From the language of sub-section (1) of
Section 28
, it
               could be seen that the court does not lose its jurisdiction after
               the grant of the decree for specific performance nor it
               becomes functus officio. The very fact that
Section 28
itself
               gives power to grant order of rescission of the decree would
               indicate that till the sale deed is executed in execution of the
               decree, the trial court retains its power and jurisdiction to deal
               with the decree of specific performance. It would also be clear
               that the court has power to enlarge the time in favour of the
               judgment-debtor to pay the amount or to perform the
               conditions mentioned in the decree for specific performance,
               in spite of an application for rescission of the decree having
               been filed by the judgment-debtor and rejected.
In other
               words, the court has the discretion to extend time for
               compliance of the conditional decree as mentioned in the
               decree for specific performance…”


In
Bhupinder Kumar v Angrej Singh10
, this Court held thus:
10 (2009) 8 SCC 766
12
“21. It is clear that
Section 28
gives power to the court either
               to extend the time for compliance with the decree or grant an
               order of rescission of the agreement. These powers are
               available to the trial court which passes the decree of specific
               performance. In other words, when the court passes the
               decree for specific performance, the contract between the
               parties is not extinguished. To put it clearly the decree for
               specific performance is in the nature of a preliminary decree
               and the suit is deemed to be pending even after the decree.
22. Sub-section (1) of
Section 28
makes it clear that the court
               does not lose its jurisdiction after the grant of decree for
               specific performance nor it becomes functus officio. On the
               other hand,
Section 28
gives power to the court to grant an
               order of rescission of the agreement and it has the power to
               extend the time to pay the amount or perform the conditions
               of decree for specific performance despite the application for
               rescission of the agreement/decree. In deciding an
               application under
Section 28(1)
of the Act, the court has to
               see all the attending circumstances including the conduct of
               the parties.”
20      Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents placed reliance on

the decision in
V S Palanichamy Chettiar Firm v C Alagappan11
.
While adverting

to the decision of this Court in
Ramankutty Guptan v Avara12
, the two judge Bench

held:
“15. …This Court observed that when the decree specifies
               the time for performance of the conditions of the decree, on
               its failure to deposit the money,
Section 28(1)
itself gives
               power to the court to extend the time on such terms as the
               court may allow to pay the purchase money or other sum
               which the court has ordered him to pay. The Court held, after
               noticing the conflict of decisions by the Bombay High Court
               and the Andhra Pradesh High Court, that when the court
               which passed the decree and the executing court is the same,
               application under
Section 28
can be filed in the executing
               court. However, where a decree is transferred for execution to
               a transferee executing court then certainly the transferee

11 (1999) 4 SCC 702
12 (1994) 2 SCC 642
13
court is not the original court and the executing court is not
              the “same court” within the meaning of
Section 28
of the Act.
But when an application has been made in the court in which
              the original suit was filed and the execution is being
              proceeded with, then certainly an application under
Section
              28
is maintainable in the same court…”



21      In
the above case
, the facts before this Court were that an agreement to sell

had been executed nineteen years earlier on 16 February 1980 and no explanation

was forthcoming as to why the balance of the sale consideration was not deposited

within the time granted by the court. No application for extension was made under
Section 28
of the Specific Relief Act. This Court observed that merely because a suit

was filed within a period of three years prescribed by
Article 54
of the
Limitation Act
1963, that did not absolve the vendee-plaintiff from demonstrating that he was ready

and willing to perform the agreement and whether the non-performance was on

account of obstacles placed by the vendor or otherwise. In that context, this Court

held:
“17. …The court has to see all the attendant circumstances
              including if the vendee has conducted himself in a reasonable
              manner under the contract of sale. That being the position of
              law for filing the suit for specific performance, can the court,
              as a matter of course, allow extension of time for making
              payment of balance amount of consideration in terms of a
              decree after 5 years of passing of the decree by the trial court
              and 3 years of its confirmation by the appellate court? It is not
              the case of the respondent decree-holders that on account of
              any fault on the part of the vendor judgment-debtor, the
              amount could not be deposited as per the decree. That being
              the position, if now time is granted, that would be going
              beyond the period of limitation prescribed for filing of the suit
              for specific performance of the agreement though this
              provision may not be strictly applicable. It is nevertheless an
              important circumstance to be considered by the Court. That
              apart, no explanation whatsoever is coming from the
14
respondent decree-holders as to why they did not pay the
             balance amount of consideration as per the decree except
             what the High Court itself thought fit to comment which is
             certainly not borne out from the record. Equity demands that
             discretion be not exercised in favour of the respondent
             decree-holders and no extension of time be granted to them
             to comply with the decree.”


The facts noted in the above extract from the judgment indicate a situation which is

factually distinct. In that case, the balance of the sale consideration was sought to

be deposited three years after the confirmation of the decree by the Appellate Court.
In the present case, the facts clearly are to the contrary. The appellant had

deposited an amount of Rs. 5,85,000/- The partial decree of the Trial Court in the

suit for specific performance was placed in issue before the Appellate Court. After

the Appellate Court affirmed the decree on 17 January 2015, the decree of the Trial

Court merged with that of the Appellate Court. Barely a month thereafter, on 19

February 2015 the appellant deposited the balance of the sale consideration. The

appellant acted bona fide. The equities in a matter arising out of a decree in a suit

for specific performance must weigh in his favour. The executing court was justified

in rejecting the specious objections of the respondents. The High Court acted in

excess of its revisional jurisdiction. The High Court impermissibly substituted the

decree for specific performance with an order for refund of the sale consideration,

beyond the earnest money of Rs. 2,00,000/- to the decree holder. The reasons

which weighed with the High Court in doing so as well as its ultimate directions are

unsustainable. In a Civil Revision arising out of an execution proceeding, the High

Court has modified the decree. Such a course was not open in law.
15
22    We accordingly allow the appeal and set aside the impugned judgment and

order dated 1 June 2018 of the learned Single Judge in CR No. 3372 of 2015

(O&M). In consequence, the order passed by the Executing Court on 23 February

2015, dismissing the objections of the respondent – judgment debtor in Execution

Petition No. 2489 of 2013 shall accordingly stand restored.


23    The appeal is allowed in the above terms. There shall be no order as to costs.
…….……..…...…...….......………………........J.
                                     [DR DHANANJAYA Y CHANDRACHUD]



                                     ……....…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                      [INDIRA BANERJEE]


New Delhi;
July 23, 2019.
16