[Cites
34
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Adani Power (Mundra) Ltd. vs Gujarat Electy Reg.Commission . on 2 July, 2019
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
Surya Kant
,
B.R. Gavai
,
Arun Mishra
1

                                                                               REPORTABLE



                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.11133 OF 2011



                         M/S ADANI POWER (MUNDRA) LTD.               .... APPELLANT(S)


                                                        VERSUS


                         GUJARAT ELECTRICITY REGULATORY
                         COMMISSION AND ORS.                         ....RESPONDENT(S)




                                                 J U D G M E N T
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.   The   appellant    has    approached     this    Court   being

                         aggrieved by the judgment and order passed by the Appellate

                         Tribunal   for   Electricity   (“the    Appellate    Tribunal”   for

                         short) in Appeal No. 184 of 2010 dated 07.09.2011 thereby

                         dismissing the appeal filed by the present appellant and

                         confirming the judgment and order passed by the Gujarat

                         Electricity   Regulatory   Commission     (“the   Commission”    for
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHARANJEET KAUR
short) dated 31.08.2010.
Date: 2019.07.02
16:39:13 IST
Reason:
2.   The facts in brief giving rise to the present appeal

                         are as under.
2
Respondent No. 2, namely, Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam

Ltd.    (hereinafter              referred      to    as    “the     procurer”)           is   a

holding company engaged in the business of bulk purchases

from the power generators and supply to the distribution

companies          in     the   State     of    Gujarat.       On    01.02.2006,           the

procurer initiated the process of bidding for supply of

power        on    long     term     basis,         by     issuing       a    Request      For

Qualification (“RFQ” for short). Three separate bids for

purchase of power in accordance with the provisions of
Section 63
of the Electricity Act, 2003 were invited. Each

of   the      three        bids    envisaged         purchase       of       power   to    the

maximum extent of 2000 Mega Watt (“MW” for short).                                   The RFQ

was followed by Request For Proposal (“RFP” for short) on

24.11.2006.               The   present matter             concerns bid          No. 2         in

respect of which the appellant was selected as a successful

bidder.
3.      On        being    successful          in    the     bidding         process,      the

procurer issued a Letter of Intent (“LOI” for short) in

respect of bid no. 2, to the appellant on 11.01.2007 for

supplying 1000 MW power at the rate of Rs. 2.35 per Kwh.

Consequently,             the     Power    Purchase         Agreement          (“PPA”      for

short) came to be entered into between the procurer and the

appellant, for purchase and sale of 1000 MW power from the

appellant’s power project at Korba, Chhatisgarh, at the

delivery point at Nani Khakhar in the State of Gujarat.
3
Similarly, on 06.02.2007 another PPA came to be executed by

the procurer with the appellant in respect of bid No. 1,

which project was to be executed by using imported coal.

The rate determined was Rs. 2.89 per unit in respect of bid

No. 1.
4.    On    12.02.2007, the      appellant informed        the procurer

that it would supply power against bid No. 2, from Mundra

Power Project in Gujarat instead of Chhatisgarh Project.

Accordingly, a supplemental PPA was entered into between

the appellant and the procurer on 18.04.2007, to off take

the contracted capacity of 1000 MW against bid No. 2, from

Mundra Power Project.
5.        The appellant contended         that, the bid submitted by

it   in    respect   of   bid   No.   2   was   on   the   basis   of   the

assurance given by Gujarat Mineral Development Corporation

(“GMDC” for short) to supply 4 million tonnes of coal.                   It

also contended that, the GMDC was not abiding by the said

assurance.      So   it    addressed      a     communication      to   the

Government of Gujarat on 21.05.2007 to find out a solution.

Since the Fuel Supply Agreement (“FSA” for short) could not

be executed, as contemplated between the appellant and the

GMDC; the appellant informed the procurer that the FSA

between it and the GMDC had not yet been finalized. Again,

a communication came to be addressed by the appellant on

01.05.2008 to the Government of Gujarat, requesting it to
4
impress upon the GMDC to adhere to its assurance and supply

the coal from the coal blocks allocated to the GMDC. The

procurer, thereafter, in the month of June, 2008, addressed

a communication to the appellants stating that, since it

had not complied with certain conditions stipulated in the

PPA   and    as    such,   it   should   furnish     an   additional

performance bank guarantee. The appellant addressed another

communication to the procurer on 17.01.2009, reiterating

its inability to supply the power to the procurer in the

absence of FSA with GMDC. It also informed that it had no

other option except to terminate the PPA.            On 27.02.2009,

the Government of Gujarat wrote to the GMDC, asking it to

supply coal to the appellant from Naini block.
6.          It appears that there was a dispute between the

appellant and the GMDC with regard to certain terms and

conditions of the FSA and as such the FSA could not be

finalized.    The record would further reveal, that there was

a long correspondence between the Government of Gujarat,

the GMDC, the procurer and the appellant with regard to the

commitment by the GMDC to supply coal to the appellant in

respect of bid No. 2 and non-adherence by the GMDC to abide

by    the   said    commitment.   The    appellant    addressed    a

communication dated 15.11.2008 specifically informing the

procurer that the bid was on the basis of the assurance by

the GMDC to supply coal. It also informed the procurer that
5
though    it   was    in    a   position     to   comply     with     all   other

conditions subsequent but they are unable to execute the

FSA   since    the    GMDC      had    not   cooperated      in    the   matter.

Another communication was addressed by the appellant on

17.01.2009 reiterating that in the absence of FSA with the

GMDC, the appellant will not be in a position to supply

contracted capacity of power to GUVNL/the procurer in the

absence of FSA with the GMDC. It further informed that the

appellant shall have no other option than to terminate the

PPA unless the coal supply comes from the GMDC from Morga-

II coal block. However, it appears that, thereafter, there

was an attempt to amicably settle the matter between the

appellant, the procurer, the GMDC as well as the Government

of Gujarat. As such, the appellant addressed communication

dated 28.04.2009 keeping its notices dated 15.11.2008 and

17.01.2009 in abeyance till the matter was resolved between

the   appellant       and    the      GMDC/Government      of     Gujarat.    It,

however, appears that the said attempts were not fruitful.

Finally, the appellant by a communication dated 28.12.2009,

issued notice to the procurer, terminating the PPA with

effect     from       04.01.2010.         The     procurer        addressed     a

communication to the Government of Gujarat on 30.12.2009,

requesting the Government to impress upon the appellant to

withdraw its termination notice dated 28.12.2009 and also

impress    upon      the    GMDC   for    resolution    of      FSA   with    the

appellant. The procurer also addressed a communication to
6
the appellant on 05.01.2010, requesting it to keep the

notice    of    termination       dated     28.12.2009          in     abeyance.    On

06.01.2010, the appellant addressed another communication

to the procurer, informing it that since the period of

termination has already expired, the PPA stands terminated

with effect from 4.01.2010.                 The appellant also deposited

an   amount     of   Rs.   25     crores     with     the       procurer    towards

liquidated      damages     in    addition      to    the       performance      bank

guarantee of Rs. 75 crores, which was already with the

procurer. On 13.01.2010 the procurer sent a letter to the

appellant,      returning        the   amount    of     Rs.       25    crores     and

calling       upon   it    to    withdraw       the    termination          notice.

However, the appellant asserted that termination was valid.
7.      The    procurer,    thereafter,         filed       a    petition     under
Sections 86(1)(f)
and
95
of the Electricity Act, 2003, for

adjudication of the dispute between the procurer and the

appellant       on   01.02.2010        before         the       Commission.        The

Commission by its judgment dated 31.08.2010 allowed the

petition of the procurer,              holding that the termination of

the PPA was illegal and directed the appellant herein to

supply the power to the procurer at the rate determined in

the PPA.        Being aggrieved, the appellant approached the

Appellate Tribunal for Electricity. By the judgment and

order    impugned dated          07.09.2011, the            Appellate Tribunal

dismissed the appeal. Hence, the present appeal.
7
8.    We have heard Mr. Gopal Jain, learned senior counsel

for   the   appellant,       and    Mr.    M.G.   Ramachandran,      learned

senior counsel for the respondent(s).
9.    The main contention raised on behalf of the appellant

is that the bid which was submitted by the appellant in

respect of bid No. 2 was on the basis of the commitment

given to it by the GMDC that it will supply the coal. It is

submitted that the PPA executed between the appellant and

the procurer was on the premise that the GMDC would abide

by its commitment. It is also submitted that since the GMDC

had failed to abide by its commitment and had not executed

the FSA with the appellant, there was a non-compliance with

the conditions stipulated in Article 3.1.2 of the PPA and

therefore        the    appellant   was    entitled   to   terminate    the

agreement, by giving 7 days notice in writing in accordance

with the provisions of Article 3.4.2 of the PPA. So the

only liability of the appellant was to pay the liquidated

damages at the rate of Rs. 10 lakhs per Mega Watt of the

contracted capacity, which is worked out to Rs. 100 crores

for 1000 MW.
10.   It    is    the    submission   of    Mr.   Jain,    learned    senior

counsel, that the Commission and the Appellate Tribunal

have grossly erred in holding that unless there was an

agreement between the parties to the effect that there was

non-compliance          with the    conditions mentioned       in Article
8
3.1.2 of the PPA, the appellant was not entitled to invoke

the    provisions         of   Article    3.4.2       of   the    PPA.    Mr.    Jain

further submitted that since the contract also provided for

liquidated damages, the Commission as well the Appellate

Tribunal, ought not to have given a direction for specific

performance. Reliance in this respect is placed on the

judgments      of     this      Court    in     the    case       of
Indian   Oil

Corporation         vs.    Amritsar Gas Services Ltd.
, (1991) 1 SCC

533 and Her Highness Maharani Shanti Devi Gaekwad                                 vs.

Savji Haribhai Patel & Ors. (2001) 5 SCC 101.
11.     Mr. Jain further submitted that the Appellate Tribunal

by    the   impugned       judgment      has    varied      the    terms    of    the

contract      executed         between    the     parties,        which     is   not

permissible in law. Reliance in this respect is placed on

the judgments of this Court in the case of Vermagiri                             vs.

Transco,       2007
SCC On Line APTEL 107 and                          Gujarat Urja

Vikas Nigam Ltd.               vs. Solar Semiconductor Power Company
,

(2017) 16 SCC 498.
12.     Per contra, Mr. Ramachandran, learned senior counsel

appearing on behalf of the procurer, would submit that the

PPA which was entered into between the parties, was not

executed on the basis of commitment by the GMDC. He submits

that the procurer is not concerned with the issue as to

from where the appellant would arrange for its supply of

coal.       The PPA between the appellant and the procurer is
9
only in respect of supply of power. It is submitted that on

the GMDC's failure to adhere to its commitment to supply

indigenous coal, it was the responsibility of the appellant

to make arrangement for an alternative source and to enter

into FSA with any other coal supplier. It is submitted that

as a matter of fact, the appellant is importing the coal

from other nations and using it for generation of power,

both for the plant under bid No. 1 and the plant under bid

No. 2. Shri Ramachandran, learned senior counsel, further

submits that, by not making arrangements for fuel supply,

it    is   the       appellant        who    had      committed      default       and,

therefore,       a    party      in   default         cannot    be    permitted      to

terminate the agreement. Reliance in this respect is placed

on various judgments of English Courts as well as this

Court. Reliance is also placed on various judgments of this

Court, in support of the proposition that in spite of the

provision of liquidated damages in the PPA, the courts are

not   powerless        to    direct     a    specific         performance     of   the

contract.
13.   Shri Ramachandran further submitted that the contract

is required to be read as a whole and the provisions of the

contract     cannot         be   read       in   isolation.         He,    therefore,

submits    that       the    Commission          as    well    as    the    Appellate

Tribunal has rightly held that Article 3.4.2 and
Article

14.1
and
Article 14.2
have to be read together. Thus, no
10
fault    could     be    found   with    the    reasoning    given   by    the

Commission as well as the Appellate Tribunal.                        Learned

senior counsel, therefore, submits that the appeal has no

merit and deserves to be dismissed.
14.     For   appraising      the   rival      submissions   it   would    be

necessary to refer to certain clauses of the PPA:
The relevant part of
Article 3
reads thus:
“3.
Article 3:
CONDITIONS SUBSEQUENT TO                     BE
              SATISFIED BY THE SELLER AND THE PROCURER
      3.1     Satisfaction of conditions subsequent by the
              Seller


      3.1.1 xxx
      3.1.2The seller agrees and undertakes to duly
           perform and complete the following activities
           within (i) Twelve (12) Months from the
           Effective Date or (ii) Fourteen (14) Months
           from the date of issue of Letter of Intent,
           whichever is later, unless such completion is
           affected due to the Procurer’s failure to
           comply with its obligations under this
           Agreement or by any Force Majeure event or if
           any of the activities is specifically waived
           in writing by the Procurer :
i.    xxx
              ii.the Seller shall have executed Fuel Supply
                Agreement and provided the copies of the
                same to the Procurer.”


              The relevant part of
Article 3.4
reads thus:
“3.4 Consequences of non-fulfilment of conditions
             under Article 3.1
        3.4.1           xxx
        3.4.2       Subject to Article 3.4.3, if:
11
(i)   fulfilment of any of the conditions specified
      in Article 3.1.2 is delayed beyond the period
      of three (3) Months and the Seller fails to
      furnish any additional Performance Guarantee
      to the Procurer in accordance with Article
      3.4.1 hereof; or
(ii) the Seller furnishes additional Performance
     Guarantee to the Procurer in accordance with
     Article 3.4.1 hereof but fails to fulfil the
     conditions specified in Article 3.1.2 for a
     period of eight (8) months beyond the period
     specified therein, the    procurer   or   the
     Seller shall have the right to terminate this
     Agreement by giving a notice to the Seller/
     Procurer in writing of at least seven (7)
     days.
If the Procurer or the Seller elects to
      terminate   this  Agreement   in  the   event
      specified in the preceding paragraph of this
      Article 3.4.2, the Seller shall be liable to
      pay to the Procurer an amount equivalent to
      Rupees Rs. 10.00 lakhs per MW of the
      Contracted Capacity as liquidated damages.
      The Procurer shall be entitled to recover
      this amount of damages by invoking the
      Performance Guarantee to the extent of an
      amount equivalent to Rupees 10.00 lakhs per
      MW of the Contracted Capacity and shall then
      return the balance Performance Guarantee, if
      any, to the Seller. If the Procurer is unable
      to recover the said amount or any part
      thereof from the Performance Guarantee the
      amount not recovered from the Performance
      Guarantee, if any, shall be payable by the
      Seller to the Procurer within ten (10) days
      from the end of eight (8) Months period from
      the due date of completion of conditions
      subsequent. It is clarified for removal of
      doubt that this Article shall survive the
      termination of this Agreement.
3.4.3In case of inability to the Seller to fulfil
     the conditions specified in Article 3.1.2 due
     to any Force Majeure event, the time period
     for fulfilment of the Condition Subsequent as
     mentioned in Article 3.1.2, shall be extended
     for the period of such Force Majeure event,
     subject to a maximum extension period of ten
     (10) Months, continuous or non-continuous in
     aggregate. Thereafter, this Agreement may be
12
terminated by the Procurer or the Seller by
            giving a notice of at least seven (7) days,
            in writing to the Other Party.”


     Since both the Commission and the Appellate Tribunal

have referred to
Article 14
, we also reproduce the same.
“14.
ARTICLE    14   :
EVENTS   OF   DEFAULT   AND
            TERMINATION
     14.1 Seller Event of Default
     The occurrence and continuation of any of the
     following events, unless any such event occurs as
     a result of a Force Majeure Event or a breach by
     Procurer   of   their   obligations  under   this
     Agreement, shall constitute a Seller Event of
     Default:
i)     the failure to Commission any Unit by   the
            date falling twelve (12) Months after its
            Scheduled Commercial Operation Date, or
ii)    after the commencement of construction of
            the Project, the abandonment by the Seller
            or the Seller’s Construction Contractors of
            the construction of the Project for a
            continuous period of two (2) Months and such
            default is not rectified within thirty (30)
            days from the receipt of first notice from
            the Procurer in this regard, or
iii) if at any time following a Unit being
          Commissioned and during its retest, as per
          Article 8, such Unit’s Tested Capacity is
          less than ninety two (92) per cent of its
          Rated Capacity, as existing on the Effective
          Date, and such Tested Capacity remain below
          ninety two (92) percent even for a period of
          three (3) Months thereafter and also the
          Seller is unable to make available the full
          Contracted Capacity at the Delivery Point
          from the Tested Capacity of the Unit(s) of
          the Power Station; or
iv)    after    Commercial  Operation    Date   of
            Contracted Capacity, the Seller fails to
            achieve Average Availability of sixty five
            per cent (65%), for a period of twelve (12)
            consecutive   Months  or   within   a  non-
consecutive period of twelve (12) Months
13
within any continuous aggregate    period   of
      thirty six (36) Months, or
v)    the Seller fails to make any payment (a) of
      an amount exceeding Rupees One (1) Crore
      required to be made to Procurer under this
      Agreement, within three (3) Months after the
      Due Date of an undisputed invoice / demand
      raised by the Procurer on the Seller or (b)
      of an amount upto Rupees One (1) Crore
      required to be made to Procurer under this
      Agreement within six (6) Months after the
      Due Date of an undisputed invoice / demand,
      or
vi)   any of the representations and warranties
      made by the Seller in Schedule 10 of this
      Agreement; being found to be untrue or
      inaccurate. Further, in addition to the
      above, any of the undertakings submitted by
      the Seller at the time of submission of the
      Bid   being   found   to  be    breached   or
      inaccurate, including but not limited to
      undertakings       from      its       parent
      company/affiliates related to the minimum
      equity obligation; Provided however, prior
      to considering any event specified under
      this sub-article to be an Event of Default,
      the Procurer shall give a notice to the
      Seller in writing of at least thirty (30)
      days, or
vii) if the Seller :
a) assigns or purports to assign any of its
         assets or rights in violation of this
         Agreement; or
b) transfers or novates any of its rights
        and / or obligations under this agreement,
        in violation of this Agreement; or
viii)if (a) the Seller becomes voluntarily or
     involuntarily the subject of any bankruptcy
     or insolvency or winding up proceedings and
     such proceedings remain uncontested for a
     period of thirty (30) days, or (b) any
     winding up or bankruptcy or insolvency order
     is passed against the Seller, or (c) the
     Seller goes into liquidation or dissolution
     or has a receiver or any similar officer
     appointed over all or substantially all of
     its   assets  or   official   liquidator  is
     appointed to manage its affairs, pursuant to
14
Law,   except   where  such  dissolution  or
      liquidation of the Seller is for the purpose
      of a merger, consolidation or reorganization
      and where the resulting entity has the
      financial     standing    to   perform   its
      obligations    under   this  Agreement   and
      creditworthiness similar to the Seller and
      expressly assumes all obligations of the
      Seller under this Agreement and is in a
      position to perform them; or
ix)   the Seller repudiates this Agreement and
      does not rectify such breach even within a
      period of thirty (30) days from a notice
      from the Procurer in this regard; or
x)    except where due to Procurer’s failure to
      comply with its material obligations, the
      Seller is in breach of any of its material
      obligations pursuant to this Agreement or of
      any of the RFP Documents where the Procurer
      and Seller are parties, and such material
      breach is not rectified by the Seller within
      thirty (30) days of receipt of first notice
      in this regard given by the Procurer to the
      Seller;
xi)   the Seller fails to complete/fulfill the
      activities /conditions specified in Article
      3.1.2, beyond a period of 8 Months from the
      specified period in Article 3.1.2 and the
      right of termination under Article 3.4.2 is
      invoked by the Procurer; or
xii) any direct or indirect change in the
     shareholding of the Seller in contravention
     of the terms of the Bid RFP Documents; or
xiii)The Seller fails to provide additional bank
     guarantee to the Procurer in accordance with
     Article 3.4.1 of this Agreement, or
xiv) Occurrence of any other event that is
     specified in this Agreement to be a material
     breach / default of the Seller.
14.2 Procurer Event of Default
The occurrence and the continuation of any of the
following events, unless any such event occurs as
a result of a Force Majeure Event or a breach by
the   Seller  of   its  obligations   under  this
Agreement, shall constitute the Event of Default
on the part of the Procurer:
15
i)    the Procurer fails to pay (with respect to a
      Monthly Bill or a Supplementary Bill) an
      amount exceeding 15% of the most recent
      undisputed Monthly Bill for a period of
      ninety (90) days after the Due Date and the
      Seller is unable to recover the amount
      outstanding  to   the  Seller   through  the
      Collateral Arrangement and Letter of Credit;
      or
ii)   the Procurer repudiates this Agreement and
      does not rectify such breach even within a
      period of thirty (30) days from a notice
      from the Seller in this regard; or
iii) except where due to any Seller’s failure to
     comply with its obligations, the Procurer is
     in material breach of any of its obligations
     pursuant to this Agreement or of any of the
     RFP Documents where the Procurer and the
     Seller are Parties, and such material breach
     is not rectified by the Procurer within
     thirty (30) days of receipt of notice in
     this regard from the Seller to the Procurer;
     or
iv)   any representation and warranties made by
      any of the Procurer in Schedule 9 of this
      Agreement being found to be untrue or
      inaccurate.  Provided  however,   prior  to
      considering any event specified under this
      sub-article to be an Event of Default, the
      Seller shall give a notice to the concerned
      Procurer in writing of at least thirty (30)
      days; or
v)    if (a) the Procurer becomes voluntarily or
      involuntarily the subject of any bankruptcy
      or insolvency or winding up proceedings and
      such proceedings remain uncontested for a
      period of thirty (30) days, or (b) any
      winding up or bankruptcy or insolvency order
      is passed against the Procurer, or (c) the
      Procurer     goes      into     liquidation    or
      dissolution or has a receiver or any similar
      officer appointed over all or substantially
      all of its assets or official liquidator is
      appointed to manage its affairs, pursuant to
      Law,   except    where    such   dissolution   or
      liquidation of the Procurer is for the
      purpose   of   a    merger,    consolidation   or
      reorganization     and    where   the   resulting
      entity has the financial standing to perform
16
its obligations under this Agreement and has
      creditworthiness similar to the Procurer and
      expressly assumes all obligations of the
      Procurer under this Agreement and is in a
      position to perform them; or;
vi)   occurrence of any other event which is
      specified in this Agreement to be a material
      breach or default of the Procurer.
14.3 Procedure   for   cases   of   Seller   Event   of
     Default
14.3.1 Upon the occurrence and continuation of
      any Seller Event of Default under
Article
      14.1
, the Procurer shall have the right to
      deliver   to   the    Seller  a   Procurer
      Preliminary Default Notice, which shall
      specify   in    reasonable   detail,   the
      circumstances giving rise to the issue of
      such notice.
14.3.2 Following    the    issue   of    Procurer
       Preliminary     Default    Notice,     the
Consultation Period of ninety (90) days or
       such longer period as the Parties may
       agree, shall apply.
14.3.3 During   the  Consultation  Period,   the
       Parties shall, save as otherwise provided
       in this Agreement, continue to perform
       their respective obligations under this
       Agreement.
14.3.4 After a period of seven (7) days following
       the expiry of the Consultation Period and
       unless the Parties shall have otherwise
       agreed to the contrary or the Seller Event
       of Default giving rise to the Consultation
       Period shall have been remedied and,
(a) in case the Contracted Capacity from a
            Power Station is less than 50% of the
            installed   capacity  of   such  Power
            Station, the Procurer may terminate
            this Agreement. Provided such seller
            shall have the liability to make
            payments for Capacity Charges based on
            Normative Availability to the Procurer
            for the period three (3) years from
            the eighth day after the expiry of the
            Consultation Period. Provided further
            that at the end of the three year
17
period,     this    Agreement     shall
          automatically       terminate       and
          thereafter, the Seller shall have no
          further   Capacity   Charge   liability
          towards    the    Procurer.    Provided
          further, the Procurer shall have the
          right to terminate this Agreement even
          before the expiry of such three year
          period provided on such termination,
          the future Capacity Charge liability
          of the Seller shall cease immediately.
(b) in case the Contracted Capacity from a
          Power Station is more than or equal to
          50% of the installed capacity of such
          Power    Station,    the    Lenders    may
          exercise or the Procurer may require
          the    Lenders    to    exercise     their
          substitution rights and other rights
          provided   to   them,    if   any,   under
          Financing Agreements and the Procurer
          would have no objection to the Lenders
          exercising their rights if it is in
          consonance with provisions of Schedule
14. Alternatively, in case the Lenders
          do   not   exercise   their    rights   as
          mentioned herein above, the Capacity
          Charge of the Seller shall be reduced
          by 20% for the period of Seller Event
          of   Default   and   the    Procurer   may
          terminate    this   Agreement    and   the
          provisions of Article 14.3.4 (a) shall
          apply mutatis mutandis.
14.4       Termination        for   Procurer   Events   of
Default
14.4.1 Upon the occurrence and continuation of
       any Procurer Event of Default pursuant to
Article 14.2 (i)
, the seller shall follow
       the   remedies  provided   under  Article
       11.5.2.
14.4.2 Without in any manner affecting the rights
       of the Seller under Article 14.4.1, on the
       occurrence of any Procurer Event of
       Default specified in
Article 14.2
the
       Seller shall have the right to deliver to
       the Procurer a Seller Preliminary Default
       Notice, which notice shall specify in
18
reasonable detail the circumstances giving
      rise to its issue.
14.4.3 Following   the    issue   of    a  Seller
       Preliminary     Default     Notice,    the
Consultation Period of ninety (90) days or
       such longer period as the Parties may
       agree, shall apply.
14.4.4 During   the  Consultation    Period,  the
       Parties shall continue to    perform their
       respective   obligations      under   this
       Agreement.
14.4.5. (i) After a period of seven (7) days
       following the expiry of the Consultation
       Period and unless the Parties shall have
       otherwise agreed to the contrary or the
       Procurer Event of Default giving rise to
       the Consultation Period shall have been
       remedied, the Seller shall be free to sell
       the Contracted Capacity and associated
       Available Capacity to any third party of
       his choice. Provided the Procurer shall
       have the liability to make payments for
       Capacity   Charges   based   on   Normative
       Availability to the Seller for the period
       three (3) years from the eighth day after
       the expiry of the Consultation Period.
       Provided further that in such three year
       period, in case the Seller is able to sell
       electricity to any third party at a net
       price at the Delivery Point which is in
       excess of the Energy Charges, then such
       excess   realization    will   reduce   the
       Capacity Charge payments due from the
       Procurer. For the avoidance of doubt, the
       above excess adjustment would be applied
       on a cumulative basis for the three-year
       period. During such period, the Seller
       shall use its best effort to sell the
       Contracted    Capacity    and    associated
       Available Capacity generated or capable of
       being generated to such third parties at
19
the most reasonable terms available in the
              market at such time, having due regard to
              the circumstances at such time and the
              pricing of electricity in the market at
              such time. Provided further, the Seller
              shall ensure that sale of power to the
              shareholders of the Seller or any direct
              or     indirect     affiliate     of   the
              Seller/shareholders of the Seller, is not
              at a price less than the Tariff, without
              obtaining the prior written consent of the
              Procurer. Such request for consent would
              be responded to within a maximum period of
              three (3) days failing which it would be
              deemed that the Procurer has given his
              consent. Provided further that at the end
              of the three-year period, this Agreement
              shall     automatically    terminate   and
              thereafter, the Procurer shall have no
              further Capacity Charge liability towards
              the Seller. Provided further, the Seller
              shall have the right to terminate this
              Agreement even before the expiry of such
              three   year   period   provided   on such
              termination, the future Capacity Charge
              liability of the Procurer shall cease
              immediately."
15.   Before we proceed to consider the rival submissions,

it will be appropriate to refer to certain judgments of

this Court on the interpretation of clauses of the contract

between the parties.
16.   This Court in the case of Rajasthan State Industrial

Development   and   Investment        Corporation   and   Anr.   vs.
20
Diamond & Gem Development Corporation Ltd. & Anr. reported

in (2013) 5 SCC 470 observed thus:
“23.    A party cannot claim anything more than
     what is covered by the terms of contract, for the
     reason that contract is a transaction between the
     two parties and has been entered into with open
     eyes and understanding the nature of contract.
     Thus, contract being a creature of an agreement
     between   two  or   more  parties,   has  to   be
     interpreted giving literal meaning unless, there
     is some ambiguity therein. The contract is to be
     interpreted giving the actual meaning to the
     words contained in the contract and it is not
     permissible for the court to make a new contract,
     however reasonable, if the parties have not made
     it themselves. It is to be interpreted in such a
     way that its terms may not be varied. The
     contract has to be interpreted without any
     outside aid. The terms of the contract have to be
     construed strictly without altering the nature of
     the contract, as it may affect the interest of
     either of the parties adversely. [
Vide United
     India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Harchand Rai Chandan
     Lal
, (
2004) 8    SCC 644, and Polymat India (P)
     Ltd. v. National Insurance Co. Ltd.
, (2005) 9
     SCC 174.]
24. In DLF Universal Ltd. v. Town and Country
     Planning Deptt., (2010) 14 SCC 1, this Court
     held: (SCC pp. 14-15, paras 13-15)
         “13. It is a settled principle in law that
         a contract is interpreted according to its
         purpose. The purpose of a contract is the
         interests, objectives, values, policy that
         the contract is designed to actualise. It
         comprises the joint intent of the parties.
Every such contract expresses the autonomy
         of the contractual parties’ private will.
         It creates reasonable, legally protected
         expectations   between  the   parties  and
         reliance on its results. Consistent with
21
the character of purposive interpretation,
          the court is required to determine the
          ultimate purpose of a contract primarily by
          the joint intent of the parties at the time
          of the contract so formed. It is not the
          intent of a single party; it is the joint
          intent of both the parties and the joint
          intent of the parties is to be discovered
          from the entirety of the contract and the
          circumstances surrounding its formation.
14. As is     stated    in   Anson’s   Law   of
          Contract :
‘a basic principle of the common law of
            contract is that the parties are free
            to   determine   for    themselves what
            primary     obligations     they   will
            accept.... Today, the position is seen
            in a different light. Freedom of
            contract is generally regarded as a
            reasonable, social, ideal only to the
            extent that equality of bargaining
            power between the contracting parties
            can be assumed and no injury is done to
            the interests of the community at
            large.’
15.   The Court assumes:
‘that the parties to the contract are
            reasonable persons who seek to achieve
            reasonable   results,    fairness   and
            efficiency... In a contract between the
            joint intent of the parties and the
            intent of the reasonable person, joint
            intent trumps, and the Judge should
            interpret the contract accordingly.’ ”
17.   This Court in the case of
Bharat Aluminium Company

vs.   Kaiser Aluminium Technical Services INC
reported in

(2016) 4 SCC 126 observed thus:
22
“10.     In the matter of interpretation, the
      court has to make different approaches depending
      upon the instrument falling for interpretation.
      Legislative drafting is made by experts and is
      subjected to scrutiny at different stages before
      it takes final shape of an Act, Rule or
      Regulation.   There    is   another   category  of
      drafting by lawmen or document writers who are
      professionally qualified and experienced in the
      field like drafting deeds, treaties, settlements
      in court, etc. And then there is the third
      category of documents made by laymen who have no
      knowledge of law or expertise in the field. The
      legal quality or perfection of the document is
      comparatively low in the third category, high in
      second and higher in first. No doubt, in the
      process of interpretation in the first category,
      the courts do make an attempt to gather the
      purpose of the legislation, its context and
      text. In the second category also, the text as
      well as the purpose is certainly important, and
      in the third category of the documents like
      wills, it is simply intention alone of the
      executor that is relevant. In the case before
      us, being a contract executed between the two
      parties, the court cannot adopt an approach for
      interpreting a statue. The terms of the contract
      will have to be understood in the way the
      parties wanted and intended them to be. In that
      context,    particularly      in   agreements   of
      arbitration, where party autonomy is the ground
      norm, how the parties worked out the agreement,
      is one of the indicators to decipher the
      intention, apart from the plain or grammatical
      meaning of the expressions and the use of the
      expressions   at   the    proper  places   in  the
      agreement.”
18.   Recently, this Court had an occasion to consider the

issue with regard to interpretation of certain clauses of
23
PPA, in the case of
Nabha Power Ltd. (NPL)             vs.   Punjab

State Power Corporation Ltd. (PSPCL) and Anr.
reported in

2018 (11) SCC 508. The Court referred to various English

and Australian judgments as well as the judgments by this

Court on the issue. We do not wish to burden this judgment

with all the English and Australian judgments reproduced in
the said judgment
.
However, it will be relevant to refer to

the following passage of the decision of the Privy Council

in the case of Attorney General of Belize            vs.     Belize

Telecom Ltd., (2009) 1 WLR 1988 (PC): reproduced in Nabha

Power Ltd.
“17.The question of implication arises when the
      instrument does not expressly provide for what is
      to happen when some event occurs. The most usual
      inference in such a case is that nothing is to
      happen. If the parties had intended something to
      happen, the instrument would have said so.
      Otherwise,   the   express   provisions  of   the
      instrument    are   to    continue   to   operate
      undisturbed. If the event has caused loss to one
      or other of the parties, the loss lies where it
      falls.”
19.   We   may   also   gainfully    reproduce   certain   judgments

which have been reproduced in the case of
Nabha Power Ltd.
(supra).
“46.   There   were,           once   again,   parallel
      developments in India           during this period in
      various High Courts but         the views of this Court
      can be found expression        in
Dhanrajamal Gobindram
24
v. Shamji Kalidas and Co.
, (1961) 3 SCR 1020: AIR
1961 SC 1285 (AIR pp. 1291 – 92, para 19)
 “19. .... Commercial documents are sometimes
 expressed in language which does not, on its
 face, bear a clear meaning. The effort of
 courts is to give a meaning, if possible.
This was
laid down by
the House of Lords in
 Hillas & Co. v. Arcos Ltd. {1932 All ER Rep
 494 (HL)}, and the observations of Lord
 Wright have become classic, and have been
 quoted with approval both by the Judicial
 Committee and the House of Lords ever since.
 The latest case of the House of Lords is
 Adamastos Shipping Co. Ltd. v. Anglo-Saxon
 Petroleum Co. Ltd. {1959 AC 133 : (1958) 2
 WLR 688 (HL)}. There, the clause was “This
 bill of lading”, whereas the document to
 which it referred was a charter-party.
 Viscount Simonds summarised at AC p. 158 all
 the rules applicable to construction of
 commercial documents, and laid down that
 effort should always be made to construe
 commercial agreements broadly and one must
 not be astute to find defects in them, or
 reject them as meaningless.”
47.
In
Union    of India v. D.N. Revri & Co.
{(1976)
4 SCC 147},    P.N. Bhagwati, J. (as he then was),
speaking for   the Bench of two Judges said in para
7 as under :   (SCC p. 151)
 “7. It must be remembered that a contract is
 a commercial document between the parties and
 it must be interpreted in such a manner as to
 give efficacy to the contract rather than to
 invalidate it. It would not be right while
 interpreting a contract, entered into between
 two lay parties, to apply strict rules of
 construction which are ordinarily applicable
 to a conveyance and other formal documents.
 The meaning of such a contract must be
 gathered by adopting a common sense approach
 and it must not be allowed to be thwarted by
25
a    narrow,    pedantic     and    legalistic
 interpretation. ...”
48. Lastly, in
Satya Jain v. Anis Ahmed Rushdie
{(2013) 8 SCC 131}, Ranjan Gogoi, J., elucidated
the well-established principles of the classic
test of business efficacy to achieve the result
of consequences intended by the parties acting as
prudent businessmen. It was opined as under: (SCC
pp. 143-44, paras 33-35)
 “33. The principle of business efficacy is
 normally invoked to read a term in an
 agreement or contract so as to achieve the
 result or the consequence intended by the
 parties   acting    as   prudent   businessmen.
 Business efficacy means the power to produce
 intended   results.    The  classic   test   of
 business efficacy was proposed by Bowen, L.J.
 in The Moorcock {(1889) LR 14 PD 64 (CA)}.
 This test requires that a term can only be
 implied if it is necessary to give business
 efficacy to the contract to avoid such a
 failure of consideration that the parties
 cannot   as    reasonable    businessmen   have
 intended. But only the most limited term
 should then be implied – the bare minimum to
 achieve this goal. If the contract makes
 business sense without the term, the courts
 will not imply the same. The following
 passage from the opinion of Bowen, L.J. in
 The Moorcock {(1889) LR 14 PD 64 (CA)} sums
 up the position : (PD p. 68)
   ‘...... In business transactions such as
   this, what the law desires to effect by
   the implication is to give such business
   efficacy to the transaction as must have
   been intended at all events by both
   parties who are businessmen; not to
   impose on one side all the perils of the
   transaction, or to emancipate one side
   from all the chances of failure, but to
   make each party promise in law as much,
26
at all events, as it must have been in
   the contemplation of both parties that he
   should be responsible for in respect of
   those perils or chances.’
34. Though in an entirely different context, this
Court in
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v.
Manubhai Dharmasinhbhai Gajera
{(2008) 10 SCC
404} had considered the circumstances when
reading an unexpressed term in an agreement would
be justified on the basis that such a term was
always and obviously intended by and between the
parties thereto. Certain observations in this
regard expressed by courts in some foreign
jurisdictions were noticed by this Court in para
51 of the Report.
As the same may have
application to the present case it would be
useful to notice the said observations : (SCC p.
434)
 ‘51. ... “... ‘Prima facie that which in any
 contract is left to be implied and need not
 be expressed is something so obvious that it
 goes without saying; so that, if, while the
 parties   were  making   their   bargain,  an
 officious bystander, were to suggest some
 express provision for it in their agreement,
 they would testily suppress him with a common
 “Oh, of course!” ’ Shirlaw        v. Southern
 Foundaries (1926) Ltd. {(1939) 2 KB 206 :
(1939) 2 All ER 113 (CA)}, KB p. 227.”
       *            *          *        *
  “...An unexpressed term can be implied if
  and only if the court finds that the parties
  must have intended that term to form part of
  their contract: it is not enough for the
  court to find that such a term would have
  been adopted by the parties as reasonable
  men if it had been suggested to them: it
  must have been a term that went without
  saying, a term necessary to give business
  efficacy to the contract, a term which,
  although tacit, formed part of the contract
27
which the parties made for themselves.”
Trollope and Colls Ltd. v. North West
        Metropolitan Regl
.
Hospital Board {(1973) 1
        WLR 601 : (1973) 2 All ER 260 (HL)}, WLR p.
609 C-D : All ER p. 268 a-b.’   (emphasis in
        original)
35. The business efficacy test, therefore, should
     be applied only in cases where the term that is
     sought to be read as implied is such which could
     have been clearly intended by the parties at the
     time of making of the agreement. ...”



     After reproducing the paras from earlier judgment,

this Court through Sanjay Kishan Kaul, J. observed thus:
“49.    We now proceed to apply the aforesaid
     principles which have evolved for interpreting
     the terms of a commercial contract in question.
     Parties indulging in commerce act in a commercial
     sense. It is this ground rule which is the basis
     of The Moorcock {(1889) LR 14 PD 64 (CA)} test of
     giving “business efficacy” to the transaction, as
     must have been intended at all events by both
     business parties. The development of law saw the
     “five condition test” for an implied condition to
     be read into the contract including the “business
     efficacy” test. It also sought to incorporate
     “the Officious Bystander Test” [Shirlaw v.
     Southern Foundries (1926) Ltd. {(1939) 2 KB 206 :
(1939) 2 All ER 113 (CA)}]. This test has been
     set   out   in    B.P.   Refinery   (Westernport)
     Proprietary Ltd. v. Shire of Hastings {1977 UKPC
     13 : (1977) 180 CLR 266 (Aus)} requiring the
     requisite conditions to be satisfied : (1)
     reasonable and equitable; (2) necessary to give
     business efficacy to the contract; (3) it goes
     without saying i.e. the Officious Bystander Test;
(4) capable of clear expression; and (5) must not
     contradict any express term of the contract. The
     same penta-principles find reference also in
28
Investors Compensation Scheme Ltd. v. West
      Bromwich Building Society {(1998) 1 WLR 896 :
(1998) 1 All ER 98 (HL)} and Attorney General of
      Belize    v.    Belize Telecom Ltd. {(2009) 1 WLR
      1988 (PC)}. Needless to say that the application
      of these principles would not be to substitute
      this    Court’s     own  view  of    the   presumed
      understanding of commercial terms by the parties
      if the terms are explicit in their expression.
The explicit terms of a contract are always the
      final word with regard to the intention of the
      parties. The multi-clause contract inter se the
      parties    has,    thus,  to  be   understood   and
      interpreted in a manner that any view, on a
      particular clause of the contract, should not do
      violence to another part of the contract.”
20.   It   could       thus   be    seen       that   it     is    more     than      well

settled that the clauses in the agreement ought to be given

the   plain,       literal         and    grammatical             meaning        of    the

expression used in the same. No doubt, that the courts will

also try to gather as to what intention the parties wanted

to give them. As has been held by Ranjan Gogoi, J.                               (as His

Lordship then was)             the principle of business efficacy

could be invoked only if by a plain literal interpretation

of the term in the agreement or the contract, it is not

possible to achieve the result or the consequence intended

by the parties acting as prudent businessmen. This test

requires        that   a   term     can    only       be   implied,         if    it    is

necessary to give business efficacy to the contract, to

avoid such a failure of consideration that the parties

cannot     as    reasonable        businessmen        have    intended.          If    the
29
contract makes business sense without the term, the courts

will not imply the same. It is amply clear that courts can

imply a clause only if it is found that the plain and

literal meaning given to the expression used in the terms

is not in a position to make out the intention of the

parties. Reading an unexpressed term in an agreement would

be justified on the basis that such a term was always and

obviously intended by and between the parties thereto.
An

unexpressed term can be implied if and only if the court

finds that the parties must have intended that term to form

part of their contract. It is not enough for the court to

find   that    such   a   term    would    have   been    adopted     by   the

parties as reasonable men if it had been suggested to them.

It must have been a term that went without saying, a term

necessary to give business efficacy to the contract, a term

which, although tacit, forms part of the contract.                   As held

in the case of
Nabha Power Ltd.
(supra), for invoking the

business      efficacy     test    and     carving       out   an     implied

condition,     not    expressly    found    in    the    language     of   the

contract, the following five conditions will have to be

satisfied:
(1)        Reasonable and equitable;
   (2)   Necessary         to     give    business      efficacy     to    the
   contract;
   (3)   It goes          without        saying   i.e.     the      Officious
   Bystander Test;
   (4)        Capable of clear expression; and
30
(5)   Must   not    contradict       any    express    term    of   the
      contract.



21.    We   have   to    examine     the       present   case       and   the
correctness or otherwise of the judgment and order passed

by the Appellate Tribunal by applying the aforesaid tests.
22.    We have hereinbefore reproduced
Articles 3
and
4
of

the PPA.
Article 3
provides for conditions subsequent to be

satisfied by the seller and the procurer.                   Clause (ii) of

Article 3.1.2 requires the seller to have executed FSA and

provided the copies of the same to the procurer within 12

months from the effective date or 14 months from the date

of issue of Letter of Intent, whichever is later, unless

such completion is affected due to the procurer’s failure

to comply with its obligations under the PPA or by any

force majeure event.
Article 3.4
provides for consequences

of non-fulfilment of conditions under
Article 3.1;
sub-

clauses (i) and (ii) of Article 3.4.2 specifically provide

that if fulfilment of any of the conditions specified in

Article 3.1.2 is delayed beyond the period of 3 months and

the   seller   fails     to   furnish    any     additional    performance

guarantee to the procurer or if the seller after furnishing

additional performance guarantee to the procurer fails to

fulfil the conditions specified in Article 3.1.2 for a

period of 8 months beyond the period specified therein,
31
both the procurer or the seller shall have the right to

terminate the agreement by giving a notice to the other

party in writing of at least 7 days.                The only requirement

is that in the event of termination either by the procurer

or    the    seller,    the   seller   shall   be    liable   to    pay   the

procurer an amount equivalent to Rs. 10 lakhs per MW of the

contracted capacity as liquidated damages. It is thus clear

that    in    the   event     of   non-compliance     with    any   of    the

requirements as provided in Article 3.1.2 within the period

specified in the said Article, an option is available both

to the seller or the procurer to terminate the PPA. The

only requirement is that, in either of the situations, the

liability would be only on the seller to pay the liquidated

damages at the rate of Rs. 10 lakhs per MW.
23.     The Appellate Tribunal has held that only in the event

there is an agreement between the parties that any of the

terms       specified    in    Article      3.1.2    is   violated,       the

provisions of Article 3.4.2 can be invoked.
24.     It will be relevant to quote certain observations made

in the judgment of the Appellate Tribunal which are as

follows:
“85. The perusal of Article 3.1.2 of the PPA would
        make it clear that the Appellant undertook to
        perform the condition subsequent to the execution
        of the Power Purchase Agreement. The Seller’s
        right to terminate the Power Purchase Agreement as
        mentioned   above  can   only   arises  upon   the
32
Procurer’s   default   in   complying   with   its
obligation under Article 3.1.2.
...
89.(iii) Article 3.4.2 provides a situation under
which the Power Purchase Agreement can be
terminated either by the Procurer or by the Seller
only when the events provided in Article 3.4.2 (i)
and (ii) arise or occur. Although Article 3.4.2
appears to provide a right to both the parties to
terminate the PPA on happening of such events
specified in Article 3.4.2 (i) and (ii), the same
has to be read and interpreted along with the
other Articles of the PPA. Article 3.4.2 further
provides that the Seller shall be liable to pay
the Procurer an amount of Rs.10 Lakhs per MW as
liquidated damages if the Procurer or the Seller
elects terminate the agreement on happening of
events specified in the earlier part of the
Article 3.4.2. From the reading of the said
Article 3.4.2, it is clear that either party can
terminate the PPA, if the events specified in
Article 3.4.2 (i) and (ii) occur and in case of
such termination by either party, the Seller alone
has the obligation to pay liquidated damages.
...
89(vi)    ..... If the seller fails to fulfill the
conditions specified in Article 3.1.2, the right
to terminate under Article 3.4.2 is invoked by the
Procurer. Similarly, the ability of either party
to terminate the PPA under Article 3.4.2 will
arise only if both the parties accept happening of
events specified under Article 3.4.2 (i) and (ii).
In other words, the termination by the Seller
under Article 3.4.2 is possible if both the
parties agree to the happening of the events
contemplated therein and the Seller is willing to
pay the liquidated damages if a dispute arises
regarding the event of termination.”
33
25.     The aforesaid observations of the Appellate Tribunal,

in    our   view,    depict    a     totally   erroneous     approach.   A

harmonious     reading    of   Article      3.4.2    and   Article   3.1.2

clearly indicates that in the event of non-compliance of

any of the conditions as stipulated in Article 3.1.2 within

the period prescribed thereunder, either of the parties,

i.e.,    the   seller    or    the     procurer     have   the   right   to

terminate the contract. However, in either of the events,

it is the seller’s liability to pay the liquidated damages

at the rate of Rs. 10 lakhs per Mega Watt.
26.     We are of the considered view that the finding of the

Appellate Tribunal that the provisions under Article 3.4.2

of the PPA can be invoked only when there is an agreement

between the parties that there is violation of any of the

conditions specified in Article 3.1.2 of the PPA is totally

incorrect. If such an argument is accepted, it will amount

to inserting a totally new condition in Article 3.4.2 of

the PPA and would amount to re-writing the contract between

the parties;        it would do total violence to the provisions

of Article 3.4.2 of the PPA.               It cannot be said to be a

condition which is either reasonable or equitable; it also

cannot be said to be a condition which is necessary to give

business efficacy to the contract; it also cannot be said

to be a test which justifies the Officious Bystander Test;

it also cannot be said to be a condition which is capable
34
of the clear expression; it is also not a condition which

does not contradict any expressed terms of the contract. On

the contrary, is a condition which would totally change the

tenor of Article 3.4.2 of the PPA. We are, therefore, of

the considered view that the Appellate Tribunal has grossly

erred in coming to the conclusion that Article 3.4.2 of the

PPA could be invoked only in the event that there is an

agreement with regard to violation of any of the conditions

in Article 3.1.2.
27.        The Tribunal, while arriving at its finding, has

held that agreement has to be read as a whole and if it is

read as whole and if Articles 3.4.2 and 3.1.2 and
Article

14
are harmoniously read, then the only conclusion that can

be    drawn   is   that   provisions    of   Article    3.4.2   can   be

invoked, only if there is an agreement between the parties,

that the conditions specified in Article 3.1.2 have not

been complied with. Let us test the correctness of this

finding.
28.      The Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of
Calcutta Gas Company (Proprietary) Ltd. vs. State of West

Bengal   and others
reported in   AIR 1962       SC 1044,   while

construing the entries in the List in Schedule VII of the

Constitution has observed thus:
35
“8 ….....The Rule of construction adopted
         by that decision       for the purpose of
         harmonizing the two apparently conflicting
         entries in the two Lists would equally
         apply to an apparent conflict between two
         entries in the same List.         Patanjali
         Sastri, J., as he then was, held in
State
         of Bombay v. Narothamdas Jethabhai
, 1951
         SCR 51 : (AIR 1951 SC69) that the words
         “administration      of    justice”     and
         “constitution and organization of all
         courts” in item one of
List II of the
         Seventh Schedule to the Government of
         India Act, 1935
must be understood in a
         restricted sense excluding from their
         scope “jurisdiction and powers of courts”
         specifically dealt with in item 2 of List
         II. In the words of the learned Judge, if
         such a construction was not given “the
         wider   construction    of entry  1   would
         deprive entry 2 of all its contents and
         reduce it to useless lumber.” This rule of
         construction has not been dissented from
         in any of the subsequent decisions of this
         Court.   It may, therefore, be taken as a
         well settled rule of construction that
         every attempt should be made to harmonize
         the apparently conflicting entries not
         only of different Lists but also of the
         same List and to reject that construction
         which will rob one of the entries of its
         entire content and make it nugatory.”


Though the aforesaid observations are made while construing

the entries in the List in Schedule VII and though while

interpreting   the   clauses   in   the   agreement   the   strict

principle of interpretation would not be applicable, the

Court can borrow the said principle while interpreting the

same.   It has been held by this Court that every attempt

has to be made to harmonize apparently conflicting entries

not only of different Lists but also of the same List and
36
to    reject that   construction which   will rob   one of   the

entries of its entire content and make it nugatory.
29.    Again, while interpreting the provisions of
Section 47
and
Order XXI, Rule 2 of the CPC
, this Court in the case of
Sultana Begum vs. Prem Chand Jain
reported in AIR 1997 SC

1006, has observed thus:
“12....... On a conspectus of the case law
         indicated above, the following principles
         are clearly discernible:
(1)It is the duty of the Courts to avoid a
            head on clash between two Sections of the
            Act and to construe the provisions which
            appear to be in conflict with each other
            in such a manner as to harmonize them.
(2)The provisions of one Section of a
            statute cannot be used to defeat the
            other provisions unless the Court, in
            spite of its efforts finds it impossible
            to effect reconciliation between them.
(3)It has to be borne in mind by all the
            Courts all the time that when there are
            two conflicting provisions in an Act,
            which cannot be reconciled with each
            other, they should be so interpreted
            that, if possible, effect should be given
            to both. This is the essence of the rule
            of “harmonious construction”.
(4)The Courts have also to keep in mind that
            an interpretation which reduces one of
            the provisions as a “dead letter” or
            “useless   lumber”   is  not   harmonious
            construction.
(5)To harmonize is not to destroy any
            statutory provision or to render it
            otiose.”
                                  (emphasis given)
37
It could thus be seen that this Court has clearly held that

to harmonize is not to destroy any statutory provision or

to render it otiose. This principle has been reiterated in

the case of
Anwar Hasan Khan vs. Mohammed Shafi and others
reported   in   AIR   2001    SC   2984.   While   considering   the

provisions of
U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting,

Rent and Eviction) Act
, this Court observed thus :
“8.   It is settled that for interpreting a
        particular provision of an Act, the import and
        effect of the meaning of the words and phrases
        used in the statute has to be gathered from
        the text, the nature of subject-matter and the
        purpose of intention of the statute.       It is
        cardinal principle of construction of statute
        that effort should be made in construing its
        provisions    by avoiding    the conflict    and
        adopting   a    harmonious   construction.   The
        statute or rules made thereunder should be
        read as a whole and one provision should be
        construed    with   reference   to   the   other
        provision to make the provision consistent
        with the object sought to be achieved. The
        well-known      principle      of     harmonious
        construction is that effect should be given to
        all the provisions and a construction that
        reduces one of the provision to a “dead
        letter” is not harmonious construction.......”
30.   Applying the aforesaid principles to various clauses

of the agreement, an attempt has to be made to harmoniously

read the provisions of Articles 3.1.2, 3.4.2 and 14.1,

14.2, 14.3 and 14.4.         An attempt has also to be made to

give effect to all the provisions.         If so read, it will be

clear that
Article 14
deals with various eventualities in
38
which procurer or the seller can terminate the agreement.
Article   14.1
provides    for    termination   in    the   event    of

various defaults committed by the seller.
Article 14.3
provides for procedure to be followed in cases of default

by the seller.
Article 14.2
provides various grounds with

regard    to     default     by     procurer.   The     procedure      for

termination in cases of default by the procurer has been

provided in
Article 14.4.
Perusal of grounds stated in
Articles 14.1
and
14.2
would reveal that these are general

in nature.     Per contra, provisions of Article 3.4.2 would

reveal that termination under this Article can be made only

if there is non-compliance with any of the conditions in

Article 3.1.2.     The power is available to both procurer and

seller.   However, in either of the cases i.e. termination

by seller or termination by procurer, there is a specific

provision of damages at the rate of Rs 10 lakhs per MW,

whereas consequences of the termination in
Articles 14.1
and
14.2
are totally different.           As such, effect will have

to be given to both the provisions, which are independent

of each other.
31.   We find, that both the Commission and the Appellate

Tribunal have grossly erred in arriving at finding that

termination can be effected under Article 3.4.2 only if

there is an agreement with regard to non-compliance of

condition under Article 3.4.2 by both the parties.               If the
39
finding of the Appellate Tribunal is accepted, it will be

amounting to making provisions of Article 3.4.2 a dead

letter and rendering them otiose.
32.      We further find that the Commission as well as the

Appellate Tribunal has lost sight of one another important

principle of law.         This Court in the case of
J.K. Cotton

Spinning and Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. vs. State of Uttar

Pradesh
, reported in AIR 1961 SC 1170, while construing the

provisions    of   Clause    5(a)        and    Clause   23   of     the
U.P.

Industrial    Disputes     Act
and    the    U.P.    Government        Order

issued    under     the
U.P.    Industrial       Disputes        Act
,    has

observed thus :
“(10) Applying this rule of construction
            that in cases of conflict between a
            specific    provision   and    a   general
            provision the specific provision prevails
            over   the   general  provision  and   the
            general provision applies only to such
            cases which are not covered by the
            special provision, we must hold that cl.
            5(a) has no application in a case where a
            special    provisions  of   cl.   23   are
            applicable.”
33.   The said principle has been reiterated by this Court

in its judgment in the case of
Maharashtra State Board of

Secondary and Higher Secondary Education and Ors.                           Vs.

Paritosh Bhupeshkumar Sheth and Ors.
reported                   in     (1984)

4 SCC 27.    Para 20 of
the said judgment
reads thus:
40
“20.   We consider that the above approach
        made   by  the   High   Court  is   totally
        fallacious and is vitiated by its failure
        to follow the well established doctrine of
        interpretation    that    the    provisions
        contained in a statutory enactment or in
        rules/regulations framed thereunder have to
        be so construed as to be in harmony with
        each other and that where under a specific
        section or rule a particular subject has
        received special treatment, such special
        provision will exclude the applicability of
        any general provision which might otherwise
        cover the said topic.........”
34.   In the present case, the perusal of various Articles

would reveal that provisions under
Article 14
are general

in nature.   The provision under Article 3.4.2 is specific,

only to be invoked in the case of non-compliance with any

of the conditions as provided under Article 3.1.2.       As

such, the special provision made in Article 3.4.2 will

exclude the applicability of general provisions contained

in
Article 14
of the contract.
35.   After considering the legal position, let us examine

some of the factual aspects of the matter. It would be

relevant to note that in the bid dated 2.01.2007 submitted

by the appellant, it is clearly mentioned that the project

is based on coal supply from the GMDC.
41
36.    It will also be relevant to refer to Clause 1.2 of

Annexure 3 to the bid document which gives details of the

proposed project.          Clause 1.2 reads as follows:
“1.2 Fuel:
The lead member, Adani Enterprises Ltd. has tied
        up the indigenous coal requirement of the
        Project with GMDC, who has been allocated Morga
        II coal block in the State of Chhatisgarh.
        Further with a view to ensure supply of fuel
        with optimum techno-commercial parameters, we
        have also tied up supply of imported coal with
        M/s Coal Orbis Trading GMBH, Germany and M/s
        Kowa Company Ltd.       and accordingly executed
        separate MoUs with them dated 9th Sept 2006 and
        21st Dec 2006 respectively.”
37.    In the brief summary of the Project given in the said

bid document, it has been specifically mentioned by the

appellant    that     the    bid    was     submitted         on     the    basis    of

indigenous     coal      supply     committed         by     the   GMDC.     The    bid

documents also form part of the PPA between the parties.
38.    It   will      be    relevant        to        note     that        after    the

communication      dated     15.11.2008          by    the    appellant       to    the

procurer thereby conveying its intention to terminate the

PPA in the wake of pending FSA with the GMDC for supply of

power under bid No. 2, the Managing Director of Gujarat

Urja   Vikas   Nigam        Ltd.,    the    procurer,          had    addressed       a

communication       to     the     Principal          Secretary,          Energy    and

Petrochemicals           Department,         Government              of      Gujarat,

requesting it to issue suitable directions since the issue
42
regarding allocation of coal from the mines allocated to

the GMDC was within the purview of Government of Gujarat.
Thereafter,      on    27.02.2009   the   Deputy   Secretary    of   the

Industries      and Mines      Department, Government    of Gujarat,

addressed a communication to the Managing Director of the

GMDC. It will be relevant to record the following part of

the said letter.
“(b) So far as Naini block is concerned, GMDC had
      already given a commitment for supply of coal from
      Morga-II mines to M/s. Adani Ltd., for a 1000 MW
      plant on the basis of which M/s. Adani submitted
      their bid in the competitive tariff bid to GUVNL
      at Gujarat bus-bar. Considering this aspect and
      the full availability to the state, 50% block may
      be given M/s. Adani Ltd and remaining 50% block
      may be given to Torrent Power Ltd., to exclusively
      provide power for Gujarat’s need. M/s.Adani and
      M/s.TPL have to sell power generated from Naini
      Block exclusively to GUVNL. No merchant sale is
      to be allowed to anyone else.
2.   You are now, therefore requested to go for
      coal allotment from Morga block with M/s. KSK by
      way of the detailed FSA and to give 50% coal from
      Naini block to M/s. Adani and remaining 50% coal
      to M/s.Torrent Power Ltd., as mentioned above.”
39.   It could thus be clearly seen that even the Government

of    Gujarat    has    also    clearly   indicated   that     the   bid

submitted by the appellant in the competitive bid was on

the basis of the commitment for supply of coal from Morga-

II mines by the GMDC. It has, therefore, requested the

Managing Director, GMDC to give 50 per cent of coal from
43
Morga block to the appellant. The State Government had,

therefore, requested that the Managing Director of the GMDC

to go for coal allotment from Morga block.
40.   It will also be relevant to note that on 30.12.2009,

the Executive (Finance) of the procurer has addressed a

letter    to   the   Principal      Secretary,   Energy    and

Petrochemicals Department, Government of Gujarat, referring

to the letter issued by the appellant on 28.12.2009. After

referring to Article 3.4.2 of the PPA, it is stated in the

said communication as under:
“In light of above circumstances Government of
      Gujarat is requested to impress upon M/s.APL to
      withdraw the Notice of Termination of PPA dated
      2nd February, 2007, executed with GUVNL, for
      supply of 1000 MW under bid specification
      no.02/LTPP/2006 and also impress upon GMDC for
      prompt necessary action for execution of FSA with
      M/s. APL to ensure supply of 1000 MW power to
      GUVNL at competitive rate to meet future demand of
      the state. Further Government of Gujarat is
      requested to kindly issue suitable directives to
      GUVNL for further necessary action in the matter.”
41.   It could thus be seen that, even the procurer was

aware that the bid of the appellant was on the basis of the

commitment by the GMDC to supply the indigenous coal.
42.   In view of the aforesaid, it could be seen that the

appellant as well as the procurer and also the Government

of Gujarat clearly understood that the bid submitted by the

appellant was on the basis of the commitment of the GMDC to
44
supply   indigenous coal       to it.    It will    be pertinent    to

mention that the appellant had sent notices intimating its

intention     to   terminate    the     PPA   on   account   of   non-

finalisation of FSA with the GMDC and also terminate the

contract much prior to commissioning of the project and

commencement of power supply to the procurer. Annexure III

to the PPA would itself show that expected commercial date

of operation is January, 2012, whereas termination is vide

notice dated 28.12.2009. The materials placed on record

would reveal that the appellant has supplied the power at

the rate of Rs. 2.35 per unit (as per bid) after the PPA

was terminated by it, to abide by the directions issued by

the Commission. It may not be out of place to mention that

the appellant was a successful bidder in respect of the two

bids i.e. bid No. 1 and bid No. 2. Insofar as bid No. 2,

which is the subject matter of the present proceedings,

the bid of the appellant was accepted at the rate of Rs.

2.35 per unit whereas in the same bidding process, bid of

the appellant for bid No. 1 was accepted at the rate of Rs.

2.89 per unit. The said Project was to be executed on the

basis of imported coal supply. It is thus clear that the

parties were very much aware that bid of the purchaser for

bid No. 1 which was at a much lower price than the price

for bid No. 2 was on account of the commitment to the

appellant from the GMDC that it would supply indigenous

coal to it.
45
43.   In that view of the matter, after the GMDC resiling

from its commitment and refusing to enter into FSA with the

appellant, the appellant was justified in invoking Article

3.4.2 of the PPA, in view of non-compliance of Condition

No. (ii) in Article 3.1.2 since it had failed to produce

the Fuel Supply Agreement. It will also be relevant to

refer to Paragraph 70 of the judgment of the Appellate

Tribunal. Paragraph 70 reads as under:
“Admittedly,   the    Seller,   the   Appellant
      mentioned in the bid documents that “Adani
      Enterprises Limited has tied-up indigenous coal
      requirements of the project with the Gujarat
      Mineral Development Corporation, who has been
      allocated Morga-II Block in the State of
      Chhatisgarh”. The Appellant has also mentioned
      in the bid documents that with a view to ensure
      the supply of fuel, they have tied-up supply of
      imported coal with two foreign Companies and
      accordingly executed separate Memorandum of
      Understanding with them dated 9.9.2006 and
      21.12.2006.”
44.   In the light of the aforesaid finding, we fail to

understand as to how the Appellate Tribunal has come to a

finding that the bid of the appellant was not on the basis

of the commitment by the GMDC to supply indigenous coal. We

are of the considered view that the Appellate Tribunal has

erred both on facts and in law. We are of the considered

view that the appellant was entitled in law as well as on

facts to invoke Article 3.4.2 of the PPA and terminate the

agreement.
46
45.     Having held that the termination was legal and valid

the question arises as to what relief is to be granted to

the appellant. On the basis of the Order of the Commission

and the Appellate Tribunal, the appellant is continuing

supply      of   electricity   to   the    respondent    No.    2,   the

procurer, though it is the contention of the appellant that

it has been sustaining losses by doing so.
46.     It will be relevant to refer to certain subsequent

developments. The appellant had approached this Court by

Interlocutory Application No. 4 of 2015 for the following

reliefs:
“(a)    to stay the operation of the impugned
             judgment dated 7.9.2011 and suspend further
             supply of electricity in terms of the PPA
             during the pendency of this Appeal.
(b)      in the alternative to prayer (a) above,
             during    the pendency of the accompanying
             Civil Appeal the Hon’ble Court may direct the
             Respondent(s) to pay the tariff as per CERC
             norms for tariff on cost plus basis; and also
             make the payment from the date of the supply
             of power under the PPA of the differential
             amount between the PPA tariff and the tariff
             as per CERC norms for tariff on cost plus
             basis on the such terms and condition as this
             Hon’ble court deems fit as just and proper.”
47.     The said application came up for consideration before

the Bench consisting of J. Chelameswar, and Abhay Manohar

Sapre, JJ. It appears that in the said I.A. an affidavit

dated    23.11.2015    came    to   be    filed   on   behalf   of   the
47
respondent No. 2, the procurer. It will be relevant to note

the averments made in the affidavit quoted in the Order

dated 3.12.2015 passed by this Court.
“15.   I submit that, without prejudice to
         the rights of the Respondent No.2 to contest
         the present appeal, the answering Respondent
         with the approval of Government of Gujarat
         has already shown its willingness to pay
         compensatory tariff prospectively (from next
         month of CERC order i.e. March 2014) subject
         to paras 12 and 13 above to resolve the
         issue by making suitable adjustments in
         tariff which till date is not implemented
         because of non acceptance by Appellant and
         other stakeholders.
16.    I say that without prejudice to its
         rights in the present appeals the Respondent
         No.2 is willing to implement the decisions
         of State Govt. for paying compensatory
         tariff prospectively (from next month of
         CERC order i.e. March 2014) to resolve the
         issue by making suitable adjustment in
         tariff on the directions of the Hon’ble
         Court. ...”
48.     This Court after hearing the parties observed that

insofar as the question of permitting the supplier/procurer

to pay the compensatory tariff, as indicated in its counter

affidavit is concerned, it requires no permission from this

Court    and   it   was   for   the    supplier/procurer   to   take   a

decision in accordance with law.
49.     Once we hold that termination is valid and legal,

question would arise as to at what rate the appellant is
48
entitled to compensatory tariff from the date of supply of

power.        Undisputedly,           even     after    the       PPA     was    validly

terminated, the appellant continued to take the project to

its logical end. After commissioning of the project, it has

started supplying electricity to the procurer in accordance

with    the     decision         of     the    Commission     and       the     Appellate

Tribunal. The appellant must have incurred huge expenditure

on    the     same.    In       order    to    do    economic      justice,       on    the

principle       of    business          efficacy,      the    appellant         would    be

entitled for adjustment of cost of the project and would

also     be    entitled          to     the    interest      on     the    expenditure

incurred        by    it        for     completion      of    the       project.        The

expenditure towards running of the project after obtaining

the coal from the open market would also be required to be

taken       into     consideration.            The   appellant       would       also    be

entitled to the interest on the delay of payment after it

receives payment upon determination of the rate which would

be     determined          by     the     Central      Electricity            Regulatory

Commission (“CERC” for short). However, we find that it

will not be appropriate for us to go into that exercise.
50.
Section       62
of    the    Electricity         Act,    2003,       provides

entire mechanism for determination of the tariff by the

CERC. It will also be relevant to note that the CERC (Terms

and Conditions of Tariff) Regulations 2009 also consider

various       factors       which        are    required      to    be     taken       into
49
consideration       by       the    CERC       while          determining        the

compensatory tariff. We find that it will be appropriate to

relegate   the    parties      to   CERC      for   determination           of   the

compensatory tariff payable to the appellant from the date

of termination of the PPA. After such determination, the

procurer would be entitled to adjust the amount if already

paid in accordance with affidavit dated 23.11.2015, from

the amount so determined by the CERC.
51.   Hence, the following order:
(i) The appeal is allowed.
(ii) The notice of termination                     of    the    PPA      dated

           28.12.2009 is held to be legal and valid. It is

           also     declared        that      the    PPA        stood       validly

           terminated with effect from 04.01.2010.
(iii)The appellant would be at liberty to approach the

           CERC     for      determination          of    the        compensatory

           tariff, including various aspects mentioned in

           paragraph 49, payable to it from the date of

           supply of electricity by it to the procurer. The

           CERC is directed to decide the said issue in the

           light of what has been observed by us hereinabove

           and in the light of the provisions of Section 62

           of the Electricity Act so also the CERC (Terms

           and    Conditions        of     Tariff)       Regulations,            2009

           within        a   period      of    three      months        from     the

           appellant’s approaching it.
50
(iv)   The   procurer          shall       make     the       payment    to    the

           appellant     as    determined             by    the    CERC     within    a

           period   of   three          months        from    the    date    of    its

           determination.
(v)    The   procurer      would          be     entitled      to    adjust    the

           amount if already paid by it in pursuance of its

           affidavit     dated          23.11.2015         from    the    amount     so

           determined by the supplier. The procurer shall

           be    entitled          to     adjust        the       balance     amount

           recoverable        by    it        from    the     appellant      towards

           liquidated damages of Rs. 100 Crore.
(vi) No order as to cost.
...................J.
                                                                [ARUN MISHRA]


                                                        ...................J.
                                                                 [B.R. GAVAI]


                                                        ...................J.
                                                                 [SURYA KANT]
NEW DELHI;
JULY 2, 2019.