[Cites
59
, Cited by
24
]
Supreme Court of India
Lily Thomas vs Union Of India & Ors on 10 July, 2013
Equivalent citations: AIR 2013 SUPREME COURT 2662, 2013 AIR SCW 4204, 2013 (6) ABR 236, (2013) 2 ORISSA LR 941, 2013 (7) SCC 653, (2013) 2 CLR 173 (SC), (2013) 3 GUJ LR 2209, (2013) 2 GUJ LH 408, (2013) 3 KER LT 296, (2013) 5 MAD LJ 463, (2013) 8 SCALE 469, (2013) 4 CIVLJ 637, (2013) 5 KANT LJ 1, (2013) 3 KER LJ 284, (2013) 4 MAD LW 857, AIR 2013 SC (CIV) 2133, (2013) 3 ESC 420, (2013) 6 ALL WC 5458, (2014) 117 CUT LT 284, (2013) 3 RECCIVR 713, 2013 (3) SCC (CRI) 641, 2013 (4) KCCR SN 445 (SC), 2013 (6) ADJ 28 NOC, (2013) 5 BOM CR 261
Bench:
Sudhansu Jyoti Mukhopadhaya
,
A. K. Patnaik
REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                         CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                    WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 490 OF 2005

Lily Thomas                                                     …
Petitioner
                                   Versus
Union of India & Ors.                              … Respondents

                                    WITH

                    WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 231 OF 2005

Lok Prahari, through its General Secretary
S.N. Shukla                                               … Petitioner

                                   Versus

Union of India & Ors.                              … Respondents


                                  Judgement

A. K. PATNAIK, J.


   These two writ petitions have been filed as Public  Interest  Litigations
for mainly declaring sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the  Representation  of
the People Act, 1951 as ultra vires the Constitution.

The background facts
2.    The background facts relevant for appreciating the challenge  to  sub-
section (4) of
Section 8
of the Act are that the Constituent Assembly  while
drafting the Constitution intended to lay down  some  disqualifications  for
persons being chosen as,  and  for  being,  a  member  of  either  House  of
Parliament as well as a member of the Legislative  Assembly  or  Legislative
Council of the State.  Accordingly, in the Constitution  which  was  finally
adopted  by  the  Constituent  Assembly,
Article  102(1)
laid   down   the
disqualifications for membership of either House of Parliament  and
Article
191(1)
laid down the disqualifications for  membership  of  the  Legislative
Assembly or Legislative Council  of  the  State.   These  two  Articles  are
extracted hereinbelow:

           102. Disqualifications for membership. –(1) A  person  shall  be
           disqualified for being chosen as, and for  being,  a  member  of
           either House of Parliament—


           (a) if he holds any office of profit  under  the  Government  of
           India or the Government of  any  State,  other  than  an  office
           declared by Parliament by law not to disqualify its holder;


           (b) if he is of  unsound  mind  and  stands  so  declared  by  a
           competent court;


           (c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;


           (d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired
           the  citizenship  of  a  foreign  State,   or   is   under   any
           acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;


           (e) if he is so  disqualified  by  or  under  any  law  made  by
           Parliament.

           191. Disqualifications for membership. – (1) A person  shall  be
           disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of the
           Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State—


           (a) if he holds any office of profit  under  the  Government  of
           India or the Government of any  State  specified  in  the  First
           Schedule, other than an office declared by  the  Legislature  of
           the State by law not to disqualify its holder;


           (b) if he is of  unsound  mind  and  stands  so  declared  by  a
           competent court;


           (c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;


           (d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired
           the  citizenship  of  a  foreign  State,   or   is   under   any
           acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;


           (e) if he is so  disqualified  by  or  under  any  law  made  by
           Parliament.


           [Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause], a  person  shall
           not be deemed to hold an office of profit under  the  Government
           of India or the Government of any State specified in  the  First
           Schedule by reason only that he is a  Minister  either  for  the
           Union or for such State.




A reading of the aforesaid constitutional provisions will show that  besides
the  disqualifications  laid  down  in  clauses  (a),  (b),  (c)  and   (d),
Parliament could lay down by law other disqualifications for  membership  of
either House  of  Parliament  or  of  Legislative  Assembly  or  Legislative
Council of the State.  In exercise of this  power  conferred  under
Article
102(1)(e)
and  under
Article  191(1)(e)
of  the  Constitution,  Parliament
provided in
Chapter-III of the Representation of the People Act,  1951
(for
short ‘the Act’), the disqualifications for  membership  of  Parliament  and
State Legislatures.
Sections 7
and
8
in
Chapter-III of the Act
,  with  which
we are concerned in these writ petitions, are extracted hereinbelow:


           7. Definitions.—In this Chapter,—


           (a)  "appropriate  Government"  means   in   relation   to   any
           disqualification for being chosen as or for being  a  member  of
           either House of  Parliament,  the  Central  Government,  and  in
           relation to any disqualification for  being  chosen  as  or  for
           being a  member  of  the  Legislative  Assembly  or  Legislative
           Council of a State, the State Government;


           (b) "disqualified" means disqualified for being chosen  as,  and
           for being, a member of either House  of  Parliament  or  of  the
           Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State.


           8. Disqualification on conviction for certain offences.—  (1)  A
           person convicted of an offence punishable under—


           (a) section 153A (offence of promoting enmity between  different
           groups on ground of religion, race, place of  birth,  residence,
           language, etc., and doing acts  prejudicial  to  maintenance  of
           harmony) or section 171E (offence of bribery)  or  section  171F
           (offence of undue influence or personation at  an  election)  or
           sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of  section  376  or  section
           376A or section 376B or section 376C or section  376D  (offences
           relating to rape) or section 498A (offence of cruelty towards  a
           woman by husband or relative of a husband) or sub-section (2) or
           sub-section (3) of section  505  (offence  of  making  statement
           creating or promoting enmity, hatred or ill-will between classes
           or offence relating to such statement in any place of worship or
           in any assembly engaged in the performance of religious  worship
           or religious ceremonies) of the
Indian Penal Code
(45 of  1860);
           or


           (b) the
Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955
(22 of 1955)  which
           provides for  punishment  for  the  preaching  and  practice  of
           "untouchability", and for  the  enforcement  of  any  disability
           arising therefrom; or


           (c)
section 11
(offence of  importing  or  exporting  prohibited
           goods) of the
Customs Act, 1962
(52 of 1962); or


           (d)
sections  10
to
12
(offence  of  being  a  member  of  an
           association declared unlawful, offence relating to dealing  with
           funds  of  an  unlawful  association  or  offence  relating   to
           contravention of an order made in respect of a  notified  place)
           of the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967
(37 of  1967);
           or


           (e) the
Foreign Exchange (Regulation) Act, 1973
(46 of 1973); or


           (f) the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985
(61
           of 1985); or


           (g)
section 3
(offence of committing terrorist acts) or
section
           4
(offence of committing disruptive activities) of the
Terrorist
           and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987
(28  of  1987);
           or


           (h)
section 7
(offence of contravention  of  the  provisions  of
sections 3
to
6
) of the
Religious  Institutions  (Prevention  of
           Misuse) Act, 1988
(41 of 1988); or


           (i)
section 125
(offence of promoting enmity between classes  in
           connection with the election) or
section 135
(offence of removal
           of ballot papers from polling stations) or
section 135A
(offence
           of booth capturing) of clause (a) of sub-section (2) of
section
           136
(offence of fraudulently defacing or fraudulently destroying
           any nomination paper) of this Act; [or]


           [(j)
section 6
(offence of conversion of a place of worship)  of
           the
Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991
], [or]


           [(k)
section 2
(offence of insulting the Indian National Flag or
           the Constitution of India) or
section 3
(offence  of  preventing
           singing of National Anthem) of  the  Prevention  of  Insults  to
           National Honour Act, 1971 (69 of 1971), [or]


           [(l) the
Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987
(3 of  1988);
           or]


           [(m) the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
(49 of 1988); or]


           [(n) the
Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002
(15 of 2002),]
           [shall be disqualified, where the convicted person is  sentenced
           to—


           (i) only fine, for a period of six years from the date  of  such
           conviction;


           (ii) imprisonment, from the date of such  conviction  and  shall
           continue to be disqualified for a further period  of  six  years
           since his release.]


           (2) A person convicted for the contravention of—


           (a)  any  law  providing  for  the  prevention  of  hoarding  or
           profiteering; or


           (b) any law relating to the adulteration of food or drugs; or


           (c) any provisions of the
Dowry Prohibition  Act,  1961
(28  of
           1961); and sentenced to  imprisonment  for  not  less  than  six
           months, shall be disqualified from the date of  such  conviction
           and shall continue to be disqualified for a  further  period  of
           six years since his release.]


           (3)  A  person  convicted  of  any  offence  and  sentenced   to
           imprisonment for not less than two years [other than any offence
           referred to in sub-section (1)  or  sub-section  (2)]  shall  be
           disqualified from the date of such conviction and shall continue
           to be disqualified for a further period of six years  since  his
           release.]


           [(4)] Notwithstanding anything [in sub-section (1),  sub-section
           (2)  or  sub-section  (3)]  a  disqualification   under   either
           subsection shall not, in the case of a person who on the date of
           the conviction is a member of Parliament or the Legislature of a
           State, take effect until three months  have  elapsed  from  that
           date or, if within that period  an  appeal  or  application  for
           revision  is  brought  in  respect  of  the  conviction  or  the
           sentence, until that appeal or application is disposed of by the
           court.


           Explanation. —In this section, —


           (a)  "law  providing  for  the   prevention   of   hoarding   or
           profiteering" means any law, or any order, rule or  notification
           having the force of law, providing for—


              I)  the  regulation  of  production  or  manufacture  of   any
                 essential commodity;
             II) the control of price at which any essential  commodity  may
                 be bought or sold;
            III)  the  regulation  of  acquisition,   possession,   storage,
                 transport, distribution, disposal, use  or  consumption  of
                 any essential commodity;
             IV) the  prohibition  of  the  withholding  from  sale  of  any
                 essential commodity ordinarily kept for sale;


           (b) "drug" has the meaning assigned  to  it  in  the  Durgs  and
           Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940);


           (c) "essential commodity" has the meaning assigned to it in  the
           Essential Commodity Act, 1955 (10 of 1955);


           (d) "food" has the meaning assigned to it in the
Prevention  of
           Food Adulteration Act, 1954
(37 of 1954).



3.    Clause (b) of
Section 7
of the  Act  quoted  above  defines  the  word
“disqualified” to mean disqualified for being chosen as, and  for  being,  a
member of either House of Parliament or of the Legislative  Assembly  or  of
Legislative Council of State.  Sub-sections (1), (2) and (3)  of
Section  8
of the Act provide that a person convicted of an offence  mentioned  in  any
of these sub-sections shall stand disqualified from the date  of  conviction
and the disqualification was to continue for the specific  period  mentioned
in the sub-section.  However, sub-section  (4)  of
Section  8
of  the  Act
provides that notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1),  sub-section  (2)
or sub-section (3) in
Section 8
of the Act, a disqualification under  either
subsection shall not, in the case of  a  person  who  on  the  date  of  the
conviction is a member of Parliament or the Legislature  of  a  State,  take
effect until three months have elapsed from that date  or,  if  within  that
period an appeal or application for revision is brought in  respect  of  the
conviction or the sentence, until that appeal or application is disposed  of
by the court.  It is this saving or protection provided in  sub-section  (4)
of
Section 8
of the Act for a member of Parliament or the Legislature  of  a
State which is challenged  in  these  writ  petitions  as  ultra  vires  the
Constitution.

Contentions on behalf of the Petitioners
4.    Mr.  Fali  S.  Nariman,  learned  Senior  Counsel  appearing  for  the
petitioner in Writ Petition No.  490  of  2005  and  Mr.  S.N.  Shukla,  the
General Secretary of the Petitioner  in  Writ  Petition  No.  231  of  2005,
submitted that the opening words of clause (1) of
Articles 102
and
191
of
the Constitution make it clear that the same disqualifications are  provided
for a person being chosen as a member of either House of Parliament, or  the
State Assembly or Legislative Council of the State and for a person being  a
member of either House of Parliament  or  of  the  Legislative  Assembly  or
Legislative Council of a State and therefore  the  disqualifications  for  a
person to be elected as a member of either House of  the  Parliament  or  of
the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council  of  the  State  and  for  a
person to continue as a member of either  House  of  Parliament  or  of  the
Legislative  Assembly  or  Legislative  Council  of  the  State  cannot   be
different.  In support of this submission, Mr. Nariman cited a  Constitution
Bench judgment of this Court in Election Commission, India v.  Saka  Venkata
Rao (AIR 1953 SC 210) in which it has been held that
Article 191
lays  down
the same set of disqualifications for election as well as for continuing  as
a member.  Mr. Nariman and Mr. Shukla  submitted  that  sub-section  (4)  of
Section 8
of the Act, insofar  as  it  provides  that  the  disqualification
under sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of
Section 8
for  being  elected  as  a
member of  either  House  of  Parliament  or  the  Legislative  Assembly  or
Legislative Council of State shall not take effect in the case of  a  person
who is already a member of Parliament or Legislature of a State on the  date
of the conviction if he files an appeal or a  revision  in  respect  of  the
conviction or the sentence within three months till the appeal  or  revision
is disposed of by the Court,  is  in  contravention  of  the  provisions  of
clause (1) of
Articles 102
and
191
of the Constitution.

5.    Mr. Shukla referred to the debates  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  on
Article 83
of the Draft Constitution, which corresponds to
Article  102
of
the Constitution.  In these debates, Mr. Shibban Lal Saksena,  a  member  of
the Constituent Assembly moved  an  Amendment  No.  1590  on  19.05.1949  to
provide  that  when  a  person  who,  by  virtue   of   conviction   becomes
disqualified and is on the date of disqualification a member of  Parliament,
his seat shall, notwithstanding anything in this Article, not become  vacant
by reason of the disqualification until three months have elapsed  from  the
date thereof or, if within those three months  an  appeal  or  petition  for
revision is brought in respect of the  conviction  or  the  sentence,  until
that appeal or petition is disposed of, but during any period  during  which
his membership is preserved by this provision, he shall  not  sit  or  vote.
Mr. Shukla submitted  that  this  amendment  to
Article  83
of  the  Draft
Constitution was not adopted in the Constituent Assembly.  Instead, in  sub-
clause (e) of clause (1) of
Articles 102
and
191
of  the  Constitution,  it
was provided that Parliament may  make  a  law  providing  disqualifications
besides those mentioned in sub-clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d)  for  a  person
being chosen as, and for being, a member of either House of  Parliament  and
of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State.   Mr.  Shukla
submitted that despite the fact that a provision similar to sub-section  (4)
of
Section 8
of the Act was not incorporated  in  the  Constitution  by  the
Constituent Assembly, Parliament has enacted sub-section (4)  of
Section  8
of the Act.

6.    According to  Mr.  Nariman  and  Mr.  Shukla,  in  the  absence  of  a
provision in
Articles 102
and
191
of the Constitution  conferring  power  on
Parliament to make a provision protecting sitting members  of  either  House
of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative  Council  of  a
State, from the disqualifications it lays down for a person being chosen  as
a member of Parliament or a State Legislature, Parliament lacks  legislative
powers to enact sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the Act and sub-section  (4)
of
Section 8
of the Act is therefore ultra vires the Constitution.

7.    Mr. Nariman next submitted that the legal basis of sub-section (4)  of
Section 8
of the Act is based on an earlier judicial view  in  the  judgment
of a Division Bench of this Court in Shri Manni Lal  v. Shri Parmal Lal  and
Others [(1970) 2 SCC 462]  that  when  a  conviction  is  set  aside  by  an
appellate order of acquittal, the  acquittal  takes  effect  retrospectively
and the conviction and the sentence are deemed to  be  set  aside  from  the
date they are recorded.  He submitted that in B.R. Kapur v.  State  of  T.N.
and Another [(2001) 7 SCC 231] a Constitution Bench of this  Court  reversed
the aforesaid judicial view and held that conviction, and  the  sentence  it
carries, operate against the accused in all their rigour until set aside  in
appeal, and a disqualification that attaches to the conviction and  sentence
applies as well.  He submitted that this later view has been  reiterated  by
a Constitution Bench of this Court in K. Prabhakaran v.  P.  Jayarajan  etc.
[(2005) 1 SCC 754].  Mr. Nariman argued that thus as soon  as  a  person  is
convicted of any of the offences mentioned in sub-sections (1), (2) and  (3)
of
Section 8
of the Act,  he  becomes  disqualified  from  continuing  as  a
member of Parliament or of a  State  Legislature  notwithstanding  the  fact
that he has filed an appeal or a revision against the conviction  and  there
is no legal basis for providing in sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of  the  Act
that his disqualification will not take effect if  he  files  an  appeal  or
revision within three months against the order of conviction.  He  submitted
that in case a sitting member  of  Parliament  or  State  Legislature  feels
aggrieved  by  the  conviction  and  wants   to   continue   as   a   member
notwithstanding the conviction, his remedy is to move  the  Appellate  Court
for stay of the order of conviction.  He cited the decision in Navjot  Singh
Sidhu v. State of Punjab and Another ([2007) 2 SCC 574] in which this  Court
has clarified that under sub-section (1) of
Section  389
of  the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 power has been conferred  on  the  Appellate  Court
not only to suspend the execution of the sentence and  to  grant  bail,  but
also to suspend the operation of the order  appealed  against,  which  means
the order of conviction.   He  submitted  that  in  appropriate  cases,  the
Appellate Court may stay the order of conviction  of  a  sitting  member  of
Parliament or State Legislature and  allow  him  to  continue  as  a  member
notwithstanding the conviction by the trial court, but a  blanket  provision
like sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the Act cannot  be  made  to  keep  the
disqualification pursuant to conviction  in  abeyance  till  the  appeal  or
revision is decided by the Appellate or Revisional Court.

8.    Mr. Nariman and Mr. Shukla submitted that  in  K.  Prabhakaran  v.  P.
Jayarajan etc. (supra) the validity of sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of  the
Act  was  not  under  challenge  and  only  a  reference  was  made  to  the
Constitution Bench of this Court on certain questions which arose  in  civil
appeals against judgments delivered by the  High  Court  in  election  cases
under the Act.  They submitted that the Constitution  Bench  of  this  Court
framed three questions with regard to disqualification of a candidate  under
Section 8
of the Act and while answering  question  no.3,  the  Constitution
Bench indicated reasons which seem to have persuaded Parliament to  classify
sitting members of the House into a separate category and to provide in sub-
section (4) of
Section 8
of the  Act  that  if  such  sitting  members  file
appeal or revision against the conviction  within  three  months,  then  the
disqualification on account of their conviction will not take  effect  until
the appeal or revision is decided by the appropriate court.  They  submitted
that the opinion expressed by the Constitution Bench of  this  Court  in  K.
Prabhakaran v. P. Jayarajan etc. (supra) regarding  the  purpose  for  which
Parliament classified sitting members of Parliament and  State  Legislatures
into a separate category and protected them from  the  disqualifications  by
the saving provision in sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the Act  are  obiter
dicta and are not binding ratio on the issue of the validity of  sub-section
(4) of
Section 8
of the Act.

9.    Mr. Nariman and Mr. Shukla submitted that sub-section (4)  of
Section
8
of the Act, in so far as it does not provide a  rationale  for  making  an
exception in the case of members of Parliament or a Legislature of  a  State
is arbitrary and discriminatory and  is  violative  of
Article  14
of  the
Constitution.  They submitted that persons  to  be  elected  as  members  of
Parliament or a State Legislature stand  on  the  same  footing  as  sitting
members of Parliament and State Legislatures  so  far  as  disqualifications
are concerned and sitting  members  of  Parliament  and  State  Legislatures
cannot enjoy the special privilege of  continuing  as  members  even  though
they are convicted of the offences mentioned in sub-sections  (1),  (2)  and
(3) of
Section 8
of the Act.

Contentions of behalf of the respondents
10.   Mr. Siddharth Luthra, learned ASG appearing for the Union of India  in
Writ Petition (C) 231 of 2005, submitted that the  validity  of  sub-section
(4) of
Section 8
of the Act has been upheld by  the  Constitution  Bench  of
this Court in K. Prabhakaran v. P. Jayarajan  etc.  (supra).   He  submitted
that while answering question no.3,  the  Constitution  Bench  has  held  in
Prabhakaran’s case that the purpose of carving out a saving  in  sub-section
(4) of
Section 8
of the Act  is  not  to  confer  an  advantage  on  sitting
members of Parliament or of a State Legislature but to  protect  the  House.
He submitted that in para 58 of the  judgment  the  Constitution  Bench  has
explained that if a member of the House was debarred  from  sitting  in  the
House and participating in the proceedings, no  sooner  the  conviction  was
pronounced followed by sentence of  imprisonment,  entailing  forfeiture  of
his membership, then two consequences would follow: first, the  strength  of
membership of the House shall stand reduced, so also  the  strength  of  the
political  party  to  which  such  convicted  member  may  belong  and   the
Government in power may be surviving on a  razor-edge  thin  majority  where
each member counts significantly and disqualification  of  even  one  member
may have a deleterious effect on the functioning of the Government;  second,
a bye-election shall have to be held which exercise may prove to be  futile,
also resulting in complications in the event of the convicted  member  being
acquitted by a superior criminal court. Mr. Luthra submitted  that  for  the
aforesaid two reasons, Parliament has  classified  the  sitting  members  of
Parliament or a State Legislature in a separate  category  and  provided  in
sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the Act that if on  the  date  of  incurring
disqualification, a  person  is  a  member  of  Parliament  or  of  a  State
Legislature, such disqualification shall not take effect  for  a  period  of
three months from the date of such disqualification to  enable  the  sitting
member to file appeal or revision challenging his conviction,  and  sentence
and if such an appeal or  revision  is  filed,  then  applicability  of  the
disqualification shall stand deferred until  such  appeal  or   revision  is
disposed of by the appropriate Court.

11.   Mr. Luthra next submitted that the  reality  of  the  Indian  judicial
system is that acquittals in the levels of the Appellate Court such  as  the
High Court are very high and it is  for  this  reason  that  Parliament  has
provided in sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the  Act  that  disqualification
pursuant to conviction or sentence in the case  of  sitting  members  should
stand deferred till the appeal or revision is decided by  the  Appellate  or
the  Revisional  Court.   He  submitted  that  the  power  to  legislate  on
disqualification  of  members  of  Parliament  and  the  State   Legislature
conferred on Parliament carries with it the incidental  power  to  say  when
the disqualification will take effect.  He  submitted  that  the  source  of
legislative power for enacting sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the  Act  is,
therefore, very much there  in
Articles  101(1)(e)
and
191(1)(e)
of  the
Constitution and if not in these articles of the  Constitution,  in
Article
246(1)
read with Entry  97  of  List  I  of  the  Seventh  Schedule  of  the
Constitution and
Article 248
of the Constitution,  which  confer  powers  on
Parliament to legislate on any matter not enumerated in  List  II  and  List
III of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.

12.   Mr. Paras Kuhad, learned ASG, appearing for  the  Union  of  India  in
Writ Petition (C) No.490  of  2005  also  relied  on  the  judgment  of  the
Constitution Bench of this Court in K.  Prabhakaran  v.  P.  Jayarajan  etc.
(supra) on the validity of sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the Act  and  the
reasoning given in the answer to question no.3 in the aforesaid judgment  of
this Court.  He further submitted that sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of  the
Act does not lay down disqualifications for members of  Parliament  and  the
State Legislatures  different  from  the  disqualifications  laid  down  for
persons to be chosen as members of Parliament and the State Legislatures  in
sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of
Section 8
of the Act.   He  submitted  that
sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the Act merely provides that the  very  same
disqualifications laid down in sub-sections (1), (2) and (3)  of
Section  8
of the Act shall in the case of sitting  members  of  Parliament  and  State
Legislatures take effect only after the appeal or revision  is  disposed  of
by the Appellate or Revisional Court as the case may  be  if  an  appeal  or
revision is filed against the conviction. He submitted that  Parliament  has
power under
Article 102(1)(e)
of the Constitution and
Article  191(1)(e)
of
the Constitution to prescribe when exactly the disqualification will  become
effective in the  case  of  sitting  members  of  Parliament  or  the  State
Legislature with a view to protect the  House.   He  also  referred  to  the
provisions of
Articles 101(3)(a)
and
190  (3)(a)
of  the  Constitution  to
argue that a member of Parliament or a State Legislature will vacate a  seat
only when he becomes subject to any  disqualification  mentioned  in  clause
(1) of
Article 102
or clause (1) of
Article 191
, as the  case  may  be,  and
this will happen only after a decision is taken  by  the  President  or  the
Governor that the member has become  disqualified  in  accordance  with  the
mechanism provided in
Article 103
or
Article 192
of the Constitution.

  13. Mr. Kuhad further submitted that Mr.  Nariman  is  not  right  in  his
      submission that the remedy of a sitting member  who  is  convicted  or
      sentenced and gets disqualified under sub-sections (1), (2) or (3)  of
Section 8
of the Act is to move the Appellate Court under
Section  389
of the Code of Criminal Procedure for  stay  of  his  conviction.   He
      submitted that the Appellate Court  does  not  have  any  power  under
Section 389
, Cr.P.C. to stay the  disqualification  which  would  take
      effect from the date of conviction and therefore a safeguard had to be
      provided in  sub-section  (4)  of
Section  8
of  the  Act  that  the
      disqualification, despite the conviction or sentence,  will  not  have
      effect until the appeal or revision is decided by the Appellate or the
      Revisional Court.  He submitted that there is, therefore, a  rationale
      for enacting sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the Act.

Findings of the Court

14.  We will  first  decide  the  issue  raised  before  us  in  these  writ
    petitions that Parliament lacked the legislative  power  to  enact  sub-
    section (4) of
Section 8
of the  Act  as  this  issue  was  not  at  all
    considered by the Constitution Bench of this Court in the aforesaid case
    of K. Prabhakaran (supra).  In The Empress v. Burah and Another  [(1878)
    5 I.A. 178] the Privy Council speaking through Selborne J. laid down the
    following  fundamental  principles  for  interpretation  of  a   written
    constitution laying down the powers of the Indian Legislature:
          “The Indian Legislature has powers expressly limited by  the  Act
          of the Imperial Parliament which  created  it;  and  it  can,  of
          course, do nothing beyond the limits  which  circumscribes  these
          powers.  But, when acting within these limits, it is not  in  any
          sense an agent or delegate of the Imperial Parliament,  but  has,
          and was intended to  have,  plenary  powers  of  legislation,  as
          large, and of the same nature, as  those  of  Parliament  itself.
          The established Courts of Justice, when a question arises whether
          the prescribed limits  have  been  exceeded,  must  of  necessity
          determine that question; and the  only  way  in  which  they  can
          properly do so, is by looking to the terms of the  instrument  by
          which, affirmatively, the legislative powers were created, and by
          which, negatively, they are restricted.  If what has been done is
          legislation within the general scope  of  the  affirmative  words
          which give the power, and if it violates no express condition  or
          restriction by which that power is  limited  (in  which  category
          would, of course, be included any Act of the Imperial  Parliament
          at variance with it), it is not  for  any  Court  of  Justice  to
          inquire further, or to enlarge  constructively  those  conditions
          and restrictions.”


The correctness of the aforesaid principles with  regard  to  interpretation
of a written constitution has been re-affirmed by the majority of Judges  in
Kesavananda  Bharti  v.  State  of  Kerala  (AIR  1973  SC  1465)  (See  the
Constitutional Law of India, H.M. Seervai, Fourth Edition, Vol.I,  para  2.4
at page 174).  Hence, when a  question  is  raised  whether  Parliament  has
exceeded the limits of its powers, courts have to  decide  the  question  by
looking  to  the  terms  of  the  instrument  by  which  affirmatively,  the
legislative  powers  were  created,  and  by  which  negatively,  they   are
restricted.

15. We must first consider the argument of Mr.  Luthra,  learned  Additional
    Solicitor General, that the legislative power to enact  sub-section  (4)
    of
Section 8
of the Act is located in
Article 246(1)
read with Entry  97
    of List I of the Seventh Schedule and
Article 248
of  the  Constitution,
    if  not  in
Articles  102(1)(e)
and
191(1)(e)
of  the  Constitution.
Articles 246
and
248
of the Constitution are placed in Chapter I of Part
    XI of the Constitution of India.  Part XI is titled  “Relations  between
    the  Union  and  the  States”  and  Chapter  I  of  Part  XI  is  titled
    “Legislative Relations”.  In Chapter I of Part  XI,  under  the  heading
    “Distribution of Legislative Powers”
Articles  245
to  255  have  been
    placed.  A reading of
Articles 245
to 255 would show that  these  relate
    to  distribution  of  legislative  powers  between  the  Union  and  the
    Legislatures of the States.
Article 246(1)
provides that Parliament has
    exclusive power to  make  laws  with  respect  to  any  of  the  matters
    enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule  of  the  Constitution  and
    under Entry 97 of List I of the Seventh Schedule  of  the  Constitution,
    Parliament has exclusive power to make law with  respect  to  any  other
    matter not enumerated in List II or List  III.
Article  248
similarly
    provides that Parliament has  exclusive  power  to  make  any  law  with
    respect to any matter not enumerated in the Concurrent List  (List  III)
    or State List (List II) of the Seventh  Schedule  of  the  Constitution.
    Therefore,
Article 246(1)
read  with  Entry  97  and
Article  248
only
    provide that in residuary matters (other than matters enumerated in List
    II and List III) Parliament will have power to make law.  To quote  from
    Commentary on the Constitution of India by Durga Das Basu (8th  Edition)
    Volume 8 at page 8988:


           “In short, the principle underlying
Article 248
, read with Entry
           97 of List I, is that  a  written  Constitution,  which  divides
           legislative power as between two legislatures in  a  federation,
           cannot intend that neither of such Legislatures shall go without
           power to legislate with respect of any  subject  simply  because
           that subject has not been  specifically  mentioned  nor  can  be
           reasonably  comprehended  by  judicial  interpretation   to   be
           included in any of the Entries in  the  Legislative  Lists.   To
           meet such a situation, a residuary power is provided, and in the
           Indian Constitution, this residuary power is vested in the Union
           Legislature.  Once, therefore, it is  found  that  a  particular
           subject-matter has not been assigned to the  competence  of  the
           State Legislature, “it leads to the irresistible inference  that
           (the Union) Parliament would have legislative competence to deal
           with the subject-matter in question.”
Articles 102(1)(e)
and
191(1)(e)
of the Constitution,  on  the  other  hand,
have  conferred  specific  powers  on  Parliament  to  make  law   providing
disqualifications  for  membership  of  either  House   of   Parliament   or
Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of the State  other  than  those
specified in sub-clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) of  clause  (1)  of
Articles
102
and
191
of the Constitution.  We may note that no  power  is  vested  in
the  State  Legislature  to  make  law  laying  down  disqualifications   of
membership of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of  the  State
and power is vested in Parliament to make law laying down  disqualifications
also in respect of  members  of  the  Legislative  Assembly  or  Legislative
Council of the State.   For these reasons, we are of the considered  opinion
that the legislative power of  Parliament  to  enact  any  law  relating  to
disqualification  for  membership  of  either   House   of   Parliament   or
Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of  the  State  can  be  located
only in
Articles 102(1)(e)
and
191(1)(e)
of  the  Constitution  and  not  in
Articles 246(1)
read with Entry 97 of List I of  the  Seventh  Schedule  and
Article  248
of  the  Constitution.   We  do  not,  therefore,  accept  the
contention of Mr. Luthra that the power to enact sub-section (4) of
Section
8
of the Act is vested in Parliament under
Articles 246(1)
read  with  Entry
97 of List I of the Seventh Schedule and 248 of the Constitution, if not  in
Articles 102 (1)(e)
and
191 (1)(e)
of the Constitution.

16.
Articles 102(1)(e)
and
191(1)(e)
of  the  Constitution,  which  contain
    the only source of legislative power to lay down  disqualifications  for
    membership of either House of Parliament  and  Legislative  Assembly  or
    Legislative Council of a State, provide as follows:

           “102(1)(e). A person shall be disqualified for being chosen  as,
           and for being, a member of either House of Parliament-(e) if  he
           is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament.”



           “191(1)(e). “A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as,
           and  for  being,  a  member  of  the  Legislative  Assembly   or
           Legislative Council of a State—(e) if he is so  disqualified  by
           or under any law made by Parliament.


A reading  of  the  aforesaid  two  provisions  in
Articles  102(1)(e)
and
191(1)(e)
of  the  Constitution  would  make  it  abundantly   clear   that
Parliament is to make one law for a person  to  be  disqualified  for  being
chosen as, and for  being,  a  member  of  either  House  of  Parliament  or
Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of the State.  In  the  language
of the Constitution Bench of this Court in  Election  Commission,  India  v.
Saka Venkata Rao (supra),
Article 191(1) [
which  is  identically  worded  as
Article 102(1)]
lays down “the same set of  disqualifications  for  election
as well as for continuing as a member”.  Parliament thus does not  have  the
power under
Articles 102(1)(e)
and
191(1)(e)
of  the  Constitution  to  make
different laws for a person to be disqualified for being chosen as a  member
and for  a  person  to  be  disqualified  for  continuing  as  a  member  of
Parliament or the State Legislature.  To put it differently, if  because  of
a disqualification a person cannot be chosen as a member  of  Parliament  or
State Legislature, for the same disqualification, he cannot  continue  as  a
member of Parliament or the State  Legislature.   This  is  so  because  the
language of
Articles 102(1)(e)
and
191(1)(e)
of  the  Constitution  is  such
that the disqualification for both a person to be chosen as a  member  of  a
House of Parliament or the State Legislature or for a person to continue  as
a member of Parliament or the State Legislature has to be the same.

17. Mr. Luthra and Mr. Kuhad, however, contended that the  disqualifications
    laid down in sub-sections (1),(2) and (3) of
Section 8
of  the  Act  are
    the same for persons who are to continue as members of Parliament  or  a
    State Legislature and sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the Act  does  not
    lay down a different set of disqualifications for  sitting  members  but
    merely states that the same  disqualifications  will  have  effect  only
    after the appeal or revision, as the case may be, against the conviction
    is decided by the Appellate or the Revisional Court if  such  appeal  or
    revision is filed within 3 months  from  the  date  of  conviction.   We
    cannot accept this contention also because of the provisions of
Articles
    101(3)(a)
and
190(3)(a)
of  the   Constitution   which   are   quoted
    hereinbelow:


        “101(3)(a).  Vacation of seats.-
        (1) …….
        (2) …….
        (3)  If a member of either House of Parliament-
        (a) becomes subject to any of  the  disqualifications  mentioned  in
        clause (1) or clause (2) of article 102.
        his seat shall thereupon become vacant”


        “190(3)(a). Vacation of seats.-
        (1) …….
        (2) …….
        (3) If a member of a House  of  the  Legislature  of  a  State-  (a)
        becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in  clause
        (1) or clause (2) of article 191.
        his seat shall thereupon become vacant”



Thus,
Article 101(3)(a)
provides  that  if  a  member  of  either  House  of
Parliament becomes subject to any  of  the  disqualifications  mentioned  in
clause (1), his seat shall thereupon become  vacant  and  similarly
Article
190(3)(a)
provides that if a member of a  House  of  the  Legislature  of  a
State becomes subject to any of the disqualifications  mentioned  in  clause
(1), his seat shall thereupon become  vacant.   This  is  the  effect  of  a
disqualification under
Articles 102(1)
and
190(1)
incurred by  a  member  of
either  House  of  Parliament  or  a  House  of   the   State   Legislature.
Accordingly, once a person who was a member of either  House  of  Parliament
or House of the State Legislature becomes disqualified by or under  any  law
made  by  Parliament  under
Articles  102(1)(e)
and
191(1)(e)
of   the
Constitution, his seat automatically falls  vacant  by  virtue  of
Articles
101(3)(a)
and
190(3)(a)
of the Constitution and  Parliament  cannot  make  a
provision as in sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the Act to  defer  the  date
on which the disqualification of a  sitting  member  will  have  effect  and
prevent his seat becoming vacant on account of  the  disqualification  under
Article 102(1)(e)
or
Article 191(1)(e)
of the Constitution.

18.   We cannot also accept the submission  of  Mr.  Kuhad  that  until  the
decision is taken by the President  or  Governor  on  whether  a  member  of
Parliament  or  State  Legislature  has  become  subject  to  any   of   the
disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of
Article 102
and
Article 191
of
the Constitution, the seat of the member alleged to have  been  disqualified
will not become  vacant  under
Articles  101(3)(a)
and
190(3)(a)
of  the
Constitution.
Articles 101(3)(a)
and
190(3)(a)
of the Constitution  provide
that  if  a  member  of  the  House  becomes   subject   to   any   of   the
disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), “his seat shall thereupon  become
vacant”.  Hence, the seat of a member who becomes  subject  to  any  of  the
disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) will fall vacant on  the  date  on
which the member incurs the disqualification and cannot await  the  decision
of the President or the Governor, as the case may  be,  under
Articles  103
and
192
respectively of the Constitution. The  filling  of  the  seat  which
falls vacant, however, may await  the  decision  of  the  President  or  the
Governor under
Articles 103
and
192
respectively of the Constitution and  if
the President or the Governor takes a view that the member  has  not  become
subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of
Articles
102
and
191
respectively of the Constitution, it has to  be  held  that  the
seat of the member so held not to be disqualified did not become  vacant  on
the date on which the member  was  alleged  to  have  been  subject  to  the
disqualification.

19.   The result of our aforesaid discussion is that the  affirmative  words
used in
Articles 102(1)(e)
and
191(1)(e)
confer power on Parliament to  make
one law laying down the same disqualifications for a person  who  is  to  be
chosen as member of either House  of  Parliament  or  as  a  member  of  the
Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State and for a person  who
is a sitting member of a  House of  Parliament  or  a  House  of  the  State
Legislature and the  words  in
Articles  101(3)(a)
and
190(3)(a)
of  the
Constitution put express limitations on such powers  of  the  Parliament  to
defer  the  date  on  which  the  disqualifications   would   have   effect.
Accordingly, sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the  Act  which  carves  out  a
saving in the case of sitting members of  Parliament  or  State  Legislature
from the disqualifications under sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of
Section  8
of the Act or which defers the date on which the disqualification will  take
effect in the case of a sitting member of Parliament or a State  Legislature
is beyond the powers conferred on Parliament by the Constitution.

  20. Looking at the affirmative terms of
Articles 102(1)(e)
and
191(1)(e)
of the Constitution, we hold that Parliament has been vested with  the
      powers to make law laying down the same disqualifications  for  person
      to be chosen as a member of Parliament or a State Legislature and  for
      a sitting member of a House of  Parliament  or  a  House  of  a  State
      Legislature.  We also hold that the provisions  of
Article  101(3)(a)
and
190(3)(a)
of the Constitution  expressly  prohibit  Parliament  to
      defer the date from which the disqualification will come  into  effect
      in case of a sitting member of  Parliament  or  a  State  Legislature.
      Parliament, therefore,  has  exceeded  its  powers  conferred  by  the
      Constitution in enacting sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the  Act  and
      accordingly sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the Act is ultra vires the
      Constitution.


  21. We do not also find merit in the submission  of  Mr.  Luthra  and  Mr.
      Kuhad that if a sitting member of Parliament or the State  Legislature
      suffers from a frivolous conviction by the trial court for an  offence
      given under sub-section (1), (2) or (3) of
Section 8
of  the  Act,  he
      will be remediless and he will suffer immense  hardship  as  he  would
      stand disqualified on account of such conviction in the absence of sub-
      section (4) of
Section 8
of the Act.   A  three-Judge  Bench  of  this
      Court in Rama Narang v. Ramesh Narang & Ors. [(1995) 2  SCC  513]  has
      held that when an appeal is preferred under
Section 374
of the Code of
      Criminal Procedure [for short ‘the Code’] the appeal is  against  both
      the conviction and sentence and, therefore,  the  Appellate  Court  in
      exercise of its power under Section 389(1) of the Code can  also  stay
      the order of conviction and the High Court in exercise of its inherent
      jurisdiction  under  Section  482  of  the  Code  can  also  stay  the
      conviction if the power was not to be found in Section 389(1)  of  the
      Code.  In Ravikant S. Patil v. Sarvabhouma S.  Bagali  [(2007)  1  SCC
      673], a three-Judge Bench of this Court, however, observed:

      “It deserves to be clarified that an order granting stay of conviction
      is not the rule but is an exception to be resorted to  in  rare  cases
      depending upon the facts  of  a  case.  Where  the  execution  of  the
      sentence is stayed, the conviction continues to operate. But where the
      conviction itself is stayed, the effect is that  the  conviction  will
      not be operative from the date of stay. An order of stay,  of  course,
      does not render the conviction non-existent, but  only  non-operative.
      Be that as it may. Insofar  as  the  present  case  is  concerned,  an
      application was filed  specifically  seeking  stay  of  the  order  of
      conviction specifying the consequences if conviction was  not  stayed,
      that is, the appellant would incur  disqualification  to  contest  the
      election. The High Court after considering the special reason, granted
      the order staying the conviction. As the conviction itself  is  stayed
      in contrast to a stay of execution of the sentence, it is not possible
      to accept the contention of the respondent that  the  disqualification
      arising out of conviction continues to  operate  even  after  stay  of
      conviction.

In the aforesaid case, a contention was raised by the respondents  that  the
appellant was disqualified from contesting the election to  the  Legislative
Assembly under sub-section (3) of
Section 8
of  the  Act  as  he  had  been
convicted for an offence punishable  under
Sections  366
and
376
of  the
Indian Penal Code and it was held by the three-Judge Bench that as the  High
Court for special reasons had passed an order staying  the  conviction,  the
disqualification arising out of the conviction ceased to operate  after  the
stay of conviction.  Therefore, the disqualification under sub-section  (1),
(2) or (3) of
Section 8
of the Act will not operate from the date  of  order
of stay of conviction passed by the Appellate Court  under  Section  389  of
the Code or the High Court under Section 482 of the Code.

22.   As we have held that Parliament had no power to enact sub-section  (4)
of
Section 8
of the Act and accordingly sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of  the
Act is ultra vires the Constitution, it is not necessary for us to  go  into
the other issue raised in these  writ  petitions  that  sub-section  (4)  of
Section 8
of the Act is violative of
Article 14
of  the  Constitution.   It
would have been necessary for us to go  into  this  question  only  if  sub-
section (4) of
Section 8
of the Act was held to be within the powers of  the
Parliament.  In other words, as we can declare sub-section (4) of
Section  8
of the Act as ultra vires the Constitution without going into  the  question
as to whether sub-section (4) of
Section  8
of  the  Act  is  violative  of
Article 14
of the Constitution, we do not think it is  necessary  to  decide
the question as to whether sub-section (4)  of
Section  8
of  the  Act  is
violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution.


23.    The  only  question  that  remains  to  be  decided  is  whether  our
declaration in this judgment that sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of  the  Act
is ultra vires the  Constitution  should  affect  disqualifications  already
incurred under sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of
Section  8
of  the  Act  by
sitting members of Parliament and State Legislatures who have filed  appeals
or revisions against their conviction within a period of  three  months  and
their appeals and revisions are still pending before  the  concerned  court.
Under  sub-sections  (1),  (2)  and  (3)  of
Section  8
of  the  Act,  the
disqualification takes effect from the date of conviction  for  any  of  the
offences mentioned in the sub-sections and remains in force for the  periods
mentioned in the sub-sections.  Thus, there may be several  sitting  members
of  Parliament  and   State   Legislatures   who   have   already   incurred
disqualification by virtue of a conviction covered  under  sub-section  (1),
or sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of
Section 8
of  the  Act.   In  Golak
Nath and Others vs. State of Punjab and Another (AIR 1967  SC  1643),  Subba
Rao,  C.J.  speaking  on  behalf  of  himself,  Shah,  Sikri,   Shelat   and
Vaidialingam, JJ. has held that
Articles 32
, 141
, 142
of  the  Constitution
are couched in such a wide and elastic terms as  to  enable  this  Court  to
formulate legal doctrines to meet the ends of justice and has  further  held
that this Court has the power not only  to  declare  the  law  but  also  to
restrict the operation of the  law  as  declared  to  future  and  save  the
transactions, whether statutory or otherwise,  that  were  effected  on  the
basis  of  the  earlier  law.   Sitting  members  of  Parliament  and  State
Legislature who  have  already  been  convicted  for  any  of  the  offences
mentioned in sub-section (1), (2) and (3) of
Section 8
of the  Act  and  who
have filed appeals or revisions which are pending and are accordingly  saved
from the disqualifications by virtue of sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of  the
Act should not, in our considered opinion, be affected  by  the  declaration
now made by us in this judgment.     This  is  because  the  knowledge  that
sitting members of Parliament  or  State  Legislatures  will  no  longer  be
protected by sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the Act  will  be  acquired  by
all concerned only on the date this judgment is pronounced  by  this  Court.
As has been observed by this Court in Harla v. State of Rajasthan (AIR  1951
SC 467):


           “……..it would be against the principles of  natural  justice  to
           permit the subjects of a State to be punished  or  penalized  by
           laws of which they had no knowledge and of which they could  not
           even  with  exercise  of  due  diligence   have   acquired   any
           knowledge.”




However, if any sitting member of  Parliament  or  a  State  Legislature  is
convicted of any of the offences mentioned in sub-sections (1), (2) and  (3)
of
Section 8
of the Act and by virtue of  such  conviction  and/or  sentence
suffers the disqualifications mentioned in sub-sections (1), (2) and (3)  of
Section 8
of  the  Act  after  the  pronouncement  of  this  judgment,  his
membership of Parliament or the State Legislature, as the case may be,  will
not be saved by sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the Act  which  we  have  by
this judgment declared as ultra vires the Constitution notwithstanding  that
he files the appeal or revision against the conviction and /or sentence.

24.   With the aforesaid declaration, the writ petitions  are  allowed.   No
costs.

                                                       ..……………..……………………….J.
                                        (A. K. Patnaik)






                                 ...…………..………………………..J.
                                     (Sudhansu Jyoti Mukhopadhaya)

New Delhi,
July 10, 2013.

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                         CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                    WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 694 OF 2004


Basant Kumar Chaudhary                                 … Petitioner

                                   Versus
Union of India & Ors.                              … Respondents







                                    ORDER
The petitioner is a practicing Advocate in the Patna High Court  and  has
filed this writ petition as a Public Interest  Litigation  challenging  sub-
section (4) of
Section 8
of the Representation of the People Act, 1951  (for
short ‘the Act’),  as ultra vires the Constitution.
2.    This writ petition was heard along with W.P.(C)  No.490  of  2005  and
W.P.(C) No.231 of 2005 in which sub-section (4) of
Section 8
of the  of  the
Act is also challenged as ultra vires the Constitution.
3.    We have today delivered the judgment in W.P.(C)  No.490  of  2005  and
W.P.(C) No.231 of 2005.  Hence, this writ petition is disposed of  in  terms
of the aforesaid judgment in W.P.(C) No.490 of 2005 and  W.P.(C)  No.231  of
2005.  No costs.
..……………..……………………….J.
                                        (A. K. Patnaik)






                                 ...…………..………………………..J.
                                     (Sudhansu Jyoti Mukhopadhaya)

New Delhi,
July 10, 2013.
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                     CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3040-3041 OF 2004

The Chief Election Commissioner Etc.              … Petitioners

           Versus


Jan Chaukidar (Peoples Watch) & Ors.        … Respondents


                                    ORDER


   These are appeals by way of  Special  Leave  under
Article  136
of  the
Constitution against the common order dated 30.04.2004  of  the  Patna  High
Court in C.W.J.C. No.4880 of 2004 and C.W.J.C. No.4988 of 2004.
2.    The facts very briefly  are  that
Article  326
of  the  Constitution
provides that  the  elections  to  the  House  of  the  People  and  to  the
Legislative Assembly of every State shall be on the basis of adult  suffrage
and every person who is a  citizen  of  India  and  who  is  not  less  than
eighteen years of age on such date as may be fixed  in  that  behalf  by  or
under any law made by the  appropriate  Legislature  and  is  not  otherwise
disqualified under the Constitution or  any  law  made  by  the  appropriate
Legislature on the grounds of non-residence, unsoundness of mind,  crime  or
corrupt or illegal practice, shall be entitled to be registered as  a  voter
for any such election.  In accordance with
Article 326
of the  Constitution,
Parliament has enacted the
Representation  of  the  People  Act,  1950
(for
short ‘the 1950 Act’) for registration of voters at such  elections  to  the
House of the People and to the Legislative Assembly of every State  and  has
also enacted the
Representation of the People  Act,  1951
(for  short  ‘the
1951 Act’) for the conduct of elections to the Houses of Parliament  and  to
the Houses of Legislature of each State.
3.    The word “elector” is defined in the  1951  Act  in  relation  to  the
constituency to mean a person whose name is entered in  electoral  rolls  of
the constituency for the time being in force and who is not subject  to  any
of the disqualifications mentioned in
Section 16
of the 1950  Act.
Section
16(1)(c)
of the 1950 Act provides that a person shall  be  disqualified  for
registration in an electoral roll if he is for the time  being  disqualified
from voting under the provisions of any law relating  to  corrupt  practices
and other offences in connection with elections.
4.
Section 4
of the 1951 Act lays down the qualifications for  membership
of the House of the People and one of the qualifications laid down  is  that
he must be an  “elector”  for  any  Parliamentary  constituency.  Similarly,
Section 5
of the 1951 Act lays down the qualifications for membership  of  a
Legislative Assembly of a State and one of the qualifications laid  down  is
that he must be an “elector” for any Assembly constituency  in  that  State.
Section 62
of the 1951 Act is titled “Right to vote” and it provides in sub-
section (5) that no person shall vote at any election if he is  confined  in
a prison, whether under a sentence  of  imprisonment  or  transportation  or
otherwise, or is in the lawful custody of the police.  The proviso  to  sub-
section (5) of
Section 62
of the 1951 Act, however,  states  that  the  sub-
section will not apply to a person subjected to preventive  detention  under
any law for the time being in force.
5.    Writ petitions C.W.J.C. No.4880 of 2004 and C.W.J.C. No.4988  of  2004
were filed in the  Patna  High  Court  contending  that  a  person,  who  is
confined  in  prison,  whether  under  a   sentence   of   imprisonment   or
transportation or otherwise, or is in the lawful custody of  the  police  is
not entitled to vote by virtue of sub-section (5) of
Section 62
of the  1951
Act and accordingly is not an “elector” and is, therefore, not qualified  to
contest elections to the House of People or the Legislative  Assembly  of  a
State because of the provisions in
Sections 4
and
5
of  the  1951  Act.   By
the impugned common order, the High Court accepted this  contention  in  the
writ petitions and held:
“A right to vote is a statutory right, the Law gives it, the Law
           takes it away.  Persons convicted of crime are  kept  away  from
           elections to the Legislature, whether to  State  Legislature  or
           Parliament, and all other public elections.  The  Court  has  no
           hesitation in interpreting the Constitution and the Laws  framed
           under it, read together, that persons in the lawful  custody  of
           the Police also will not be voters, in  which  case,  they  will
           neither be electors.  The Law temporarily takes away  the  power
           of such persons to go anywhere near the election scene.  To vote
           is a statutory right. It is privilege to vote,  which  privilege
           may be taken away.  In that  case,  the  elector  would  not  be
           qualified, even if his name is on the electoral rolls.  The name
           is not struck off, but the qualification to be  an  elector  and
           the privilege to vote when in the lawful custody of  the  police
           is taken away.”
6.    Aggrieved, by the findings of the  High  Court,  the  appellants  have
filed these appeals.  We have heard learned counsel for the parties  and  we
do not find any infirmity in the findings of the High Court in the  impugned
common order that a person who has  no  right  to  vote  by  virtue  of  the
provisions of sub-section (5) of
Section 62
of  the  1951  Act  is  not  an
elector and is therefore not qualified to contest the election to the  House
of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State.
7.    These civil appeals are accordingly dismissed.  No costs.
..……………..……………………….J.
                                        (A. K. Patnaik)






                                 ...…………..………………………..J.
                                     (Sudhansu Jyoti Mukhopadhaya)

New Delhi,
July 10, 2013.
-----------------------
43
43
43