[Cites
5
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Mun.Corp.Of Gr.Mumbai & Ors vs Kohinoor Ctnl Infrs.Co.P.Ltd.& Ors on 25 July, 2013
Author:
G. S. Singhvi
Bench:
H.L. Gokhale
,
G.S. Singhvi
NON-REPORTABLE

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

               SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.33402 OF 2012


Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai and others       …Petitioners

                                   versus

Kohinoor CTNL Infrastructure Company Private
Limited and another
…Respondents



                                  O R D E R
G. S. Singhvi, J.
Part-I
1.    This petition is directed against order dated 9.7.2012 passed  by  the
Division Bench of the Bombay High Court whereby  Writ  Petition  No.143/2012
filed by the respondents was allowed and stop work notice  dated  22.12.2011
issued  by  Executive  Engineer  (Building  Proposal)  City-III,   Municipal
Corporation of Greater Mumbai  and  order  dated  27.4.2012  passed  by  the
Additional Municipal Commissioner restricting the height of Wing ‘C’ of  the
buildings being constructed on Plot No.46 of Town Planning Scheme – III,  N.
Kelkar Road, Shivaji  Park,  Mumbai  to  ground  and  4  upper  floors  were
quashed.
2.    The plans submitted by respondent No.1 for  construction  of  Wings  -
‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ of the building were sanctioned by the competent  authority
of  the  Municipal  Corporation  of  Greater   Mumbai   (for   short,   ‘the
Corporation’) and Intimation of Disapproval was issued on  15.2.2006.  After
the Ministry  of  Environment  and  Forests,  Government  of  India  granted
clearance  for  the  construction  of  commercial  building,  the  competent
authority  issued  commencement  certificate  dated  13.9.2006.   The  Joint
Commissioner of  Police  (Traffic)  issued  NOC  dated  11.12.2009  for  the
development of a multi-storied public parking  lot  and  vide  letter  dated
2.6.2010, the State Government granted in-principle  approval  under  Clause
33(24) of the Development Control  Regulations  (DCR)  for  Greater  Mumbai,
1991 for construction of a multi-storied  public  parking  lot.  Thereafter,
the competent authority issued the Letter of Intent dated 27.7.2010.
3.    During  the  construction  of  the  building,  the  Urban  Development
Department of the  State  Government  sent  letter  dated  4.3.2011  to  the
Municipal Commissioner requiring him to submit a proposal for  amendment  of
Clause 33 (24) of the DCR for limiting the height of  parking  towers  to  4
floors and also  for  revocation  of  all  sanctioned  proposals  where  the
commencement certificates had not been issued. In view of that  letter,  the
Corporation issued circular dated 22.6.2011 prescribing  certain  conditions
under Clause (iv) of DCR 33(24) and clarified that all proposals for  public
parking lots shall be  considered  subject  to  those  conditions.  The  new
conditions sought to limit the height of public parking  to  ground  plus  4
upper floors and 2 basements.
4.    As a sequel to the above changes, the Corporation issued notice  dated
29.11.2011 to respondent No.1 under
Section 51
of the  Maharashtra  Regional
and Town Planning Act, 1966 requiring  it  to  show  cause  as  to  why  the
commencement certificate may not  be  revoked.   Respondent  No.1  submitted
detailed reply dated 14.12.2011 and pleaded  that  the  amended  DCR  33(24)
cannot be made applicable to its buildings because substantial  construction
had already been  made  at  a  cost  of  Rs.167/-  crores.  Thereafter,  the
concerned Executive Engineer issued stop work notice  dated  22.12.2011  and
directed respondent No.1 to restrict the work of public parking to 4  floors
instead  of  13  floors.  After  about  six  months,  Additional   Municipal
Commissioner passed order dated 27.4.2012, the relevant portion of which  is
extracted below:
“As there is a substantial construction on core part of the plot,  PPL
      done in this part shall be allowed to the extent of  already  executed
      construction as per report dated 27/12/2011. In the remaining  portion
      of the plot, where there is no substantial construction, PPL shall  be
      limited to G + 4, Developer is to be asked  to  modify  his  plans  in
      consonance with modified DCR.”
5.    The respondent challenged the stop work notice and the  order  of  the
Additional Municipal Commissioner in Writ Petition  No.143/2012,  which  was
allowed by the High Court in the following terms:
“In the facts of this case, the admitted position as accepted  in  the
      order of the Additional Municipal Commissioner indicates that the work
      of development had substantially progressed by the time  a  notice  to
      show cause was issued under Section 51 of the M.R. & T.P.  Act,  1966.
      The impugned order passed by  the  Additional  Municipal  Commissioner
      restricting the Petitioners to a height of a  ground  floor  and  four
      upper floors  in  deviation  of  the  permission  granted  earlier  is
      therefore contrary to law. Hence, the impugned order would have to  be
      quashed and set aside and is accordingly  set  aside.  The  stop  work
      notice which has been issued to the Petitioners on the  basis  of  the
      notice to show cause dated 29 November 2011 is to that extent  quashed
      and set aside. Rule is made absolute in these terms. There shall be no
      order as to costs.”
6.    The special leave petition filed by the petitioners was taken  up  for
admission hearing on 23.11.2012, on which date  S/Shri  F.S.  Nariman,  K.K.
Venugopal, Dr. A.M. Singhvi, Shyam Divan and other learned counsel  appeared
on behalf of the respondents. During the course of  arguments,  Shri  Harish
N.Salve, learned senior counsel appearing  for  the  petitioners  made  some
suggestions. Thereupon, Shri F.S. Nariman, learned senior counsel  appearing
for  respondent  No.1  gave  out  that  his  assisting  counsel  will   seek
instructions. The case was then adjourned to 10.12.2012 with liberty to  the
parties  to  file  additional  affidavits  incorporating  their   respective
suggestions and also produce copies of the sanctioned plans.
7.    On the next date of hearing, i.e., 10.12.2012, this Court  passed  the
following order:
“We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
The engineers of the Corporation and the respondents may hold  a
      joint meeting, examine the plans prepared  by  the  Corporation  which
      have been  filed  before  this  Court  and  submit  a  report  on  the
      feasibility  of  providing  ramp  at  the  point  suggested   by   the
      Corporation.
List the case on 11.01.2013.”
8.    Further arguments  were  heard  on  22.1.2013,  30.1.2013,  19.2.2013,
28.2.2013 and 11.4.2013.  On  18.4.2013,  learned  senior  counsel  for  the
parties gave out that their clients have amicably settled the matter.  Their
instructing counsel also filed a Memorandum  of  Settlement  along  with  an
annexure duly signed  by  the  representatives  of  the  parties  and  their
advocates.
9.     Accordingly,   the   Memorandum   of   Settlement   signed   by   the
representatives of the parties and their  advocates  on  18.4.2013  together
with the annexure are taken on record.   We note  that  this  settlement  is
arrived at on the backdrop of the facts and circumstances of this case.   We
clarify that we have  not  in  anyway  held  the  Municipal  Circular  dated
22.6.2011 to be bad in law. We direct that the parties shall strictly  abide
by the terms of settlement.
Part-II

(A)   The problem concerning reduction in the recreational area at the
      ground level:-
10.   Having dealt with the actual controversy  between  the  parties  which
led to this SLP, we deem it proper to take cognizance  of  a  few  important
issues, which arose in the course of this proceeding concerning  the  impact
of excessive construction and higher FSI  on  the  urban  environment.   The
concept of Floor Space Index (FSI) implies  the  buildable  potential  of  a
plot of land. The FSI  to  be  allowed  must  take  into  consideration  the
availability  of  civic  infrastructure  including  open  spaces,  transport
facilities, requirements for protection against fire, and water  supply  and
sewerage as well as electricity. An increase in  FSI  is  likely  to  result
into an increase in the density of population. FSI has an important  bearing
on the quality of urban life. A relaxation of FSI norms or, as the case  may
be, an enhancement of FSI by urban  planners  cannot  be  removed  from  the
issue of adequacy, or as the case may be, inadequacy of civic services.
11.    The requirement of keeping open spaces at the ground level should  be
read in this context. The  recreational  areas  and  greens  in  the  multi-
storied buildings have to be scrupulously safeguarded. The problem with  the
existing Municipal and Town Planning statutes is that they factor  only  two
out of the three compelling needs. The first  need  is  that  of  increasing
housing stock – which is undeniable. The second  need  is  that  of  keeping
recreational areas for residents. The third entirely different and  equally,
if not more compelling, is the need to assess the  sustainable  capacity  of
the city and to balance the development with this  capacity.  The  principle
of sustainable development which has been construed  by  this  Court  as  an
integral part of
Article 21
of the Constitution deserves to  be  applied  to
town and urban planning throughout the country.  This  requires  a  thorough
assessment of the environmentally sustainable capacity of  every  city/urban
area.  The preparation of Master Plan/Town Planning Schemes has to  be  made
keeping in  view  the  issue  of  sustainable  capacity  of  the  particular
city/urban area.
12.   Clause 23 of DCR for Greater Mumbai lays down the minimum  requirement
for  providing  the  recreational  ground.  The  area  to  be  retained   as
recreational ground varies depending upon the size of the plot. The  present
position under the DCR is as follows:-
|(i) |Area from 1001 SQ.M. to 2500 SQ.M.     |15 per cent  |
|(ii)|Area from 2501 SQ.M. to 10,000 SQ.M.   |20 per cent  |
|(iii|Area above 10,000 SQ.M.                |25 per cent  |
|)   |                                       |             |
13.   In the present case, we find  that  as  per  the  approved  plan,  the
recreational space available at the ground level is only 7.7%  of  the  area
of the plot and respondent No.1 has  accordingly  raised  construction.  The
respondents’ plea, which appears to have been accepted by  the  Corporation,
is that under DCR 38(34) the  recreational  area  can  be  provided  on  the
podium.  We may add that since the petitioners and respondents have  arrived
at a settlement, we do not propose to go into this  issue  with  respect  to
the construction of the respondent.  We are,  however,  surprised  that  the
Municipal Corporation did not look into the reduction  in  the  recreational
area at the ground level very seriously, probably because the  rule  permits
recreational space on  the  podium.    If  this  is  treated  as  a  correct
interpretation, then it is quite possible that the  recreational  area  left
at the ground level could simply be zero. It  may  leave  no  space  on  the
ground floor for the residents/occupants of the  apartments  constructed  in
the particular building, and that will have serious adverse  impact  on  the
right to life not only of the residents / occupants of  the  apartments  but
also of the people in the adjoining areas because all of them will  have  to
only fall back on the public parks or play grounds  and  gardens  for  their
minimum recreational requirements. When  the  cities  are  overcrowded,  the
roads are narrow and the  traffic  is  increasing,  the  situation  will  be
extremely hazardous for the children and senior citizens. There will  be  no
greens in the buildings and the people will always crave for fresh and  pure
air.  The  buildings  without  greens  will  add  to  the  ever   increasing
temperature  of  the  overcrowded  cities  and  urban  areas.  To   put   it
differently, all  constructions  without  adequate  green  and  recreational
areas will have serious impact on the environment and  human  life.  If  the
recreational area is on 20th or 40th floor, the residents of the  apartments
may be able to access the same only  through  an  elevator  and  that  could
never be a substitute for any such activity at the ground level.
(B)   The problem of impact on traffic:-
14.   The next issue which came up during the discussion  of  this  SLP  was
concerning the impact of the construction of high rise buildings in  thickly
populated areas on the traffic in the city. In the present case  parking  is
proposed to be provided in the basements of the three buildings and  in  the
ground floor plus 13 floors of building / tower C, wherein now  as  per  the
settlement between the parties, basement and ground plus 4 floors are to  be
reserved for public parking and the  upper  floors  from  5th  to  13th  are
reserved for the parking of  the  residents  /  occupants  of  the  building
concerned (called as captive parking).  It is alright to  say  that  parking
is being provided for public purpose as well, but on that ground higher  FSI
is granted to the developer.  The object of the arrangement  is  not  merely
to provide space for public parking but also for the parking of vehicles  by
the residents of the high rise buildings,  and  then  to  get  further  FSI.
Consequently, such high rise buildings bring along with them more number  of
vehicles of the occupants.  Under DCR No.31 (1), the height of the  building
has to be in proportion  to  width  of  the  road  which  is  adjoining  the
building.  Proviso to DCR 31 (1) lays down that construction  schemes  under
certain DCRs bearing  Nos.33  (7),  33  (8)  and  33  (9)  which  relate  to
reconstruction  /  redevelopment  of  old  buildings   are   exempted   from
application  of  DCR  31(1).   The  consequence  is  that  the  schemes   of
reconstruction bring along with them more population and more vehicles  into
an already congested area.   The  question  is  whether  such  exemption  is
justified, valid and legal?
15.   The  Municipal  Corporation  has  prepared  a  document  called  "City
Development Plan under Jawaharlal  Nehru  Urban  Renewal  Mission  (JNNURM).
The document sets out that for a population of 12 million,  in  an  area  of
437 Sq. Kms. there are only 753 parks with an area of 4.4 Sq.Kms.  There  is
a vehicle population of 1.2 million with annual increase of 4  to  5%.   9.9
million people commute daily.   The  transportation  system  is  plagued  by
inadequate capacity of the existing arterial roads,  overriding  surface  of
the roads, traffic bottle-necks and over burdened suburban rail system.  The
traffic density at peak hours is 6 to 8 kms. per hour.   All  these  aspects
will have  to  be  kept  in  mind  while  examining  the  issues  concerning
recreational areas and traffic problems.
(C)   The hazards arising out of non-compliance of fire safety standards:-
16.   The third  question  which  came  up  during  deliberations  was  with
respect to the hazards due to fire in  such  towers.  There  are  provisions
with respect to the space to be kept around such buildings for the  movement
of the fire-engines within the compound and within such building [DCR  No.43
(1) 2].  There are also provisions with  respect  to  sprinklers  and  other
provisions in Appendix-VIII.  The fire engines with their ladders  available
with the Municipal Corporation are reportedly not reaching  anywhere  beyond
14th floor.  Even the fire which  very  recently  engulfed  the  Secretariat
Building of the State of Maharashtra (known as Mantralaya) took a  few  days
to be controlled when the building has a height of 6 floors,  and  in  which
exercise a few persons unfortunately died.   The  issue  of  safety  of  the
occupants of the high rise buildings, the  residents  in  the  neighbourhood
and the firemen is equally important.
17.   We are, therefore, of the view that following four  issues  require  a
consideration:-
1) What should be the correlation between DCR 23 and  DCR  38  (34)
           regarding the recreational area?  Is it  permissible  to  reduce
           the minimum recreational area  provided  under  DCR  23  on  any
           ground?
2) Whether the exemption from DCR 31 (1) under DCR Nos. 33 (7),  33
           (8) and 33 (9) is justified, valid and legal particularly in the
           island city of Greater Mumbai?  If so, to  what  extent  and  in
           which context?
3) What is the impact of the addition of FSI in the island city  on
           the traffic situation?  How can it be controlled?
4) Whether the present mechanism for protection  against  the  fire
           hazards is adequate and is  being  implemented  effectively?  If
           not, what should be the mechanism for enforcement  with  respect
           to the provisions concerning the fire safety?
18.  We propose to examine these questions in the light of  the  statistics
 of the population in the island city of Mumbai,  the  availability  of  the
 roads therein, and the incidents of fire which  have  taken  place  in  the
 island city.  We will require the assistance of  Municipal  Corporation  of
 Greater Mumbai and the State of Maharashtra for this purpose.  These issues
 have become urgent particularly for the residents of island city  which  is
 not  disputed  by  Mr.  Harish  Salve,  learned  senior  counsel  for   the
 petitioners as well as Mr. Nariman, learned senior  counsel  appearing  for
 the respondents.   It  is,  therefore,  that  we  feel  that  although  the
 petitioners and respondents may be permitted to proceed with the settlement
 that they have arrived at, this SLP be kept alive so that Mr. Salve and Mr.
 Nariman can assist us on these issues in public interest.
19.  We will also have to hear the State of Maharashtra.  We would like  to
 look into the aforesaid issues in the light  of  Constitutional  provisions
 under
Articles 14
, 19
, 21
and
48A.
We would  like  the  counsel  for  both
 these  parties  and  the  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the  State   of
 Maharashtra to help us arrive at  early  decision  since  the  problem  has
 become urgent and acute.  They may as well suggest  appropriate  protective
 measures including prohibitory/guiding orders  with  respect  to  on  going
 constructions.
20.  A notice will be issued to  the  State  of  Maharashtra  to  file  its
 response within 4 weeks  hereafter.   The  Municipal  Corporation  and  the
 respondents who are the builders are already before this Court.   They  are
 also directed to file their response within 4 weeks on the  above  referred
 four issues.
(A).  We direct the Municipal Corporation to file following  affidavits  on
 the above four issues:-
(i)   The affidavit of the Chief Engineer,  Town  Planning  on  issues
           no.1 and 2.
(ii)  The affidavit of the Chief Engineer, concerning traffic on issue
            no.3.
iii) The affidavit of the Chief Fire Officer on issue no.4.
  (B).  We direct the State of Maharashtra to cause affidavits to  be  filed
on the above four issues.
(i)   By the Secretary, Urban Development Department on issue nos.  1,
           2 and 3 above.
(ii)  By the Commissioner of Police (Traffic) on issue no. 3 above.
21. The SLP be notified for further hearing after 4 weeks.
..….………………….…J.
                                                 [G.S. SINGHVI]


                                                 ..….………………….…J.
                                                 [H.L. GOKHALE]
New Delhi,
July 25, 2013.
-----------------------
12