[Cites
7
, Cited by
80
]
Supreme Court of India
G.Ravindranath @ R.Chowdary vs E.Srinivas & Anr on 1 July, 2013
Equivalent citations: AIR 2013 SUPREME COURT 2974, 2013 AIR SCW 4867, 2013 AAC 2828 (SC), (2013) 130 ALLINDCAS 224 (SC), 2013 (9) SCALE 503, 2013 (3) RECCIVR 934, 2014 (1) SCC (CRI) 704, (2013) 4 TAC 849, 2013 (130) ALLINDCAS 224, (2013) 3 RECCRIR 934, AIR 2013 SC (CIVIL) 2452, (2013) 3 ACJ 2131, (2013) 100 ALL LR 721, 2013 (12) SCC 455, (2013) 4 PUN LR 255, (2013) 4 RAJ LW 3270, (2013) 6 ANDHLD 79, (2013) 9 SCALE 503, (2013) 4 ACC 345, (2013) 5 ALL WC 4674, (2013) 56 OCR 449
Bench:
V. Gopala Gowda
,
G.S.Singhvi
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                        CIVIL APPEAL No.5520 OF 2013
                    (Arising out of SLP(C)No.14794 OF 2012)




      G.RAVINDRANATH @ R.CHOWDARY              .......APPELLANT




                                   VERSUS




      E.SRINIVAS & ANR                        ......RESPONDENTS
J  U  D  G  M  E  N  T




            Leave granted.
This appeal is one of the several such cases which  the  victims
      of accidents are compelled to file because the compensation awarded by
      the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal and/or the High Court is  abysmally
      inadequate or tragically disproportionate to his/her suffering.
The appellant, who was 19 years old at the relevant time and was
      assisting his father in  agricultural  operations,  suffered  grievous
      injuries in an accident which occurred on 31.10.2000  when  respondent
      No.1 reversed Tipper No. APH 5971  in  a  rash  and  negligent  manner
      without care and without signal and dashed against the appellant.  The
      rear tyre of the Tipper caused fracture in the pelvic  region  of  the
      appellant. He was initially treated  at  Bhandari  Hospital,  Raichur.
      Later,  he  was  taken  to  Nizam’s  Institute  of  Medical  Sciences,
      Hyderabad (NIMS). The doctors at NIMS diagnosed that the appellant had
      sustained pelvic and urethral injuries (total urethral rupture).
The appellant filed a petition under
Section 166
of  the  Motor
      Vehicles Act, 1988 and prayed for  award  of  compensation  under  the
      following heads:
|“1.   |Annexure-I Medical expenses      |65,399.00          |
|      |incurred                         |                   |
|2.    |Annexure-II Hospitalization      |42,113.00          |
|      |charges incurred                 |                   |
|3.    |Annexure-III Mess and Lodging    |31,555.00          |
|      |charges                          |                   |
|4.    |Annexure-IV Transportation       |74,540.00          |
|      |charges                          |                   |
|5.    |Damages, physical and mental     |2,00,000.00        |
|      |shock, pains, sufferings suffered|                   |
|      |by claimant and likely to suffer |                   |
|      |in future                        |                   |
|6.    |Damages for loss of amenities,   |5,00,000.00        |
|      |life including loss of marriage, |                   |
|      |cannot sit and walk              |                   |
|7.    |Damages for loss of expectation  |2,00,000.00        |
|      |of life                          |                   |
|8.    |Frustration, hardship,           |1,50,000.00        |
|      |inconveniences, disappointment,  |                   |
|      |mental shock in life, dejection  |                   |
|      |and unhappiness in future life   |                   |
|9.    |Loss of earnings                 |2,80,000.00        |
|10.   |Loss of income to the parents of |2,00,000.00        |
|      |the claimant.                    |                   |
|11.   |Future medication,               |3,00,000.00        |
|      |hospital-ization expenses.       |                   |
|                                        |                   |
|Grand Total                             |20,43,607.00”      |




            The appellant pleaded that he was a student of PUC  second  year
      and was earning Rs.3,500/- per  month  by  extending   help   to   his
      father in agricultural operations at Amareshwara  Camp.  Some  of  the
      averments contained in the claim petition are extracted below:
“The claimant was studying in PUG IInd year on the date  of  this
           illegible.  He  was  helping  his  father  in   the   agriculture
           operations since as family they own 8 acres of irrigated land  at
           Amareshwara camp include other similar land of extent of 20 acres
           taken under lease basis. The accident has left him as a person of
           impotence since it was diagnosed he will have the  erectile  dis-
           function throughout his life by making him unfit for any  marital
           life. The claimant was contributing the service  to  his  parents
           and agriculture activities  to  the  extent  of  Rs.3,500/-  p.m.
           including his absorption in the dairy farm  being  maintained  by
           his mother. The claimant's prospects of better studies  and  good
           employment have disappeared. The parents  of  the  claimant  have
           lost the agriculture income on account  of  their  compulsion  to
           accompany him. The claimant suffered permanent disability and  he
           is still undergoing treatment. He  experiences  severe  pain  and
           inconvenience in passing urine and he  is  undergoing  series  of
           surgical operations. He requires medical attention  for  rest  of
           life as he needs constant care. He needs the attendance of  other
           persons to be looked after. He suffered loss  of  expectation  of
           life and he is now compelled to lead agonizing and dejected life.
           The parents of claimant are  now  finding  extreme  difficult  to
           arrange  for  his  further   treatment   by,   abandoning   their
           agriculture and other operations and works. The clamant is put to
           separatism marital life as he cannot marry.
(emphasis supplied)


            The owner, the driver and the insurance company (respondent No.2
      herein) were proceeded ex-parte  because  no  one  appeared  on  their
      behalf. However, on an application filed by respondent No.2,  the  ex-
      parte proceedings were set aside qua that respondent and it was  given
      an opportunity to file the written statement. By taking  advantage  of
      the liberty given by the Tribunal, respondent No.2 filed objections to
      contest the appellant’s claim on all possible counts.
On the  pleadings  of  the  parties,  the  Tribunal  framed  the
      following issues:
“1.   Whether the claimant proves that he met with  accident  on
           31.10.2000 at about 10.30 AM at Amareshwara Camp due to the rash
           and negligent driving of Respondent No.1 who caused the accident
           while taking reverse of his Tipper bearing No.APH 5971?
2.    Whether the claimant further proves his medical treatment-
           expenses and also his disability along with loss of  income  and
           his future treatment as averred in para-1 of the claim petition?
3.    Does the Respondent No.3 proves that he is not  liable  to
           pay the compensation since Respondent No.1 was driving the  said
           vehicle  without  DL  and  also  due  to  violation  of   policy
           conditions?
4.    Whether the claimant is entitled for compensation? If  so,
           how much and from whom?”




            The appellant examined himself as  PW1,  Dr.P.V.L.N.  Murthy  as
      PW2, Dr. Sudhakar Krishnamurthy as PW3 and produced  documents,  which
      were marked as Exhibits P.1 to P.18.  On behalf  of  respondent  No.3,
      only one witness was examined as  RW1  and  one  document,  i.e.,  the
      insurance policy was produced as Exhibit R1.
The Tribunal relied upon the contents of the  First  Information
      Report and the statement of the  appellant  (P.W.1),  who  gave  vivid
      description of the accident and whose testimony was not shaken in  the
      cross-examination and held that the accident was caused  due  to  rash
      and negligent driving of Tipper by  its  driver.   The  Tribunal  then
      referred to the evidence relating  to  the  appellant’s  treatment  at
      Bhandari Hospital, Raichur and NIMS, Hyderabad and held:
“Therefore, I am of the clear  opinion  that  the  claimant  has
           sustained  fracture  of  pelvic  region,  and  he   subsequently
           developed all the above handicaps due to non-passing of urine by
           natural passage and his extensive treatment has also  not  cured
           him for the said accidental injury.  PW.2 and 3 who have treated
           the claimant extensively in NIMS  Hospital  at  Hyderabad,  have
           clearly deposed that the claimant has now  erectile  dysfunction
           (impotence) and he needs follow up treatment for 5 to  10  years
           in future.  Therefore, under this back ground, the  claimant  is
           entitled for Rs.30,000/- for fracture of pelvic region.”




            The Tribunal awarded Rs.75,000/- towards  medical  expenses  and
      Rs.10,000/- for transportation, lodging and  boarding  and  conveyance
      expenses.  The Tribunal did not accept the appellant’s assertion  that
      he was a student of PUC-II by observing that he has not  produced  any
      document to substantiate the same. The Tribunal also declined to  rely
      upon the appellant’s statement regarding his income and observed  that
      his notional income could  be  taken  as  Rs.600/-  per  month.  After
      deducting 1/3rd towards personal expenses, the Tribunal held that  the
      appellant’s net income would be Rs.4,800/- per  annum.   The  Tribunal
      awarded Rs.50,000/- towards disability due  to  erectile  dysfunction,
      Rs.25,000/-  for  future  treatment  and  other  unforeseen  expenses,
      Rs.10,000/-  towards  pain  and  suffering  and  Rs.10,000/-   towards
      doctors’ fees, vehicle expenses etc.

            On an appeal  filed  by  the  appellant,  the  High  Court  took
      cognizance of his statement about the age,  educational  qualification
      and the  fact  that  he  was  assisting  his  father  in  agricultural
      operations and held  that  it  would  be  just  and  proper  to  award
      compensation  of  Rs.2,00,000/-  for  the  injuries  suffered  by  the
      appellant and an additional compensation of  Rs.1,50,000/-.  The  High
      Court awarded additional amount of  Rs.25,000/-  in  lieu  of  medical
      expenses  and  another  sum  of  Rs.25,000/-  towards   transportation
      charges, nourishment, attendants charges, etc.  This is  evinced  from
      paragraphs 11, 12, 13 and 14 of the judgment  under  challenge,  which
      are extracted below:
“11. In a case of this nature, when his limbs and hands  are  not
           affected, his ability to earn  is  not  affected.  But  the  fact
           remains, at the prime of  his  youth,  he  has  become  impotent.
           Therefore, the compensation of Rs.50,000/- under the  heading  of
           erectile dysfunction is certainly on the lower side. In some what
           similar situation in the year 1999, the Apex Court had awarded  a
           sum of Rs.1.00,000/- and now the accident has taken place  nearly
           five years thereafter and we  are  awarding  compensation  nearly
           after eleven years. Therefore, in our view, the  just  amount  of
           compensation to be awarded under the said heading is Rs.2,00,000/-
            and the additional compensation is Rs.1,50,000/-.
12. Though the Tribunal has awarded a sum of Rs.75,000/-  towards
           medical expenses, it has not taken into consideration other bills
           produced and the  treatment  appears  to  be  continuous.  Though
           another sum of Rs.25,000/- is awarded towards future expenses, we
           are of the view that towards medical expenses - past and  future,
           another sum of Rs.25,000/- would be an appropriate compensation.
13. Similarly, the evidence on record shows, for taking treatment
           the claimant has to leave Raichur to  go  to  Hyderabad  on  many
           occasions.  In  that  context,   the   amount   of   compensation
           awarded towards transportation charges,    nourishment, attendant
           charges, is on the lower side and we deem it just and  proper  to
           award a sum of Rs.25,000/- under the aforesaid head.
14. The amount of compensation awarded under the heading of  pain
           and suffering, having regard to the  nature  of  injury  and  the
           number of days he has taken treatment, appears to be on the lower
           side. Therefore, we award an  additional  amount  of  Rs.25,000/-
under the aforesaid head".
We have heard learned counsel  for  the  parties  and  carefully
      perused the record.
It is settled law that compensation  in  personal  injury  cases
      should be determined under the following heads:
Pecuniary damages (Special damages)
(i)  Expenses  relating  to  treatment,  hospitalisation,   medicines,
           transportation, nourishing food and miscellaneous expenditure.
(ii)  Loss of earnings (and other gains) which the injured would  have
           made had he not been injured, comprising:
(a) Loss of earning during the period of treatment;
(b) Loss of future earnings on account of permanent disability.
(iii) Future medical expenses.
Non-pecuniary damages (General damages)
(iv)  Damages for pain, suffering and trauma as a consequence  of  the
           injuries.
(v) Loss of amenities (and/or loss of prospects of marriage).
(vi)  Loss of expectation of life (shortening of normal longevity).
In routine personal injury cases, compensation will  be  awarded
      only under heads (i), (ii)(a) and (iv). It is only in serious cases of
      injury, where there is specific  medical  evidence  corroborating  the
      evidence of the claimant, that compensation will be granted under  any
      of the heads (ii)(b), (iii), (v) and (vi) relating to loss  of  future
      earnings on account of permanent disability, future medical  expenses,
      loss of amenities (and/or loss of prospects of marriage) and  loss  of
      expectation of life.
In
Ibrahim v. Raju
(2011) 10 SCC 634, this Court took cognizance
      of the plight of the victim of road accidents and observed:
“The sufferings of the dependants of  those  who  are  killed  in
           motor accidents and the survivors who are disabled are  manifold.
           Sometime these can be measured in terms of money but most of  the
           times it is not possible to do so. If an individual  is  disabled
           as a result of road accident, the cost  of  treatment,  care  and
           rehabilitation is likely to be very high. A very large number  of
           people involved in motor accidents are pedestrians, children  and
           women and, on account  of  sheer  ignorance,  poverty  and  other
           disabilities, majority of them are  unable  to  engage  competent
           lawyers for putting their cause  before  the  Tribunals  and  the
           courts. The insurance companies, with whom the vehicles  involved
           in the  accidents  are  insured  always  have  the  advantage  of
           assistance of  legally  trained  mind  (law  officers  and  panel
           lawyers).  They  contest  the  claim  petitions  by  raising  all
           possible technical objections for ensuring that their clients are
           either completely absolved or their liability is minimised and in
           the process, adjudication of the  claims  filed  by  the  victims
           and/or their legal representatives is delayed for years together.
           At times, the delay in disposal of the claim cases and litigation
           expenses make the award of compensation meaningless for survivors
           of the accidents and/or families of the victims.”


            The Court also referred to the judgments in Ward v. James (
1965)
      1 All ER 563 (CA), R.D.Hattangadi v. Pest  Control  (India)  (P)  Ltd
.
(1995) 1 SCC 551, Nizam’s
Institute of Medical Sciences v. Prasanth S.
      Dhananka
(
2009) 6 SCC 1, Reshma Kumari v. Madan Mohan
(
2009)  13  SCC
      422, Arvind Kumar Mishra v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd.
(2010) 10 SCC
      254, Raj Kumar v. Ajay  Kumar  (2011)  1  SCC  343  and  enhanced  the
      compensation from Rs.1,89,440/-  to Rs.6 lakhs. The factual matrix  of
      that case and the  factors  considered  by  this  Court  for  awarding
      enhanced compensation to the appellant in that case are  contained  in
      paragraphs 17 to 20 of the judgment, which are reproduced below:
“17. A perusal  of  the  record  shows  that  the  appellant  had
           produced substantive evidence to prove that as a  result  of  the
           accident he had suffered 8 grievous injuries  including  fracture
           of pelvis and he had to remain in the hospital for one month  and
           a half; that he was  treated  by  Dr.  Anil  K.  Bhat,  Assistant
           Professor, Orthopaedics  and  Dr.  Joseph  Thomas,  Professor  of
           Urology and that on account of grievous injuries he was unable to
           continue his  studies.  In  his  deposition,  Dr.  Joseph  Thomas
           categorically stated that the appellant will  have  to  undertake
           life-long treatment for recurrence  of  urethral  strictures  and
           consequential   dysfunction   due   to   fracture   of    pelvis.
           Unfortunately, neither the Tribunal nor the High  Court  adverted
           to this part of the evidence and omitted  to  award  compensation
           for the expenses likely to  be  incurred  by  the  appellant  for
           future treatment.
18. One can reasonably expect that the appellant who was only  18
           years old at the time of accident would live for at least next 50
           years. The Tribunal awarded Rs 20,340 for  expenses  incurred  by
           the appellant  for  treatment  taken  by  him  in  the  hospital.
Although, Dr. Thomas did not indicate the approximate expenditure
           likely to be incurred by the appellant and his family for  future
           treatment, keeping in view the nature of injuries  and  the  fact
           that he will have to take treatment for the  remaining  life,  it
           will be reasonable to infer that he will be required to  spend  a
           minimum of Rs 1000 per month for future  treatment,  which  would
           necessarily   include   fees   of   the    doctors,    medicines,
           transportation, etc. In the absence of  concrete  evidence  about
           the anticipated expenditure, we think that ends of  justice  will
           be met if the appellant is awarded a sum of Rs 2 lakhs which,  if
           deposited in a fixed deposit, would earn an interest of Rs 14,000
           to 16,000 per annum.
19. On account of the injuries suffered by him, the prospects  of
           the appellant’s marriage have considerably reduced. Rather,  they
           are extremely bleak. In any case, on account of the  fracture  of
           pelvis, he will not  be  able  to  enjoy  the  matrimonial  life.
           Therefore, the award of Rs 50,000 under this head must be treated
           as wholly inadequate. In the facts and circumstances of the case,
           we feel that a sum of  Rs  2  lakhs  should  be  awarded  to  the
           appellant for loss of marriage prospects and enjoyment of life.
20. The compensation  awarded  for  loss  of  future  earning  on
           account  of   permanent   partial   disablement   is   ex   facie
           unreasonable. Respondent  3  did  not  produce  any  evidence  to
           controvert the appellant’s  assertion  that  on  account  of  the
           injuries suffered in the accident, he had to abandon his studies.
           The consequences which followed were extremely grave inasmuch  as
           he lost all opportunities for making  a  career  in  future.  The
           prospects  of  the  appellant’s  marriage  are  extremely  bleak.
           Therefore, a sum of Rs 2 lakhs deserves to be awarded under these
           heads.”



            In Ramachandrappa v. Royal Sundaram Allinace Insurance Co.  Ltd.
      (2011) 13 SCC 236, this Court observed:
“The  compensation  is  usually  based  upon  the  loss  of   the
           claimant’s earnings or earning capacity,  or  upon  the  loss  of
           particular  faculties  or  members  or  use  of   such   members,
           ordinarily in accordance with a  definite  schedule.  The  courts
           have time and again observed that the compensation to be  awarded
           is not measured by the nature, location or degree of the  injury,
           but rather by the extent or degree of  the  incapacity  resulting
           from the injury. The Tribunals are  expected  to  make  an  award
           determining the amount of compensation which should appear to  be
           just, fair and proper.
The term ‘disability’, as  so  used,  ordinarily  means  loss  or
           impairment of earning power and has been held not to mean loss of
           a member of the body. If the physical efficiency because  of  the
           injury has substantially impaired or if he is unable  to  perform
           the same work with the same ease as before he was injured  or  is
           unable to do heavy work which he was able to do previous  to  his
           injury, he will be entitled to suitable compensation.  Disability
           benefits are ordinarily graded on the basis of the  character  of
           the  disability  as  partial  or  total,  and  as  temporary   or
           permanent. No  definite  rule  can  be  established  as  to  what
           constitutes partial incapacity in cases not covered by a schedule
           or fixed liabilities, since  facts  will  differ  in  practically
           every case.”

            In
Kavita v. Deepak
(2012) 8 SCC  604,  the  Court  referred  to
      earlier precedents and held:
“In the light of the principles
laid down in
the  aforementioned
           cases, it is suffice to say that in determining  the  quantum  of
           compensation payable to the victims of accident, who are disabled
           either permanently or temporarily, efforts should always be  made
           to award adequate compensation not only for the  physical  injury
           and treatment, but also for the loss of earning and inability  to
           lead a normal life and enjoy amenities,  which  would  have  been
           enjoyed but for the disability caused due to  the  accident.  The
           amount awarded under the head of loss  of  earning  capacity  are
           distinct and do not overlap with the  amount  awarded  for  pain,
           suffering and loss of enjoyment of life or the amount awarded for
           medical expenses.”



            We may now revert to the case in hand.  In  his  statement,  the
      appellant had vividly described the  injuries  suffered  by  him,  the
      treatment taken in Bhandari Hospital, Raichur and NIMS,  Hyderabad  as
      also the expenses incurred for the treatment, loss  of  education  and
      income in the following words:
1. ..........Due to impact the rear tyre of the tipper caused  me
           grievous injury at the pelvic region  and  the  said  injury  was
           internal. After the accident I fell down and was in conscious. My
           father who was with the me at that time, immediately admitted  me
           to Bhadari Hospital Raichur. Due to the internal injury the urine
           was stopped and it was  extracted  by  catheter.  My  father  was
           advised to take me for further treatment at Hyderabad Accordingly
           I was taken to Nizam Hospital Hyderabad on 1-11-2000. The  doctor
           on my  examination  came  to  the  conclusion  that  I  sustained
           fracture of pelvis and total rupture  of  urethra.  In  the  said
           hospital also I was not passing the urine and it was extracted by
           catheter. I was advised  to  come  after  3  weeks  to  under  go
           operation and also the RGU and HCU test. Thereafter I returned to
           Amareshwar Camp and during that period I was not passing my urine
           naturally and also I was unable  to  move.  I  was  also  getting
           severe pains in that is region. I was passing my urine and  stool
           on ray bed only. After 3 weeks I was taken to Nizam  Hospital  by
           my father. On 1-12-2002 and I was in the Hospital upto  4-12-2000
           for above tests. Again I went to the Hospital on 18.12.2000,  and
           the operation was  not  conducted,  since  the  same  has  to  be
           undergone only after observation of results of RGU and MCU tests.
Again I went to the Hospital on 27.1.2001 and at that time I  was
           not passing the urine naturally and I was in lot of pains and was
           unable to stand and move. The RGU and MCU Tests were done on 31-1-
           2001. The doctor advised me that my urethra is completely damaged
           and he asked  me  to  come  after  one  month  for  operation  of
           electively operation. The doctors extracted my urine by SPC  test
           since it was not coming through catheter. Again  I  went  to  the
           said hospital on 1.3.2001 and I was operated on 20-3-2001. I have
           undergone transpubic end to urethroplasty. Due to  the  injury  I
           developed erectable unction and the doctors suggested me that the
           same cannot be  cured  in  the  near  future.  The  doctors  have
           mentioned  the  said  disability  in,  their   medical   records.
           Subsequently  I  went  for  further   treatment   on   25.4.2001,
           16.5.2001, 11-6-2001 and 23-7-2001,  10.8-2001,  20-8-2001,  3-9-
           2001, 5-9-2001 and  15-9-2001.  On  all  these  days  I  went  to
           Hyderabad in a hired jeep from Amareshwar Camp and  I  have  paid
           Rs.5000 to Rs.6000 per trip. I have produced those hire bills  in
           this court. Now the catheter is removed  only  before  one  month
           back.
2. In between the period of treatment  had  the  swelling  of  my
           private part. Now also I am going to Nizam Hospital Hyderabad for
           my treatment as advised. Now also  I  have  pain  in  the  pelvic
           region and now also I find it very difficult  to  pass  my  urine
           naturally.
3. At the time of accident was studying in PUC II year (commerce)
           in Kalmath College Manvi, and the said college  is  about  15  KM
           from Amareshwar Camp. I used to attend to my college by a bus  on
           Student Pass.
4. I was also assisting my father in my agricultural  work  after
           my college hours, My father has 8 acres of land  (irrigated),  at
           Amareshwar Camp. I was also vending  the  milk  from  the  6  she
           buffalo which were maintained by my family. Now I  am  unable  to
           assist my father in agricultural work and also  in  milk  vending
           due to ray pain and injury in the pelvic region. I was forced  to
           discontinue my studies due to the said factor. I was contributing
           about Rs.4000 under my services to my family.
5. The doctors have also ruled out  my  marriage  due  to  pelvic
           injury and also erectile dysfunction. I am also advised to future
           long treatment. Now I am maintained by my parents, and due to the
           above accident my life has become dejected.”



            In cross-examination, the counsel appearing for respondent  No.2
      did make laboured attempt to discredit the testimony of the  appellant
      but he firmly withstood his ground and reiterated the  facts  relating
      to accident,  his  injuries,  pain  and  suffering  and  the  expenses
      incurred under various heads. It is quite interesting to note that the
      appellant was not cross-examined  on  the  issue  of  his  educational
      qualification and the assistance provided by  him  to  his  father  in
      doing agriculture. Therefore, that part of the testimony also remained
      unshaken.
PW-2 - Dr. P.V.L.N. Murthy, Professor of Urology and  H.O.D.  of
      Urogoly, NIMS gave detailed description of the nature of injuries  and
      the treatment given to the appellant in the following words:
“On 1-11-2000 the patient was admitted on  emergency  ward  under
           the  care  of  emergency  Medical  department  or   the   poetics
           ward/Urology.  An  initial  emergency  treatment  was  given  and
           discharged on 3.11.2000 with advise to review in urology O.P  and
           Ortho O.P after three weeks. By the time he was admitted here  he
           was with a SPC through which Urine was collected by a bag/ he was
           unable to  pass  urine  via  natural  passage.  The  patient  was
           admitted back on 27.1.2001 as per advise and we discharged him on
           31-1-2001. During his admission he was treated  for  infection  &
           fever (U.T.L.) and special X-ray procedures (R.G.U 85 M.C.U) were
           conducted to evaluate the stricture. The length of the  stricture
           evaluate the strictures. The length of the stricture was 3  to  4
           centimeters  and  urinary  passage  was  blocked  completely.  By
           history of the patient it was know that  he  was  suffering  from
           erectile dysfunction be cause of injury (Trauma).
He was admitted on  21-3-2001  and  operated  for  the  Traumatic
           stricture Urethra, he under went  transpubic  urithroplasty.  The
           stricture length was 3 to 4 centimeters and there  was  extensive
           callous which was  removed.  Postoperatively  patient  had  wound
           infection which was treated. After removing the Unwarily Catheter
           / Cystoscopy was performed and adhesions and granucalation tissue
           were removed  and  catheter  reinstated.  He  was  discharged  on
           21.4.2001 to review back in  urology  O.P.  after  one  week  for
           cathetal removal.
After cathetral removal patient passed urine and readmitted on 16-
           5-2001 for the management of recurrence  of  the  stricture.   He
           under  went  VIU  (Visual  Internal   Urithrotonomy)   endoscopic
           operation for the recurrence of tine stricture. He was discharged
           on 23-5-2001 for the removal of the  Urothril  cathotic.  He  was
           called back to O.P. and catheter was removed, and he passed urine
           satisfactorily.
He was re-admitted on 11-6-2001  for  narrowing  of  the  urinary
           stream  die  to  recurrence  of  the  stricture.  He  under  went
           endoscope report operation (VIU) and advised him to perform  self
           dilatation. AS the nature of the injury is severe the results  of
           the primary operation (Urithroplast) was explained to the patient
           required multiple operations and continuous fallow at  periodical
           intervals because the initial trauma was severe and  the  results
           of operation will not be satisfactory in this type  of  injuries.
           Patient developed ere tile  dysfunction  following  trauma.  This
           could be due to impairment in blood supply or nerve supply to the
           penis.
Ex. P. 5 which was already marked is the cut patient record shows
           about the regular and periodical visit and follow-up. Whenever  a
           procedure was under taken he was advised to  take  medicines  for
           two to three weeks.
Most of the visits he was accompanied with his father.
Totally there are 13 X-rays which were already marked as Ex. P-10
           are pertaining to pelvic fracture and traumatic stricture of  the
           Urethra. Some  of  the  X-rays  are  related  to  post  operation
           condition. How I  see  already  marked  Ex.  P-ll  which  is  the
           outpatient card dt. 11-12-2002 containing past operative  follow-
           up after one year of self dilatation  and  erectile  disjunction.
           Patient was passed urine satisfactorily with self dilatation. His
           urine flow  rate  was  peak  flow  31.3  average  flow  16.3.  He
           complained absence of  nocturnal  erections  since  the  accident
           there was minimum tuniscence after sexual  arosal.  Regiscan  and
           Papavarin (PIPE) were advised to evaluate erectile dysfunction at
           an endrology centre.
xxx         xxx         xxx

           For erectile  disjunction  he  might  retire  if  he  is  willing
           prosthetic penile implantation which is an  artificial  erection.
           It is an expensive operation and fraught with complications.”



              In   cross-examination,   nothing   could   be   elicited   by
      Dr.P.V.L.N.Murthy which may cast doubt on his testimony regarding  the
      nature of injuries and treatment given to the appellant by NIMS.
PW-3  –  Dr.  V.Krishnammurty,  Andrologist  and   Microsurgeon
      described  the  test  conducted  on  the  appellant.  He  denied   the
      suggestion that the certificates Exhibits P-13 to P-16 and Exhibits P-
      16 (a) to (c) were false.
From the testimony of three witnesses, it is established that as
      a result of accident the appellant had suffered grievous  injuries  in
      the pelvic region and he has become impotent. It is  also  established
      that he has already undergone multiple surgeries and will have to take
      treatment in institutes like NIMS for at least 10 years.
Unfortunately, the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal,  Raichur  did
      not give due weightage to the evidence produced by the  appellant  and
      awarded  meager  compensation  and  that  too   by   overlooking   the
      documentary evidence produced by the appellant regarding the  expenses
      incurred by him at Bhandari Hospital, Raichur and NIMS  at  Hyderabad.
      The High Court also  failed  to  properly  analyse  and  evaluate  the
      evidence produced by the appellant and did not adequately enhanced the
      compensation determined by the Tribunal.
In our view, the appellant is entitled to Rs.2,20,000/-  towards
      the expenses  incurred  in  the  treatment  including  hospitalization
      charges, mess and lodging charges,  transportation,  etc.  For  future
      medical  expenses  including  hospitalization,  medicines,   attendant
      charges, etc., the appellant is entitled  to  Rs.6  lakhs.  For  pain,
      suffering and trauma, the appellant is  entitled  to  a  sum  of  Rs.3
      lakhs. For loss of amenities and prospects of marriage, the  appellant
      is entitled to Rs.4 lakhs. For loss of expectation of life and loss of
      future earning, the appellant is entitled to a sum of Rs.5 lakhs.
In the result, the appeal is allowed, the impugned  judgment  is
      set aside and it is held that  the  appellant  is  entitled  to  total
      compensation of Rs.20,20,000/- (rupees twenty  lakhs  twenty  thousand
      only) with interest at the rate of 6%  per  annum  from  the  date  of
      filing the claim petition till the date of actual payment.
Since the offending vehicle was insured with respondent No.2 and
      no evidence was produced by it to prove that the driver was not having
      any valid licence or that  there  was  any  breach  of  the  insurance
      policy,  respondent  No.2  is  held  liable  to   pay   the   enhanced
      compensation and interest to the appellant. The needful must  be  done
      within a period of eight weeks by getting a demand draft  prepared  in
      his name from a nationalized bank.
If respondent  No.2  has  already  paid  the  compensation
      awarded by the Tribunal and enhanced compensation awarded by the  High
      Court then it shall  pay  the  balance  amount  i.e.  the  enhancement
      granted by this Court along with  interest  within  eight  weeks  from
      today by getting a demand draft prepared in the appellant’s name  from
      a nationalized bank.
.......................J.
                                            (G.S.SINGHVI)







                                                 .........................J.
                                             (V. GOPALA GOWDA)




      NEW DELHI;
JULY 1, 2013.