[Cites
13
, Cited by
20
]
Supreme Court of India
Shyam Narayan Chouksey vs Union Of India on 9 January, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 357, 2018 (2) ABR 446, 2018 (1) AKR 838, AIR 2018 SC (CIVIL) 769, (2018) 1 KER LT 444, (2018) 1 GUJ LH 172, (2018) 1 JLJR 224, 2018 (2) KCCR SN 192 (SC), AIRONLINE 2018 SC 627, 2018 (1) AKR 357
Author:
Dipak Misra
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                                WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.855 OF 2016


     SHYAM NARAYAN CHOUKSEY                                      … Petitioner(s)


                                   Versus


     UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS                                     … Respondent(s)



                                            JUDGMENT
Dipak Misra, CJI.
The petitioner, a public spirited person, has approached this

     Court under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India for issue of a

     writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order or direction

     commanding the respondents to take appropriate steps for

     inculcating in the public a proper sense for paying due respect to

     the National Anthem; to issue a writ, order or direction as to what

     is required to be done and not to be done when the National
Signature Not Verified
Anthem is being played or sung; to specify what will constitute
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2018.01.09
21:05:17 IST
Reason:
disrespect and abuse of the National Anthem; and to restrain the
2
use of the National Anthem for any commercial exploitation or to

gain financial advantage in any manner.
2.   Apart from the aforesaid prayers, there are many other prayers

and one such prayer includes that no one should print the National

Anthem on any undesirable object or display it in a manner and at

such places which may be      disgraceful and may tantamount to

showing disrespect to the National Anthem.
3.   After issue of notice, learned Attorney General for India

entered appearance. On 30th November, 2016, taking note of the

assertions made in the petition, this Court had passed an interim

order, which reads thus:-
―Having heard the learned counsel for the parties
          and awaiting the reply from the Union of India, as
          an interim measure, it is directed that the following
          directions shall be scrupulously followed:-
(a) There shall be no commercial exploitation to give
          financial advantage or any kind of benefit. To
          elaborate, the National Anthem should not be
          utilized by which the person involved with it either
          directly or indirectly shall have any commercial
          benefit or any other benefit.
(b) There shall not be dramatization of the National
          Anthem and it should not be included as a part of
          any variety show. It is because when the National
          Anthem is sung or played it is imperative on the part
3
of every one present to show due respect and
          honour. To think of a dramatized exhibition of the
          National Anthem is absolutely inconceivable.
(c) National Anthem or a part of it shall not be
          printed on any object and also never be displayed in
          such a manner at such places which 3 may be
          disgraceful to its status and tantamount to
          disrespect. It is because when the National Anthem
          is sung, the concept of protocol associated with it
          has its inherent roots in National identity, National
          integrity and Constitutional Patriotism.
(d) All the cinema halls in India shall play the
          National Anthem before the feature film starts and
          all present in the hall are obliged to stand up to
          show respect to the National Anthem.
(e) Prior to the National Anthem is played or sung in
          the cinema hall on the screen, the entry and exit
          doors shall remain closed so that no one can create
          any kind of disturbance which will amount to
          disrespect to the National Anthem. After the
          National Anthem is played or sung, the doors can be
          opened.
(f) When the National Anthem shall be played in the
          Cinema Halls, it shall be with the National Flag on
          the screen.
(g) The abridge version of the National Anthem made
          by any one for whatever reason shall not be played
          or displayed.‖
4.   After issuing the directions, this Court noted the submissions

of the learned Attorney General which were to the following effect:-
4
―We have so directed as Mr. Mukul Rohtagi, learned
          Attorney General for India submits with all humility
          at his command and recommend that National
          Anthem has to be respected. The directions are
          issued, for love and respect for the motherland is
          reflected when one shows respect to the National 4
          Anthem as well as to the National Flag. That apart,
          it would instill the feeling within one, a sense
          committed patriotism and nationalism.‖
5.   Thereafter,   as   the   factual   matrix   would   unfurl,   two

applications were filed seeking impleadment and recall of the

interim order. They were taken up on 9th December, 2016, and on

that day, the prayer for impleadment was allowed, but as far as the

application for recall was concerned, the Court passed the following

order:-
―As far as the recall of the order is concerned, the
          same has to be heard on merits when the matter is
          finally debated upon. Be it noted, Mr. Dinesh,
          learned counsel for the applicant at the time of
          mentioning had submitted that there has to be some
          kind of exemption for the physically challenged
          persons or physically handicapped persons. Mr.
          Siddharth Luthra, learned senior counsel who was
          present in Court has referred to the Persons with
Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
          Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995
.
Mr. Rohatgi, learned Attorney General for
          India submitted that how the physically challenged
          or physically handicapped persons shall show
          respect to the National Anthem, the Central
          Government will issue guidelines within ten days
5
hence. As the guidelines are going to be issued, we
          clarify, if a physically challenged person or physically
          handicapped person goes to the Cinema hall to
          watch a film, he need not stand up, if he is incapable
          to stand, but must show such conduct which is
          commensurate with respect for the National Anthem.
          When we say physically challenged or physically 3
          handicapped persons, it means persons with
          disability as defined under
Sections 2(i)
and
2(t)
of
          the Persons with
Disabilities (Equal Opportunities,
          Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act,
          1995
. Another aspect needs to be cleared. When we
          said that the doors shall be closed, we did not mean
          that the doors shall be bolted as mentioned in the
          case of
Municipal Corporation of Delhi, Delhi vs.
          Uphaar Tragedy Victims Association and Ors.
[(2011)
          14 SCC 481] but only to regulate the ingress and
          egress during the period while the National Anthem
          is played.‖
6.   On the next date of hearing i.e. 14th February, 2017, certain

interlocutory applications were filed, which related to the difficulties

faced by the disabled persons. Mr. Sidharth Luthra, learned senior

counsel, who was appointed as the friend of the Court, had

highlighted certain aspects and taking note of the same, the

following order was passed:-
―Mr. Siddharth Luthra, learned amicus curiae,
          submitted that it may be clarified that the people are
          not expected to stand when the National Anthem is
          sung or played as a part of the storyline in the
          feature film or as a part of the newsreel or the
          documentary. Mr. Rohatgi, learned Attorney General
6
accepted the said suggestion.
In view of the aforesaid, it is clarified that when
          the National Anthem is sung or played in the
          storyline of a feature film or par of the newsreel or
          documentary, apart from what has been stated in
          the order dated 30.11.2016, the audience need not
          stand.
At this juncture, we may state that the
          Parliament has brought a new legislation called 'The
          Rights of Persons with
Disabilities Act, 2016
.
          Section 102 repeals 'The Persons with
Disabilities
          (Equal Opportunity Protection of Rights and Full
          Participation) Act, 1995
. This Court on 9.12.2016
          has modified the earlier order regard being had to
          the handicapped persons keeping in view the 1995
          Act. On a query being made, Mr. Mukul Rohatgi,
          learned Attorney General for India submitted that
          the Union of India shall issue an appropriate
          notification/guidelines in view of the language
          employed in the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities
          Act, 2016
. The said notification/guidelines may be
          issued within a week hence.
Mr. Subhash Chandran, learned counsel
          submits that he may be permitted to file an
          application for intervention on behalf of the National
          Platform for the Rights of the Disabled. He is at
          liberty to file the application.‖
7.   On 18th April, 2017, dealing with I.A. No.15 of 2017, which

also related to disabled persons, certain modifications were made.

The said order is as follows:-
―This is an application filed by the NPRD to direct
7
the respondent No.1 to exempt certain categories of
disabled persons from the purview of the order of
this Court dated 30th November, 2016 and 9th
December, 2016. The categories of persons
mentioned are:-
(i) Wheel chair users – can be cerebral palsy,
Parkinsons, Multiple sclerosis, Muscular dystrophy
or other conditions
(ii) Those with autism
(iii) Those with cerebral palsy
(iv) Intellectual disabilities
(v) Mental illness
(vi) Deaf blind
(vii) Multiple disabilities
(viii) Parkinsons, Multiple sclerosis
(ix) Leprosy cured
(x) Muscular dystrophy

           Having heard learned counsel for the
parties, we are inclined to modify the orders and
direct that the persons who are wheel chair users,
those with autism, persons suffering from cerebral
palsy, multiple disabilities, parkinsons, multiple
sclerosis, leprosy cured, muscular dystrophy and
deaf and blind be treated not to be within the ambit
of the orders passed by this Court.
As far as the other categories, which we
have not referred to mentioned in the application,
are concerned, the same may be considered by the
8
Union of India.‖
8.   On the previous occasion i.e. 23rd October, 2017, having heard

learned counsel for the parties and the learned Attorney General for

India, the following order came to be passed:-
―The submission of the learned Attorney General is
          that because of the vast diversity in the country
          based on religion, race, caste and even region, it
          becomes necessary to have uniformity which should
          be cultivated by playing the National Anthem so that
          when people come out from the cinema halls,
          instilling the belief that they are all Indians. Be that
          as it may. In this context, he has referred to
Article
          51A(a)
of the Constitution of India.
Having heard learned counsel for the
          parties for some time, we think it appropriate that
          the Central WP(C) 855/16 4 Government should
          take a call in this regard and, if necessary, as
          advised, may bring out the requisite notification or
          circular or rules. When we say 'take a call', needless
          to say, the discretion rests with the Central
          Government. The discretion has to be exercised
          without being influenced by our interim order. We
          may further emphasize that the discretion may be
          utilized to regulate in an inclusive manner or as the
          Central Government feels fit.‖
9.   In pursuance of our earlier order, an affidavit has been filed by

the Union of India. It is submitted by Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned

Attorney General that the Central Government has constituted a
9
Committee by a Notification/Order dated 5th December, 2017. We

shall refer to the same at a later stage.
10. Mr. Abhinav Shrivastava, learned counsel appearing for the

petitioner has raised the following contentions:-
(a)
The Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971
(for

      short, ‗the 1971 Act‘) vide
Section 3
only deals with prevention

      of singing/playing of National Anthem, etc., but it does not

      deal fully as to how the respect is to be shown and, therefore,

      appropriate measures should be prescribed by law in that

      regard.
(b)
Article 51A(a)
of the Constitution which provides that every

      citizen of India is to abide by the Constitution and respect its

      ideals and institutions, the National Flag and the     National

      Anthem, warrants that every citizen or person in this country

      has to show respect to the       National Anthem wherever it is

      played.
(c)   The Preamble of the Constitution uses the word ―unity and

      integrity of the Nation‖ and the said words are required to be

      interpreted on a broad canvass so that honour and respect
10
due to the National Anthem are maintained.
(d)   The order passed by this Court sub-serves the cause of

      integrity of the Nation and, therefore, need not be recalled and

      should be made absolute.
(e)   The instructions issued under the heading ―Orders Relating to

      the National Anthem of India‖ are executive in nature as they

      relate to various aspects and are not binding and, therefore,

      there has to be an appropriate law in the field and in the

      absence of law, this Court may issue directions till the law is

      brought covering the said aspects.
11. Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General, referring to the

affidavit and the Notification/Order would contend that the

Committee constituted by the Notification shall look into every

aspect including the amendment to the 1971 Act and formulation of

further executive instructions and till then the mandatory order

passed by this Court for playing/singing of the National Anthem

before starting of feature films in cinema halls may be modified by

making it directory. The suggestion given by him is that the word

―shall‖ used in the order be substituted by ―may‖.
11
12. Mr. Sidharth Luthra, learned Amicus Curiae, has submitted

that
Article 51A
of the Constitution has been brought when the

1971 Act was in force and, therefore, it has to be understood in the

said perspective. He has also submitted that
Section 2
of the 1971

Act was amended vide Act 31 of 2003 with effect from 8th May,

2003, as a consequence of which, respect to the National Anthem is

a part of the statutory provision. To buttress the said submission,

he has emphasized on the language employed in
Section 2
which

uses the words ―or the Constitution of India or any part thereof‖.

To have a sense of completeness, we think it appropriate to

reproduce
Section 2
of the 1971 Act, which is as under:-
―2. Insult to Indian National Flag and Constitution of
          India.- Whoever in any public place or in any other
          place within public view burns, mutilates, defaces,
          defiles, disfigures, destroys, tramples upon or
          *otherwise shows disrespect to or brings into
          contempt (whether by words, either spoken or
          written, or by acts) the Indian National Flag or the
          Constitution of India or any part thereof, shall be
          punished with imprisonment for a term which may
          extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation      1.–      Comments        expressing
          disapprobation or criticism of the Constitution or of
          the Indian National Flag or of any measures of the
          Government with a view to obtain an amendment of
          the Constitution of India or an alteration of the
          Indian National Flag by lawful means do not
12
constitute an offence under this section.
Explanation 2.– The expression, ―Indian National
Flag‖ includes any picture, painting, drawing or
photograph, or other visible representation of the
Indian National Flag, or of any part or parts thereof,
made of any substance or represented on any
substance.
Explanation 3.– The expression ―public place‖
means any place intended for use by, or accessible
to, the public and includes any public conveyance.
Explanation 4.- The disrespect to           the   Indian
National flag means and includes—
(a) a gross affront or indignity offered to the Indian
National Flag; or
(b) dipping the Indian National Flag in salute to any
person or thing; or
(c) flying the Indian National Flag at half-mast
except on occasions on which the Flag is flown at
half-mast on public buildings in accordance with
the instructions issued by the Government; or
(d) using the Indian National Flag as a drapery in
any form whatsoever except in state funerals or
armed forces or other para-military forces funerals;
or
(e) using the Indian National Flag:-
(i) as a portion of costume, uniform or accessory of
any description which is worn below the waist of any
person; or
(ii) by embroidering or printing it on cushions,
handkerchiefs, napkins, undergarments or any
13
dress material; or
(f) putting any kind of inscription upon the Indian
          National Flag; or
(g) using the Indian National Flag as a receptacle for
          receiving, delivering or carrying anything except
          flower petals before the Indian National Flag is
          unfurled as part of celebrations on special occasions
          including the Republic Day or the Independence
          Day; or
(h) using the Indian National Flag as covering for a
          statue or a monument or a speaker‘s desk or a
          speaker‘s platform; or
(i) allowing the Indian National Flag to touch the
          ground or the floor or trail in water intentionally; or
(j) draping the Indian National Flag over the hood,
          top, and sides or back or on a vehicle, train, boat or
          an aircraft or any other similar object; or
(k) using the Indian National Flag as a covering for a
          building; or
(l) intentionally displaying the Indian National Flag
          with the ―saffron‖ down.‖
13. It is his further submission that once the words ―or any part

thereof‖ have been used in the 1971 Act, the same is bound to be

read in consonance with
Article 51A(a)
of the Constitution and

hence, it presently gets ingrained as a statutory command.
14. Dr.   Rajeev   Dhawan,     learned   senior   counsel,   who    was
14
permitted to intervene in-person, has supported the stand of the

Union of India so far as the modification of the interim order is

concerned.
15. Though Mr. Sajan Poovayya, learned senior counsel, has filed

a separate writ petition relating to some other aspect, he submitted

that the word ―secular‖ that finds place in the Preamble is meant

for integration of the diverse communities existing in India and the

said principle has been recognized in the context of the Flag Code

in the
Union of India vs. Naveen Jindal and Another1
. He has

drawn our attention to paragraph 27 of the judgment which we

think it seemly to reproduce:
―Then the question arises, which view is to be
             accepted.   National Anthem, National Flag and
             National Song are secular symbols of the
             nationhood. They represent the supreme collective
             expression of commitment and loyalty to the nation
             as well as patriotism for the Country. They are
             necessary adjuncts of sovereignty being symbols
             and actions associated therewith.‖
16. Emphasizing on the aforesaid passage, he would contend that

both the National Anthem and the National Flag and the National

Song being secular symbols representing the nationhood command
1
(2004) 2 SCC 510
15
desired respect. He has also drawn our attention to the statement

made by the President of the Constituent Assembly. It is as under:-
―Statement

            Mr. President: There is one matter which has been
            pending for discussion, namely, the question of the
            National Anthem. At one time, it was thought that
            the mater might be brought up before the House
            and a decision taken by the House by way of a
            resolution. But it has been felt that, instead of
            taking a formal decision by means of resolution, it is
            better if I make a statement with regard to the
            National Anthem.        Accordingly I make this
            statement.
The composition consisting of the words
            and music known as Jana Gana Mana is the
            National Anthem of India, subject to such
            alterations in the words as the Government may
            authorise as occasion arises; and the song Vande
            Mataram, which has played a historic part in the
            struggle for Indian freedom, shall be honoured
            equally with Jana Gana Mana and shall have equal
            status with it. I hope this will satisfy the Members.‖
17. We may hasten to add that we have reproduced the same to

show the sanctity of the National Anthem and the respect it has to

be given.
18. Mr. C.U. Singh, learned senior counsel appearing for the

intervenor, which has filed an application for recalling the interim

order contends that in the absence of any law, this Court should
16
not have made the playing of National Anthem in cinema halls

mandatory.
19. At this juncture, Mr. P.V. Dinesh, learned counsel assisting

Mr. C.U. Singh, learned senior counsel would submit that if this

Court thinks of continuing the interim order, it may at least modify

the direction that whenever there is a film festival and more than

five to six films are exhibited in a day, the audience should be

permitted to stand only at the commencement of the first feature

film.
20. Mr. V.K. Biju, learned counsel who has intervened in the writ

petition has submitted that though the Committee has been

constituted to look into the matter from various spectrums, the

interim order should be allowed to continue.
21. Ms. Nanita Sharma, learned counsel, who is appearing for the

respondent No.4 because of the application for intervention having

been allowed, submitted that the said organization has submitted

representations to the Government and they need to be considered

as they are pending since 2014.
17
22. Mr. Sanjeev Bhatnagar, who has filed an application for

intervention, appearing in-person has submitted that there can be

no doubt that the National Anthem and the National Flag are to be

respected and every citizen is obliged to show respect, but the

cinema halls may not be the appropriate place.
23. To appreciate the submissions advanced at the Bar, it is

necessary to refer to
Section 3
of the 1971 Act. It reads as under:-
―3. Prevention of singing of National Anthem, etc..-
          Whoever intentionally prevents the singing of the
          Indian National Anthem or causes disturbances to
          any assembly engaged in such singing shall be
          punished with imprisonment for a term, which may
          extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.‖
24. On a perusal of the said provision, it is clear as day that no

one can intentionally prevent the singing of the National Anthem or

cause any disturbance to an assembly engaged in such singing. It

is a penal provision. The Orders relating to the National Anthem

deal with playing of the anthem, mass singing of the anthem,

playing of foreign anthems and general provisions. Clause III(4) of

the orders reads as follows:-
―III(4).  It is not possible to give an exhaustive list
          of occasions on which the singing (as distinct from
18
playing) of the Anthem can be permitted. But there
          is no objection to the singing of the Anthem
          accompanied by mass singing so long as it is done
          with due respect as a salutation to the motherland
          and proper decorum is maintained.‖
25. On a careful reading of the above provision, it is clear that the

said Order states that it is not possible to give an exhaustive list of

the occasions. It further lays down that there is no objection to the

singing of the National Anthem accompanied by mass singing so

long as it is done with due respect as a salutation to the

motherland and maintenance of the proper decorum. Thus, three

aspects are obvious: First the National Anthem is not only to be

respected, but it is a respect as a salutation to the motherland;

second, the list of occasions cannot be exhaustively stated; and,

third, proper decorum has to be maintained when the National

Anthem is played or sung.
26. At this stage, we may refer to the Order/Notification dated 5th

December, 2017. It is as follows:-
―ORDER

          Subject: Constitution of an Inter-Ministerial
          Committee on playing/singing of the National
          Anthem.
19
It has been decided to constitute an
Inter-Ministerial     Committee      under       the
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary (Border
Management), Ministry of Home Affairs, with
representatives (not below the rank of Joint
Secretary)         from         the        following
Ministries/Departments to give recommendations
regarding regulation of playing/singing of National
Anthem and to suggest changes in the
Prevention
to Insults to National Honour Act, 1971
or in the
Orders Relating to the National Anthem of India.
Sl. No.         Ministry/Department

     1     Additional Secretary (BM),      Chairman
           MHA
     2     Ministry of Defence             Member
     3     Ministry of External Affairs    Member
     4     Ministry of Culture             Member
     5     Ministry of Women and Child     Member
           Development
     6     Ministry of Parliamentary       Member
           Affairs
     7     Ministry of Information &       Member
           Broadcasting
     8     Ministry of Minority Affairs    Member
     9     Department of Legal Affairs     Member
     10    Department of School            Member
           Education and Literacy
     11    Department of Empowerment       Member
           of Persons with Disability
     12    Joint Secretary (Admn.), MHA    Convenor


2.       The    Committee        will     submit      its
20
recommendations in six months.
3.  This issues with the approval of the Competent
                Authority.‖
27. It is perceptible from the said order, that the inter-Ministerial

Committee             has   been   given        the   responsibility   to   make

recommendations for regulating the playing/singing of the National

Anthem and to suggest changes in the 1971 Act or in the Orders

relating to the National Anthem of India.
28. We may presently travel to the past.                   This Court in
Bijoe

Emmanuel and Others vs. State of Kerala and Others2
(in

paragraphs 9 and 10) has also emphasized on respect to the

National Anthem. We may hasten to add that it sustained the right

of the petitioner therein, but yet observed that a person who stands

up respectfully when the National Anthem is sung, is showing

proper respect. Thus, the stress is on respect when the National

Anthem is sung or played.
29. We may at this stage reproduce the Statement of Objects and

Reasons of the 1971 Act, as the same has been stressed by Mr.
2
AIR 1987 SC 748
21
Abhinav Srivastava, learned counsel for the petitioner. It reads as

under:-
―STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

                      Cases involving deliberate disrespect to
          National Flag, the National Anthem and the
          Constitution have come to the notice in the recent
          past. Some of these incidents were discussed in
          both the Houses of Parliament and members
          expressed great anxiety about the disrespect shown
          to the national symbols. Government were urged to
          prevent the recurrence of such incidents.
          Disrespect to the National Flag and the Constitution
          or the National Anthem is not punishable under the
          existing law. Public acts of insults to these symbols
          of sovereignty and the integrity of the nation must
          be prevented. Hence the Bill. The scope of the law
          is restricted to overt acts of insult to and attack on,
          the national symbols by burning, trampling defiling
          or mutilating in public. It is not intended to prohibit
          honest and bona fide criticism of the symbols, and
          express provisions to this effect have been made in
          the Bill.‖
30. When we consider the perspectives put forth before us

pronounced in their own way, we have no shadow of doubt that one

is compelled to show respect whenever and wherever the National

Anthem is played. It is the elan vital of the Nation and fundamental

grammar of belonging to a nation state. However, the prescription

of the place or occasion has to be made by the executive keeping in

view the concept of fundamental duties provided under the
22
Constitution and the law.
31. In view of the aforesaid, we think it appropriate that the

Committee should comprehensively look into all the aspects. Mr.

K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General for India has submitted

in the course of argument that the petitioner can give suggestions

by way of representation to the Committee. Mr. V.K. Biju and Ms.

Nanita Sharma, learned counsel and Mr. Sanjeev Bhatnagar, the

applicant in-person can also give suggestion in this regard. When

we say suggestions, we mean that suggestions shall only relate to

the National Anthem and nothing else.
32. Having said that, the issue remains for continuance of the

interim order or modification of the same.    As submitted by Mr.

Venugopal, learned Attorney General, the playing of the National

Anthem in the cinema halls on the screen may not be made

mandatory and the word ―shall‖ may be substituted with ―may‖

until a final decision is taken by the Committee and, thereafter, by

the Central Government.     Needless to emphasize, the discretion

vests with the Central Government and they shall take a decision

uninfluenced by the interim order as clarified in our order dated

23rd October, 2017.
23
33. In view of the aforesaid, we do not intend to keep the writ

petition pending and dispose of the same with the following

directions:-
(i)     The Committee appointed by the Union government shall

        submit its recommendations to the competent authority in

        terms of the Notification dated 5th December, 2017, for follow

        up action.
(ii)    The order passed on 30th November, 2016, is modified to the

        extent that playing of the National Anthem prior to the

        screening of feature films in cinema halls is not mandatory,

        but optional or directory.
(iii)   Since the Committee constituted by the Union government is

        looking into all aspects of the matter, it shall make its

        recommendations uninfluenced by the interim directions of

        this Court, as clarified in our order dated     23rd October,

        2017. Similarly, the competent authority shall in taking its

        decision(s) not be constrained or influenced by any of the

        interim directions.
24
(iv)   Citizens or persons are bound to show respect as required

       under executive orders relating to the National Anthem of

       India and the prevailing law, whenever it is played or sung on

       specified occasions.
(v)    The exemption granted to disabled persons shall remain in

       force till the final decision of the competent authority with

       regard to each occasion whenever the National Anthem is

       played or sung.
34. The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of. There shall be

no order as to costs.
..............................CJI.
[Dipak Misra]


                                          ...................................J.
                                          [A.M. Khanwilkar]


                                          ...................................J.
                                          [Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud]

New Delhi
January 09, 2018.