[Cites
15
, Cited by
11
]
Supreme Court of India
Nagaiah vs Chowdamma (Dead) By Lrs. on 8 January, 2018
Author:
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
Bench:
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
,
Arun Mishra
REPORTABLE


                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                            CIVIL APPEAL NO.  22969  OF 2017


     Nagaiah and another                                      ..Appellants

                                              Versus

     Smt. Chowdamma (dead) By Lrs.
     and another                                              ..Respondents




                                        J U D G M E N T




     MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR, J.
1.                  The judgment dated 08.01.2013 passed by the High Court

     of Karnataka at Bangalore in Regular Second Appeal No. 1102 of 2004

     is called in question in this appeal by the unsuccessful plaintiffs.
Signature Not Verified
2.
Digitally signed by
SARITA PUROHIT
Brief facts leading to this appeal are: Original Suit No. 228
Date: 2018.01.10
13:10:50 IST
Reason:
of   1989   was   filed   by   the   appellants   herein   (plaintiffs   1   and   2
1
respectively   in   the   suit)   praying   for   a   declaration   that   the   suit

schedule   property   is   the   joint  property  of  the  appellants  along   with

their   father   Kempaiah   (defendant   no.1   in   the   suit/respondent   no.2

herein) and that they are entitled to 2/3rd share in the said property;
that the sale deed executed by the father­Kempaiah (defendant no.1 in

the   suit/respondent   no.2   herein)   in   favour   of   defendant

no.2/respondent   no.1­Chowdamma   was   not   binding   on   their   2/3 rd

share in the suit schedule property.  A relief for permanent injunction

was also sought.   A certain set of other facts was also pleaded which

may not be material for the disposal of this appeal.   It is relevant to

note   that   at   the   time   of   filing   of   the   suit,   i.e.   on   24.01.1985,   the

appellant no.2 herein, namely, Krishna was aged about 17 years.  The

appellant   no.1/Plaintiff   No.1   herein   being   the   elder   brother   of

appellant no.2 filed the suit not only on his personal behalf but also

on behalf of the second appellant­second plaintiff (who was a minor).
3.           The   trial   Court   dismissed   the   suit   on   merits.     The   first

Appellate Court allowed the Regular Appeal No. 90 of 2003 filed by the

unsuccessful   plaintiffs   and   decreed   the   suit.     Aggrieved   by   the

judgment   of   the   first   appellate   Court,   the   unsuccessful   defendant

no.2­   Chowdamma/purchaser   of   the   property   filed   Regular   Second

Appeal before the High Court of Karnataka at Bangalore.
2
By   the   impugned   judgment,   the   High   Court   has   allowed   the

appeal and dismissed the suit mainly on the ground that the plaintiff

no.1 being the elder brother could not act as the guardian of plaintiff

no.2   during   the   life­time   of   Kempaiah,   the   father   of   the   plaintiffs

(defendant no.1), inasmuch as plaintiff no.1/appellant no.1 was not

appointed as a guardian of the minor plaintiff no. 2 by any competent

Court.  Since the first defendant is the father of plaintiff no.2, he was

the natural guardian and hence he could only represent plaintiff no.2

and none else.
It is to be noted that no issue was raised in the trial Court

with regard to competency of plaintiff No.1 to represent plaintiff no.2

in the suit.   Even in the first appellate Court, such question was not

raised, hence not considered.  However, the High Court seems to have

permitted such question to be raised for the first time in the second

appeal, since it is purely a question of law.
4.          Hence,   the   only   question   to   be   decided   in   this   appeal   is,

whether   the   first   plaintiff   being   the   elder   brother   of   minor   second

plaintiff (at the time of filing of the suit) could have filed the suit on

behalf of the minor as his next friend/guardian.
3
5.           The   High   Court,   while   coming   to   the   conclusion   that   the

first plaintiff could not have acted as a guardian of the minor­ second

plaintiff,   has   relied   upon
Section   4(b)
of   the   Hindu   Minority   and

Guardianship   Act   (hereinafter   called   as   ‘
Hindu   Guardianship   Act
’).

Sub­Section (b) of
Section 4
of the Hindu Guardianship Act reads as

under:
“(b) "guardian” means a person having the care of the
      person of a minor or of his property or of both his person
      and property, and includes—
(i) a natural guardian,
(ii)   a   guardian   appointed   by   the   will   of   the   minor's
      father or mother,
(iii) a guardian appointed or declared by a court, and
(iv)  a   person   empowered to act  as such  by   or  under
      any enactment relating to any court of wards;”

As mentioned supra, the High Court has ruled that defendant no.1,

being   the   father   of   minor   plaintiff   no.2,   is   the   natural   guardian   of

plaintiff no.2 and consequently plaintiff no.1 could not have acted as

the guardian in the suit on behalf of minor plaintiff, particularly when

he was not appointed as a guardian by any competent court of law.  In

our considered opinion, the High Court has totally misdirected itself

while concluding so.
6.           There cannot be any dispute that the plaintiff no.1 did not
4
and does not come within the meaning of a “Guardian” as specified in

sub­section (b) of
Section 4
of the Hindu Guardianship Act. But the

present   facts   are   not   governed   by   the   provisions   of
Hindu

Guardianship   Act
;   rather   they   are   governed   by
Order   XXXII   of   the

Code of Civil Procedure
(hereinafter referred to “Code”).  To decide the

present   controversy   it   would   be   relevant   to   note   the   following

provisions as contained in Order XXXII,   Rules 1, 3, 6, 7, 9, 12, 13

and 14 of the Code (as amended in Karnataka State, since the matter

is from Karnataka State) :
1.    Minor   to   sue   by   next   friend.–Every   suit   by   a
          minor shall be instituted in his name by a person who
          in such suit shall be called the next friend of the minor.
18
[Explanation:  In this Order, “minor” means a person
          who has not attained his majority within the meaning of
Section 3
of the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875),
          where the suit relates to any of the matters mentioned
          in clauses (a) and (b) of
Section 2
of that Act or to any
          other matter.]
2.     Where   suit   is   instituted   without   next   friend,
          plaint   to   be   taken   off   the   file.–  (1)   Where   a   suit   is
          instituted   by   or   on   behalf   of   a   minor   without   a   next
          friend, the defendant may apply to have the plaint taken
          off the file, with costs to be paid by the pleader or other
          person by whom it was presented.
(2)   Notice   of   such   application   shall   be   given   to   such
          person,   and   the   Court, after  hearing  his  objections  (if
          any) may make such order in the matter as it thinks fit.
3. Qualifications to be a next friend or guardian.—
          (1) Any person who is of sound mind and has attained
5
majority   may   act   as   next   friend   of   a   minor   or   as   his
guardian for the suit:
Provided that the interest of that person is not adverse
to that of the minor and that he is not, in the case of
next friend, a defendant, or, in the case of a guardian
for the suit, a plaintiff 

(2) Appointed or declared guardians to be preferred and
to be superseded only for reasons recorded.— Where a
minor   has   a   guardian   appointed   or   declared   by
competent authority, no person other than the guardian
shall act as the next friend of the minor or be appointed
his guardian for the suit unless the Court considers, for
reasons to be recorded, that it is for the minor’s welfare
that another person he permitted to act or oe appointed
as the case may be.
(3) Where the defendant is a minor, the Court on being
satisfied   of   the   fact   of   his   minority   shall   appoint   a
proper person to be guardian for the suit for the minor.
A   person   appointed   as   guardian   under   this   sub­rule,
shall,   unless   his   appointment   is   terminated   by
retirement or removal by order of Court on application
made   for   the   purpose   or   by   his   death,   continue
throughout all proceedings in the suit or arising out of
the   suit   including   proceedings   in   any   appeal   or   in
revision and  any  proceedings in execution of a decree
and the service of any process in any such proceeding
on the said guardian if duly made shall be deemed to be
good service for the purposes of such proceedings.
(4) An order for the appointment of a guardian for the
suit may be obtained upon an application in the name
and   on   behalf   of   the   minor   or   by   the   plaintiff.   The
application   where   it   is   by   the   plaintiff   shall   whenever
necessary set forth in the order of their suitability a list
of   persons   who   are competent  and qualified  to  act as
guardian for the suit for the minor defendant.
(5) The application referred to in the last preceding sub­
rule whether made by the plaintiff or on behalf of the
minor   defendant   shall   be   supported   by   an   affidavit
verifying the fact that the proposed guardian has not or
that no one of the proposed guardians has any interest
6
in the matters in controversy in the suit adverse to that
of   the   minor   and   that   the   proposed   guardian   or
guardians   are   fit   persons   to   be   so   appointed.   The
affidavit   shall   further   state   according   to   the
circumstances of each case particulars of any existing
guardian appointed or declared by competent authority,
the name and address of the person, if any, who is the
de   facto   guardian   of   the   minor,   the   names   and
addresses of persons, if any, who, in the event of either
the   natural   or   the   de   facto   guardian   or   the   guardian
appointed or declared by competent authority, not being
permitted   to   act,   are   by   reason   of   relationship   or
interest,   or   otherwise   suitable   persons   to   act   as
guardians for the minor for the suit.
(6) An application for the appointment of a guardian for
the   suit   of   a   minor   shall   not   be   combined   with   an
application   for   bringing   on   record   the   legal
representative of a deceased party.
(7)   No   order   shall   be   made   on   any   application   under
sub­rule (4) above except upon notice to the minor and
also to any guardian of the minor appointed or declared
by an authority competent in that behalf, or where there
is no such guardian upon notice to the father or natural
guardian   of   the   minor   or   where   there   is   no   father   or
natural   guardian   upon   notice   to   the   person   in   whose
actual care the minor is and after hearing any objection
which may be urged on behalf of any person so served
with notice. The notice required by this sub­rule shall
be   served   at   least   seven   clear   days   before   the   day
named in the notice for hearing of the application.
(8)   Where   none   of   the   persons   mentioned   in   the   last
preceding   sub­rule   is   willing   to   act   as   guardian,   the
Court   shall   direct   notice   to   other   person   or   persons
proposed   for   appointment   as   guardian   either
simultaneously to some or all of them or successively as
it   may   consider   convenient   or   desirable   in   the
circumstances of the case. The Court shall appoint such
person as it thinks proper from among those who have
signified   their   consent   and   intimate   the   fact   of   such
appointment to the person appointed by registered post
unless he is present at the time of appointment either in
person or by pleader.
7
(9) No person shall be appointed guardian for the suit
without   his   consent   and   except   in   cases   where   an
applicant himself prays for his appointment as guardian
notices issued shall clearly require the party served to
signify his consent or refusal to act as guardian.
(10) Where the Court finds no person fit and willing to
act as guardian for the suit the Court may appoint any
of its officers or a pleader of the Court to be a guardian
and may direct that costs to be incurred by that officer
or pleader in the performance of his duties as guardian
shall   be   borne   either   by  the  parties or  by  any  one or
more   of   the   parties   to   the   suit   or   out   of   any   fund   in
Court   in   which   the   minor   is   interested   and   may   give
direction for the repayment or allowance of the costs as
justice and the circumstances of the case may require.
(11) When a guardian for the suit as a minor defendant
is appointed and it is made to appear to the Court that
the   guardian   is   not   in   possession   of   any   or   sufficient
funds   for   the   conduct   of   the   suit   on   behalf   of   the
defendant and that the defendant will be prejudiced in
his  defence  thereby, the Court may from time to time
order  the   plaintiff to advance moneys to the guardian
for   the   purpose   of   his   defence   and   all   moneys   so
advanced   shall   form   costs   of   the   plaintiff   in   the   suit.
The  order shall direct that the guardian as and when
required by the Court shall file into Court the account
of the moneys so received by him."­­
6. Receipt by next friend or guardian for the suit of
property under decree for minor. – (1) A next friend or
guardian for the suit shall not, without the leave of the
Court, receive any money or other movable property on
behalf of a minor either—
(a) by way of compromise before decree or order, or
(b)   under   a   decree   or   order   in   favour   of   the   minor.
(2) Where the next friend or guardian for the suit has
not been appointed or declared by competent authority
to be guardian of the property of the minor, or, having
been so appointed or declared, is under any disability
known   to   the   Court   to   receive   the   money   or   other
movable property, the Court shall, if it grants him leave
8
to receive the property, require such security and give
such   directions   as   will,   in   its   opinion,   sufficiently
protect the property from waste and ensure its proper
application:
28
[Provided   that   the   Court   may,   for   reasons   to   be
recorded,   dispense   with   such   security   while   granting
leave   to   the   next   friend   or   guardian   for   the   suit   to
receive money or other movable property under a decree
or order, where such next friend or guardian—
(a) is the manager of a Hindu undivided family and the
decree or order relates to the property or business of the
family; or
(b) is the parent of the minor.]

Provided that the Court may in its discretion dispense
with   the   security   in   cases   where   the   next   friend   or
guardian   for   the   suit   is   a   manager   of   a   joint   Hindu
family or the Karnavan of a Tharwad or the Ejaman of
an   Aliyasanthana   family   and   the   decree   is   passed   in
favour   of   such   joint   family   or   Tharwad   or   the
Aliyasanthanafamily as the case may be.
7.  Agreement   or   compromise   by   next   friend   or
guardian  for the suit.–(1) No next friend or guardian
for   the   suit   shall,   without   the   leave   of   the   Court,
expressly   recorded   in   the   proceeding,   enter   into   any
agreement   or   compromise   on   behalf   of   a   minor   with
reference to the suit in which he acts as next friend or
guardian.
(2) Where an application is made to the Court for leave
to   enter   into   an   agreement   or   compromise   or   for
withdrawal of a suit in pursuance of a compromise or
for taking any other similar action on behalf of a minor
or other person under disability, the affidavit in support
of the application shall set out the manner in which the
proposed   compromise,   agreement   or   other   action   is
likely to effect the interests of the minor or other person
under   the   disability   and   the   reason   why   such
compromise, agreement or other action is expected to be
for   the   benefit   of   the   minor   or   other   person   under
9
disability, where in such a case the minor or the other
person   under   disability   is   represented   by   counsel   or
pleader, the said counsel or pleader shall also file into
Court   along   with   the   application   a   certificated   to   the
effect   that   the   agreement   or   compromise   or   action
proposed is in his opinion for the benefit of the minor or
other person under disability. If the Court grants leave
under sub­rule (1) of this Rule, the decree or order of
the   Court  shall  expressly recite the grant of the leave
sought   from   the   Court   in   respect   of   the   compromise,
agreement   or   other   action   as   aforesaid   after
consideration   of   the   affidavit   and   the   certificate
mentioned   above   and   shall   also   set   out   either   in   the
body   of   the   decree   itself   or   in   a   schedule   annexed
thereto   the   terms   of   the   compromise   or   agreement   or
the particulars of other action.
(3)   Any   such   agreement   or   compromise   entered   into
without   the   leave   of   the   court   so   recorded   shall   be
voidable against all parties other than the minor.
9.  Removal   of   next   friend.–(1)   Where   the   interest   of
the next friend of a minor is adverse to that of the minor
or   where   he   is   so   connected   with   a   defendant   whose
interest  is   adverse to  that  of the minor  as to make it
unlikely   that   the   minor’s   interest   will   be   properly
protected by him, or where he does not do his duty, or
during the pendency of the suit, ceases to reside within
India, or for any other sufficient cause, application may
be made on behalf of the minor or by a defendant for his
removal; and the Court, if satisfied of the sufficiency of
the   cause   assigned,   may   order   the   next   friend   to   be
removed accordingly, and make such other order as to
costs as it thinks fit.
(2) Where the next friend is not a guardian appointed or
declared by an authority competent in this behalf, and
an application is made by a guardian so appointed or
declared,   who   desires   to   be   himself   appointed   in   the
place of the next friend, the Court shall remove the next
friend unless it considers, for reasons to be recorded by
it, that the guardian ought not to be appointed the next
friend   of   the   minor,   and   shall   thereupon   appoint   the
applicant to be next friend in his place upon such terms
10
as to the costs already incurred in the suit as it thinks
fit
12.   Course   to   be   followed   by   minor   plaintiff   or
applicant on attaining majority.– (1) A minor plaintiff
or   a   minor   not   a   party   to   a   suit   on   whose   behalf   an
application is pending shall, on attaining majority, elect
whether he will proceed with the suit or application. 

(2)   Where   he   elects   to   proceed   with   the   suit   or
application, he shall apply for an order discharging the
next friend and for leave to proceed in his own name. 

(3) The title of the suit or application shall in such case
be corrected so as to read henceforth thus:—

“A,B.,  late  a  minor, by C.D., his next friend, but now
having attained majority”.
(4) Where he elects to abandon the suit or application,
he shall, if a sole plaintiff or sole applicant, apply for an
order to dismiss the suit or application on repayment of
the costs incurred by the defendant or opposite party or
which may have been paid by his next friend.
(5)   Any   application   under   this   rule   may   be   made   ex
parte;   but   no   order   discharging   a   next   friend   and
permitting a minor plaintiff to proceed in his own name
shall be made without notice to the next friend.
13.   Where   minor   co­plaintiff   attaining   majority
desires   to   repudiate   suit.–(1)   Where   a   minor   co­
plaintiff   on  attaining  majority desires to repudiate the
suit, he shall apply to have his name struck out as co­
plaintiff;   and   the   Court,   if   it   finds   that   he   is   not   a
necessary   party,   shall   dismiss   him   from   the   suit   on
such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit. 
(2) Notice of the application shall be served on the next
friend, on any co­plaintiff and on the defendant.
(3) The costs of all parties of such application, and of all
or any proceedings theretofore had in the suit, shall be
paid by such persons as the Court directs.
(4) Where the applicant is a necessary party to the Suit,
11
the Court may direct him to be made a defendant.
14.  Unreasonable   or   improper   suit.–(1)   A   minor   on
           attaining majority may, if a sole plaintiff, apply that a
           suit   instituted   in   his   name   by   his   next   friend   be
           dismissed   on   the   ground   that   it   was   unreasonable   or
           improper.
(2) Notice of the application shall be served on all the
           parties concerned; and the Court, upon being satisfied
           of such unreasonableness or impropriety, may grant the
           application and order the next friend to pay the costs of
           all parties in respect of the application and of anything
           done in the suit, or make such other order as it thinks
           fit.
14­A.  When a minor defendant attains majority either
           he or the guardian appointed for him in the suit or the
           plaintiff   may   apply   to   the   Court   to   declare   the   said
           defendant a major and to discharge the guardian and
           notice thereof shall be given to such among them as are
           not  applicants.   When the Court by  order  declares the
           said   defendant   as   major   it   shall   by   the   same   order
           discharge the guardian and thereafter the suit shall be
           proceeded with against the said defendant as a major.

A  bare   reading   of   Order   XXXII, Rule 1 of the  Code makes it amply

clear that every suit by a minor shall be instituted in his name by a

person who in such suit shall be called the “next friend” of the minor.

The next friend need not necessarily be a duly appointed guardian as

specified under Sub­Section (b) of
Section 4
of Hindu Guardianship

Act.   “Next friend” acts for the benefit of the “minor” or other person

who is unable to look after  his or her own interests or manage his or

her   own   law   suit   (person   not  sui   juris)   without   being   a   regularly

appointed guardian as per
Hindu Guardianship Act
.   He acts as an
12
officer of the Court, especially appearing to look after the interests of a

minor or a disabled person whom he represents in a particular matter.

The afore­said provision authorises filing of the suit on behalf of the

minor by a next friend.   If a suit by minor is instituted without the

next   friend,   the   plaint   would   be   taken   off   the   file   as   per   Rule   2   of

Order   XXXII   of   the   Code.     Order   XXXII   Rules   1  and   3  of   the   Code

together make a distinction between a next friend and a guardian ad

litem; i.e., (a) where the suit is filed on behalf of a minor and (b) where

the suit is filed against a minor.   In case, where the suit is filed on

behalf of the minor, no permission or leave of the Court is necessary

for   the   next   friend   to   institute   the   suit,   whereas   if   the   suit   is   filed

against a minor, it is obligatory for the plaintiff to get the appropriate

guardian ad litem appointed by the Court for such minor.
A “guardian

ad   litem”  is   a   special   guardian   appointed   by   a   court   in   which   a

particular litigation is pending to represent a minor/infant, etc. in that

particular litigation and the status of guardian ad litem exists in that

specific litigation in which appointment occurs. Various High Courts

have also adopted this view. The Madras High Court in  Kaliammal,

minor by
Guardian, Patta Goundan v. Ramaswamy Goundan
, AIR

1949   Mad.   859  observed   that   there   is   no   need   of   sanction   of   the

Court for a next friend to sue, if he is not incapacitated.
This was also
13
the view taken by the High Court of Allahabad in
K. Kumar v. Onkar

Nath
, AIR 1972 All. 81.
7.         The   Kerala   High   Court   upheld   the   same   in   no   uncertain

terms in
Gopalaswamy Gounder v. Ramaswamy Kounder
, AIR 2006

Ker 138. In that case, the High Court observed that any person who

does not have any interest adverse to that of the minor can figure as

his next friend. It held as follows:
“Law   does   not   contemplate   the   appointment   of   a
         next   friend   for   a   minor   who   institutes   a   legal
         proceeding   either   as   a   Plaintiff   or   as   a   Petitioner.
         The object of a minor being represented through a
         next friend is only for the purpose of enabling the
         opposite party to look upon the next friend for costs,
         if any, ordered against the minor…”
         ….      ….         ….
Where   the   minor   institutes   a   proceeding   as   a
         Plaintiff or applicant any person who does not have
         any interest adverse to that of the minor can figure
         as  his  next friend. The mere fact that the minor's
         mother Selvi was appointed as the guardian of the
         minor   in   execution   proceedings   where   the   minor
         was   impleaded   as   an   additional   Respondent,   will
         not   disable   Gopalaswamy   Kounder   from   styling
         himself   as   the   next   friend   of   the   minor   for   the
         purpose of filing the petitions under
Order 21, Rule
         90 Code of Civil Procedure
There was absolutely no
         necessity   for   the   next   friend   to   seek   his
         appointment  as   the next  friend nor  was the  court
         below   justified   in   dismissing   the   said   application.
         Even in a case where the proceedings are instituted
         by   the   minor   through   his   next   friend,   the   real
         Plaintiff  or applicant is the minor himself and not
         the next friend.”
8.         Not   only,   is   there   no   provision   for   appointment   of   next
14
friend   by   the   Court,   but   the   permission   of   the   Court   is   also   not

necessary.
However, even in respect of minor defendants, various High

Courts are consistent in taking the view that the decree cannot be set

aside even where certain formalities for the appointment of a guardian

ad litem to represent the defendant have not been observed.  The High

Courts   have   observed   in   the   case   of   minor   defendants,   where   the

permission of the Court concerned under Order XXXII Rule 3 of the

Code is not taken, but the decree has been passed, in the absence of

prejudice   to   the   minor   defendant,   such   decree  cannot  be  set  aside.

The   main   test   is   that   there   has   to   be   a   prejudice   to   the   minor

defendant for setting aside the decree. For reference, see the cases of
Brij   Kishore   Lal   v.   Satnarain   Lal   &   Ors.
,   AIR   1954   All.
599,
Anandram   &   Anr.   v.   Madholal   &   Ors.
AIR   1960   Raj.   189

Rangammal   v.   Minor   Appasami
&amp;
Ors.   AIR   1973   Mad.12,

Chater Bhuj Goel v. Gurpreet Singh
AIR 1983 Punjab 406 & Shri

Mohd.  Yusuf  and  Ors.  v.  Shri Rafiquddin Siddiqui
.  ILR  1974 (1)

Delhi 825.
In the matter on hand, the suit was filed on behalf of the minor and

therefore   the   next   friend   was   competent   to   represent   the   minor.

Further, admittedly no prejudice was caused to plaintiff no. 2.
15
9.         “Guardian” as defined under the
Hindu Guardianship Act
is a

different concept from the concept of “next friend” or the “Guardian ad

litem”.     Representation   by   “next   friend”   of   minor   plaintiff   or   by

“guardian  ad litem” of minor defendant is purely temporary, that too

for the purposes of that particular law suit.
10.           There   is   no   hurdle   for   a   natural   guardian   or   duly

constituted   guardian   as   defined   under
Hindu   Guardianship   Act
to

represent   minor   plaintiff   or   defendant   in   a   law   suit.       But   such

guardian   should   not   have   adverse   interest   against   minor.     If   the

natural guardian or the duly constituted guardian has adverse interest

against the minor in the law suit, then a next friend or guardian  ad

litem,   as   the   case   may   be,   would   represent   the   minor   in   the   civil

litigation.
11.           It is by now well settled and as per the provisions of Order

XXXII   of   Code   that   any   person   who   is   of   sound   mind,   who   has

attained majority, who can represent and protect the interest of the

minor, who is a resident of India and whose interest is not adverse to

that of the minor, may represent the minor as his next friend. Such

person who is representing the minor plaintiff as a next friend shall

not be party to the same suit as defendant. Rules 6 and 7 of Order

XXXII of the Code specifically provide that the next friend or guardian
16
in the suit shall not without the leave of the Court receive any money

or immovable property and shall not without the leave of the Court

enter into any agreement or compromise.  The rights and restrictions

of the natural guardian provided under the
Hindu Guardianship Act
do not conflict with the procedure for filing a suit by a next friend on

behalf of the minor.   Not only is there no express prohibition, but a

reading of Order XXXII of the Code would go to show that wherever the

legislature thought it proper to restrict the right of the next friend, it

has expressly provided for it in Rules 6 and 7 of Order XXXII of the

Code.  Rule 9 of Order XXXII – apart from other factors, clarifies that

where a next friend  is not a guardian appointed or declared by the

authority competent in this behalf and an application is made by the

guardian so appointed or declared who desires to be himself appointed

in the place of the next friend, the Court shall remove the next friend

unless   it   considers,   for   reasons   to   be   recorded,   that   the   guardian

ought   not   to   be   appointed   as   the   next   friend   of   the   minor.     Order

XXXII, Rules 12, 13 and 14 of the Code empower the minor plaintiff to

take a decision either to proceed with the suit or to abandon the suit,

after attaining majority.  Thus, after attaining majority,  if the plaintiff

elects   to   proceed   with   the   suit,   he   may   do   so   by   making   an

application,   consequent   upon   which   the   next   friend   ceases   to
17
represent the minor plaintiff from the date of attaining majority by the

minor.  Order XXXII Rule 12 of the Code requires the minor plaintiff to

have the option either to proceed with the suit or to abandon the suit

and  does not  at all  provide that if no such election is made by the

minor  plaintiff  on attaining majority, the suit is to be dismissed on

that ground. In case, if the Court discovers during the pendency of the

suit that the minor plaintiff has attained majority, such plaintiff needs

to be called upon by the Court to elect whether he intends to proceed

with the suit or not. In other words the minor who attained majority

during the pendency of the matter must be informed of the pendency

of the suit and in the absence of such a notice the minor cannot be

imputed with the  knowledge of the pendency of the suit. So, before

any adverse orders are to be made against the minor who has attained

majority, the Court has to give notice to such person. Of course, in the

present matter, under the facts and circumstances, such occasion did

not arise, since plaintiff no. 2 on attaining majority has continued with

the suit, which means he has elected to proceed with the suit.
12.         The principles arising out of the
Guardians and Wards Act,

1890
and the
Hindu Guardianship Act
may not be apposite to the next

friend appointed under Order XXXII of the Code. The appointment of a

guardian  ad   litem  to   represent   the   defendant   or   a   next   friend   to
18
represent the plaintiff in a suit is limited only for the suit and after the

discharge   of   that   guardian  ad   litem/next   friend,   the   right/   duty   of

guardian as defined under sub­section (b) of
Section 4
of the Hindu

Guardianship   Act   (if   he   has   no   adverse   interest)   automatically

continues as guardian. In other words, a next friend representing the

minor in the suit under Order XXXII, Rule 1 of the Code, will not take

away   the   right   of   the   duly   appointed   guardian   under   the
Hindu

Guardianship Act
as long as such guardian does not have an adverse

interest or such duly appointed guardian is not removed as per that

Act.
13.         In the case on hand, respondent No.2/defendant 1, though

was the father of the plaintiff no.2 could not have represented plaintiff

no.2   in   the   present   suit   as   his   guardian,   because   his   interest   was

adverse to that of plaintiff no.2.   A number of allegations are made

against the vendor of the property i.e. against the natural guardian by

plaintiff no.2 in the suit while questioning the validity of the sale deed.

The action of respondent no.2 herein (defendant no.1) in selling the

property without any valid reason and family necessity is the subject

matter in the suit. On the other hand, plaintiff no.1 (elder brother of

plaintiff no.2) who did not have any adverse interest to that of plaintiff

no.2, has properly represented plaintiff no.2 as his next friend.   The
19
plaintiff   no.2   has   not   made   a   single   allegation   against   the   plaintiff

no.1/his next friend, after he attained majority.
14. The   minor­plaintiff   no.2   had   attained   majority   within   one   year

from the date of filing of the suit. The suit, as afore­mentioned, was

filed on 21.04.1985 when the plaintiff No.2 was 17 years of age. Thus

plaintiff   no.2   attained   the   age   of   majority   on   or   about   20.04.1986.

Evidence of PW1 (the first witness of the plaintiffs) was recorded on

15.10.1992, which means, much prior to the recording of evidence of

any of the witnesses, plaintiff no.2 had attained majority and he had

by then elected to continue with the suit.   It is also relevant to note

that plaintiff no.2 is pursuing the matter from the date of attaining

majority till this date on his own. Therefore, it was not open for the

High   Court   to   non­suit   the   plaintiff   no.2   for   the   afore­mentioned

reasons.
15.         Though   records   are   not   produced   before   us   to   show   that

plaintiff no.2 had filed a formal application for discharging the next

friend   after   he   attained   majority,   the   fact   remains   that   he   has

continued with the proceedings on his own, from the trial Court to this

Court.   The   same   clearly   shows  his  intention  of  continuing  with  the

litigation. He has not abandoned his claim but has elected to continue

with civil action.
20
16.         To sum up, instituting a suit on behalf of minor by a next

friend or to represent a minor defendant in the suit by a guardian ad

litem  is   a   time­tested   procedure   which   is   in   place   to   protect   the

interests of the minor in civil litigation. The only practical difference

between   a   “next   friend”   and   a   “guardian  ad   litem”   is   that   the   next

friend is a person who represents a minor who commences a lawsuit;

guardian  ad litem  is a person appointed by the Court to represent a

minor   who   has   been   a   defendant   in   the   suit.   Before   a   minor

commences   suit,   a   conscious   decision   is   made   concerning   the

deserving adult (next friend) through whom the suit will be instituted.

The   guardian  ad   litem  is   appointed  by  Court  and whereas  the next

friend   is   not.   The   next   friend   and   the   guardian  ad   litem  possess

similar powers and responsibilities. Both are subject to control by the

Court  and   may   be   removed by  the  Court  if the  best  interest of  the

minor so requires.
17.         In view of the above discussion, we are of the opinion that

the   impugned   order   relying   upon   the   provisions   of
Hindu

Guardianship Act
to non­suit the plaintiff no.2 is not justified.  Having

regard   to   the   totality   of   the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case,  it

would be just and proper if the matter is remitted to the High Court

for a fresh decision on merits in accordance with law.   Accordingly,
21
this appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent, the judgment of the High

Court is set aside and the matter is remitted to the High Court for a

fresh   decision   on   merits,   in   accordance   with   law.     Needless   to

mention, that we have not expressed any opinion on the merits of the

case.  There shall be no order as to costs.
…………………………………J.
                                                  [Arun Mishra]
             

                                                …………….……………………J.
                                               [Mohan M. Shantanagoudar]

New Delhi;
January  08, 2018
22
ITEM NO.1501                     COURT NO.10                         SECTION IV-A
(For Judgment)

                  S U P R E M E C O U R T O F                I N D I A
                          RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Civil Appeal No(s).22969/2017

NAGAIAH    & ANR.                                                  Appellant(s)

                                      VERSUS

SMT. CHOWDAMMA (DEAD) BY LRS.        & ANR.                        Respondent(s)
Date : 08-01-2018 This appeal was called on for pronouncement
                  of Judgment today.
For Appellant(s)          Mr. Nikhil Majithia,Adv.
Mr. Yadav Narender Singh,AOR

For Respondent(s)         Mr. Nishanth Patil,Adv.
Mr. Prasanna Mohan,Adv.
Mr. Anup Jain,AOR



           Hon’ble        Mr.   Justice        Mohan    M.     Shantanagoudar
   pronounced the Reportable Judgment of the Bench comprising
   Hon’ble Mr. Justice Arun Mishra and His Lordship.
The appeal is allowed with no order as to costs in
   terms     of     the    signed   Reportable         Judgment.         Pending
   application, if any, stands disposed of.
(Sarita Purohit)                             (Jagdish Chander)
         Court master                                Branch Officer
(Signed Reportable Judgment is placed on the file)
23