[Cites
21
, Cited by
11
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Dasam Vijay Rama Rao vs M.Sai Sri on 17 June, 2015
Equivalent citations: AIR 2015 HYDERABAD 191
Author:
Nooty Ramamohana Rao
Bench:
Nooty Ramamohana Rao
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE NOOTY RAMAMOHANA RAO             

C.R.P.No.1621 of 2015 

17-06-2015 

Dasam Vijay Rama Rao .Petitioner   

M.Sai Sri . Respondent  

Counsel for the Petitioner: Sri D. Madhava Rao

Counsel for the Respondent: --- 


<Gist :

>Head Note: 

? Cases referred:
1.[2009] 151 Comp Cas 51 (AP)  
2.1995 (3) ALD 341 (DB) 

THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE NOOTY RAMAMOHANA RAO              

CIVIL REVISION PETITION No.1621 of 2015    

ORDER:
This revision has been preferred by the 2nd petitioner in Family
Court O.P.No.1547 of 2014, Family Court, Ranga Reddy District at
L.B.Nagar.  The sole respondent herein is the 1st petitioner in the
above O.P. 
      The petitioner herein is the husband and the respondent is his
wife.  Both of them have filed the aforesaid O.P.No.1547 of 2014
under
Section 13-B
of Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, for dissolution of
their marriage performed on 22.08.2010 by a decree of divorce by
mutual consent.
The case of the petitioners in the O.P. was that they are both
Hindus by religion and faith and got married on 22.08.2010 at
Dwaraka Tirumala, West Godavari District, Andhra Pradesh, as per
Hindu rites and customs and they initially lived at Jeedimetla,
Hyderabad, and later on, in Australia where the 2nd petitioner was
employed and that certain differences have cropped up between
them, which could not be reconciled in spite of the best efforts made
by the petitioners themselves, friends, well-wishers and elders of the
families of both the petitioners.  The petitioners, all due to
incompatibility between them had realized that their marriage has
broken down irretrievably and hence, both of them have taken a
decision and agreed to have the marriage dissolved by mutual
consent.  Hence, they filed the O.P. before the Family Court, Ranga
Reddy District.
The 1st petitioner in the O.P., who is the respondent herein, has
been attending to the proceedings by appearing before the Family
Court.  However, the father of the 2nd petitioner, who holds the
General Power of Attorney (GPA) of the 2nd petitioner/husband in the
O.P., filed an interlocutory application bearing SR.No.2216 of 2015
on 09.04.2015 before the Family court to receive the chief affidavit of
PW.2/petitioner No.2, duly dispensing with the personal appearance
of the 2nd petitioner before the Family Court.  The
2nd petitioner has sworn to a detailed affidavit and got it notarized by
a notary public of South Melbourne, Australia.  That interlocutory
application has been returned with a cryptic order dated 09.04.2015,
which reads as under:
Petition is returned as not maintainable.
It is against this order the present revision is filed.
      Since no reasons are assigned why the learned Judge of the
Family Court came to the conclusion that the petition is not
maintainable, the reasons are solicited.  The learned Family Court
Judge, Ranga Reddy District, in her communication dated 
28.04.2015 addressed to the Registry has set out that the O.P. was
moved on 08.10.2014 and it was posted to 09.04.2015 for
appearance of both parties after six months and that since the
1st petitioner was present and the 2nd petitioner was not present, the
matter was posted to 22.04.2015 and that on 22.04.2015, the
counsel for the 2nd petitioner filed a chief affidavit of PW.2, which was
notarized in Australia and on that day neither the GPA Holder of the
2nd petitioner nor the 2nd petitioner was present and hence, the same
is returned.
Apparently, since the Court could not enquire from the parties
about their subsisting consent for granting divorce by mutual
consent, the I.A. moved by the 2nd petitioner appears to have been
returned on 09.04.2015, but not on 22.04.2015.  It would have been
better for the learned Judge to have spelt out the reasons for her
conclusion.
The respondent/wife herein, who is the 1st petitioner in O.P.,
was present before this Court.  She appears to be fairly very clear
that the marriage between her and the 2nd petitioner in the O.P. is
required to be dissolved.  She does not appear to be having any
doubts in that regard.  I have also no doubt in my mind that the
respondent herein has any second thoughts about dissolution of her
marriage with the 2nd petitioner in the O.P.  She was also clear that
there is no necessity to cross-examine the 2nd petitioner in the O.P.
with regard to the contents of the affidavit sought to be filed by him,
as the contents are virtually the same as are narrated in the O.P.
itself.
From the report of the learned Judge of the Family Court, I
could gather that two factors obviously weighed on her mind.  One is
whether a GPA holder can represent a party in Family Court O.P. and
also depose on behalf of his principal.
I had an occasion to consider the question as to whether a
power of attorney holder can be examined as a witness in a legal
proceeding, while deciding on 15.04.2009 a company case between  
Smt. K.Padmasree Vs. Lotus Aluminium P. Ltd. , and held as  
under:
Learned counsel for the Respondent Sri D. Srinivas,
placed reliance upon the Judgment rendered by a learned
single Judge of this Court in
K. BHARATHY, GUDIVADA AND     
ANOTHER v. AUTHORITY UNDER SECTION
50 OF A.P.S.E.          
ACT- CUM-LABOUR OFFICER, MACHILIPATNAM AND            
ANOTHER (1999 (3) ALD 420) and contended that no person    
holding a Power of Attorney can examine himself as a witness
and hence, the evidence brought on record through the
Special Power of Attorney holder, viz., PW-1 should be
eschewed and since the petitioner has not examined herself,
the above petition should be dismissed.
Hence, the question as to whether a Power of Attorney
holder can be examined as a witness requires a deeper
consideration.
The expression "Power of Attorney" has been defined in
the Strouds Judicial Dictionary as an authority whereby one
"is set in the turn, stead, or place of another" to act for him. It
is generally made by deed poll, but semble, may be by writing
unsealed. In the Blacks Law Dictionary; as An instrument
granting someone authority to act as agent or attorney-in-fact
for the grantor. In The Words and Phrases - Permanent
Edition - as: The term "power of attorney" indicates a power or
authority under seal.  A "power of attorney" is an instrument
in writing by which one person, as principal, appoints another
as his agent and confers upon him the authority to perform
certain specified acts or kinds of acts on behalf of the
principal. "Power of attorney" is not contract, but is merely
document evidencing to third parties existence of agency
relationship and powers of agent. In Corpus Juris Secondum
it is stated as; Authority may be conferred on an agent by a
written appointment, and if the writing is formal the authority
is said to be conferred by letter of attorney and the agent is,
an attorney in fact.  And in Advanced Law Lexicon as A formal
instrument by which one person empowers another to  
represent him or act in his stead for certain purposes.  "Power
of Attorney" includes any instrument (not chargeable with a
fee under the law relating to Courtfees for the time being in
force) empowering a specified person to act for and in the
name of the person executing it.  American Jurisprudence,
noted that, a person may properly appoint an agent to do the
same acts and to achieve the same legal consequences by the  
performance of an act as if he had himself personally acted,
unless public policy or the agreement with the principal
requires personal performance  Mc Nulty v. Dean (154 Wash.
110).  It was further noted that, the grant of power is not,
however, to be frittered away by very nice and metaphysical
distinctions; the object and purposes of the parties must
always be kept in view, and, where the language will permit,
that construction should be carried out that will support
instead of defeat the purposes of the instrument - Holladay v.
Daily (19 Wall. (U.S.) 606).
It will be relevant to notice that the donee of a power of
attorney, acts on behalf of his/her Principal, hence, the power
of attorney is a Special Power of agency, normally, deriving
power for the purpose of managing, buying or selling real and
personal property or for purposes of carrying on business or
for the purpose of securing loans, leases, mortgages and for
making investments and for securing insurance cover and also
for the purpose of suing and to be sued. Thus, a host of
functions, which are otherwise normally liable to be performed
in an individual capacity by a particular person, called as
Principal, are granted to be performed by another person in
the capacity as the agent of such a Principal.  This grant of
power in writing is what has come to be constituted and
recognized as the Power of Attorney.  To render the Principal
to be bound by all such actions of his agent and with a view to
secure the execution of instruments and their sealing, to
become lawful and also further to avoid any doubt as to the
liability of a donee of a power of attorney, who makes the
payments in good faith after the donor of the power of attorney
has died or becomes lunatic or becomes insolvent or has
revoked the said power, when the fact of such death, lunacy,
insolvency or revocation, was not known to the donee at the
time of making such payments, the
Power of Attorneys Act, 
1882
, has been made.  By granting such power, the donor has 
notified in rem that he has authorized and granted necessary
power to a donee to do all such acts as are required to be
performed by him, and when so performed by such donee, the  
donor, therefore, irrevocably undertakes to ratify all such
actions of the donee. Hence, the power of attorney holder can
act on behalf of his Principal without any reservations.  It
would help the Principal to perform all such acts and
functions through such an agent, in his own interest.
Section 2
of the Powers-of-Attorney Act, 1882, has dealt
with this aspect of the matter in the following manner:
2. Execution under power-of-attorney.-The donee of a
power-of-attorney may, if he thinks fit, execute or do any
instrument or thing in and with his own name and signature,
and his own seal, where sealing is required, by the authority
of the donor of the Power; and every instrument and thing so
executed and done, shall be as effectual in law as if it had
been executed or done by the donee of the power in the name,
and with the signature and seal, of the donor thereof".
Then, what are those acts and actions, which the
holder of a power of attorney can perform?
For this purpose one has to bear in mind the
distinction between all such actions, which are liable to be
performed by a person in his individual capacity as distinct
from those, which are liable to be performed in exercise of a
Statutory duty or function or such actions, which are liable to
be regulated by a Statute itself.
A Full Bench of the Madras High Court in
M.
KRISHNAMMAL V. T. BALASUBRAMANIA PILLAI
(AIR 1937          
Mad 937), speaking through the Chief Justice Beasley, has
clearly pointed out that a power of attorney holder cannot
plead on behalf of his Principal in the following words:
"..................and he claimed that the power of attorney
was of the same force and validity as that of a vakalat and
that, unless it was revoked by formal proceedings through
Court, no orders could be passed on the petition. Therefore, by
reason of the authority given to him in the power of attorney,
he claimed the same right as a legal practitioner who has been
given a vakalat; and since the power of attorney authorizes
him to plead in Court, it follows that he claims that right; and
indeed we are informed that either in these proceedings or in
some other, Lakshmana Rao, J. allowed him to address the 
Court. In view of the claim put forward by the respondent in
the affidavit referred to, the Master posted the matter before
Gentle, J. for orders and he has referred the matter to us and
it has been fully argued here by the learned counsel for the
petitioner, Krishnammal, the Bar Council, the Advocates'
Association and the Attorneys' Association; and we have also
heard the respondent in person.
We may say at once that there is an unreported Bench
decision of this High Court directly in point on the first
question in C.M.P. No. 498 of 1911, where it was held by
Benson and Sundara Ayyar, JJ. that a right to appear in
Court for his principal given to a recognized agent by Order 3,
Rules 1 and 2, Civil P. C, does not include a right to plead,
that it means simply that one can take proceedings to submit
oneself to jurisdiction that the High Court has under the
Letters Patent and the Legal Practitioners' Act and under
Sections 119 and 122, Civil P. C, power to make rules as to
who shall plead for parties before the High Court in its original
and appellate jurisdiction and in the lower Courts, that
Section 10, Letters Patent, makes provision with regard to who
alone can plead before the High Court and that others such as
recognized agents cannot have the right to plead. There are
also two decisions of the Calcutta High Court upon this point,
viz. Harchand Ray v. B.N. Ry. Co., (1916) 3 AIR Cal 181 and In
re Eastern Tavoy Minerals Corporation, Ltd., (1984) 21 AIR
Cal 563. In the former, a recognized power of attorney agent
claimed a right to plead in Court on behalf of his principal
under Order 3, Rule 1, Civil P.C., but it was held by Jenkins,
C.J. and Chaterjea, J. that he had no right of audience; and in
the latter ease, a director of a company holding a power of
attorney, authorizing him to appear for and on behalf of the
company, to conduct and represent the company in the 
proceedings, claimed the right of audience on behalf of the
company and, applying the ruling in the former case, it was
held that he had no right of audience. It is plain from these
three cases that Rules 1 and 2 of Order 3, Civil P. C, do not
give the recognized agent any right to plead in Court on behalf
of his principal either in the appellate or Original Sides of the
High Court............."
The Full Bench had approvingly noticed the two earlier
judgments rendered by the Calcutta High Court reported in
HARCHAND RAY V. B.N. RY. CO., (AIR 1916 Cal 181) and      
EASTERN TAVOY MINERALS CORPORATION, LTD., In re, AIR          
1934 Cal 563, in this context.  The Andhra Pradesh High
Court in HARI OM RAJENDER KUMAR AND OTHERS           
VS.CHIEF RATIONING OFFICER OF CIVIL SUPPLIES, A.P.,        
HYDERABAD (AIR 1990 AP 340), held as follows:
"5. Both American and English Courts have adopted the
doctrine that a non-lawyer may not appear in Court to
represent another person. Outside the court-house, non-
lawyers in earlier periods of Armerican history freely
performed tasks that today would be called the unathorised
practice of law. That general pattern still obtains in England
and other countries in Europe where there has been never a
prohibition against non-lawyers performing such legal
functions as giving legal advice or preparing some kinds of
legal documents.
13.
Now, the Advocates Act, 1961
, which is an Act to
amend and consolidate the law, repeals the above provisions
of the Letters Patent and parts of the
Legal Practitioners Act
.
Section 32
of the Advocates Act uses the word 'appear' while
Sees. 29 and 33 use the expression 'Practice'. The word
'Practice' includes both acting and pleading, and takes in all
the normal activities of a legal practitioner. Though
Sec. 33
of
the Advocates Act uses the word 'Practice', we are here
concerned with the word 'appear' used in
S. 32
. A non-
Advocate, when he seeks permission to 'appear' cannot, in my
view, be permitted to 'address' the Court on the strength of the
power-of-attorney. In Sornam's case, while observing that he
can 'appear' or 'act' Natesan, J. observed (p. 211).
"As a recognised agent, he can have appearance and he
can act; now he wants also to plead the cause before the
Court, that is factually to practice the profession of law."
14. Natesan, J, also stated that the Supreme Court in
Aswini Kumar Ghosh v. Arabinda Bose ( AIR 1952 SC 369 at
375), approved the meaning given to the word 'practice' by
Kumaraswami Sastry, J. in the Full Bench case in Re-Powers- 
of-Advocates, (1929) ILR 52 Mad 92 : 55 MLJ 551 : (AIR 1928
Mad 1182), to the following effect :--
"the word 'Practice' means appear, act, and plead,
unless there is anything in the subject or context to limit its
meaning."
15. Therefore the word 'appear' is only one aspect and
does not take in the concept of 'pleading' without which; it
cannot be equated to 'practising'. In Thayarammas case, (AIR
1937 Madras 937), also it was stated that 'Practice' means
drafting, engrossing, filing plaints, Judge's summons,
affidavits and generally issuing legal process, and all that a
legal practitioner does. Even one isolated act has, in England,
been held to constitute 'acting as a solicitor' rendering persons
guilty of such conduct liable to be dealt with under Sec. 26 of
the Solicitors Act, I860 for contempt of Court (In Re
Ainsworth, Ex parte Incoporated Law Society, 1905 KB 103) 
......................
16. What the power-of-attorney agent in this case seeks
to do is the same as in Tayarammal and Sornam cases -- He  
wants to be placed in the same position as an advocate; in
respect of not merely drafting and filing cases but pleading
and arguing in Court.  ...............  It is clear therefore, that his
acts amount to 'practising' the profession of law. In fact, the
power-of- attorney is executed in 1987 permitting the agent to
file, plead and argue all cases of the principals in future and
the deed is not confined to this or any particular case. Though
this Court has power to grant permission for non-lawyers to
plead/argue cases in certain special circumstances, the
present case is obviously not one such. Under the guise of
seeking permission in each case, the petitioner is continuously
pleading and arguing every case for the principals who are Dal
Mill owners^ and in a routine fashion, on the sole ground that
the principals have decided never to engage any lawyers before
any Court or tribunal. The parties are not seeking permission
on any special grounds applicable to this case alone. They
obviously want to engage the agent in all cases where
normally lawyers should have been engaged. That clearly is hit
by
S. 33
of the Advocates Act."
In the context of
Section 2
of the Powers of Attorney
Act, 1882, it is of importance to notice the following statement
of law, (made by Full Bench), in Re. The powers of newly
enrolled Statutory Advocates under the
Indian Bar Councils
Act
:
"..... I am of opinion that where an Act confers rights to
a party in general terms and entitles him to perform more
than one function, the cutting down of those rights by a rule
would make that rule repugnant to the provisions of the Act.
The following observations of Wills,J., in Reg. V. Bird Needes
Ex parte - [1898] 2 Q.B 340 = 67 L.J.Q.B. 618 = 14 T.L.R. 384
= 62 J.P. 422 = 46 W.R. 528 =  79 L.T. 156 are in point:
I desire in my judgment to adopt a broad principle
which is too clear to need cases to be cited for its justification
- the principle that where a power to make regulations is given
to a public body by statute, no regulations made under it can
abridge a right conferred by the statute itself."
In fact, the Supreme Court had authoritatively
pronounced its disapproval of allowing the powers of Attorney
Holders to plead on behalf of their Principals.  The Supreme
Court in
HARISHANKAR RASTOGI v. GIRDHARI SHARMA          
AND ANOTHER
(AIR 1978 SC 1019) has set out as to the    
undesirable effects that are beset in allowing a Power of
Attorney holder to plead.
Once again the Supreme Court had
set at rest all speculative aspects relating there to in
T.C.MATHAI v. DISTRICT AND SESSIONS JUDGE,        
THIRUVANANTHA- PURAM, KERALA
(1999 3 SCC 614), in the         
following passages:
8. The work in a Court of law is a serious and
responsible function. The primary duty of criminal Court is to
administer criminal justice. Any lax or wayward approach, if
adopted towards the issues involved in the case, can cause
serious consequences for the parties concerned. It is not just
somebody representing the party in the criminal Court who
becomes the pleader of the party. In the adversary system,
which is now being followed in India, both in civil and criminal
litigation, it is very necessary that the Court gets proper
assistance from both sides.
9. Legally qualified persons who are authorised to
practise in the courts by the authority prescribed under the
statute concerned can appear for parties in the proceedings
pending against them. No party is required to obtain prior
permission of the Court to appoint such persons to represent
him in Court.
Section 30
of the Advocates Act confers a right
on every advocate whose name is entered in the roll of
advocates maintained by a State Bar Council to practise in all
the Courts in India including the Supreme Court.
Section 33
says that no person shall be entitled to practise in any Court
unless he is enrolled as an advocate under that Act. Every
advocate so enrolled becomes a member of the Bar. Bar is one 
of the main wings of the system of justice. An advocate is the
officer of the Court and is hence accountable to the Court.
Efficacious discharge of judicial process very often depends
upon the valuable services rendered by the legal profession.
10. But if the person proposed to be appointed by the
party is not such a qualified person the Court has first to
satisfy itself whether the expected assistance would be
rendered by that person. The reason for the parliament for
fixing such a filter in the definition clause [
Sec. 2 (q)
of the
Code] that prior permission must be secured before a non-
advocate is appointed by the party to plead his cause in the
Court, is to enable the Court to verify the level of equipment of
such person for pleading on behalf of the party concerned.
11. V. R. Krishna Iyer, J. had occasion to deal with a
similar matter while considering a plea like this in a chamber
proceeding in the Supreme Court. In that case, a party sought
permission to be represented by another person in a criminal
case. Learned Judge then struck a note of caution in the
following terms in
Harishankar Rastogi v. Girdhari Sharma
,
AIR 1978 SC 1019 (Para 3) :
"If the man who seeks to represent has poor
antecedents or irresponsible behaviour or dubious character,
the Court may receive counter-productive service from him.
Justice may fail if a knave were to represent a party. Judges
may suffer if quarrelsome, ill-informed or blackguardly or
blockheadly private representatives fling arguments at the
Court. Likewise the party himself may suffer if his private
representative deceives him or destroys his case by
mendacious or meaningless submissions and with no   
responsibility or respect for the Court. Other situations,
settings and disqualifications may be conceived of where grant
of permission for a private person to represent another may be
obstructive, even destructive of justice."
12. Appellant submitted that he is the duly appointed
attorney of the respondent-couple by virtue of an instrument
of power of attorney executed by them and on its strength he
contended that his right to represent the respondent-couple in
the court would be governed by the said authority in the
instrument.
.
14. Under the English Law, "every person who is sui
juris has a right to appoint an agent for any purpose
whatsoever, and he can do so when he is exercising statutory
right no less than when he is exercising any other right",
[videJackson and Co. v. Napper - (1886) 35 Ch. D. 162 at page
172].
But this Court has pointed  out that the aforesaid
common law principle does not apply where the act to be
performed is personal in character, or when it is annexed to a
public office or to an office involving any fiduciary obligation,
[vide
Rayulu Subba Rao v. Commr. of Income-tax, Madras
, 
AIR 1956 SC 604].
..
..
..
..
In all these cases what has not been allowed to be done
or performed by a Power of Attorney holder is, to seek the right
of audience in a Court, while at the same time allowing him to
sue or be sued on behalf of his principal.  From times
immemorial, the right of audience in formal court proceedings
is granted in favour of a class of trained professionals, who
were known as Pleaders or Lawyers or Attorneys.  After the
advent of the
Advocates Act, 1961
, the right of audience in
formal court proceedings is liable to be confined only to the
professional class of advocates, who are admitted as Members 
and enrolled as such on the rolls by the Bar Council
concerned.  Therefore, grant of permission for audience is
liable to be confined in favour of such class, but not otherwise.
However, the conventional viewpoint that was holding
field was that, a party could enter appearance and solicit the
right of audience for himself.  Our legal system is not allergic
to receive the submissions of a party-in-person. Therefore, a
party, whether well versed or not, in legal matters and
whether trained or not, can enter appearance of himself and
seek to be heard, by a Court.  That is not forbidden.  To this
day, right up to the highest Court of our land, some parties,
who are confident of their articulative abilities enter
appearances on their own and are heard with the same kind of
attention a professional lawyer is paid.  But however, the
holder of a Power of Attorney, being not a party himself, but
merely an agent of another person, cannot seek such right of
audience.  Pleading in formal court proceedings is an aspect,
which is now regulated by a Statute.  The right to instruct a
Lawyer or an Attorney and to settle the pleadings in writing or
to affix the verifications for the general truth of the averments
is not a prohibitory exercise, but is a legitimate exercise liable
to be carried on by an agent.  Therefore, the power of attorney
holders have always been accorded the necessary permission  
to set forth the pleadings on behalf of their Principals.  An
agent is always allowed and permitted to make and set forth
the pleadings on behalf of his Principal in India.
Therefore,
deposing on behalf of the Principal in a Court being part of
exercise of tendering evidence is not a forbidden exercise to be
indulged in by an agent.  Such persons are entitled to be
cross-examined as the act and art of cross-examination being
essentially to ascertain the veracity of the
statements/submissions made by a witness and in that 
process, extract the whole of the truth.
Section 18
of the
Evidence Act, clearly permits and allows evidence to be
collected even from an agent.  Therefore, the contention
canvassed by the learned counsel for the Respondent placing
reliance upon a judgment in
K. BHARATHY, GUDIVADA AND      
ANOTHER
case cited (1 supra), is not tenable.  It is altogether
a different thing that a Power of Attorney holder is not liable to
be granted permission to plead in a Court, which is an
exercise, regulated by
Section 32
of the Advocates Act, while
the act of deposing as a witness on behalf of the Principal, is
not such a regulated exercise.
Therefore, the correct way to
understand the judgment in
K. BHARATHY, GUDIVADA AND       
ANOTHER
case cited (1 supra) is that the power of attorney
holder is not entitled to plead on behalf of the Principal, but
he can only lead evidence or settle the pleading in the form of
a plaint or written statement or petition.
In view of the above clear cut pronouncement, it is evident that
a GPA holder can depose and also lead evidence on behalf of his
principal.
Learned Family Court Judge also appears to have entertained
an apprehension as to whether the Family Court can entertain an
application presented by a legal practitioner in view of the provision
contained in
Section 13
of the Family Courts Act, 1984.
From the very preamble of the
Family Courts Act, 1984
, one
would gather that every endeavour is required to be made by the
Family Court to assist the parties in arriving at a speedy settlement
of disputes relating to the marriage and/or family affairs.  That
explains the reason
Section 9
of the said Act provided for an
appropriate legal environment for settlement of the disputes in an
amicable manner.  The parties are not only required to be assisted,
but also required to be persuaded by the Judge in arriving at a
settlement while keeping in view the importance of protecting and
preserving the institution of the marriage between the parties.  To the
extent possible, the Family Court is required to utilize its skills and
wisdom gained over long period of time by careful study of the ills of
the society and then finding suitable cure for them and hence, the
Family court must try to bring about a reconciliation of the
disagreements persisting between the parties.  However, when two
parties to a marriage come before a Family Court and ask for
dissolution of their marriage by mutual consent under
Section 13-B
of Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, the Court is required to adjourn the
motion moved by both parties by a period not earlier than six
months, as per sub
Section 2
of
Section 13-B
of the Hindu Marriage
Act.  Further, Sub
Section 2
requires that the Court shall, on being
satisfied, after hearing the parties and after making such enquiry as
it thinks fit with regard to the averments in the petition are true, pass
a decree of divorce declaring the marriage to be dissolved with effect
from the date of such decree.  Therefore, there may have been a
genuine apprehension in the mind of the Family Court Judge as to
whether there is any possibility of reconciliation between the parties
or change of mind with regard to consent expressed earlier for such
dissolution, when the petition is returned by it.
Keeping the very object behind the
Family Courts Act, 1984
,
read with the spirit behind
Section 13-B
of the Hindu Marriage Act,
the Family Court could have entertained the interlocutory application
in as much as legal practitioners are not totally forbidden from
rendering assistance to the Family Court.  One of the reasons why
Section 13
of the Family Courts Act, 1984, declared that no party to a
suit or proceeding shall be entitled as of right to be represented by a
legal practitioner sans technicalities or legal necessities, the parties
must be helped by the Court to reconcile the disputes persisting
between them.  Unlike a traditional setup of the Court, where the
Presiding Judge has to maintain not only an equiy distance between
the parties to a lis, but also maintain a sense of impartiality towards
the cause of both sides and essentially was required to maintain an
arms length distance from the parties, in a Family Court, the Judge
is donning the robes of a facilitator, a mentor and an expert
counselor.  A slight tilt in the approach to one of the parties in a
Family Court, depending upon the facts and circumstances prevailing
in the case and if the ends of justice would be better served by dosing
so, is allowable.  The emphasis being laid upon essentially preserving
the institution and interest of the marriage and the welfare and
wellbeing of the parties etc.  Hence, the Family Court is entitled to
receive, examine and act upon an affidavit filed by one of the parties
before it, acting through a GPA.  A petition moved in that regard is
maintainable.  I am in fact supported in my view, by the ruling in
Mrs. Padmakiran Rao v. B. Venkataramana Rao
, the Division 
Bench of this Court held as under:
As required by sub-section (2) of Section 13-A, the
petition was posted for enquiry on 25-6-1994 i.e., after six
months. At the enquiry the appellant herein (wife) examined
herself and she reiterated her desire to get divorce. However,
the respondent could not be present as he is residing in
United States. At the same time, an affidavit signed on 22nd
February 1994 and affirmed in the presence of a notary public
was filed by the respondent. The respondent made it clear that
the marriage had irretrievably broken down, that there are no
mutual obligations or claims against each other and sought an
order dissolving the marriage.
Relying on the wording - "after hearing the parties" in
Sub-section (2) of Section 13-B, the learned Subordinate
Judge took the view that both the parties to the marriage
should necessarily be present in the Court for examination
and the filing of affidavit will not be a substitute for that
requirement. The learned Judge observed that unless the
parties are personally present, it would be difficult for the
Court to assess whether they have changed their mind since
the date of filing the petition. We do not think that this is a
correct view to be taken. 'Hearing' does not necessarily mean
that both parties have to be examined. The word 'hearing' is
often used in a broad sense which need not always mean 
personal hearing. In any case, the evidence of one of the
parties i.e., the appellant herein was recorded by the Court.
Thus, even if the word 'hearing' is construed in a literal sense
that requirement must be deemed to have been satisfied in the
instant case in view of the examination of the appellant. On
the husband's side, there is evidence in the form of an
affidavit which can be legitimately taken into account in view
of
Order XIX Rule 1 C.P.C
. It is not as if the affidavit has been
doubted or the other party wanted to cross-examine the
deponent of the affidavit. When there are no suspicious
circumstances or any particular reason to think that the
averments in the affidavit may not be true, there is absolutely
no reason why the Court should not act on the affidavit filed
by one of the parties.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the Family Courts are
entitled to ascertain the views of the parties and for that purpose
adjourning a case by a reasonable period is not to be frowned upon.
But, however, if one of the parties, like in the present case, appears
before the Family court and expresses no objection for an affidavit of
the other party to be taken on record and is not desirous of cross
examining the deponent of the affidavit, the Family Court cam
entertain, unhesitatingly any such move/application.
Increasingly Family Courts have been noticing that one of the
parties is stationed abroad.  It may not be always possible for such
parties to undertake trip to India, for variety of good reasons.  On the
intended day of examination of a particular party, the proceedings
may not go on, or even get completed possibly, sometimes due to pre-
occupation with any other more pressing work in the Court.  But,
however, technology, particularly, in the Information sector has
improved by leaps and bounds.  Courts in India are also making
efforts to put to use the technologies available.  Skype is one such
facility, which is easily available.  Therefore, the Family Courts are
justified in seeking the assistance of any practicing lawyer to provide
the necessary skype facility in any particular case.  For that purpose,
the parties can be permitted to be represented by a legal practitioner,
who can bring a mobile device.  By using the skype technology,
parties who are staying abroad can not only be identified by the
Family Court, but also enquired about the free will and consent of
such party.  This will enable the litigation costs to be reduced greatly
and will also save precious time of the Court.  Further, the other
party available in the Court can also help the Court in not only
identifying the other party, but would be able to ascertain the
required information.  Accordingly, I direct the Family Court to
entertain the I.A. as it is maintainable and permit the GPA of the 2nd
petitioner in O.P. to represent and depose on behalf of the 2nd
petitioner in the O.P. and the Family Court shall also direct such GPA
or any legal practitioner chosen by him to make available the skype
facility for the Court to interact with the 2nd petitioner, who is staying
at Melbourne, Australia and record the consent of 2nd petitioner and
proceed with the matter thereafter as expeditiously as is possible.
Accordingly, the civil revision petition is allowed.  No order as
to costs.
Consequently, the miscellaneous petitions, if any pending shall
also stand closed.
_______________________________________       
JUSTICE NOOTY RAMAMOHANA RAO           
17.06.2015