[Cites
72
, Cited by
20
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Potlabathuni Srikanth And Others vs Shriram City Union Finance Limited And ... on 1 October, 2015
Equivalent citations: AIR 2016 HYDERABAD 73, (2016) 1 ARBILR 362, (2016) 3 CIVLJ 493, (2016) 2 ANDHLD 10
Bench:
R. Subhash Reddy
,
A. Shankar   Narayana
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE R. SUBHASH REDDY AND HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A. SHANKAR   NARAYANA                   

CIVIL REVISION PETITION Nos.1340 OF 2015 and batch     

01-10-2015 

Potlabathuni Srikanth and others ..Petitioners

Shriram City Union Finance Limited and others .. Respondents


!Counsel for the petitioners
in C.R.P. Nos.1340 and 1779 of 2015 :  Sri K. Rajanna

Counsel for the petitioners
 in C.R.P. Nos.1533 and 2140 of 2015:  Sri M. Radhakrishna

Counsel for the petitioners
 in C.R.P. No.2841of 2015 :  Sri Krishna Devan


Counsel for respondent No.1: Sri Maheswara Rao Kuncham          

<GIST: 


> HEAD NOTE:   


?  CASES REFERRED:     

1.  AIR 1970 SC 1475 
2.  AIR 2015 SC 260 = 2014 Law Suit (SC) 737 
3.  2005 Law Suit (Mad) 1447
4.  2003 Law Suit (AP) 1181 = 2004 (4) ALT 609
5.  2007 Law Suit (Mad) 3680
6.  AIR 2005 KERALA 290   
7.  AIR 2005 ORISSA 30  
8.  AIR 2001 KARNATAKA 364    
9.  AIR 2015 PATNA 131  
10.  2009(2) Arb. LR 334 (Bombay) 
11.  2010(1) ALT 808 (DB) = 2010 (1) ALD 522 (DB) 
12.  2014 (6) ALT 69 (DB)
13.  2010 (1) ALD 153 (DB)
14.  2001 (6) ALD 272
15.  1995 (Supp.) 2 SCC 348 
16.  AIR 2014 SC 1093 
17.  2000 (1) KLT 691
18.  2003 (2) ALD 818
19.  2007(2) Arb. LR 362 (Bom.) (FB) = AIR 2007 BOMBAY 149    
20.  2004 (2) ALT 174
21.  AIR 2008 MP 328 
22.  1998 (2) ALT 586
23.  1992 (1) An.WR 220 


HONBLE SRI JUSTICE R. SUBHASH REDDY         
AND  
HONBLE SRI JUSTICE A. SHANKAR NARAYANA           

CIVIL REVISION PETITION Nos.1340, 1779, 1533,    

2140 AND 2841 OF 2015   

COMMON ORDER:
(Per Honble Sri Justice A. Shankar Narayana)     


        Since point of law is common in all these revisions, they are
being disposed of by this common order.
2.  Aggrieved of the orders passed by the learned Senior Civil
Judge of Mangalagiri, Peddapuram, Gajuwaka and Chittoor, 
respectively, these Civil Revision Petitions are filed by the respective
judgment-debtor(s) in C.F.R. No.2546 of 2014 in E.P. No.50 of 2014,
C.F.R. No.2548 of 2014 in E.P. No.42 of 2014, E.P. No.31 of 2013,
E.P. No.115 of 2013 and E.P. No.61 of 2012,  under
Section 115
of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short
CPC
), mainly, on the
ground of lack of inherent jurisdiction in view of definition of Court
as envisaged under
Section 2(1)(e)
of The Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short the Act).
C.R.P. No.1340 of 2015:
3.  (a)  The revision petitioner herein is petitioner - judgment-
debtor No.3 in C.F.R. No.2546 of 2014 in E.P. No.50 of 2014 on the
file of Senior Civil Judge, Mangalagiri, and respondent No.3 in
A.O.P. No.374 of 2012.
(b)  The decree-holder viz., Shriram City Union Finance
Limited, Mangalagiri Branch, through its authorized representative,
filed A.O.P. No.374 of 2012 invoking the arbitration clause contained
in the agreement between the parties.
(c)  The arbitrator has passed the award, dated 16-09-2013, for
a sum of Rs.3,52,562/- with future interest at 30% per annum for each
defaulted installment from the date of reference of the claim till
realization in full with costs of Rs.6,132/-.
(d)  Enforcing the said award, the decree holder filed E.P.
No.50 of 2014 on the file of Senior Civil Judge, Mangalagiri, Guntur
District.  During pendency of the proceedings, revision petitioner
(judgment-debtor No.3) filed C.F.R. No.2546 of 2014 under
Section
47
of CPC, questioning executability of the award.  In the said
application, the very appointment of arbitrator, who is arrayed as
respondent No.2 therein, was questioned on the ground that the
arbitrator has not given his consent as required by the provisions of
sub-section (2) of
Section 28
of the Act.  The other ground raised by
him was that the arbitrator did not adhere to the procedure maintained
by the provisions of
Sections 18
,
19
and
20
of the Act.
(e)  The learned Senior Civil Judge, placing reliance on the
decision of the Honble Supreme Court in
Vasudev Dhanjbhai Modi 
v. Rajabhai Abdul Rehman
held that the objections raised by the
revision petitioner are unsustainable and, therefore, rejected the
application.  Assailing the same, this revision is filed.
C.R.P. No.1779 of 2015:
4.  (a)  This revision is filed by the petitioner-judgment
debtor No.1 in C.F.R. No.2548 of 2014 in E.P. No.42 of 2014 on the
file of Senior Civil Judge, Mangalagiri, and respondent No.1 in
A.O.P. No.260 of 2012.
(b)  The decree-holder viz., Shriram City Union Finance
Limited, Mangalagiri Branch, through its authorized representative,
filed A.O.P. No.260 of 2012 invoking the arbitration clause contained
in the agreement between the parties.
(c)  The arbitrator has passed the award, dated 17-09-2013, for
a sum of Rs.3,36,182/- with future interest at 30% per annum for each
defaulted installment from the date of reference of the claim till
realization in full with costs of Rs.5,968/-.
(d)  Enforcing the award, the decree-holder filed E.P. No.42 of
2014 on the file of Senior Civil Judge, Mangalagiri, Guntur District.
During pendency of the proceedings, judgment debtor No.1 filed
C.F.R. No.2548 of 2014 under
Section 47
of CPC, objecting to
executability of the award passed by the arbitrator.
(e)  The learned Senior Civil Judge, placing reliance on the
decision of the Honble Supreme Court in
Vasudev Dhanjbhai
Modis
Case (Supra 1) held that the objections raised by the revision
petitioner (judgment debtor No.1) are unsustainable and consequently,
rejected the application in limini.  Assailing the same, this revision is
filed.
C.R.P. No.1533 of 2015:
5.  (a)  Assailing the order, dated 10-02-2015, in E.P. No.31 of
2013 in A.R.C. No.1045 of 2011, passed by the learned Senior Civil
Judge, Peddapuram, East Godavari District, this revision is filed by
both the judgment-debtors.
(b)  Though the revision petitioner (judgment-debtor No.2)
opposed the request of the respondent - decree-holder in execution
petition (EP) on the ground that the decree-holder without exhausting
the remedy available to him under law, is disentitled to file the EP for
sale of the petition schedule property, the executing Court, having
found that there was no substance in the resistance offered by the
revision petitioner, rejected the objections and made the attachment
effected in respect of the petition schedule property by order, dated
04-02-2013, under Rule - 54 of Order - XXI
CPC
, absolute and
directed to issue sale notice.
C.R.P. No.2140 of 2015:
(6)  Assailing the docket order, dated 13-04-2015, in
E.P. No.115 of 2013 in A.A. No.788 of 2011, passed by the learned
Senior Civil Judge, Gajuwaka, Visakhapatnam, this revision is filed
by both the judgment-debtors.  By the order impugned, the executing
Court directed to issue warrant of arrest of the revision petitioners
(judgment-debtors) under Rules - 37 and 38 of Order - XXI
of CPC
,
on payment of batta subsistence allowance and transit fare by
22-06-2015.
CRP No.2841 of 2015:
7.  Assailing the order, dated 26-11-2013, in E.P. No.61 of 2012
in A.R.C. No.296 of 2012, passed by the learned Principal Senior
Civil Judge, Chittoor, this revision is filed by judgment-debtor No.2.
By the order impugned, the executing Court issued warrant of
attachment of salary of judgment-debtor No.1 at Rs.5,700/- per
month, and against the revision petitioner (judgment-debtor No.2),
attachment was ordered subject to Section 60 of CPC on the ground 
that his salary certificate was not received by it.
8.  Thus, the orders under challenge in C.R.P. Nos.1340 and
1779 of 2015 are passed by one and the same Court rejecting the
applications filed under
Section 47
of CPC and since the grounds
agitated in both the revisions are identical, we would like to advert to
the grounds in C.R.P. No.1340 of 2015.
9.  (a)  According to the revision petitioners in C.R.P. Nos.1340
and 1779 of 2015, the decision of the Honble Supreme Court in
Vasudev Dhanjbhai Modis
Case (Supra 1) relied on by the
executing Court is not at all applicable to the facts and circumstances
occurring in each of the cases.
(b)  The next ground urged by them is that appointment of
respondent No.2 as arbitrator was without notice to them and,
therefore, the said appointment is in violation of the Act and the Rules
made thereunder and, therefore, the very ex parte order passed in the
respective petitions are illegal and arbitrary.
(c)  The third ground urged by them is that the learned Senior
Civil Judge, Mangalagiri, has no jurisdiction to entertain the EPs since
he, somehow, did not take note of the definition of Court occurring in
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Act, which envisages that Court means
the Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a district, and
includes the High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil
jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the
subject-matter of a suit, but does not include any civil Court of a grade
inferior to such Principal Civil Court, or any Court of Small Causes,
and, thus, the learned Senior Civil Judge, Mangalagiri has no
jurisdiction to entertain the EPs.
(d)  Stating that as per the definition, the Principal District
Court at Guntur has jurisdiction to entertain the EPs, but not the
learned Senior Civil Judge, Mangalagiri, as such, the execution
applications filed by them under
Section 47
of CPC are liable to be
allowed and, thus, sought to set aside the orders under challenge.
10.  In C.R.P. No.1533 of 2015, revision petitioners challenged
the order impugned therein, on the ground that the executing Court
has no jurisdiction to entertain the EP in view of the definition of
Court as defined under
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Act.
11.  In C.R.P. No.2140 of 2015, though the revision petitioners
have not specifically referred to
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Act, contended
that the executing Court has exercised jurisdiction illegally with
material irregularity, and, as such, the order under revision is liable to
be set aside.  The other grounds agitated by the revision petitioners are
unnecessary to advert in adjudicating upon the main controversy in
these revisions.
12.  In C.R.P. No.2841 of 2015, though the petitioner has not
raised the plea that the executing Court lacks jurisdiction to entertain
the EP and raised various other pleas.  Since the executing Court was
the Principal Senior Civil Judge, Chittoor and inferior to the Court to
that of a District Court, we are of the view to take up this revision
along with other revisions as we are invited to examine competency of
the Senior Civil Judges Court to entertain EPs when the awards
passed by the arbitrators are sought to be enforced under
Section 36
of
the Act.
13.  Heard Sri K. Rajanna, learned counsel for the petitioners in
C.R.P. Nos.1340 and 1779 of 2015, Sri M. Radhakrishna, learned 
counsel for the petitioners in C.R.P. Nos.1533 and 2140 of 2015,
Sri Krishna Devan, learned counsel for the petitioner in C.R.P.
No.2841 of 2015; and Sri K. Maheswara Rao Kuncham, learned   
counsel for respondent No.1 - M/s. Sriram City Union Finance
Limited in C.R.Ps. 1340, 1779 and 2841 of 2015 and M/s. Shriram 
Transport Finance Company Limited in C.R.P. Nos.1533 and 2140 of  
2015.
14.  The arguments advanced by Sri K. Rajanna, learned
counsel for the petitioners in C.R.P. Nos.1340 and 1779 of 2015, are
adopted by the learned counsel for the petitioners in other revisions.
15.  Learned counsel would submit that as per the definition of
Court as defined in
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Act, Court means, the
Principal Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction in a District and includes
the High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction,
having jurisdiction to decide the question forming the subject matter
of arbitration, if the same had been the subject matter of a suit, but
does not include any civil Court of a grade inferior to such civil Court
or any Court of small causes, and, therefore, the orders under
challenge passed by the Senior Civil Judges Courts, which are
inferior to the Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a
District, lack jurisdiction to entertain the execution petitions, and,
therefore, sought to set aside the orders.
16.  To fortify his submission, learned counsel has placed
reliance on a decision of Honble Supreme Court and the decisions
rendered by various High Courts; in
State of West Bengal v.
Associated Contractors
,
State of Tamil Nadu, v. R. Sundaram
,
Sri Prashanth Spinners Limited v. Chunnilal Pranjivandass
and
Company , P. Kandasamy v. Neyveli Lignite Corporation 
Limited
,
Mahesh B. Shah v. C.V. Joseph
, M/s.
Nila Chakra
Construction v. State of Orissa and others
,
I.C.D.S. Limited v.
Mangala Builders Private Limited and others
,
Radha Devi v.
Punay Pratap Mandal
and
Rajashree Shrinivas Joshi and others 
v. Omega Information Systems
.
17.  On the other hand, learned counsel for respondent No.1
would submit that in view of the provisions of
Section 16
of
A.P. Civil Courts Act 1972, dealing with the limits of pecuniary
jurisdiction of Civil Courts and provisions of
Section 37
of CPC
dealing with the expression Court which passed the decree, arbitral
awards can be enforced under
Section 36
of the Act by filing EPs
before the Court concerned having pecuniary and territorial
jurisdiction limits.  To substantiate his submission, learned counsel
placed reliance on the decisions of Division Benches of this Court in
Bhoomatha Para Boiled Rice and Oil Mill v. M/s. Maheshwari 
Trading Company , M. Rama Rao v. Sriram City Union Finance  
Limited and others , Lakhamraju Sujatha v. Yuvaraj Finance
Private Limited , and
Kvaerner Cementation India Limited v.
Bharat Heavy Plate and Vessels Limited
.
18.  It is his submission that
Section 36
of the Act provides for
enforcement of an award shall be in the same manner as if it were
decree of a Court under
CPC
, and, thus, makes it abundantly clear that
for enforcement of award, the same can be filed before the Court
having pecuniary and territorial jurisdictions, and, therefore, the
Court as defined under the provisions of
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Act
would not attract the enforcement of awards by the Principal District
Court alone.
19.  In all these revision petitions, we are confronted with the
question as to which Court will have jurisdiction to entertain and
decide an application under
Section 36
of the Act.
20.  Adverting to the submissions and the decisions relied on by
the learned counsel for the revision petitioners, in
Associated
Contractors
Case (Supra 2), the Honble Supreme Court, on
reference, as to which Court will have the jurisdiction to entertain an
application under
Section 34
of the Act for setting aside the award,
had the occasion to deal with the definition of Court as defined
under
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Act.
While stating that the definition is
an exhaustive one as it uses the expression means and includes is
meant to be exhaustive in nature and placing reliance on its earlier
decision in
P. Kasilingam and others v. P.S.G. College of
Technology and others
observed that the definition in the Act fixes
Court to be the Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction and
would not include any civil Court of a grade inferior to such Principal
Civil Court or a Small Causes Court.
21.
In the said context, the Honble Supreme Court referred to
its earlier decision in
Executive Engineer, Road Development
Division No.III and another v. Atlanta Limited
, wherein the
Honble Supreme Court has taken a view that
Section 2(1)(e)
of the
Act contains a scheme different from that contained in
Section 15
of
CPC.
The facts in
Atlanta Limiteds
Case (Supra 16) would
show that the State of Maharashtra had moved an application under
Section 34
of the Act before the District Judge, Thane; on the same
day, since Atlanta Limited had moved an application before the High
Court of Bombay for setting aside some of the directions contained in
the award, the Honble Supreme Court held that Court for the
purpose of
Section 42
of the Act would be the High Court and not
District Court.  It would be appropriate to refer to the observations
made by the Honble Supreme Court contained in paragraph Nos.25  
and 26, thus:
25. All the same, it is imperative for us to determine,
which of the above two courts which have been
approached by the rival parties, should be the one, to
adjudicate upon the disputes raised. For an answer to
the controversy in hand, recourse ought to be made
first of all to the provisions of the
Arbitration Act
.
On the failure to reach a positive conclusion, other
principles of law, may have to be relied upon. Having
given out thoughtful consideration to the issue in
hand, we are of the view, that the rightful answer can
be determined from
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Arbitration
Act, which defines the term Court. We shall
endeavour to determine this issue, by examining how
litigation is divided between a High Court exercising
ordinary original civil jurisdiction, and the
principal civil court of original jurisdiction in a
district. What needs to be kept in mind is, that the
High Court of Bombay is vested with ordinary
original civil jurisdiction over the same area, over
which jurisdiction is also exercised by the principal
Civil Court of original jurisdiction for the District of
Greater Mumbai (i.e. the Principal District Judge,
Greater Mumbai). Jurisdiction of the above two
courts on the ordinary original civil side is over the
area of Greater Mumbai. Whilst examining the
submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the
appellant under
Section 15
of the Code of Civil
Procedure, we have already concluded, that in the
above situation, jurisdiction will vest with the High
Court and not with the District Judge. The aforesaid
choice of jurisdiction has been expressed in
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Arbitration Act, without any
fetters whatsoever.  It is not the case of the appellants
before us, that because of pecuniary dimensions,
and/or any other consideration(s), jurisdiction in the
two alternatives mentioned above, would lie with the
Principal District Judge, Greater Mumbai. Under the
scheme of the provisions of the
Arbitration Act
therefore, if the choice is between the High Court (in
exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction)
on the one hand, and the principal civil court of
original jurisdiction in the District i.e. the District
Judge on the other;
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Arbitration
Act has made the choice in favour of the High Court.
This in fact impliedly discloses a legislative intent.
To our mind therefore, it makes no difference, if the
principal civil court of original jurisdiction, is in
the same district over which the High Court exercises
original jurisdiction, or some other district.  In case
an option is to be exercised between a High Court
(under its ordinary original civil jurisdiction) on the
one hand, and a District Court (as principal Civil
Court of original jurisdiction) on the other, the
choice under the
Arbitration Act
has to be exercised
in favour of the High Court.
26.  In the present controversy also, we must choose
the jurisdiction of one of two courts i.e. either the
ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High
Court of Bombay; or the principal civil court of
original jurisdiction in District Thane i.e. the District
Judge, Thane.  In view of the inferences drawn by us,
based on the legislative intent emerging out of
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Arbitration Act, we are of the
considered view, that legislative choice is clearly in
favour of the High Court.  We are, therefore of the
view, that the matters in hand would have to be
adjudicated upon by the High Court of Bombay 
alone.
22.  The Honble Supreme Court in
Associated Contractors
Case (Supra 2), concurring with the reasoning in the case of
Atlanta
Limited
(Supra 16), observed in paragraph No.15, thus:
15. A recent judgment of this Hon'ble Court
reported in
Executive Engineer, Road Development 
Division No. III, Panvel & Anr. v. Atlanta Limited
,
AIR 2014 SC 1093 has taken the view that
Section 
2(1)(e)
contains a scheme different from that
contained in
Section 15
of the Code of Civil
Procedure.
Section 15
requires all suits to be filed in
the lowest grade of court.  This Hon'ble Court has
construed
Section 2(1)(e)
and said that where a High
Court exercises ordinary original civil jurisdiction
over a district, the High Court will have preference to
the Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in
that district.  In that case, one of the parties moved an
application under
Section 34
before the District
Judge, Thane.  On the same day, the opposite party
moved an application before the High Court of
Bombay for setting aside some of the directions
contained in the Award.  In the circumstances, it was
decided that the "Court" for the purpose of
Section 42
would be the High Court and not the District Court.
Several reasons were given for this.  Firstly, the very
inclusion of the High Court in the definition would be
rendered nugatory if the above conclusion was not to
be accepted, because the Principal Civil Court of
original jurisdiction in a district is always a court
lower in grade than the High Court, and such District
Judge being lower in grade than the High Court
would always exclude the High Court from
adjudicating upon the matter. Secondly, the
provisions of the
Arbitration Act
leave no room for
any doubt that it is the superior most court exercising
original jurisdiction which has been chosen to
adjudicate disputes arising out of arbitration
agreements. We respectfully concur with the
reasoning contained in this judgment.
The conclusions arrived at by the Honble Supreme Court are
contained in paragraph No.25, thus:
25. Our conclusions therefore on
Section 2(1)(e)
and
Section 42
of the Arbitration Act, 1996 are as
follows:
(a)
Section 2(1)(e)
contains an exhaustive definition
marking out only the Principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction in a district or a High Court having
original civil jurisdiction in the State, and no other
court as "court" for the purpose of
Part-I of the
Arbitration Act, 1996
.
(b) The expression "with respect to an arbitration
agreement" makes it clear that
Section 42
will apply
to all applications made whether before or during
arbitral proceedings or after an Award is pronounced
under Part-I of the 1996 Act.
(c) However,
Section 42
only applies to applications
made under Part-I if they are made to a court as
defined.  Since applications made under
Section 8
are
made to judicial authorities and since applications
under
Section 11
are made to the Chief Justice or his
designate, the judicial authority and the Chief Justice
or his designate not being court as defined, such
applications would be outside
Section 42
.
(d)
Section 9
applications being applications made to
a court and
Section 34
applications to set aside
arbitral awards are applications which are within
Section 42
.
(e) In no circumstances can the Supreme Court be 
"court" for the purposes of Section 2(1)(e), and
whether the Supreme Court does or does not retain
seisin after appointing an Arbitrator, applications will
follow the first application made before either a High
Court having original jurisdiction in the State or a
Principal Civil court having original jurisdiction in
the district as the case may be.
(f) Section 42 will apply to applications made after
the arbitral proceedings have come to an end
provided they are made under Part-I.
(g) If a first application is made to a court which is
neither a Principal Court of original jurisdiction in a
district or a High Court exercising original
jurisdiction in a State, such application not being to a
court as defined would be outside
Section 42
.  Also,
an application made to a court without subject matter
jurisdiction would be outside
Section 42
.
The reference is answered accordingly.
23.
In
Sundarams
Case (Supra 3), a Division Bench of
Madras High Court, while deciding the question as to whether the
Principal Sub Court had competence or inherent jurisdiction to deal
with it and also the expression Court as contained in
Section 36
of
the Act, held in paragraph No.13, thus:
13.  By examining the matter from any angle, it is
thus apparent that the Court in which application
under
Section 34
of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act can be filed is the principal Civil Court of
original jurisdiction in a district.  Moreover, as per
the definition clause contained in the
Arbitration and
Conciliation Act
, any Civil Court of a grade inferior
to the principal Civil Court is specifically excluded.
In view of the specific provision contained in
Section
2(e)
of the Act read with
Section 2(4)
of the Code of
Civil Procedure, it must be taken that the expression
"Court" as contained in
Sections 34
and
36
of the Act
is the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in
a district, that is to say, the District Court or the
District Judge.
The High Court of Madras referred to the decision in
Sulekha v.
Union of India
, rendered by the High Court of Kerala, wherein the
Kerala High Court, has struck down the Rule framed by the High
Court specifying the Principal Subordinate Judge as the authority to
deal with the matters under
Sections 9
,
34
and
36
of the Act; extracted
the observations of the High Court, thus;
Therefore, it is clear that the Court is the Principal
Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a District.  Rule
specifically says that it "does not include any Civil
Court of a grade inferior to such Principal Civil Court
...." Principal Civil Court in a district is the District
Court. This is clear from the definition given in
Section 2(4)
of the Code of Civil Procedure.  The
District Court has got original jurisdiction in certain
types of civil matters.  There can be no dispute for
the proposition that Principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction in a District is the District Court.
Therefore, the 'Court' for the purpose of the Act is
only the District Court being the Principal Civil
Court of the District and not the Subordinate Court
which is inferior in statute to the District Court.
Since the Court of inferior character of Principal
Civil Court cannot be treated as a 'Court' in view of
the specific exclusion under
Section 2(e)
of the Act,
Rule 2(c) of the Rules is inconsistent with the
provisions of the Act and invalid.  Hence it is
declared that Rule 2(c) of the Rules is invalid and in
view of
Section 2(e)
of the Act the District Court -
Principal Civil Court in the District - will continue to
exercise jurisdiction until rules are amended
otherwise on all matters which are to be decided by a
'Court' under the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996
except the appointment of an Arbitrator under
Section 11
of the said Act.  Therefore, I am of the
opinion that fourth respondent District Court has
jurisdiction to decide the Arbitration O.P. and the
Arbitration O.P. has to be decided according to law
by that Court itself without transferring the same to
the Sub-Court.
24.  A single Judge of this Court in
Sri Prashanth Spinners
Limiteds
Case (Supra 4), observing that the Court of Senior Civil
Judge, Puttur, is not the Principal Court having original jurisdiction
within the meaning of
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Act, held in paragraph
No.6, thus:
6. Section 2 of the Act deals with Definitions and
Section 2(1)(e) defines "Court" as:
"In this part, unless the context otherwise requires,
"Court" means the Principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction in a District and includes the High Court
in exercise of its ordinary civil jurisdiction, having
jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the
subject matter of the arbitration if the same had been
the subject matter of a suit, but does not include any
Civil Court of a grade inferior to such principal Civil
Court or any Court of Small Causes".
There cannot be any doubt or controversy that
definitely the Senior Civil Judge, Puttur is not the
principal Court of original jurisdiction of the District
within the meaning of
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Act.  In
the decision referred supra, while dealing with a
similar question, this Court held at para 12:
"A plain reading of
Section 3
, Clause (17) of the
General Clauses Act
shows that the Principal Civil
Court of original jurisdiction means the District Court
inasmuch as the district Judge is the Presiding Officer
of that Court.  Both the provisions (
Section 3(17)
of
General Clauses Act and
Section 2(4)
of CPC) make  
it manifest that a District Court in a district is the
principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction.  When
the Court considers the expression "the Principal
Civil Court of original jurisdiction in district"
appearing in the first part of Clause (e) of
Section
2
of the Act the definition of the word "Court" in
conjunction with the meaning given in
Section 2
,
Clause (4)(
of the C.P.C
. and Clause (17) of
Section
3
of the General Clauses Act, it is obvious that it is
the Court of District Judge, that is, the Principal Civil
Court of original jurisdiction in a District.  Not only
that, the definition as given under
Section 2(e)
expressly excludes any other Civil Court of a grade
inferior to such Principal Civil Court or any Court of
Small Causes.  Therefore, the last limb of
Section
2(e)
is more emphatic that it shall be only the
Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a
district and no other Court.  This, therefore, leaves no
room for any doubt that the expression "Court" as
envisaged under
Section 2(e)
means only the
"Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction" in a
district which is obviously the District Court.  There
is no reason to construe the expression "the Principal
Civil Court of original jurisdiction" in a district
which is obviously the District Court.  There is no
reason to construe the expression "the Principal Civil
Court of original jurisdiction" as envisaged under
Section 2(e)
of the Act in a different sense than what
has been envisaged by the two provisions under the
code of Civil procedure and the
General Clauses Act
referred to hereinabove.
25.  Thus, the learned single Judge placing reliance on
decision rendered by a single Judge of this Honble Court in
Ankati Satyamaiah v. Sallangula Lalaiah and another
,
concluded that entertainment of E.P. by the Senior Civil Judge at
Puttur is without authority and jurisdiction and that the District
Court at Chittoor would be the Principal Court of original
jurisdiction of the District.
26.
In
P. Kandasamys
Case (Supra 5), a single Judge of
Madras High Court, in a similar situation, held that the Principal
District Court, Cuddalore, is competent to deal with an arbitration
application, placing reliance on the decision in
Sundarams
Case
(Supra 3) rendered by a Division Bench of Madurai Bench of
Madras High Court, wherein it was held that the expression
Court, as contained in
Sections 34
and
36
of the Act, is the
Principal Court of original jurisdiction in a District i.e., the
District Court or the District Judge.
27.
In
Mahesh B. Shahs
Case (Supra 6), a single judge
of High Court of Kerala took a similar view holding that the
Munsiffs Court, Cherthala, has no jurisdiction to enforce the
award passed by an arbitration committee for recovery of money.
In
Nila Chakra Constructions
Case (Supra 7), a single Judge
of High Court of Orissa took same view having dealt with the
provisions of
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Act,
Section 2(4)
of CPC and
Section 2(10)
of Orissa General Clauses Act, 1937 holding that
the District Judge, Phulbani is the Principal Civil Court of
original jurisdiction and not the Civil Judge (Senior Division)
Phulbani.
28.
In
Mangala Builders Private Limiteds
Case (Supra
8),  a single Judge of Karnataka High Court, has expressed a
similar view in the context of enforcement of an award under
Section 36
of the Act holding that the II Additional Civil Judge
(Senior Division), Mangalore has no jurisdiction to entertain EPs
under
Section 36
of the Act, and that the Principal District Judge
exercising jurisdiction over Mangalore alone would have
jurisdiction to entertain the EPs.
29.
In
Rajashree Shrinivas Joshis
Case (Supra 10),
a single Judge of Bombay High Court in the context of
application filed to enforce an award under
Section 36
of the Act,
placing reliance on a decision of a Full Bench of the same High
Court in
Fountain Head Developers v. Maria Arcangela
Sequeira
, held that the District Court is the Court for the
purpose of executing the award passed under the Act.  The Full
Bench of Honble Bombay High Court while answering the 
question whether it is the Civil Judge (Senior Division) or the
District Court, which should be construed as being the Principal
Court of original jurisdiction for the purpose of petition under
Section 34
of the Act elaborately dealt with the definition and
meaning of Court and the expression the Principal Civil Court
of original jurisdiction in a District occurring in
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Act.  The observations contained in paragraph Nos.12, 13,
14 and 17 are relevant for the purpose of present case, we fell it
apt to extract them, which are thus:
12.  In our opinion, a plain and literal reading of all
the aforesaid words/expressions/terms employed in
Section 2(e)
clearly demonstrate the exact meaning of
the term "court".  It means the district court is the
principal civil court of original jurisdiction in a
district and not a civil court of a grade inferior to
such principal civil court.  The court of Civil Judge,
Senior Division may also be a civil court of original
jurisdiction, but in any case it could not be termed as
the principal civil court of original jurisdiction in a
district.
13. The Parliament, in the Act of 1996, has
intendedly used the terms "Court" and not the
"District Court" as we usually find in various other
enactments.  From a plain and literal reading of the
definition of "Court" it is apparent that  the  definition
is inclusive.  It specifically includes in the High
Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil
jurisdiction.  Under
Section 3(17)
of the General
Clauses Act, 1897 and
Section 3(15)
of the Bombay 
General Clauses Act, 1904 the term "District Judge"
means the Judge of a principal civil court of original
jurisdiction.  The High Court in exercise of its
ordinary original jurisdiction is not included in these
definitions.  To get out of these definitions and with a
view to include the High Court, the Parliament in the
Act of 1996 has not used the term "District Court"
and has used only "Court" to mean and include the
High Court in exercise of its ordinary original
jurisdiction.
14. Thus, from the language of the definition of
"Court" under
Section 2(e)
of the Act of 1996 the
Parliament apparently intended to confer the power
on the highest judicial authority in a district.  It must
certainly be taken to have been conscious of the
object to be achieved while framing the definition of
the term "Court".  Besides, it intended to minimise
supervisory role of the courts in arbitral process, it
also intended to add the greatest credibility to this
process.  We find support for the view in the
judgments of the Supreme Court.  The Supreme  
Court while dealing with the provisions of
Section 11
of the Act of 1996, in
S.B.P. & Company (AIR 2006
SC
450) (supra) in paragraph 12 of the judgment has
observed that "the court is defined in the Act to be the
principal Civil Court of original civil jurisdiction of
the district and includes the High Court in exercise of
its ordinary original civil jurisdiction.  The principal
Civil Court of original civil jurisdiction is normally
the District Court.  The High Courts in India
exercising ordinary original civil jurisdiction are not
too many.  So in most of the States the concerned
court would be the District Court".
Similarly, the
Supreme Court in Garhwal Mandal v. Krishna Travel
Agency in Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 18344
of 2004 decided on 24.1.2007, while dealing with the
question whether it could entertain all objections to
the award and holding that even if the appointment of
the Arbitrator is made by High Court or the Supreme
Court, the principal civil court of original jurisdiction
remains the same as contemplated under
Section 2(e)
of the Act of 1996, has observed that the principal
civil court of original jurisdiction remains the
"District Court" even if the appointment of the
Arbitrator is made by the High Court.  It is thus clear
that the Legislature clearly circumscribed and
specifically narrowed down the definition of "Court"
to mean only the Court of principal civil original
jurisdiction in a district and it is only the court of
"District Judge" in a district which is such a "Court"
of principal civil jurisdiction.
17. We would also now like to consider the
provisions of
Section 37
and more particularly
Sub-section (3) thereof which provides that no
second appeal shall lie from the order passed in the
appeal under this section, but nothing in this section
shall affect or take away any right to appeal in the
Supreme Court.  Mr. Deo, learned Counsel submitted 
that the question of filing second appeal would arise
only if a Civil Judge, Senior Division is held to be the
principal civil court of original civil jurisdiction in a
district and not otherwise.  In other words, he
submitted that it is only against the order of the Civil
Judge, Senior Division, the appeal contemplated
under
Section 37
would be maintainable before the
District Court and against that order the second
appeal under
Section 100
of the Code of Civil
Procedure would lie to the High Court and that is the
reason why the Legislature has specifically curtailed
the remedy of second appeal.  We are unable to agree
with this submission made by Mr. Deo for more than
one reason.  It is true that
Sections 37(3)
expressly
prohibits a "second appeal" from an order passed in
appeal under
Sections 37(1)
and
38(2)
except an
appeal to the Supreme Court.  However, there is clear
indication inherent in Sub-section (3) that the
expression "second appeal" does not mean an appeal  
under
Section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The Supreme Court had an occasion to deal with
Section 39(2)
of the Act of 1940 in
Union of India v.
Mohinder Supply Company
AIR 1962 Supreme     
Court 256.  The provisions contained in
Section 39(2)
in the Act of 1940 are pari-materia with
Section 37(3)
of the Act of 1996.  The Supreme Court in this
judgment has held that the expressions "second 
appeal" used in
Section 39(2)
of the Act of 1940
means a further appeal from an order passed in
appeal under
Section 39(1)
and not an appeal under
Section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure. The
Supreme Court has further proceeded to observe that
if the expression 'second appeal' includes an appeal
under the Letters Patent, it would be impossible to
hold that notwithstanding the express prohibition, an
appeal under the Letters Patent from an order passed
in appeal under sub-section (1), of
Section 39
of the
Act of 1940, is competent.  It is thus clear that no
Letters Patent appeal would lie from an order in an
appeal filed under
Section 37
of the Act of 1996. The
second appeal contemplated under sub-section (3) of
Section 37
of the Act of 1996 means an appeal under
the Letters Patent and since there is expressed
prohibition to file such appeal no letters patent would
lie. Merely because the expression "second appeal" is
used in this section does not mean an appeal under
Section 100
of the Code of Civil Procedure. This
provision is consistent with the statement of objects
and reasons which clearly states that enactment of the
Act of 1996 is to minimise supervisory role of the
Courts in an arbitral process.  The submissions of
Mr. Deo, therefore, must be rejected.  His further
submissions that the later part of the definition of
"Court" under
Section 2(e)
would be material and
controlling factor for the definition, which is to the
effect that having jurisdiction to decide the questions
forming the subject matter of the arbitration, if the
same had been subject matter of a suit also deserves
to be rejected in view of the discussion in the
foregoing paragraphs of the judgment.
Thus, the Full Bench answered the question that the Principal Civil
Court of original jurisdiction in a District for the purpose of a petition
under
Section 34
of the Act is District Court and does not include
any other Court inferior to the District Court.
30.  Thus, we find from the catena of decisions, on which reliance
has been placed by the learned counsel for the revision petitioners,
consistently holding that the Court as defined in
Section 2(1)(e)
of the
Act refers to District Court being the Principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing an award under
Section 36
of
the Act.
31.  Turning to the decisions relied on by the learned counsel
for respondent No.1, a Division Bench of this Court in Bhoomatha
Para Boiled Rice and Oil Mills Case (Supra 11), took a different
view holding that every arbitral award be enforced as if it is a decree
of Civil Court following relevant provisions in Part - II and Order -
XXI
of CPC
and the EP for enforcement of arbitral award need not
always be filed before the District Judges Court under
Section 36
of
the Act and it can be filed before the Courts of Junior Civil Judge,
Senior Civil Judge and District Judge or Additional District Judge,
depending upon the amount awarded in an arbitral award subject to
territorial jurisdiction.  The learned counsel laid emphasis on
paragraph Nos.19 and 22 of the decision, wherein it was held thus:
19. In our considered opinion for the purpose of
enforcement of award as a decree of Court for the
purpose of
Section 36
of Arbitration Act, the Court
means not only the Court as defined under
Section
2(1)(e)
of Arbitration Act but all the Courts subject to
territorial and pecuniary jurisdictional limits, they are
entitled to enforce the awards. If Parliament intended
to confer the power of enforcement of arbitral award
only on the District Court irrespective of pecuniary
jurisdiction, the word "the Court" with necessary
explanation as in
Sections 47
and
56
of Arbitration
Act ought to have found place in
Section 36
of
Arbitration Act. To our mind, Parliament
intentionally excluded the use of term "the Court" or
"Principal Civil Court" or "District Court" but only
indicated that the arbitral award shall be enforced as a
decree of the Court. It is rather difficult to visualize
the situation that all the awards irrespective of
pecuniary considerations should be enforced/
executed only in a District Court. That is not the
intention of
Section 36
of Arbitration Act because as
already pointed out except creating a fiction
regarding arbitral award treating it as a decree of
Civil Court, there is nothing in
Section 36
of
Arbitration Act to read
Section 2(1)(e)
into it
(definition of 'Court'). We have considered different
situations below to test the validity of this argument
in an attempt to show that an arbitral award passed
under the provisions of
Arbitration Act
can be
enforced even in a Court of Junior Civil Judge or
Senior Civil Judge, as the case may be, depending
upon the pecuniary jurisdiction.
22.
After CPC (Amendment) Act, 1999
, inserting 
Section 89 in Part V, any Civil Court can refer the
suit or proceeding before it to arbitration if there are
elements of settlement acceptable to the parties.
When the matter is referred to arbitration as per
Section 87(2)(a)
of CPC, the provisions of
Arbitration Act
shall apply as if the matter is referred
to arbitration under the provisions of
Arbitration Act
.
It is not only the District Court which is empowered
under
Section 89
of CPC to refer the disputes to
arbitration but also all civil Courts in the hierarchy
including High Court can refer the disputes to
arbitration. In a given case, a Junior Civil Judge may
refer the dispute to arbitration and after the award is
passed, if the successful party has to enforce the
award only before a District Court, it would violate
provisions
of CPC
and
Civil Courts Act
. As seen
from
Sections 37
and
38
of CPC, a decree has to be
executed by the Court, which passed the decree.
Therefore, if an arbitral award is made pursuant to
reference made by a Court within its pecuniary
jurisdictional limits, it is only that Court, which can
execute/enforce such award and not any other Court.
In paragraph No.28 of the decision, this Court summed up the
principles, thus:
(i)   If an arbitral award is passed, an application
         for enforcement by way of execution petition
         need not always be filed under
Section 36
of
         Arbitration Act before District Court;
(ii)    Depending on the amount awarded in the 
arbitral award, subject to territorial
jurisdiction, an application for enforcement
under
Section 36
of Arbitration Act can be
filed if the value of the award is less than
Rs.1,00,000/- before the Court of Junior
Civil Judge; if the value of the award is
more than Rs.1,00,000/- but does not
exceed Rs.10,00,000/- before the Court of
Senior Civil Judge; and if the value of the
award is more than Rs.10,00,000/- before
the Court of District Judge or Additional
District Judge if it is assigned to such
Additional District Judge;
(iii)   Every arbitral award can be enforced as if
it is a decree of Civil Court following
relevant provisions in Part II and Order
XXI of CPC; and
(iv)    An application for enforcement of foreign
award either under
Section 49
or 58 of
Arbitration Act
shall have to be made only
before the District Court and can also be
decided by Additional District Court if the
case is assigned to such Court.
32.  Based on pecuniary jurisdiction of the hierarchy of the
Courts, the very same Division Bench of this Court in Lakhamraju
Sujatha (Supra 13), which was decided earlier to Bhoomatha Para
Boiled Rice and Oil Mills Case (Supra 11), had occasion to answer
the question whether the Additional District Judge has jurisdiction to
adjudicate the EP filed for enforcing the award passed by the
arbitrator under the provisions of the Act.
Referring to the definition
of decree occurring in
Section 2(2)
of CPC,
Sections 3
and
10
of A.P.
Civil Courts Act, 1972, placing reliance on the decision of a single
Judge of this Court in
Globsyn Technologies Limited v. Eskaaycee
Infosys
and a Division Bench of Madhya Pradesh High Court in
M.P.S.E. Board v. ANSALDO Energia, S.P.A. , held that the 
Additional District Judges exercise jurisdiction over the entire District
and Additional District Judge, Rajahmundry exercises jurisdiction
over the entire District, and, therefore, even if the property attached is
situated in Kakinada, the same is not a bar to exercise the jurisdiction
of Additional District Judge, Rajahmundry.
33.  In M. Rama Raos Case (Supra 12) another Division
Bench of this Court has expressed the same view as in
Bhoomatha Para Boiled Rice and Oil Mills Case (Supra 11),
holding in paragraph No.9, thus:
9. Contention of the learned counsel for the
petitioner that the Principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction in a District got jurisdiction cannot be
accepted, because there is no mention in
Section
2(e)
of the Act about the jurisdiction of the District
Court. Principal Court of original jurisdiction will be
having jurisdiction to try the cases, if the value of
property or the value of decree is less than
Rs.10,00,000/- Senior Civil Judge will be having
original jurisdiction to execute a decree. The Senior
Civil Judge is also Principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction because in respect of all the suits where
the value is more than Rs.1,00,000/- and less
than Rs.10,00,000/-, Senior Civil Judge will be
having jurisdiction to try the cases. There is no other
reason to deviate from the findings recorded by the
Division Bench of this Court in Civil Revision
Petition No.2980 of 2009, as the findings are based
upon proper appreciation of evidence on record as
well as law. Contention of the learned counsel for the
petitioner to refer the matter to the Larger Bench does
not arise. Therefore, the Civil Revision Petition is
devoid of merit and it is liable to the (Sic. be)
dismissed.
34.
In the case of
Kvaerner Cementation India Limited
(Supra 14), this Court while dealing with the power of the District
Court in transferring the application filed under
Section 34
of the Act
to set aside the award, held that the District Judge acts as a Court
and not as a persona designata, and, therefore, entitled to transfer the
application to the Additional District Judge.
While answering the
contention that assumption of the learned Judge that he is persona
designata under the Act and so he cannot make over the proceedings 
to the Courts of co-ordinate jurisdiction is erroneous raised by the
learned counsel for the petitioner therein relying on the decision of
this Court in
S. Srinivas Rao v. High
Court of
A.P.  and New Jaji
Labour Society v. Haji Abdul Rahaman Sahab
, the learned single
Judge following the decision in
New Jaji Labour Societys
Case
(Supra 23), observed in paragraph No.5, thus:
5.
In
New Jaji Labour Society
's case (supra),
another Division Bench of this Court, was dealing
with
Section 7
of the A.P. Land Grabbing
(Prohibition) Act, 1982 prior to its amendment by
Act and XVI of 1987, when the 'Special Court; under
the said Act was 'District Judge'.  After amendment to
the said Act by Act XVI of 1987, the District Judges
are designated as Special Tribunal under Section
7A of that Act.  The question before the Division
Bench was whether the District Judge acting as
'Special Court' under the Provisions of the that Act
has power to make over the case filed by him under
the Act to Additional Disrict Judge, and whether the
Additional District Judge has power to deal with the
case made over to him.
After referring to
Srinivas
Rao
's case (supra) and other cases, a Division bench
of this Court held that the 'District Judge' while
discharging the functions of a 'Special Court' (under
the Unamended Land Grabbing (Prohibition) Act) 
does not discharge the duties as persona designata,
but acts only as a civil Court of original jurisdiction
and, as such, has power to transfer or make over the
cases under the said Act to the Additional District
Judge.  The ratio in those decisions applies on all
fours to the facts of this case also, because
Section
2 (e)
of the Act only contemplates the "Court' in
which the proceedings referred to
Section 34
of the
Act have to be instituted and nothing more.  There is
no other provision in the Act which lays down that
only that Court where the proceedings were instituted
should try and dispose the case as PERSONA   
DESIGNATA and not as a 'Court'.  Therefore, the
Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction,, before
whom proceedings under the Act are instituted, acts
only as 'Civil Court', but not as 'persona designata'
and therefore the proceedings instituted under
Section 34
of the Act would be governed by the
provisions of the
Civil Courts Act
.  Under
Section 11
of the Civil Courts Act, District Judge has power to
make over or assign the cases instituted before him
under the Act to the Additional District Judge.
Hence, contention of the learned counsel for the
respondent that Additional District Judge has no
power to deal with and dispose of the cases under the
Act is not sustainable.
Though, learned counsel for respondent No.1 placed reliance on this
decision, it would not render any assistance to substantiate his
submission.
35.  With respect, we would like to express that, somehow, it
appears that the provisions/mandate of Rule 10 of the Andhra Pradesh
Arbitration Rules, 2000 (for short Rules) framed under the Act, by
the High Court, perhaps, was not brought to the notice of the Division
Benches of this Court while rendering the judgments in Bhoomatha
Para Boiled Rice and Oil Mills Case (Supra 11), Lakhamraju
Sujathas Case (Supra 13) and M. Rama Raos Case (Supra 12).  It 
is, therefore, imperative upon us to refer to Rule 10 of the Rules,
which reads thus:
10. An application under
Section 34
and an
application under
Section 36
shall be filed in the
Court as defined in
Section 2(e)
of the Act, subject to
the special provisions contained in
Section 42
of the
Act.
It is needless to mention that Rule 10 of the Rules, thus, mandates that
an application to enforce an award under
Section 36
of the Act can be
entertained by the Court as defined under
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Act,
of course, subject to the special provisions contained in
Section 42
of
the Act which deals with jurisdiction.
36.
In the context of explaining the meaning of the word
Court occurring in
Section 42
of the Act, the Honble Supreme
Court in
Associated Contractors
Case (Supra 2), referred to the
significance of two changes made in its predecessor Section in
paragraph No.11, thus:
11.   It will be noticed that
Section 42
is in
almost the same terms as its predecessor Section 
except that the words "in any reference" are
substituted with the wider expression "with respect to
an arbitration agreement". It will also be noticed that
the expression "has been made in a court competent 
to entertain it", is no longer there in
Section 42
.
These two changes are of some significance as will
be pointed out later.
Section 42
starts with a non-
obstinate clause which does away with anything
which may be inconsistent with the Section either in
Part-I of the Arbitration Act, 1996
or in any other law
for the time being in force. The expression "with
respect to an arbitration agreement" widens the scope
of
Section 42
to include all matters which directly or
indirectly pertain to an arbitration agreement.
Applications made to Courts which are before, during
or after arbitral proceedings made under
Part-I of the
Act
are all covered by
Section 42
. But an essential
ingredient of the Section is that an application under
Part-I must be made in a court.
Concerning the word Court occurring in
Section 42
of the Act, the
Honble Supreme Court   held in the same decision (
Supra 2)
[Associated Contractors
Case], that it should be construed in the
same manner as defined under the Act, in paragraph No.20, thus:
The context of
Section 42
does not in any
manner lead to a conclusion that the word "court" in
Section 42
should be construed otherwise than as
defined. The context of
Section 42
is merely to see
that one court alone shall have jurisdiction over all
applications with respect to arbitration agreements
which context does not in any manner enable the
Supreme Court to become a "court" within the
meaning of
Section 42
. It has aptly been stated that
the rule of forum conveniens is expressly excluded
by
section 42
. See:
JSW Steel Ltd. v. Jindal Praxair
Oxygen Co. Ltd.
, (2006) 11 SCC 521 at para 59.
Section 42
is also markedly different from
Section
31(4)
of the 1940 Act in that the expression "has been
made in a court competent to entertain it" does not
find place in
Section 42
. This is for the reason that,
Under
Section 2(1)(e)
, the competent Court is fixed
as the Principal Civil Court exercising original
jurisdiction or a High Court exercising original civil
jurisdiction, and no other court. For all these reasons,
we hold that the decisions under the 1940 Act would
not obtain under the 1996 Act, and the Supreme
Court cannot be "court" for the purposes of Section
42.
37.  Thus, the Honble Supreme Court held that
Section 42
of
the Act applies only to the applications made under Part  - I, if they
are made to a Court as defined under the Act and the applications
made under
Sections 8
and
11
of the Act would be outside
Section 42
of the Act, and, thus, it is clear that reference to the Court
mentioned in
Section 42
of the Act also relates to the Court defined
under
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Act.
38.  A survey of decisions of the Honble Supreme Court and
the Honble High Courts of various States including our High Court,
referred to hereinabove, thus, makes it clear that the Court referred
to in
Sections 34
and
36
of the Act is the Court as defined under
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Act and, thus, in unmistakable terms refers to a
District Court, but not the character of a grade inferior to the
Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction; as not only we are
fortified in arriving at such a conclusion by the decisions in
Sundarams
Case (
Supra 3), Sri Prashanth Spinners Limiteds
Case (
Supra 4), Ankati Satyamaiahs
Case (
Supra 18), 
P. Kandasamys
Case (
Supra 5), Mahesh B. Shahs
Case (
Supra 6),   
Nila Chakra Constructions
Case (
Supra 7), Mangala Builders
Private Limiteds
Case (
Supra 8) and Rajshree Shrinivas Joshis
Case (Supra 10), in which, provisions of
Section 36
of the Act in
relation to the applications to enforce the award have been directly
dealt with, but also in view of the very mandate of Rule 10 of the
Andhra Pradesh Arbitration Rules 2000, framed under the Act by this
Court.
39.  Though, it is superfluous to mention again, we would
like to mention that in the decisions relied on by the learned
counsel for respondent No.1, attention of the Courts as to
existence of Rule 10 of the Andhra Pradesh Arbitration Rules
2000, was not drawn, which, perhaps, lead to rendering the
judgments with the meaning of the word Court occurring in
Sections 34
and
36
of the Act, something different from the word
Court as defined under
Section 2(1)(e)
of the Act by
interpreting the pecuniary and territorial jurisdiction of the
Courts as classified in the
Andhra Pradesh Civil Courts Act,
1972
.
40.  For the aforesaid reasons, it is obvious that the learned
Senior Civil Judges Courts of Mangalagiri, Peddapuram,
Gajuwaka and Chittoor have no inherent jurisdiction to deal with
the applications filed under
Section 36
of the Act and
consequently entertaining the EPs by those Courts is without
authority and, therefore, the orders impugned are hereby set aside
by giving liberty to respondent No.1 to invoke the jurisdiction of
the proper Court.
41.  With the above direction, these Civil Revision
Petitions are allowed.  There shall be no order as to costs.
42.  As a sequel thereto, Miscellaneous Petitions, if any,
pending in these revisions stand disposed of.
__________________________    
R. SUBHASH REDDY, J     
 ____________________________    
A. SHANKAR NARAYANA, J      
October 1, 2015.