[Cites
92
, Cited by
6
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Coromandel Mining & Exports Pvt. Ltd., ... vs Union Of India & Others on 11 September, 2015
Equivalent citations: AIR 2016 HYDERABAD 28, (2016) 2 ANDHLD 552
Author:
S.V.Bhatt
Bench:
S.V.Bhatt
THE HONBLE THE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE SRI DILIP B.BHOSALE, AND THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE S.V.BHATT             

WRIT PETITION Nos.10364 OF 2015 and batch     

11-09-2015 

Coromandel Mining & Exports Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad & others Petitioners 

Union of India & others   Respondents
Counsel for Petitioners:Sri C.V.Mohan Reddy,
                         Mr.Sivaraju Srinivas
                         & others

Counsel for Respondents:Mr.K.M.Nataraj  
                          Addl. Solicitor General

<GIST:
>HEAD NOTE:
?Cases referred         : 1)    (2012) 10 SCC 1         2)      (2014) 9 SCC 516
3)   (2012) 3 SCC 1                  4)      (1980) 4 SCC 1
5)   (1987) 2 SCC 295                6)      (1988) 1 SCC 166
7)   (1997) 7 SCC 592                8)      (2000) 8 SCC 262
9)   (2009) 7 SCC 561                  10)   (2003) 8 SCC 100
11)    1981 4 SCC 675            12)   1986 Supp 1 SCC 20
13)    AIR 1996 SC 1627                14)     (2007) 6 SCC 236
15)    (2008) 4 SCC 720                16)     (2011) 9 SCC 1
17)    (2008) 6 SCC 1                  18)     (1978) 1 SCC 248
19)    (1974) 4 SCC 3                  20)     (1979) 3 SCC 489
21)    (2002) 2 SCC 188                22)     (1994) 2 SCC 691
23)    (1996) 2 SCC 405                24)     (2002) 2 SCC 333
25)    (2011) 7 SCC 639                26)     (2005) 8 SCC 534
27)     (2011) 6 SCC 570                28)     AIR 1996 SC 2921
29)     (2007) 9 SCC 78         30)     (1996) 6 SCC 702
31)     (1981) 2 SCC 205                32)     2013 AIR SCW 2484
33)     2013 AIR SCW 2484               34)     (2004) 1 SCC 663
35)     (2004) 8 SCC 1                  36)     AIR 1957 SC 540
37)     AIR 1958 SC 554         38)     (2007) 13 SCC 492
39)     (2014) 5 SCC 219                40)     (2006) 3 SCC 354
41)     (2008) 12 SCC 112               42)     (2014) 4 SCC 657
43)     (2007) 2 SCC 1 



THE HON'BLE THE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE SRI DILIP B.BHOSALE           
AND  
THE HONBLE SRI JUSTICE S.V.BHATT       

WRIT PETITION Nos.10364, 11582, 11970, 12236,    
12437, 12476, 12686, 12690, 12692, 12700, 
12712, 12944, 12975, 12976, 13115, 13129, 
13171, 13205, 13206, 13208, 13219, 13464, 
13643, 13654, 13779, 15132, 15135, 18276, 
21005, 21466, 25146, 25198, 27133, 27158  
and 27165 OF 2015  

COMMON JUDGEMENT: (per Hon'ble The Acting Chief Justice Dilip B.Bhosale)     

                Heard learned counsel for the parties.  Rule.  By
consent of learned counsel heard forthwith.
2.              Principally, two prayers have been made in these
petitions, first, to declare that Sections 8, 10, 11 and 13 of
The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) 
Amendment Act, 2015 (for short the Amendment Act)  
notified in the extraordinary gazette dated 27.03.2015 and
brought into effect on 12.01.2015, are unreasonable, arbitrary
and unconstitutional being violative of
Articles 14
, 19(1)(g)
,
39
, 300(A)
and
301
of the Constitution of India, and second, a
direction to the respondents to complete processing of their
applications for prospecting licences made in accordance with
the provisions of
Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1957
(for short the Principal Act) as
available prior to the date of the Amendment Act came into
effect.
3.              The petitioners in these petitions had applied for
prospecting licence-cum-mining lease under
Section 10
for
minerals like limestone, and while their applications were
pending, the Amendment Act came into effect and as a result
thereof their applications became ineligible, and hence they
have prayed for striking down the aforesaid provisions of the
Amendment Act and sought direction to process their 
applications under the Principal Act.  Sub-section(1) of Section
10A of the Amendment Act states that all applications received
prior to the date of commencement of the Amendment Act  
(i.e. 12.01.2015) became ineligible.
4.              Though the petitioners in these petitions are
different the challenge raised is similar.  In order to consider
and appreciate the grounds of challenge, we deem it
necessary to state few facts, to the extent they are necessary,
of the Writ Petition No.11582 of 2015, which was argued by
Sri C.V.Mohan Reddy, learned senior counsel for the
petitioners.  He made leading arguments in this batch of writ
petitions.
4.1             The first petitioner-Company, in this petition, is
100% share holder (Holding Company) of the second  
petitioner-Company.  The third petitioner is one of the
promoter shareholders of the first petitioner-Company.  The
first petitioner-Companys applications for grant of mineral
concessions (prospecting licence-cum-mining lease) were 
pending with the 2nd respondent-State of Andhra Pradesh on 
the date when the Amendment Act came into effect.  Their
applications, as claimed by them, have direct impact on the
first and second petitioner-Companies and also the interest of
the third petitioner as their promoter shareholder.
4.2             The first petitioner-Company is a Company
incorporated under the
Companies Act, 1956
. Presently, it is
having 5.2 million tons per annum manufacturing capacity of
cement at its factory located at Mellacheruvu Village/Mandal,
Nalgonda District, and at Mullakalapalli Village, Yelamanchili
Mandal, Visakhapatnam District.  The Company also has two  
Ready-Mix Concrete Plants at Patancheruvu, Medak District 
and Nacharam, Ranga Reddy District.  The first petitioner-
Company claims that it had achieved a turnover of 1659.88
crores in the financial year 2013-2014 by sale of 35.29 lakhs
metric tones of cement manufactured and marketed under the 
brand of MAHA cement.
4.3             The second petitioner-Company, which has been  
acquired by the first petitioner-Company, also has a cement
plant with production capacity of about 3.2 million tons per
annum at Yankandla Village, Banaganapalli Mandal, Kurnool 
District in the State of Andhra Pradesh.
4.4             Limestone is one of the most essential raw
materials required for manufacturing of cement and the cost
of procurement thereof, according to the petitioners, has a
direct impact on the profitability of their Companies. Further,
according to the petitioners, having regard to the cost factor,
standard industry practice is that mineral concessions rights
are acquired by such cement manufacturing Companies in  
close proximity of the factories location and the mineral
(limestone) so acquired is captively consumed by the cement
industry for production of cement.
4.5             The first petitioner-Company had applied for six
different prospecting licences in six different parcels of land
situated in Banaganapalli Mandal of Kurnool District in order to
feed the industrial unit of the second petitioner-Company
situated at Srinagar, Yanakandla Village, Banaganapalli
Mandal, Kurnool District. The applications were made on
different dates and they were pending at various stages when
the Amendment Act was introduced and came into effect.
5.              The 1st respondent-Union of India issued a Mines
and Minerals (Development & Regulation) Amendment   
Ordinance, 2015, dated 12.01.2015 (for short the Ordinance)
and the same was subsequently placed before the Parliament 
and thereby promulgated into the Amendment Act.  Though it 
was notified, as aforementioned, on 27.03.2015, the
amendment was brought into effect from 12.01.2015.  The
Amendment Act made several drastic amendments to the    
Principal Act.  One of the most significant amendments is
insertion of
Section 10A
, in particular sub-section (1) thereof,
whereby all applications received prior to the date of
commencement of the Act rendered ineligible.
6.              In this backdrop, having regard to the grounds of
challenge, we may have to consider the following questions of
law: (i) whether Sections 8, 10, 11 and 13 of the Amendment
Act are liable to be declared arbitrary, unreasonable and
unconstitutional being violative of
Articles 14
, 19 (1) (g)
, 39
,
300 (A)
and
301
of the Constitution of India and those being
in conflict with the law laid down by the Supreme Court in
Natural Resources Allocation, in Re, Special Reference
No.1 of 2012( ) and Manohar Lal Sharma v. Principal
Secretary and Others( ), in particular; and (ii) whether the
petitioners have vested right in obtaining prospecting licence-
cum-mining lease under Section 11 of the Principal Act, even
after its substitution by Section 11 of the Amendment Act?
7.              We have heard the learned counsel for the parties
at considerable length and gone through the relevant
provisions of the Principal Act, the Amendment Act and so also
the relevant Rules and judgments relied upon by them in
support of their contentions.  Leading arguments, as stated
earlier, in this batch of writ petitions were advanced by Sri
C.V.Mohan Reddy, learned Senior Counsel, in W.P.No.11582 of   
2015, and Sri Sivaraju Srinivas, learned counsel in
W.P.Nos.13115, 12944, 13171, 13129, 21466 and 11970 of   
2015.  Other learned counsel appearing for the petitioners
adopted the arguments advanced by Sri C.V.Mohan Reddy and    
Sri Sivaraju Srinivas and in addition thereto, some of them
made further submissions.  We would make reference to the 
submissions of Sri C.V.Mohan Reddy and of other counsel 
appearing for the petitioners at an appropriate stage/s.
8.              Sri C.V.Mohan Reddy, learned Senior Counsel, at 
the outset, invited our attention to Section 11 of the Principal
Act, i.e.
Section 11
as it stood prior to the Amendment Act,
and submitted that under this provision a person who made an
application for grant of a mineral concession at an earlier date
had vested right/accrued right for being considered
preferentially over the persons who made applications at a
latter date.  He submitted the petitioners being the first
applicants have vested right in grant of prospecting licences
under Section 11 of the Principal Act over others who made
applications subsequently and such vested right/accrued
right cannot be taken away by the Amendment Act.  
Sub-section (1) of Section 10A of the Amendment Act, he 
submitted, he submitted, has the effect of bringing the
enactment into force with retrospective effect, since it renders
all applications made prior to the commencement of the
Amendment Act ineligible, and thereby takes away the rights
of the petitioners that have accrued in their favour on account
of the provisions of Sections 10 and 11 of the Principal Act.
8.2             He then invited our attention to Section 10B (2) of
the Amendment Act and submitted that it provides for
notification by the State for conducting auction for grant of
prospecting licence-cum-mining lease.  From the language of
the provision, he submitted, such a notification and auction
would be vague since there is no empiric data that would be
available regarding the available quantity and, therefore,
auction would be speculative and based on chance.  Such 
vagueness is not permissible in legislation and is in violation of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.  He then submitted that
there is no consideration or provision made for mineral based
industries in order to safeguard availability of raw materials to
them and, therefore, the Amendment Act is arbitrary,
discriminatory and in violation of
Article 14.
8.3             Sri C.V.Mohan Reddy, lastly contended that 
prescribing an auction as a solitary mechanism for
dispensation of mineral concession by Amendment Act would  
increase centralization and restrict the grants into the hands
of few, as oppose to the provisions of
Article 39
of the
Constitution of India.  While introducing the provision,
providing for an auction, the Legislature did not take into
consideration the possibility of mineral based industries being
affected adversely for want of raw-material if they do not get
preference in grant in surrounding areas.  In view thereof, he
submitted that the provision is arbitrary and discriminatory.
9.              Mr.Sivaraju Srinivas, the learned counsel appearing
for the petitioners in some of the writ petitions, adopted the
submissions advanced by Sri C.V.Mohan Reddy, the learned   
Senior Counsel, and in addition thereto he invited our
attention to the Statement of Objects and Reasons and
submitted that it is clear and evident that the amendment
brought, based on the judgment of the Supreme Court, is
arbitrary and violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution of
India. The Parliament has misapplied the judgments of the
Supreme Court in
Centre For Public Interest Litigation
and Others v. Union of India and Others
( ), which is
known as 2G Case, in Manohar Lal Sharma and Natural   
Resources Allocation (supra) in introducing auction, as a
method for alienating natural resources. He submitted, as a
matter of fact, the Supreme Court in these cases held that
auction cannot be elevated to be a Constitutional Mandate.
9.1             He then submitted that though auction has not
been mandated, as held by the Supreme Court, the method  
introduced by the Amendment Act takes away the protection  
that the mineral based industries had under the provisions of
Principal Act.  He submitted, the system of auction,
contemplated by Section 10B and 11 of the Amendment Act,   
has the hazard of the industry being cornered by larger
Corporations and MNCs.  Further, he submitted that the
provisions of Section 8 of the Amendment Act do not provide
for renewal, which is also contrary to the object of the Act.
9.2             According to Mr.Sivaraju Srinivas, as per the
provisions of Section 8 of the Amendment Act, whereby
Section 8A
has been introduced after Section 8 of the Principal
Act, the lease for a period of 50 years is provided without any
provision for renewal thereof.  Absence of renewal provision
has the potential threat of the Culture of Conservation of
Mineral Wealth being transformed to Profit Maximization on
account of a Concession holders intention to empty the mines
from all the mineral within 50 years time.  He submitted that
the procedure of auctioning for Prospecting Licence-cum-
Mining Lease would require the State to notify and conduct an
auction for unknown quality and quantities of mineral which
would render the very grant speculative.  Auction could have
been restricted to all cases where evidence of mineral is
available, as even the previous statutory regime had a
provision for the State to notify for grant.  Therefore, there
could have been a substitution of procedure wherever a
notification is issued and not in cases where applications are
made voluntarily by interested parties or industries.  He
submitted that these factors, viz., non-application of mind,
classification of non-homogenous groups into one homogenous  
group, not having a nexus between the purpose sought to be
achieved reflect arbitrariness and hence violative of
Article 14.
He submitted that not providing protection or a distinction for
industries based on mineral raw materials and creating
possibility of larger Corporations and Multinational Companies
to corner the mineral would amount to placing an
unreasonable restriction on the rights of the petitioners, which
are small corporations, to carry out their business and hence
Sections 10B and 11 of the Amendment Act are in violation of
Article 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution of India.  While  so, he also
referred to
Article 39
and submitted that mandate cast upon
the State under clauses (b) and (c) thereof to protect the
mineral and natural resources and ensure equi-distribution of
the same has been violated as the mode of auction has the
direct effect of persons having money and resources to control
the minerals.
10.             Most of learned counsel appearing for the
petitioners in different writ petitions adopted the submissions
made by Sri C.V.Mohan Reddy and Sri Sivaraju Srinivas. In
addition, it was submitted that Section 10(A)(1) of the
Amendment Act is illegal on account of the provisions of
Section 6
of the General Clauses Act, 1897, which protects all
rights, privileges accrued to the petitioners under the Principal
Act.  It was submitted that although the expression used in
Section 6
of the General Clauses Act, 1897 is repeal and
enactment, the Section applies to the Amendment Act with
full force on account of the fact that enactment is defined in
Section 3(19)
of the General Clauses Act itself as including a
provision contained in any Act.
11.             On the other hand, Mr.K.M.Nataraj, learned
Additional Solicitor General appearing for the Union of India,
at the outset, invited our attention to the counter affidavit
filed on behalf of the Union of India and submitted that the
petitioners do not get or acquire a vested right under the
provisions of the Principal Act by mere making of an
application.  In other words, making an application under the
Principal Act did not confer any right, whether vested or legal.
Making an application under the Principal Act, before the
Amendment Act came into effect, was only a procedural 
aspect for grant of mineral concession.  Since the procedure is
changed by virtue of the Amendment Act for grant of mineral
concession, a person cannot be stated to have had any right
for grant of mineral concession on the basis of the pending
application. He submitted that Section 11 of the Principal Act,
which came to be substituted by the Amendment Act,  
assumed the characteristics of right is misconstrued.
Section 11
gave only inter-se preference among those who
had applied for grant of mineral concession subject to
statutory eligibility.  He submitted that when there is a change
in law, insofar as procedure is concerned, the same has to be
applied retrospectively.  When no vested right is taken away,
Article 226
cannot be invoked. He submitted that even if it is
assumed that the petitioners had acquired a right merely on
the basis of making of applications, the so-called right is only
a creature of the Statute.  The legislature which is competent
to create a right also has the power to modify or withdraw
such right under the statute.  The legislature which has the
power to amend a law also has the power to make a law 
retrospectively.
11.1            It was then submitted that the law made by the
legislature can be struck down only on the ground of violation
of constitutional provisions and that to if it clearly violates
some provisions of the Constitution. He submitted that the
Principal Act is enacted on the subject regulation of mines
and mineral development mentioned in Entry 54
of List-I of the Seventh Schedule in the public interest.
Article 39(b)
of the Constitution obliges the State to direct its
policy towards securing the ownership and control of the
material resources of the community are so distributed as best
to sub serve the common good.  In view thereof, he submitted
that the Amendment Act has been enacted by giving  
declaration to that effect under
Section 2
of the Act.  He
submitted that
Article 31A
saves certain laws from attack on
grounds of inconsistency with
Article 14
and
19.
Clause (e) of
Article 31A
deals with saving of laws made for extinguishment
of any rights accruing by virtue of any lease or licence or
winning of mineral.  Such extinguishment of any right etc.,
related to winning of mineral by any law cannot be challenged
on the grounds of
Articles 14
and
19.
He submitted that
Article 31C
of the Constitution also saves the law giving effect
to the policy of the State towards securing all or any of the
principles in Part-IV from being deemed to be void on the
ground that it is inconsistent with or takes away or abridges
any of the rights conferred by
Article 14
or
Article 19.
He then
submitted that alienation/distribution of mineral is a matter of
policy of the Government. The law made for dealing with
material resources as a matter of legislative policy cannot be
assailed on the grounds of
Article 14
or
Article 19.
Such laws
are protected under
Article 31C.
Lastly, he submitted that plea
of unreasonableness, arbitrariness and proportionality always
raises an element of subjectivity to which a Court cannot
strike down a statute or statutory provision.
12.             Apart from the grounds of objections, as reflected
from the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties in
the foregoing paragraphs, they did not make any other
submissions.  We may also observe that none of learned 
counsel for the parties made any submissions challenging the
provisions contained in Section 10C and Section 13 of the
Amendment Act.  Bearing this in mind, we would now proceed  
to examine the challenge raised and the questions framed on
the basis of the arguments advanced by learned counsel for
the parties.
13.             Learned counsel for the parties, in the course of
hearing, placed reliance upon the judgments of the Supreme
Court to which we propose to make reference at appropriate
stages.
14.             Before we proceed further, we would like to
consider the judgments of the Supreme Court dealing with the
question whether an auction as a method of disposal of
natural resources is a constitutional mandate?  These
judgments have a bearing on the first question that falls for
our consideration in these petitions.  In this connection, it was
argued on behalf of the petitioners that the Amendment Act,
providing for auction as a method of disposal of natural
resources, is in direct conflict with the three judgments of the
Supreme Court.
14.1            The first judgment is in 2G Case (supra).  In this
case, the Supreme Court considered several questions 
amongst which we are concerned with only two, first,
whether the exercise undertaken by Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT) from September, 2007 to  
March, 2008 for grant of Unified Access Services (UAS)
licences to the private respondents in terms of the
recommendations made by Telecom Regulatory Authority of   
India (TRAI) is vitiated due to arbitrariness and mala fides and
is contrary to public interest?; and second, Whether the policy
of first-come-first-served followed by DoT for grant of licences
is ultra vires the provisions of
Article 14
of the Constitution
and whether the said policy was arbitrarily changed by the
Minister of Communications and Information Technology, 
without consulting TRAI, with a view to favour some of the
applicants?. These two questions were answered by the 
Supreme Court mainly in paragraphs 94 to 96, which read
thus:-
94.  There is a fundamental flaw in the first-come-first-served
policy inasmuch as it involves an element of pure chance or accident.
In matters involving award of contracts or grant of licence or
permission to use public property, the invocation of first-com-
first-served policy has inherently dangerous implications.  Any
person who has access to the power corridor at the highest or the
lowest level may be able to obtain information from the government
files or the files of the agency/instrumentality of the State that a
particular public property or asset is likely to be disposed of or a
contract is likely to be awarded or a licence or permission is likely to
be given, he would immediately make an application and would
become entitled to stand first in the queue at the cost of all other who
may have a better claim.
95.  This Court has repeatedly held that wherever a contract is
to be awarded or a licence is to be given, the public authority must
adopt a transparent and fair method for making selections so that all
eligible persons get a fair opportunity of competition.  To put it
differently, the State and its agencies/instrumentalities must
always adopt a rational method for disposal of public property
and no attempt should be made to scuttle the claim of worthy
applicants.  When it comes to alienation of scarce natural resources
like spectrum, etc. it is the burden of the State to ensure that a non-
discriminatory method is adopted for distribution and alienation, which
would necessarily result in protection of national/public interest.
96.  In our view, a duly publicised auction conducted
fairly and impartially is perhaps the best method for
discharging this burden and the methods like first-come-first-
served when used for alienation of natural resources/public
property are likely to be misused by unscrupulous people who
are only interested in garnering maximum financial benefit and
have no respect for the constitutional ethos and values.  In
other words, while transferring or alienating the natural resources, the
State is duty-bound to adopt the method of auction by giving wide
publicity so that all eligible persons can participate in the process.
(emphasis supplied)

14.2            The next judgment is in Natural Resources
Allocation Case (supra).  The reference was made by the
President of India on 12.04.2012 in exercise of the powers
conferred under
Article 143 (1)
of the Constitution of India.
The Supreme Court in this judgment considered and dealt with
seven questions referred for consideration.  For our purpose
two questions are relevant; one, whether the only permissible
method for disposal of all natural resources across all sectors
and in all circumstances is by the conduct of auctions?, and
two, whether a broad proposition of law that only the route of
auctions can be resorted to for disposal of natural resources
does not run contrary to several judgments of the Supreme
Court including those of the larger Benches?. While dealing
with these questions, the Supreme Court considered whether 
auction, as a method of disposal of natural resources, be
declared as a constitutional mandate under
Article 14
of the
Constitution of India? and in paragraphs 108, 109 and 112
observed thus:-
108.  Such being the constitutional intent and  effect  of
Article 14
, the question arises  Can auction as a method of
disposal of natural resources be declared a constitutional
mandate under
Article 14
of the Constitution of India? We
would unhesitatingly answer it in the negative since any other
answer would be completely contrary to  the  scheme  of
Article 14.
Firstly,
Article 14
may imply positive and negative rights
for an individual, but with respect to the State, it is only couched in
negative terms: like an admonition against the State which prohibits
the State from taking up actions that may be arbitrary, unreasonable,
capricious or discriminatory.
Article 14
, therefore, is an injunction to
the State against taking certain type of actions rather than
commanding it to take particular steps.  Reading the mandate of
auction into its scheme would thus, be completely contrary to
the intent of the article apparent from its plain language.
109.  Secondly, a constitutional mandate is an absolute
principle that has to be applied in all situations; it cannot be applied in
some and not tested in others.  The absolute principle is then
applied on a case-by-case basis to see which actions fulfil the
requirements of the constitutional principle and which do not.
112.  Equality, therefore, cannot be limited to mean only
auction, without testing it in every scenario.  In State of W.B. v.
Anwal Ali Sarkar (AIR 1952 SC 75) this Court, quoting from Kotch v.
River Port Pilot Commissioners (91 L Ed 1093) had held that:
10 . The constitutional command for a State to
afford equal protection of the laws sets a goal not attainable
by the invention and application of a precise formula.  This
Court has never attempted that impossible task.
One cannot test the validity of a law with reference to the
essential elements of ideal democracy, actually incorporated in
the Constitution.  (See Indira-Nehru Gandhi v. Raj Naraian [1975
Supp SCC 1]).  The courts are not at liberty to declare a statute
void, because in their opinion it is opposed to the spirit of the
Constitution.  The courts cannot declare a limitation or
constitutional requirement under the notion of having
discovered some ideal norm.  Further, a constitutional principle
must not be limited to a precise formula but ought to be an abstract
principle applied to precise situations.  The repercussion of holding
auction as a constitutional mandate would be the voiding of
every action that deviates from it, including social endeavours,
welfare schemes and promotional policies, even though CIPL
itself has argued against the same, and asked for making
auction mandatory only in the alienation of scarce natural
resources meant for private and commercial business
ventures.  It would be odd to derive auction as a constitutional
principle only for a limited set of situations from the wide and generic
declaration of
Article 14.
The strength of constitutional adjudication
lies in case to case adjudication and therefore auction cannot be
elevated to a constitutional mandate.
(emphasis supplied)

14.2.1  Then, the Supreme Court also considered the 
opinion expressed in 2G Case (in paragraphs 94 to 96) and
observed thus:-
Our reading of these paragraphs suggests that the Court was
not considering the case of auction in general, but specifically
evaluating the validity of those methods adopted in the distribution of
spectrum from September 2007 to March 2008.  It is also pertinent to
note that reference to auction is made in the subsequent para 96 with
the rider perhaps.  It has been observed that a duly publicised
auction conducted fairly and impartially is perhaps the best method
for discharging this burden.  We are conscious that a judgment is not
to be read as a statute, but at the same time, we cannot be oblivious
to the fact that when it is argued with vehemence that the judgment
lays down auction as a constitutional principle, the word perhaps
gains significance.  This suggests that the recommendation of auction
for alienation of natural resources was never intended to be taken as
an   absolute   or   blanket   statement   applicable   across  all natural


resources, but simply a conclusion made at first blush over the
attractiveness of a method like auction in disposal of natural
resources.  The choice of the word perhaps suggests that the
learned Judges considered situations requiring a method other than
auction as conceivable and desirable.
14.3            The last judgment is in Manohar Lal Sharma 
(supra).  The Supreme Court in this case dealt with the
validity of allocation of coal blocks by the Central Government
from 1993 to 2011 through Screening Committee route and 
Government Dispensation route.  The principal contention
raised was that the allocation of coal blocks made during the
above period was illegal and unconstitutional on several
grounds. In this judgment, the Supreme Court considered
three questions.  One, whether the allocation of coal blocks
ought to have been done only by public auction?, two,
whether the allocation of coal blocks made on the basis of
recommendations of the Screening Committee suffer from any  
constitutional vice and legal infirmity? and three, whether the
allocation of coal blocks made by way of Government
Dispensation Route (Ministry of Coal) is consistent with the
constitutional principles and the fundamentals of the equality
clause enshrined in the Constitution. In this case, the
Supreme Court considered the judgments in 2G Case and   
Natural Resources Allocation (supra) and also other
judgments including the judgment in Kasturi Lal Lakshmi
Reddy v. State of J&K( ) and in paragraphs 104 and 110
observed thus:
104.  In light of the above legal positions, the argument that
auction is the best way to select private parties as per
Article 39 (b)
does not merit acceptance.  The emphasis on the word best in
Article 39 (b)
by the learned Senior Counsel for the intervener does
not deserve further discussion in light of the legal position exposited
by the Constitution Bench in Natural Resources Allication, In re,
Special Reference No.1 of 2012, [(2012) 10 SCC 1], with reference to
Article 39 (b).
We are fortified in our view by a recent decision of this
Court (three-Judge Bench) in
Goa Foundation v. Union of India
(2014)
6 SCC 590 wherein following Natural Resources Allocation, In re, it
was stated (
Goa Foundation
case, SCC p.634, para 81)
81.  . it is for the State Government to decide as a
matter of policy in what manner the leases of these
mineral resources would be granted, but this decision
has to be taken in accordance with the provisions of the
MMDR Act
and the Rules made thereunder and in   
consonance with the constitutional provisions.
110.  The above facts show that it took almost 8 years in putting in
place allocation of captive coal blocks through competitive bidding.
During this period, many local blocks were allocated giving rise to
present controversy, which was avoidable because competitive
bidding would have brought in transparency, objectivity and very
importantly given a level playing field to all applicants of coal and
lowered the difference between the market price of coal and the cost
of coal for the allottee by way of premium which would have accrued
to the Government. Be that as it may, once it is
laid down by
the
Constitution Bench of this Court in Natural Resources Allocation
Reference that the Court cannot conduct a comparative study of
various methods of distribution of natural resources and
cannot mandate one method to be followed in all facts and
circumstances, then if the grave situation of shortage of power
prevailing at that time necessitated private participation and
the Government felt that it would have been impractical and
unrealistic to allocate coal blocks through auction and later on
in 2004 or so there was serious opposition by many State
Governments to bidding system, and the Government did not 
pursue competitive bidding/public auction route, then in our
view, the administrative decision of the Government not to
pursue competitive bidding cannot be said to be so arbitrary or
unreasonable warranting judicial interference. It is not the
domain of the Court to evaluate the advantages of competitive
bidding vis--vis other methods of distribution / disposal of
natural resources. However, if the allocation of subject coal blocks
is inconsistent with
Article 14
of the Constitution and the procedure
that has been followed in such allocation is found to be unfair,
unreasonable, discriminatory, non-transparent, capricious or suffers
from favoritism or nepotism and violative of the mandate of
Article 14
of the Constitution, the consequences of such unconstitutional or
illegal allocation must follow.
(emphasis supplied)

14.4            In Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddy (supra) the
Supreme Court considered that where the State was 
allocating resources such as water, power, raw materials, etc.,
for the purpose of encouraging setting up of industries within
the State, the State was not bound to advertise and tell the
people that it wanted a particular industry to be set up within
the State and invite those interested to come up with
proposals for the purpose.  It was also observed that if any
private party comes before the State and offers to set up an
industry, the State would not be committing breach of any
constitutional or legal obligation if it negotiates with such
party and agrees to provide resources and other facilities for
the purpose.
14.5            The Supreme Court in
Sachidanand Pandey v.  
State of W.B.
( ) had observed that ordinary rule for disposal
of State-owned or public-owned property, was by way of
public auction or by inviting tenders but there could be
situations where departure from the said rule may be
necessitated but then the reasons for the departure must be
rational and should not be suggestive of discrimination and
that nothing should be done which gives an appearance of
bias, jobbery or nepotism.
14.6            In
Haji T.M. Hassan Rawther v. Kerala
Financial Corporation
( ), the Supreme Court stated that the
public property owned by the State or by an instrumentality of
State should be generally sold by public auction or by inviting
tenders. It was emphasized that this rule has been insisted
upon not only to get the highest price for the property but also
to ensure fairness in the activities of the State and public
authorities and to obviate the factors like bias, favoritism or
nepotism. Clarifying that this is not an invariable rule, the
Court reiterated that departure from the rule of auction could
be made but then it must be justified.
The said principle was
again reiterated by the Supreme Court
M.P. Oil Extraction v.
State of M.P.
( ) observing that distribution of largesse by
inviting open tenders or by public auction is desirable but it
cannot be held that in no case distribution of such largesse by
negotiation is permissible.
14.7            The Supreme Court in
Netai Bag Vs. State of
W.B.
( ) had observed that when any State land is intended to
be transferred or the State largesse is decided to be
conferred, resort should be had to public auction or transfer by
way of inviting tenders from the people as that would be a
sure method of guaranteeing compliance with mandate of
Article 14
of Constitution but non-floating of tenders or not
holding public auction would not in all cases be deemed to be
the result of the exercise of the executive power in an
arbitrary manner.
14.8            In
Villianur Iyarkkai Padukappu Maiyam v.
Union of India
( ), the Supreme Court while dealing with
selection of contractor for development of the port of
Pondicherry without floating a tender or holding public auction
held that where the State was allocating resources such as
water, power, raw materials, etc., for the purpose of
encouraging development of the port, the State was not bound
to advertise and tell the people that it wanted development of
the port in a particular manner and invite those interested to
come up with proposals for the purpose.
14.9            In 5
M&T Consultants v. S.Y.Nawab
( ) it was
observed that Courts have always leaned in favour of
sufficient latitude being left with the authorities to adopt their
own techniques of management of projects with concomitant 
economic expediencies depending upon the exigencies of a 
situation guided by appropriate financial policy in the best
interests of the authority.
14.10   At this stage, we make it clear that we have
referred to the above judgments, in sub-paras 14.4 to 14.9,
also to pose a question whether, despite auction being the
method provided for in sections 10B and 11 of the
Amendment Act, is it possible for the State to allocate a
prospecting licence-cum-mining lease, without conducting
public auction, in exercise of its administrative powers, in
public interest and as a policy for special reasons and without
committing breach of any constitutional or legal obligation?
However, we do not wish to examine this question in this
batch of writ petitions, since such a question is either not
raised or arise for our consideration.  We keep it open to be
considered as and when necessary or when the circumstances   
so demand.
15.             Having regard to the
judgments
referred to above
we would like to once again have a look at the judgments of
the Supreme Court in 2G Case, Natural Resources  
Allocation and Manohar Lal Sharma (supra) in further
detail.  This is necessary to appreciate the contentions urged
on behalf of the petitioners and the first question framed by us
that providing for an auction as mechanism/method for
dispensation of mineral concession is liable to be struck down
in the light of these judgments.
15.1            In 2G Case, the Supreme Court held that duly
publicised auction conducted fairly and impartially was
perhaps the best method for alienation of natural resources
lest there was likelihood of misuse by unscrupulous people
who were only interested in garnering maximum financial
benefit and have no respect for the constitutional ethos and
values.  This view necessitated the reference by the President
of India to the Supreme Court in Natural Resources
Allocation (supra). We have already seen the questions those
were considered and dealt with, insofar as this batch of writ
petitions is concerned, by the Supreme Court in this
judgment.
15.2            The Constitution Bench in Natural Resources
Allocation (supra) clarified that the statement of law in 2G
Case (supra) that while transferring or alienating the natural
resources, the State is duty bound to adopt the method of
auction, was confined to the specific case of spectrum and not
for dispensation of all natural resources. It was also made
clear that the findings in 2G Case (supra) were limited to the
case of spectrum and not beyond that and that it did not deal
with the modes of allocation for natural resources other than
spectrum. The Constitution Bench in that case decided the
consideration of this aspect under two heads, viz., "Legitimate
deviations from auction" and "Potential of abuse.
Insofar as
the head "Legitimate deviations from auction", the Supreme
Court after considering its earlier decisions in
Kasturi Lal
Lakshmi Reddy, Sachidanand Pandey, Haji T.M. Hassan    
Rawther, M.P. Oil Extraction, Netai Bag and Villianur
Iyarkkai Padukappu Maiyam
(supra) held that there is no
constitutional mandate in favour of auction under
Article 14.
It would be relevant to notice the observations made by the
Supreme Court in Paragraphs 129, 130 and 131 in Natural 
Resources Allocation (supra), which read thus:-
"       129. Hence, it is manifest that there is no constitutional
mandate in favour of auction under
Article 14.
The Government
has repeatedly deviated from the course of auction and this Court has
repeatedly upheld such actions. The judiciary tests such deviations on
the limited scope of arbitrariness and fairness under
Article 14
and its
role is limited to that extent. Essentially whenever the object of policy
is anything but revenue maximization, the Executive is seen to adopt
methods other than auction.
130. A fortiori, besides legal logic, mandatory auction
may be contrary to economic logic as well. Different resources
may require different treatment. Very often, exploration and
exploitation contracts are bundled together due to the requirement of
heavy capital in the discovery of natural resources. A concern would
risk undertaking such exploration and incur heavy costs only if it was
assured utilization of the resource discovered; a prudent business
venture, would not like to incur the high costs involved in exploration
activities and then compete for that resource in an open auction. The
logic is similar to that applied in patents. Firms are given incentives to
invest in research and development with the promise of exclusive
access to the market for the sale of that invention. Such an approach
is economically and legally sound and sometimes necessary to spur 
research and development. Similarly, bundling exploration and
exploitation contracts may be necessary to spur growth in a
specific industry.
131.  Similar deviation from auction cannot be ruled out
when the object of a State policy is to promote domestic
development of an industry, like in Kasturi Lal's case,
discussed above. However, these examples are purely illustrative in
order to demonstrate that auction cannot be the sole criteria for
alienation of all natural resources."
(emphasis supplied)


15.3            Similarly, while dealing with the head "Potential of
abuse, the Supreme Court in Natural Resources Allocation
(supra) observed that a potential of abuse cannot be the basis
for striking down the method as ultra vires the Constitution.
The Supreme Court noted its two decisions in
R. K. Garg v.
Union of India & Ors.
( ) and
D.K. Trivedi & Sons & Ors.
v. State of Gujarat & Ors.
( ), and held that neither auction
nor any other method of disposal can be held ultra vires the
Constitution merely because of a potential abuse.  In this
connection, it would be relevant to notice the observations
made by the Supreme Court in paragraph 135, which read  
thus:-
"135. Therefore, a potential for abuse cannot be the basis
for striking down a method as ultra vires the Constitution. It is
the actual abuse itself that must be brought before the Court
for being tested on the anvil of constitutional provisions. In
fact, it may be said that even auction has a potential of abuse, like
any other method of allocation, but that cannot be the basis of
declaring it as an unconstitutional methodology either. These
drawbacks include cartelization, "winners curse" (the phenomenon by
which a bidder bids a higher, unrealistic and unexecutable price just
to surpass the competition; or where a bidder, in case of multiple
auctions, bids for all the resources and ends up winning licences for
exploitation of more resources than he can pragmatically execute),
etc. However, all the same, auction cannot be called ultra vires
for the said reasons and continues to be an attractive and
preferred means of disposal of natural resources especially
when revenue maximization is a priority. Therefore, neither
auction, nor any other method of disposal can be held ultra
vires the Constitution, merely because of a potential abuse."
(emphasis supplied)

15.4            Further, in Natural Resources Allocation
(referred supra) the Constitution Bench concluded that auction
despite being a more preferable method of
alienation/allotment of natural resources cannot be held to be
constitutional requirement or limitation for alienation of all
natural resources and, therefore, every method other than
auction cannot be struck down as ultra vires the constitutional
mandate. The Supreme Court also opined that auction as a 
mode cannot be conferred the status of a constitutional
principle.  While observing so, the Court held that alienation of
natural resources is a policy decision and the means adopted
for the same are, thus, executive prerogatives.  Then, it was
observed that reading auction as a constitutional mandate
would be impermissible because such an approach may distort  
another constitutional principle embodied in
Article 39(b).
It
would be relevant to notice the observations made by the
Supreme Court in paragraphs 113,115, 116, 119 and 120, 
which read thus:-
113.  Finally, reading auction as a constitutional mandate
would be impermissible because such an approach may distort  
another constitutional principle embodied in
Article 39 (b).
The said
Article enumerating certain principles of policy, to be followed by the
State, reads as follows:
39.  Certain principles of policy to be followed by the
State.- The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards
securing-
(a)     *       *       *       *
(b)  that the ownership and control of the material
resources of the community are so distributed as best to
subserve the common good;
The disposal of natural resources is a facet of the use and
distribution of such resources.
Article 39 (b)
mandates that
the ownership and control of natural resources should be so
distributed so as to best subserve the common good.
Article
37
provides that the provisions of Part IV shall not be
enforceable by any court, but the principles laid down therein
are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country
and it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in
making laws.  Therefore, this Article, in a sense, is a restriction
on distribution built into the Constitution.  But the restriction
is imposed on the object and not the means.  The overarching
and underlying principle governing distribution is furtherance of
common good.  But for the achievement of that objective, the
Constitution uses the generic word distribution.  Distribution has
broad contours and cannot be limited to meaning only one method i.e.
auction.  It envisages all such methods available for
distribution/allocation of natural resources which ultimately subserve
the common good.
115. It can thus, be seen from the aforequoted paragraphs
that the term "distribute" undoubtedly, has wide amplitude and
encompasses all manners and methods of distribution, which would 
include classes, industries, regions, private and public sections, etc.
Having regard to the basic nature of
Article 39(b)
, a narrower
concept of equality under
Article 14
than that discussed above,
may frustrate the broader concept of distribution, as conceived
in
Article 39(b).
There cannot, therefore, be a cavil that "common
good" and "larger public interests" have to be regarded as
constitutional reality deserving actualisation.
116. The learned counsel for CPIL argued that revenue
maximisation during the sale or alienation of a natural resource for
commercial exploitation is the only way of achieving public good since
the revenue collected can be channelised to welfare policies and
controlling the burgeoning deficit. According to the learned counsel,
since the best way to maximise revenue is through the route of
auction, it becomes a constitutional principle even under
Article 39(b).
However, we are not persuaded to hold so. Auctions may be the 
best way of maximising revenue but revenue maximisation 
may not always be the best way to subserve public good.
"Common good" is the sole guiding factor under
Article 39(b)
for distribution of natural resources. It is the touchstone of
testing whether any policy subserves the "common good" and 
if it does, irrespective of the means adopted, it is clearly in
accordance with the principle enshrined in
Article 39(b).
119. The norm of "common good" has to be understood and  
appreciated in a holistic manner. It is obvious that the manner in
which the common good is best subserved is not a matter that can be
measured by any constitutional yardstick it would depend on the
economic and political philosophy of the Government. Revenue
maximisation is not the only way in which the common good can be 
subserved. Where revenue maximisation is the object of a
policy, being considered qua that resource at that point of time
to be the best way to subserve the common good, auction 
would be one of the preferable methods, though not the only
method. Where revenue maximisation is not the object of a policy of
distribution, the question of [pic]auction would not arise. Revenue
considerations may assume secondary consideration to developmental  
considerations.
120.  Therefore, in conclusion, the submission that the
mandate of
Article 14
is that any disposal of a natural resource for
commercial use must be for revenue maximisation, and thus by 
auction, is based neither on law nor on logic. There is no
constitutional imperative in the matter of economic policies
Article 14
does not predefine any economic policy as a constitutional mandate.
Even the mandate of
Article 39(b)
imposes no restrictions on
the means adopted to subserve the public good and uses the 
broad term "distribution", suggesting that the methodology of
distribution is not fixed. Economic logic establishes that
alienation/allocation of natural resources to the highest bidder
may not necessarily be the only way to subserve the common  
good, and at times, may run counter to public good. Hence, it
needs little emphasis that disposal of all natural resources
through auctions is clearly not a constitutional mandate."
(emphasis supplied)

15.5            In Manohar Lal Sarma (supra) the Supreme Court 
considered Natural Resources Allocation (supra) in depth
and in paragraph 110 stated about the principle laid down in
Natural Resources Allocation as follows:-
the Court cannot conduct a comparative study of various methods of
distribution of natural resources and cannot mandate one method to
be followed in all facts and circumstances, then if the grave situation
of shortage of power prevailing at that time necessitated private
participation and the Government felt that it would have been
impractical and unrealistic to allocate coal blocks through auction and
later on in 2004 or so there was serious opposition by many State
Governments to bidding system, and the Government did not pursue  
competitive bidding/public auction route, then in our view, the
administrative decision of the Government not to pursue competitive
bidding cannot be said to be so arbitrary or unreasonable warranting
judicial interference. It is not the domain of the Court to evaluate
the advantages of competitive bidding vis- -vis other methods
of distribution / disposal of natural resources. However, if the
allocation of subject coal blocks is inconsistent with
Article 14
of the Constitution and the procedure that has been followed
in such allocation is found to be unfair, unreasonable,
discriminatory, non-transparent, capricious or suffers from
favoritism or nepotism and violative of the mandate of
Article
14
of the Constitution, the consequences of such
unconstitutional or illegal allocation must follow.
(emphasis supplied)
16.             Thus, having regard to the judicial
pronouncements, in particular, the judgments of the Supreme
Court in Natural Resources Allocation and Manohar Lal
Sharma (supra), it is clear that auction is not the only
permissible method for disposal of all natural resources across
all sections and in all circumstances and/or there is no
constitutional mandate in form of auction under
Article 14.
The methodology pertaining to disposal of the natural
resources is a matter of State Policy/an economic policy. It
entails intricate economic choices and the Court lacks the
necessary expertise to make them.  As has been repeatedly 
said, it cannot, and shall not, be the endeavour of Court to
evaluate the efficacy of auction vis--vis other methods of
disposal of natural resources. The Court cannot mandate one
method to be followed in all facts and circumstances or to
evaluate the advantages of competitive bidding vis--vis other
methods of distribution/disposal of natural resources.  But the
Legislature in its wisdom or the Government in its discretion
can certainly provide for the method of allocation of natural
resources.  It is the prerogative of the Legislature/Government
to decide, as a matter of policy, in what manner the leases of
the mineral resources could be granted inconsonance with the
constitutional provisions.  Thus, in our opinion, the provisions
of Sections 8, 10 and 11 of the Amendment Act cannot be 
stated to be in conflict with the judgments of the Supreme
Court.  In any case, after the judgments, the Parliament has
brought the amendment into effect and, therefore, it will have
to be independently considered whether the provisions under
challenge are unconstitutional.  For instance, in case of
minerals not specified in Part A and Part B of the first
schedule, as contemplated by Section 10B and 11 of the 
Amendment Act, it cannot be stated that the Government 
cannot adopt the auction as the sole method it being
transparent and fair, giving equal opportunity to all eligible
persons.  As long as the allocation of natural resources, having
regard to the provisions of the principal Act as well as the
Amendment Act is consistent with
Article 14
of the
Constitution and if the procedure that has to be followed is
fair, reasonable, non-discriminatory, transparent and does not
suffer from favouritism or nepotism, it cannot be held to be
violative of the mandate of
Article 14
of the Constitution.
17.             It is, thus, clear that though there is no
constitutional mandate in favour of auction under
Article 14
and that other methods of distribution can also be adopted,
does not mean that auction cannot be provided as a method 
for allocation of natural resources.  Merely because auction is
preferred by the Amendment Act, it cannot be described as
arbitrary or unreasonable.  In other words, it is true that there
is no constitutional mandate in favour of auction under
Article 14
, but the converse is also true that there is no
prohibition in adopting auction as the method for allocation of
natural resources being transparent and fair method so that all
eligible persons get a fair opportunity of competition.
18.             Before considering whether the provisions of
Sections 8, 10, 11 and 13 of the Amendment Act, which are 
under challenge being unreasonable, arbitrary and
unconstitutional, we would like to look into the law laid down
by the Supreme Court on the question when the provisions
can be struck down being unconstitutional.
18.1            In
State of Andhra Pradesh v. McDowell &
Co.
( ) the Supreme Court observed that a law made by the
Parliament or the legislature can be struck down by Courts on
two grounds and two grounds alone, viz., (1) lack of
legislative competence; and (2) violation of any of the
fundamental rights guaranteed in Part-III of the Constitution
or of any other constitutional provision. There is no third
ground.  If an enactment is challenged as violative of
Article 14
, it can be struck down only if it is found that it is

violative of the equality clause/equal protection clause
enshrined therein.
Similarly, if an enactment is challenged as
violative of any of the fundamental rights guaranteed by
Clauses (a) to (g) of Article 19(1), it can be struck down only
if it is found not saved by any of the clauses (2) to (6) of
Article 19 and so on.
18.1            The very same principle was subsequently 
reiterated by the Supreme Court in
Greater Bombay 
Cooperative Bank Limited v. United Yarn Tex (P)
Limited and others
( ) and in addition thereto in paragraphs
84 and 85 observed thus:
84.    As observed by this Court in CST v. Radhakrishnan [(1979)
2 SCC 249], in considering the validity of a statute the
presumption is always in favour of constitutionality and the
burden is upon the person who attacks it to show that there
has been transgression of constitutional principles. For
sustaining the constitutionality of an Act, a court may take into
consideration matters of common knowledge, reports, preamble, 
history of the times, objection of the legislation and all other facts
which are relevant. It must always be presumed that the
legislature understands and correctly appreciates the need
of its own people and that discrimination, if any, is based on
adequate grounds and considerations. It is also well settled
that the courts will be justified in giving a liberal interpretation in
order to avoid constitutional invalidity. A provision conferring very
wide and expansive powers on authority can be construed in
conformity with legislative intent of exercise of power within
constitutional limitations. Where a statute is silent or is
inarticulate, the court would attempt to transmutate the
inarticulate and adopt a construction which would lean towards
constitutionality albeit without departing from the material of
which the law is woven. These principles have given rise to rule of
reading down the provisions if it becomes necessary to uphold
the validity of the law.
85.
In
State of Bihar v. Bihar Distillery Ltd.
[(1997) 2 SCC 453]
this Court indicated the approach which the court should adopt
while examining the validity/constitutionality of a legislation. It
would be useful to remind ourselves of the principles laid down,
which read: (SCC p. 466, para 17)
    The approach of the court, while examining the challenge to
the constitutionality of an enactment, is to start with the
presumption of constitutionality. The court should try to sustain its
validity to the extent possible. It should strike down the
enactment only when it is not possible to sustain it. The
court should not approach the enactment with a view to
pick holes or to search for defects of drafting, much less
inexactitude of language employed. Indeed, any such defects
of drafting should be ignored out as part of the attempt to sustain
the validity/constitutionality of the enactment. After all, an Act
made by the legislature represents the will of the people
and that cannot be lightly interfered with. The
unconstitutionality must be plainly and clearly established
before an enactment is declared as void. The same approach 
holds good while ascertaining the intent and purpose of an
enactment or its scope and application.
In the same para, this Court further observed as follows: (SCC p.
466)
    The court must recognise the fundamental nature and
importance of legislative process and accord due regard and
deference to it, just as the legislature and the executive are
expected to show due regard and deference to the judiciary. It
cannot also be forgotten that our Constitution recognises and gives
effect to the concept of equality between the three wings of the
State and the concept of checks and balances inherent in such
scheme.
(emphasis supplied)


18.2            In
Government of Andhra Pradesh v. P. Laxmi 
Devi
( ) the Supreme Court considered how and when should 
the power of the Court to declare the statute unconstitutional
be exercised.  After considering several judgments in
paragraph-46 the Supreme Court observed thus:
46. In our opinion, there is one and only one ground for
declaring an Act of the legislature (or a provision in the
Act) to be invalid, and that is if it clearly violates some
provision of the Constitution in so evident a manner as to
leave no manner of doubt. This violation can, of course, be in
different ways e.g. if a State Legislature makes a law which only
Parliament can make under List I to the Seventh Schedule, in
which case it will violate
Article 246(1)
of the Constitution, or the
law violates some specific provision of the Constitution (other
than the directive principles). But before declaring the statute to
be unconstitutional, the court must be absolutely sure that there
can be no manner of doubt that it violates a provision of the
Constitution. If two views are possible, one making the
statute constitutional and the other making it
unconstitutional, the former view must always be
preferred. Also, the court must make every effort to
uphold the constitutional validity of a statute, even if that
requires giving a strained construction or narrowing down its
scope vide Rt. Rev. Msgr.
Mark Netto v. State of Kerala
67 L Ed
1047: 262 US 404 (1923) SCC para 6 : AIR para 6. Also, it is
none of the concern of the court whether the legislation in its
opinion is wise or unwise.
(emphasis supplied)

18.2.1  In the very same judgment, the Supreme Court in
paragraph-51 observed that In our opinion the legislature
must be given freedom to do experimentations in exercising
its powers, provided of course it does not clearly and
flagrantly violate its constitutional limits.  The Supreme Court
in paragraph-68 further observed that the Court must make
every effort to uphold the constitutional validity of a statute,
even if that requires giving the statutory provision a strained
meaning, or narrower or wider meaning, than what appears
on the face of it. It is only when all efforts to do so fail should
the court declare a statute to be unconstitutional.
18.3            In
K.T. Plantation Private Limited v. State of
Karnataka
( ) while dealing with a question that in what
circumstances a provision can be declared unconstitutional or
ultra vires the Constitution the Supreme Court observed that
plea of unreasonableness, arbitrariness, proportionality, etc.,
always raises an element of subjectivity on which a court
cannot strike down a statute or a statutory provision,
especially when the right to property is no more a
fundamental right.  Otherwise the Court will be substituting its
wisdom to that of the legislature, which is impermissible in our
constitutional democracy.  The observations made in
paragraphs 208, 209 and 210 are relevant, which read thus:
208.   We have already found, on facts as well as on law,
that the impugned Act has got the assent of the
President as required under the proviso to
Article
31-A(1)
, hence, immune from challenge on the ground of
arbitrariness, unreasonableness under
Article 14
of the
Constitution of India.
209.    Statutes are many which though deprive a person 
of his property, have the protection of
Article 30(1-A)
,
Articles
31-A
, 31-B
, 31-C
and hence are immune from challenge under
Article 19
or
Article 14.
On deletion of
Article 19(1)(f)
the
available grounds of challenge are
Article 14
, the basic
structure and the rule of law, apart from the ground of
legislative competence.
In
I.R. Coelho
case [(2007) 2 SCC 1]
the basic structure was defined in terms of fundamental rights
as reflected under
Articles 14
, 15
, 19
, 20
, 21
and
32.
In that
case the Court held that statutes mentioned in Schedule IX are
immune from challenge on the ground of violation of
fundamental rights, but if such laws violate the basic structure,
they no longer enjoy the immunity offered by Schedule IX.
210. The Acquisition Act, it may be noted, has not been
included in Schedule IX but since the Act is protected by
Article
31-A
, it is immune from the challenge on the ground of
violation of
Article 14
, but in a given case, if a statute violates
the rule of law or the basic structure of the Constitution, is it
the law that it is immune from challenge under
Article 32
and
Article 226
of the Constitution of India?
(emphasis supplied)

18.4            In
Ashoka Kumar Thakur v. Union of India
( ) while
examining the validity of the
Central Educational Institutions
(Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006
, the Supreme Court in
paragraph-219 observed thus:
219.   One of the fundamental principles of a democratic society
inherent in all the provisions of the Constitution is that any
interference with the peaceful enjoyment of possession should be
lawful. Let the message, therefore, be loud and clear, that the rule
of law exists in this country even when we interpret a statute,
which has the blessings of Article 300-A.

18.5            Thus, no enactment can be struck down by just 
saying that it is arbitrary or unreasonable. Some or other
constitutional infirmity has to be found before invalidating the
Act.  An enactment cannot be struck down on the ground that 
Court thinks it unjustified.  The Parliament and the legislatures
being the representatives of the people, are supposed to know
and be aware of the needs of the people and what is good and
bad for them. The court cannot sit in judgment over their
wisdom.  The unconstitutionality must be plainly and clearly
established before an enactment is declared as void.  It is one
thing to say that a restriction imposed upon a fundamental
right can be struck down if it is disproportionate, excessive or
unreasonable and quite another thing to say that the Court
can strike down enactment if it thinks it unreasonable,
unnecessary or unwarranted.
19.
In the light of the law
laid down by
the Supreme
Court in the judgments quoted in paragraph 18, we would like
to have a close look at
Article 14
of the Constitution.
Article 14
states that The State shall not deny to any person
equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws
within the territory of India.  The underlying object of
Article
14
is to secure to all persons, citizens or non-citizens, equality
of status and opportunity referred to in the Preamble to our
Constitution.  In Natural Resources Allocation (supra) the
Supreme Court stated that The language of
Article 14
is
couched in negative terms and is in form, an admonition
addressed to the State. It does not directly purport to confer
any right on any person as some of the other articles, e.g.
Article 19
, do. The right to equality before law is secured from
all legislative and executive tyranny by way of discrimination,
since the language of
Article 14
uses the word State which
as per
Article 12
, includes the executive organ.
(See
Basheshar Nath v. CIT
AIR 1959 SC 149) Besides,
Article 14
is
expressed in absolute terms and its effect is not curtailed by
restrictions like those imposed on
Article 19(1)
by
Articles
19(2)
to 19(6).  However, notwithstanding the absence of
such restrictions, certain tests have been devised through
judicial decisions to test if
Article 14
has been violated or not.
19.1            In
Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India
( ) the
Supreme Court after considering the opinion delivered in
E.P.Royappa v. State of T.N.
( ) in paragraph-7 observed
thus:
7.  The principle of reasonableness, which legally as well as
philosophically, is an essential element of equality or non-
arbitrariness pervades
Article 14
like a brooding omnipresence and
the procedure contemplated by
Article 21
must answer the test of
reasonableness in order to be in conformity with
Article 14.
It must
be right and just and fair and not arbitrary, fanciful or
oppressive;
19.2            In
Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International
Airport Authority of India
( ) the Supreme Court explained
the limitations of
Article 14
on the functioning of the
Government as follows:
12.  It must, therefore, be taken to be the law that where
the Government is dealing with the public, whether by
way of giving jobs or entering into contracts or issuing
quotas or licences or granting other forms of largesse, the
Government cannot act arbitrarily at its sweet will and,
like a private individual, deal with any person it pleases,
but its action must be in conformity with standard or
norms which is not arbitrary, irrational or irrelevant. The
power or discretion of the Government in the matter of grant of
largesse including award of jobs, contracts, quotas, licences, etc.
must be confined and structured by rational, relevant and non-
discriminatory standard or norm and if the Government departs
from such standard or norm in any particular case or cases, the
action of the Government would be liable to be struck down,
unless it can be shown by the Government that the departure
was not arbitrary, but was based on some valid principle which
in itself was not irrational, unreasonable or discriminatory.
(emphasis supplied)

19.3            In
Sharma Transport v. Government of A.P.
( )
while dealing with the expressions arbitrariness and
unreasonableness the Supreme Court in paragraph-25 
observed thus:
25.  In order to be described as arbitrary, it must be shown that
it was not reasonable and manifestly arbitrary. The expression
arbitrarily means: in an unreasonable manner, as fixed or done
capriciously or at pleasure, without adequate determining
principle, not founded in the nature of things, non-rational, not
done or acting according to reason or judgment, depending on the
will alone.
20.             Before examining the relevant provisions, we would
also like to look into judgments of the Supreme Court dealing
with policy decisions.  This is necessary in view of the
contention urged on behalf of the respondent that the policy
decision of the Government, as reflected in the impugned
provisions, is not open for judicial review.  It is not in dispute
that alienation/distribution of natural resources is a policy
matter.  The Supreme Court in Natural Resources 
Allocation (supra) observed that the methodology pertaining
to disposal of natural resources is clearly an economic policy.
The Supreme Court time and again delivered opinions about
the power of judicial review of policy decisions.
20.1            It would be relevant to notice the observations
made by the Supreme Court in
Premium Granites v. State  
of T.N.
( )  in paragraph 54, which read thus:
54.    It is not the domain of the court to embark upon
unchartered ocean of public policy in an exercise to consider as
to whether a particular public policy is wise or a better public
policy can be evolved. Such exercise must be left to the
discretion of the executive and legislative authorities as the case
may be. The court is called upon to consider the validity of a
public policy only when a challenge is made that such policy
decision infringes fundamental rights guaranteed by the
Constitution of India or any other statutory right.    ..
20.2            Similarly in
Delhi Science Forum V. Union of
India
( ) in paragraph 7 the Supreme Court observed thus:
7.             What has been said in respect of legislations is
applicable even in respect of policies which have been adopted by
Parliament. They cannot be tested in Court of Law. The courts
cannot express their opinion as to whether at a particular juncture
or under a particular situation prevailing in the country any such
national policy should have been adopted or not. There may be
views and views, opinions and opinions which may be shared and 
believed by citizens of the country including the representatives of
the people in Parliament. But that has to be sorted out in
Parliament which has to approve such policies.
20.3            In
Balco Employees Union v. Union of India
( )
in paragraph-38 Supreme Court observed thus:
38.    To the same effect are the observations of this Court in
Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd. v. Reserve Bank 
of India
[(1992) 2 SCC 343] in which Kasliwal, J. observed at  p.
375 as follows: (SCC para 31)
31.   The function of the Court is to see that lawful
authority is not abused but not to appropriate to itself the
task entrusted to that authority. It is well settled that a
public body invested with statutory powers must take care
not to exceed or abuse its power. It must keep within the
limits of the authority committed to it. It must act in good faith
and it must act reasonably. Courts are not to interfere with
economic policy which is the function of experts. It is not
the function of the courts to sit in judgment over matters
of economic policy and it must necessarily be left to the
expert bodies. In such matters even experts can seriously and
doubtlessly differ. Courts cannot be expected to decide them
without even the aid of experts.
(emphasis supplied)

20.4            In
State of M.P. v. Narmada Bachao 
Andolan
( ) the Supreme Court said that judiciary cannot
engage in an exercise of comparative analysis over the
fairness, logical or scientific basis, or wisdom of a policy. It
held that The Court cannot strike down a policy decision
taken by the Government merely because it feels that another
decision would have been fairer or more scientific or logical or
wiser. The wisdom and advisability of the policies are
ordinarily not amenable to judicial review unless the policies
are contrary to statutory or constitutional provisions or
arbitrary or irrational or an abuse of power.
20.5            The following observations made by the Supreme 
Court in Natural Resources Allocation (supra) are also
relevant, which read thus:
To summarise in the context of the present Reference, it
needs to be emphasised that this Court cannot conduct a comparative 
study of the various methods of distribution of natural resources and
suggest the most efficacious mode, if there is one universal efficacious
method in the first place. It respects the mandate and wisdom of the
executive for such matters. The methodology pertaining to
disposal of natural resources is clearly an economic policy. It
entails intricate economic choices and the Court lacks the
necessary expertise to make them. As has been repeatedly  
said, it cannot, and shall not, be the endeavour of this Court to
evaluate the efficacy of auction vis--vis other methods of
disposal of natural resources. The Court cannot mandate one
method to be followed in all facts and circumstances. Therefore,
auction, an economic choice of disposal of natural resources, is not a
constitutional mandate. We may, however, hasten to add that the
Court can test the legality and constitutionality of these methods.
When questioned, the courts are entitled to analyse the legal validity
of different means of distribution and give a constitutional answer as
to which methods are ultra vires and intra vires the provisions of the
Constitution. Nevertheless, it cannot and will not compare which
policy is fairer than the other, but, if a policy or law is patently
unfair to the extent that it falls foul of the fairness
requirement of
Article 14
of the Constitution, the Court would
not hesitate in striking it down.
(emphasis supplied)
21.             In the backdrop of the law laid down by the
Supreme Court, we would now like to consider relevant
provisions of the Principal Act which were either substituted or
omitted therefrom by the Amendment Act.  This is necessary 
in view of the prayers of the petitioners, in particular the
prayer seeking direction to the respondents to complete
processing of their applications for prospecting licences made
by them in accordance with those provisions in the Principal
Act.  In short, they have prayed for issue of licences on the
basis of their applications made prior to the Amendment Act
and under the provisions contained in the Principal Act, as
were available before the Amendment Act came into effect.
22.
The Mines and Minerals (Development and  
Regulation) Act, 1948
(for short, the 1948 Act) was enacted
to provide for regulation of mines and oil fields and for the
development of minerals under Entry-36 of the Government of
India Act, 1935.  It came into effect on 8.9.1948.  The 1948
Act was repealed by the Principal Act.  Even the Principal Act
has undergone amendments from time to time.
23.             We would like to make reference to the provisions
of the Principal Act that are relevant for our purpose.
Section 2
thereof declares that it is expedient in the public
interest that the Union should take under its control the
regulation of mines and the development of minerals to the
extent, as provided in the Act.  Original Section 10 of the
Principal Act has not been either substituted or omitted by the
Amendment Act.  It provides that the application for
reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease in
respect of any land in which the minerals vest in the
Government shall be made to the State Government  
concerned, inrter alia, it empowers the State Government
concerned to grant or refuse to grant permit, licence or lease
having regard to the provisions of the Principal Act or the
Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 (for short, the Rules).
23.1            Section 11 of the Principal Act is relevant for our
purpose.  It is relevant since the claim of the petitioners
seeking preferential right over prospecting licences is based on
their applications made under Section 10 of the Principal Act
prior to the Amendment Act.  Though this provision has been
substituted by Section 11 of the Amendment Act, we would 
like to have a close look at it to appreciate the submissions
made on behalf of the petitioners.
23.1.1
Section 11
provides for preferential right of certain
persons.  Sub-section (1) of
Section 11
makes a provision that
where a reconnaissance permit or prospecting licence has
been granted in respect of any land, the permit holder or the
licencee shall have a preferential right for obtaining a
prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may be, in
respect of that land over any other person. This is, however,
subject to the State Governments satisfaction and certain
conditions as provided therein.
23.1.2  Sub-section (2) of
Section 11
says that where the
State Government does not notify in the Official Gazette the
area for grant of reconnaissance permit or prospecting licence
or mining lease and two or more persons have applied for a
reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or a mining lease
in respect of any land in such area, the applicant whose
application was received earlier, shall have a preferential right
to be considered for such grant over the applicant whose
application was received later. This is, however, subject to
provisions of sub-section (1). The first proviso appended
thereto enacts that where an area is available for grant of
reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease
and the State Government has invited applications by
notification in the Official Gazette for grant of such permit,
licence or lease, the applications received during the period
specified in such notification and the applications which had
been received prior to the publication of such notification in
respect of the lands within such area or had not been disposed
of, shall be deemed to have been received on the same day
for the purpose of assigning priority under sub-section (2).
The second proviso indicates that where such applications are
received on the same day, the State Government, after taking
into consideration the matter specified in sub-section (3), may
grant the reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining
lease to one of the applicants as it may deem fit.
23.1.3  Sub-section (3) elaborates the matter referred to in
sub-section (2), namely, (a) any special knowledge of,
experience in reconnaissance operations, prospecting
operations or mining operations, possessed by the applicant;
(b) the financial resources of the applicant; (c) the nature and
quality of the technical staff employed or to be employed by
the applicant; (d) the investment which the applicant proposes
to make in the mines and in the industry based on the
minerals; and (e) such other matters as may be prescribed.
23.1.4  Sub-section (4) provides that subject to the
provisions of sub-section (1), where the State Government
notifies in the Official Gazette an area for grant of
reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease, as
the case may be, all the applications received during the
period as specified in such notification, which shall not be less
than thirty days, shall be considered simultaneously as if all
such applications have been received on the same day and the
State Government, after taking into consideration the matters
specified in sub-section (3), may grant the reconnaissance
permit, prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may
be, to such one of the applicants as it may deem fit.
23.1.5  Sub-section (5) states that notwithstanding
anything contained in sub-section (2), but subject to the
provisions of sub-section (1), the State Government may, for
any special reasons to be recorded, grant a reconnaissance
permit, prospecting licence or a mining lease, as the case may
be, to an applicant whose application was received later in
preference to an applicant whose application was received
earlier, provided that in respect of minerals specified in First
Schedule, prior approval of the Central Government shall be
obtained before passing any order under this sub-section.
23.2
Section 11
was amended also in 2010 and
Section 11A
was inserted by Mines and Minerals (Development  
and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2010 vide G.O.I. Ext. Part II,
Section 1
, No.43, dated 9.9.2010 (No.34 of 2010).   It would
be relevant to reproduce
Section 11A
, that was inserted in
2010, which reads thus:
Granting of reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence
or mining lease in respect of coal or lignite.
[11A. The Central Government may, for the purpose of
granting reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease in
respect of an area containing coal or lignite, select through auction by
competitive bidding on such terms and conditions as may be
prescribed, a company engaged in
(i)     production of iron and steel;
(ii)    generation of power;
(iii)   washing of coal obtained from a mine; or
(iv)    such other end-use as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify,

and the State Government shall grant such reconnaissance permit,
prospecting licence or mining lease in respect of coal or lignite to such
company as selected through auction by competitive bidding under
this section:
Provided that the auction by competitive bidding shall not be
applicable to an area containing coal or lignite
(a)     where such area is considered for allocation to a Government
company or corporation for mining or such other specified end-use;
(b)     where such area is considered for allocation to a company or
corporation that has been awarded a power project on the basis of
competitive bids for tariff (including Ultra Mega Power Projects).
Explanation-    For the purposes of this section, company means a
company as defined in
Section 3
of the Companies Act, 1956 and 
includes a foreign company within the meaning of Section 591 of that
Act]

23.3            From the language employed in Section 11 of the
Principal Act, which has now been substituted by Amendment  
Act, it is clear that it is not mandatory for the State
Government to grant a reconnaissance permit or prospecting
licence or mining lease as of right to the person whose
application was received first in point of time. Similarly, where
the State Government notifies an area for grant of
reconnaissance permit or prospecting licence or mining lease,
as the case may be, all the applications received during the
period as specified in such notification shall be considered
simultaneously as if all such applications have been received
on the same day and the State Government after taking into
consideration the matters specified in sub-section(3) may
grant such permit/licence/lease to one such applicants as it
may deem fit.  Sub-section (5) also gives power to the State
Government to grant such permit/licence/lease to an applicant
whose application was received later in preference to an
applicant whose application received earlier. Even the
language employed in the Rules, in particular Rules 22, 26,
31, 34 and 35, clearly shows that the State Government is
also empowered to refuse to grant licence/lease.
24.             The Rules were framed by the Central Government, 
in exercise of powers conferred under Section 13 of the
Principal  Act.  We are concerned with very few rules.
Chapter-IV of the Rules deals with grant of mining leases in
respect of the land in which the minerals vest in the
Government.  Rule 22 provides for the procedure for making
an application for grant of mining leases in respect thereof.
Rule 26 empowers the State Government to refuse to grant or
renew mining lease over the whole or part of area applied for,
after giving an opportunity of being heard and for reasons to
be recorded in writing and communicate to the applicant.
Rule 31 provides for time within which the lease is to be
executed where an order has to be made for grant of such
lease on an application.  Rule 34 provides for the manner of
exercise of preferential right for mining lease. Rule 35
provides for preferential right of certain persons.
25.             Our attention was specifically invited to Rule 63-A
in Chapter-VIII of the Rules.  It would be advantageous to
reproduce the said Rule, which reads thus:
63-A.   The State Government shall dispose of the application for
grant of reconnaissance permit, prospecting license or mining lease in
the following period:-
(a)     Reconnaissance Permitwithin six months from the date of  
receipt of the application for reconnaissance permit under rule 4A.
(b)     Prospecting Licensewithin nine months from the date of 
receipt of the application for prospecting license under rule 10.
(c)     Mining Leasewithin twelve months from the date of receipt
of the application for mining lease under rule 22:
Provided that the aforesaid periods shall be applicable only if
the application for reconnaissance permit, prospecting license or
mining lease, as the case may be, is complete in all respects:
Provided further that the disposal by the State Government in
case of minerals listed in the
First Schedule to the Act
shall mean
either recommendation to the Central Government for grant of the
mineral concession, or refusal to grant the mineral concession by the
State Government under rule 5 for reconnaissance permit, rule 12 for
prospecting license and rule 26 for mining lease, and in all other
cases, disposal shall mean either intimation regarding grant of precise
area, or refusal to grant the mineral concession under rule 5 for
reconnaissance permit, rule 12 for prospecting license and rule 26 for
mining lease:
Provided also that in case the State Government is not able to
dispose of the application for grant of reconnaissance permit,
prospecting license or mining lease within the period as specified
above, the reasons for the delay shall be given in writing.
25.1            Rule 63-A undoubtedly prescribes the periods for
disposing of the applications for grant of reconnaissance
permit, prospecting licence or mining lease.  It states that an
application should be considered within the specified period
provided it is complete in all respects. The second proviso
gives two options to the State Government, either to
recommend to the Central Government for grant of mineral
concession or refusal to grant mineral concession under Rule 5
for reconnaissance permit, Rule 12 for prospecting licence and
Rule 26 for mining lease.  The third proviso is also important
which provides that if the State Government is not able to
dispose of the application for grant of reconnaissance permit,
prospecting licence, or mining lease as specified therein, the
reasons for the delay shall be given in writing.  A close look at
this Rule would show that it does not contain deeming
provision. In other words, if the application is not considered
and decided within the specified period it does not provide
deemed acceptance or rejection.  Keeping this in view, we will
have to deal with the petitioners prayer for prospecting
licences under the provisions of
Section 10
and Section 11 of
the Principal Act.
26.             In the light of the provisions of the Principal Act
and the Rules, we now proceed to consider whether the
petitioners, who had applied for licence/lease under Section 10
of the Principal Act, can as of right state that under
Section 11
thereof they are entitled for such lease/licence even after the
Amendment Act came into effect.  In other words, we may 
also have to consider whether the applicants had any right,
muchless vested right, to seek a direction to the respondents
to complete the processing of their applications for
prospecting licences made by them under
Section 10
read with 
Section 11 of the Principal Act after the Amendment Act came
into effect.
27.             In the backdrop of the relevant provisions of the
Principal Act and the Rules and the questions that fall for our
consideration, let us have a look at the relevant provisions of
the Amendment Act.  To consider and appreciate the challenge 
and the submissions advanced by learned counsel for the
parties, it would be relevant to notice the intent of the
Parliament in amending the provisions contained in
Section 10
and substituting
Section 11
, in particular, by the Amendment
Act.
28.             It is well settled that the Statement of Objects and
Reasons play a very significant role in understanding the
legislative intent.
In
State of Gujarat v. Mirzapur Moti
Kureshi Kassab Jamat
( ) the Supreme Court while 
considering the significance and role of the Statement of
Objects & Reasons, not only in understanding the intend of the
Legislature but in interpreting the provisions of an enactment,
in paragraph-69 observed thus:
69. Reference to the Statement of Objects and Reasons is
permissible for understanding the background, antecedent state of
affairs in relation to the statute, and the evil which the statute has
sought to remedy. (See Principles of Statutory Interpretation by
Justice G.P. Singh, 9th Edn., 2004, at p. 218). In State of W.B. v.
Subodh Gopal Bose 1954 SCR 587 : AIR 1954 SC 92 the Constitution   
Bench was testing the constitutional validity of the legislation
impugned therein. The Statement of Objects and Reasons was used   
by S.R. Das, J. for ascertaining the conditions prevalent at that time
which led to the introduction of the Bill and the extent and urgency of
the evil which was sought to be remedied, in addition to testing the
reasonableness of the restrictions imposed by the impugned provision.
In his opinion, it was indeed very unfortunate that the Statement of
Objects and Reasons was not placed before the High Court which 
would have assisted the High Court in arriving at the right conclusion
as to the reasonableness of the restriction imposed.
State of W.B. v.
Union of India
(1964) 1 SCR 371 : AIR 1963 SC 1241, SCR at pp. 
431-32 approved the use of Statement of Objects and Reasons for the
purpose of understanding the background and the antecedent state of
affairs leading up to the legislation.
28.1            Thus, it is clear that the facts stated in the
Statement of Objects & Reasons appended to any legislation 
are evidence of the legislative intent. They indicate the
thought process of the elected representatives of the people
and their cognizance of the prevalent state of affairs, impelling
them to enact the law. These, as observed in
Mirzapur Moti
Kureshi Kassab Jamat
(supra), constitute important factors
which amongst others will be taken into consideration by the
court in judging the reasonableness of any restriction imposed
on the fundamental rights of the individuals. The Court would
begin with a presumption of reasonability of the restriction,
more so when the facts stated in the Statement of Objects and
Reasons and the preamble are taken to be correct and they
justify the enactment of law for the purpose sought to be
achieved.
28.2            It is relevant to reproduce the Statement of Objects
& Reasons appended to the Amendment Act, which reads thus:
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS           

        The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 
1957
(MMDR Act
) is the Central Act which governs the development 
and regulation of mines and minerals in terms of the powers vested in
the Central Government. The provisions of the
MMDR Act
extend to 
the whole of India. State Governments have to regulate the mines
and minerals in terms of the
MMDR Act
.
The Act
has been amended   
several times over the years, notably in 1972, 1986, 1994 and 1999.
2. To comprehensively amend the law governing the mineral
sector with the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Bill,
2011 (MMDR Bill, 2011), was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 
12.12.2011. Extensive consultations preceded the finalization of
the draft of the Bill. It was thereafter intensively scrutinized
by the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel who gave their 
Report in May 2013. However, the Bill could not be passed before
the dissolution of the 15th Lok Sabha and consequently lapsed.
3. The mining sector has been subjected to numerous 
litigations in the past few years. Important judgements related
to the mining sector have been pronounced by the Supreme 
Court, besides judgements on the issue of allocation of natural
resources which have direct relevance to the grant of mineral
concessions.
4. The present legal framework of
MMDR Act, 1957
, does not 
permit the auctioning of mineral concessions. Auctioning of mineral
concessions would improve transparency in allocation.
Government would also get an increased share of the value of
mineral resources. Some provisions of the law relating to
renewals of mineral concessions have also been found to be
wanting in enabling quick decisions. Consequently, there has
been a slowdown in the grant of new concessions and the 
renewal of existing ones. As a result, the mining sector started
registering a decline in production affecting the manufacturing
sector which largely depends on the raw material provided by
mining sector. The Government has therefore felt it necessary
to address the immediate requirements of the mining sector
and also to remedy the basic structural defects that underlie
the current impasse.
5. In view of the urgent need to address these problems, the
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment    
Ordinance, 2015 was promulgated on 12th January, 2015. The  
present Bill is to replace this Ordinance. This bill is designed to put in
place mechanism for:
(i) Eliminating discretion;
(ii) Improving transparency in the allocation of mineral
resources;
(iii) Simplifying procedures;
(iv) Eliminating delay in administration, so as to enable
expeditious and optimum development of the mineral resources of the
country;
(v) Obtaining for the government an enhanced share of
the value of the mineral resources of the country; and
(vi) Attracting private investment and the latest
technology;
6. The salient features of MMDR Amendment Bill, 2015 are as 
follows:
(i) Removal of discretion; auction to be sole method of
allotment: The amendment seeks to bring in utmost transparency by 
introducing auction mechanism for the grant of mineral concessions.
The tenure of mineral leases has been increased from the
existing 30 years to 50 years. There is no provision for renewal
of leases.
(ii) Impetus to the mining sector: The mining
industry has been aggrieved due to the second and subsequent 
renewals remaining pending. In fact, this has led to closure of
a large number of mines. The Bill addresses this issue also. The Bill
provides that mining leases would be deemed to be extended from 
the date of their last renewal to 31st March, 2030 (in the case of
captive mines) and till 31st March, 2020 (for the merchant miners) or
till the completion of the renewal already granted, if any, or a period
of fifty years from the date of grant of such leave, whichever is later.
(iii) Safeguarding interest of affected persons: There is
provision to establish District Mineral Foundation in the districts
affected by mining related activities.
(iv) Encouraging exploration and investment: The Bill
proposes to set up a National Mineral Exploration Trust created out of
contributions from the mining lease holders, in order to have a
dedicated fund for encouraging exploration in the country.  Transfer
of mineral concessions granted through auction will be
permitted in order to encourage private investors.
(v) Simplification of procedures and removal of delay:
The amendment removes the need for "previous approval" from the
Central Government for grant of mineral concessions in case of
important minerals like iron ore, bauxite, manganese etc. thereby
making the process quicker and simpler. Similarly, the State
Governments will devise a system for filling of a mining plan obviating
the need for prior approval of the Mining Plans by the Central
Government. The Central Government will have revision powers in
case State Governments fail to decide issues within the prescribed
time.
(vi) Stronger provisions for checking illegal mining: In
order to address the serious problem of illegal mining, the penal
provisions have been made further stringent by prescribing higher
penalties up to 5 lakh rupees per hectare and imprisonment up to 5
years. State Governments will now be able to set up Special Courts
for trial of offences under the Act.
(emphasis supplied)
29.             Before we go to Sections 8 and 11 of the
Amendment Act whereby
Section 8A
has been inserted after  
Section 8 of the Principal Act and
Section 11
has been
substituted, let us also consider the provisions contained in
Section 10A
, which was inserted after Section 10 of the
Principal Act, in view of the basic challenge in these writ
petitions to sub-section (1) of
Section 10A
.  By this provision,
all applications received prior to the date of commencement of
the Amendment Act became ineligible.
29.1            Section 10A of the Amendment Act reads thus:
10.  After
section 10
of the principal Act, the following sections shall
be inserted, namely:--
10A. (1) All applications received prior to the date of
commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and    
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015, shall become ineligible.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the following shall remain
eligible on and from the date of commencement of the Mines and
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015:
(a) applications received under
section 11A
of this Act;
(b) where before the commencement of the Mines and  
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015 a   
reconnaissance permit or prospecting licence has been granted in
respect of any land for any mineral, the permit holder or the licensee
shall have a right for obtaining a prospecting licence followed by a
mining lease, or a mining lease, as the case may be, in respect of that
mineral in that land, if the State Government is satisfied that the
permit holder or the licensee, as the case may be,
(i) has undertaken reconnaissance operations or
prospecting operations, as the case may be, to establish the existence
of mineral contents in such land in accordance with such parameters as
may be prescribed by the Central Government;
(ii) has not committed any breach of the terms and
conditions of the reconnaissance permit or the prospecting licence;
(iii) has not become ineligible under the provisions of
this Act; and
(iv) has not failed to apply for grant of prospecting
licence or mining lease, as the case may be, within a period of three
months after the expiry of reconnaissance permit or prospecting
licence, as the case may be, or within such further period not
exceeding six months as may be extended by the State Government;
(c) where the Central Government has communicated previous  
approval as required under sub-section (1) of
section 5
for grant of a
mining lease, or if a letter of intent (by whatever name called) has
been issued by the State Government to grant a mining lease, before
the commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and    
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015, the mining lease shall be granted
subject to fulfilment of the conditions of the previous approval or of the
letter of intent within a period of two years from the date of
commencement of the said Act:
Provided that in respect of any mineral specified in the First Schedule,
no prospecting licence or mining lease shall be granted under clause
(b) of this sub-section except with the previous approval of the Central
Government.
(emphasis supplied)
30.             It was submitted by learned counsel for the
petitioners, in particular Mr.C.V.Mohan Reddy, learned Senior
Counsel, that a vested right created in favour of the applicants
on their making applications under the provisions of
Section 10
read with Section 11 of the Principal Act has been taken away
by sub-section (1) of Section 10A of the Amendment Act.  It
was further submitted that sub-section (1) of Section 10A of
the Amendment Act has the effect of bringing the Amendment  
Act into force with retrospective effect, since it renders all
applications made prior to the commencement of the 
Amendment Act ineligible, taking away the right of the
petitioners that have accrued in their favour on account of the
provisions of Sections 10 and 11 of the Principal Act.
31.             The question, therefore, is whether mere making an
application under the provisions of Section 10 of the Principal
Act, created any right, much less a vested right, to seek
direction to the respondents to consider their applications for
preferential allocation under Section 11 of the Principal Act,
even after the Amendment Act came into effect?
32.             The Supreme Court had an occasion to consider  
what is vested right in
J.S.Yadav v. State of U.P.
( ).  In this
case, after noticing a dictionary meaning of the word vested
the Supreme Court observed that a vested right can be taken
away only if the law specifically or by necessary implication
provides for such a cause.  It would be relevant to notice what
has been stated by the Supreme Court exactly in paras 20, 21
and 22 in the judgment, which read thus:
20.  17. The word vested is defined in Blacks Law Dictionary (6th Edn.) at
p.1563, as:
Vested; fixed; accrued; settled; absolute; complete.  Having the
character or given the rights of absolute ownership; not contingent; not
subject to be defeated by a condition precedent.
Rights are vested when right to enjoyment, present or prospective, has
become property of some particular person or persons as present interest;
mere expectancy of future benefits, or contingent interest in property founded
on anticipated continuance of existing laws, does not constitute vested rights.
In Websters Comprehensive Dictionary (International) Edn. At p.1397,
vested is defined as:
[L]aw held by a tenure subject to no contingency; complete;
established by law as a permanent right; vested interests. 
    (See
Bibi Sayeeda v. State of Bihar
(1996) 9 SCC 516 at SCC p.527, para 17)
21.  The word vest is normally used where an immediate fixed right in
present or future enjoyment in respect of a property is created.  With the long
usage the said word vest has also acquired a meaning as an
absolute or indefeasible right.  It had a legitimate or settled
expectation can be rendered impossible of fulfilment due to change in law by
the legislature.  Besides this, such a settled expectation or the so-called
vested right cannot be countenanced against public interest and
convenience which are sought to be served by amendment of the law. (
Vide
Howrah Municipal Corpn. V. Ganges Rope Co. Ltd.
(2004) 1 SCC 663)
22.  Thus, vested right is a right independent of any contingency.
Such a right can arise from a contract, statute or by operation of law.
A vested right can be taken away only if the law specifically or by
necessary implication provides for such a course.
(emphasis supplied)
33.             In this connection, we would like to refer to some
more judgments of the Supreme Court where similar 
contentions were raised, considered and addressed.
33.1            In
S.B. International Limited v. Assistant
Director of General of F.T.
( ) the Supreme Court had an
occasion to consider a similar situation, as has arisen in this
batch of writ appeals.  The question was whether a vested
right accrued to the appellant for issuance of advance licences
as per the value addition norm in vogue on the date of filing of
the said applications the moment it made those applications
and whether any subsequent change in policy effected before
issuance of licences, is not applicable to such licences?   The
question arose in the backdrop of the facts that the appellant
in this case, who was engaged in export of mine products, had
made five applications for advance licences in May, June and
September, 1992. Advance licences were not issued by  
September 25, 1992.  On that date, a change was effected in
the value addition norm, enhancing the value addition norm to
1900% from 1000%. Licences were issued according to this  
enhanced value addition norm in February, 1993.  The
appellant thereafter protested against the application of
revised/enhanced value addition norm on the ground that
since it had applied for advance licences prior to
September 25, 1992, the change brought about on and with 
effect from the said date has no application and that its
application ought to be governed by value addition norm in
force prior to September 25, 1992.  The Supreme Court, while
dealing with the question, in paragraphs 8 and 8-A, observed
thus:
8.     The first question in these appeals is whether a vested
right accrued to the appellant for issuance of advance licences
as per the value addition norm in vogue on the date of filing of
the said applications the moment it made those applications
and whether any subsequent change in policy effected before
the issuance of licences, is not applicable to such licences. For
answering this question, one has to look to the policy itself, the
material clauses of which have already been set out. The said
provisions make it clear that the object behind the Scheme is to
enable the exporter to import raw materials, components etc.
required for the purpose of producing goods for export. It is a facility
provided by the Government  an incentive. There is no right to
advance licence apart from the policy. No citizen has a
fundamental  right  to  import,  much less  import  free of duty.
Mere making of an application does not create any
right in the applicant since he has no pre-existing right to such
licence. His right is only that which is given by the policy. The
situation could have been different if the policy had said that a person
exporting goods of a particular value shall be entitled to an import
licence of a particular value; in such a case, the export of goods can
be said to create a right in the applicant to get an import licence of
the specified value. Here is a case, where one has to ask for an import
licence promising to export goods of a particular value within a
particular time. It is difficult to appreciate how can it be said in such a
situation that mere filing of an application creates a vested legal right
to obtain a licence according to the value addition norm in vogue on
the date of the application. It is the date of licence that is relevant
and not the date of application therefor. It is obvious that the norm
(value addition norm) in vogue on the date of grant of licence shall
govern the licence. The mere fact that the authorities have a
discretion to take into account the exports made after the date of
application for advance licences makes no difference to this position;
it is in the nature of yet another concession. What is relevant is that
the licence granted under Chapter VII of the policy is an advance
licence. It is granted in advance of export  rather to enable the
export. The theory of a vested right accruing to the applicant to
get a licence as per the norms in force on the date of
application is inconceivable in such a situation  unless, of
course, the policy itself says so.
8-A.    It should be noticed that grant of licence is neither a
mechanical exercise nor a formality. On receipt of the application,
the authorities have to satisfy themselves about the correctness of the
contents of the application. They also have to satisfy themselves that
the application satisfies all the requirements of the scheme and the
other applicable provisions of law, if any. In a country like ours, where
abuse of such facilities is rampant, reasonable time has to be afforded
to the authorities to process the application. (What is a reasonable
time, of course, depends on the facts of each case. No hard and fast
limit can be prescribed.) It is only after appropriate verification that
the licence is granted.
(emphasis supplied)

33.2            In
M.P. Ram Mohan Raja v. State of Tamil 
Nadu and others
( ) and in
Dharambir Singh v. Union of
India and others
( ) similar situation was under
consideration before the Supreme Court.
33.2.1  In
Dharambir Singh
(supra) the petitioner had
challenged the notification issued by the State Government,
declining to grant mining lease in his favour stating that the
State Government had done so in its discretion and that the
Central Government would not curtail the said discretion as it
is its property.  While dealing with the challenge, the Supreme
Court considered the provisions contained in Section 11 of the
Principal Act which came to be substituted by Section 11 of
the Amendment Act.  The Supreme Court in this case after 
considering the provisions contained in Section 11 of the
Principal Act observed thus:
In grant of mining lease of a property of the State, the State
Government has a discretion to grant or refuse to grant any
prospective licence or licence to any applicant. No applicant
has a right, much less vested right, to the grant of mining
lease for mining operations in any place within the State. But
the State Government is required to exercise its discretion, subject to
the requirements of the law.
(emphasis supplied)

33.2.2  In
M.P. Ram Mohan Raja
(supra) the appellant 
had applied to the concerned department for grant of quarry
lease for quarrying jelly and rough stone for a period of 20
years under Rule 39 of Tamil Nadu Minor Mineral Concession 
Rules, 1959.  The appellant had filed writ petition before the
High Court alleging that his application under Rule 39 was not
disposed of and as such prayed for a direction to the State
Government to dispose of his application.   In view of the
direction issued by the High Court, his application was
considered and rejected.
While dealing with the challenge, the
Supreme Court considered the following observations in
State
of Tamil Nadu v. Hind Stone
( ):
The submission was that it was not open to the Government
to keep applications for the grant of leases and applications for
renewal pending for a long time and then to reject them on the basis
of Rule 8-C notwithstanding the fact that the applications had been
made long prior to the date on which Rule 8-C came into force. While
it is true that such applications should be dealt with within a
reasonable time, it cannot on that account be said that the right to
have an application disposed of in a reasonable time clothes an
applicant for a lease with a right to have the application disposed of
on the basis of the rules in force at the time of the making of the
application. No one has a vested right to the grant or renewal of
a lease and none can claim a vested right to have an
application for the grant or renewal of a lease dealt with in a
particular way, by applying particular provisions. In the
absence of any vested rights in anyone, an application for a
lease has necessarily to be dealt with according to the rules in
force on the date of the disposal of the application despite the
fact that there is a long delay since the making of the
application. We are, therefore, unable to accept the submission of
the learned counsel that applications for the grant of renewal of leases
made long prior to the date of GOMs No. 1312 should be dealt with as
if Rule 8-C did not exist.
(emphasis supplied)


33.3            In
U.P. Avas Evam Vikas Parishad and others 
v. Om Prakash Sharma
( ) the Supreme Court while dealing 
with the right of a person participated in the tender process
observed that by merely giving bids, the bidder had not
acquired any vested right.  The Supreme Court further
observed that in view of the fact that no legal right accrued in
its favour in the absence of a concluded contract which was
said to have existed by mere offering of highest bid in relation
to the property in question to obtain the property on lease for
a period of 90 years amounting to disposal of the property of
the first defendant being an authority under
Article 12
of the
Constitution, no right was accrued upon the bidder in relation
to the property in question.
33.4            In
Municipal Corporation, Shimla v. Prem Lata
Sood and others
( ) the Supreme Court stated that it is well
settled, where the statute provides for a right, but
enforcement thereof is in several stages, unless and until the
conditions precedent laid down therein are specified, no right
can be said to have vested in the person concerned.
33.5            In
Howrah Municipal Corporation v. Ganges
Rope Company Limited
( ) the Supreme Court dealt with 
almost similar situation and categorically held as under:
The context in which the respondent Company claims a vested right
for sanction and which has been accepted by the Division Bench of the
High Court, is not a right in relation to ownership or possession of
any property for which the expression vest is generally used. What
we can understand from the claim of a vested right set up by the
respondent Company is that on the basis of the Building Rules, as
applicable to their case on the date of making an application for
sanction and the fixed period allotted by the Court for its
consideration, it had a legitimate or settled expectation to obtain
the sanction. In our considered opinion, such settled expectation, if
any, did not create any vested right to obtain sanction. True it is, that
the respondent Company which can have no control over the manner  
of processing of application for sanction by the Corporation cannot be
blamed for delay but during pendency of its application for sanction, if
the State Government, in exercise of its rule-making power, amended
the Building Rules and imposed restrictions on the heights of buildings
on G.T. Road and other wards, such settled expectation has been
rendered impossible of fulfilment due to change in law. The claim
based on the alleged vested right or settled expectation
cannot be set up against statutory provisions which were
brought into force by the State Government by amending the
Building Rules and not by the Corporation against whom such
vested right or settled expectation is being sought to be
enforced.  The vested right or settled expectation has been
nullified not only by the Corporation but also by the State by
amending the Building Rules. Besides this, such a settled expectation
or the so-called vested right cannot be countenanced against public
interest and convenience which are sought to be served by
amendment of the Building Rules and the resolution of the
Corporation issued thereupon.
(emphasis supplied)

33.6            In
Hind Stone
Case (supra) the Supreme Court had 
an occasion to deal with similar situation and while dealing with
the same in paragraph-13 of the judgment stated thus:
13. Another submission of the learned counsel in connection with the
consideration of applications for renewal was that applications made
sixty days or more before the date of GOMs No. 1312 (December 2, 
1977) should be dealt with as if Rule 8-C had not come into force. It
was also contended that even applications for grant of leases
made long before the date of GOMs No. 1312 should be dealt 
with as if Rule 8-C had not come into force. The submission was
that it was not open to the government to keep applications for the
grant of leases and applications for renewal pending for a long time
and then to reject them on the basis of Rule 8-C notwithstanding the
fact that the applications had been made long prior to the date on
which Rule 8-C came into force. While it is true that such applications
should be dealt with within a reasonable time, it cannot on that
account be said that the right to have an application disposed of in a
reasonable time clothes an applicant for a lease with a right to have
the application disposed of on the basis of the rules in force at the
time of the making of the application. No one has a vested right to the
grant or renewal of a lease and none can claim a vested right to have
an application for the grant or renewal of a lease dealt with in a
particular way, by applying particular provisions. In the absence of
any vested rights in anyone, an application for a lease has necessarily
to be dealt with according to the rules in force on the date of the
disposal of the application despite the fact that there is a long delay
since the making of the application. We are, therefore, unable to
accept the submission of the learned counsel that applications
for the grant of renewal of leases made long prior to the date
of GOMs No.1312 should be dealt with as if Rule 8-C did not
exist.
(emphasis supplied)
34.             In view of the law
laid down by
Supreme Court, in
our opinion, theory of vested right accruing to the applicant
to get the licence as per the provisions of the principal Act in
force on the date of the application is inconceivable in view of
sub-section (1) of Section 10A of the Amendment Act.  That
apart, it is clear from the provisions of the Principal Act as well
as the Rules, that in grant of mining lease, the State
Government has discretion either to grant or refuse to grant
prospecting licence or mining lease to any applicant.  It cannot
be stated that the applicant has a right, much less vested
right, to the grant of mining lease for mining operations in any
place within the State.   From bare perusal of the provisions
contained in Section 11 of the Principal Act, which has been
substituted by Section 11 of the Amendment Act, and the 
relevant Rules, it is clear that the petitioners cannot claim
preferential right or a vested right to the grant of the lease or
the licence.  Mere making of an application does not create
any right in the applicant since the applicant cannot claim that
he had pre-existing right to such licence or the lease.   His
right is only to make an application, which was given by the
policy, then existing, and if the policy is changed, may be by
way of an amendment, one cannot be stated to have any  
right/vested right on the basis of the earlier policy, which now
do not hold good or find place in the Statute.  It is difficult to
appreciate, how can it be said in such a situation that mere
filing of an application created vested right to obtain a
prospecting licence or mining lease on the basis of the
provision which has been substituted by the Amendment Act. 
It is the date of mining lease that is relevant and not the date
of the application.  Merely because the applications were kept
pending for long or were not considered by the concerned
authority would not create any right or an applicant cannot be
stated to have a vested right in seeking mining lease on the
basis of the provision which has been substituted by the
Amendment Act.
34.1            From perusal of
Section 11
of the principal Act, it is
clear that on receipt of an application, authorities have to
satisfy themselves about correctness of the contents of the
application.  They have also to be satisfied that the application
satisfies all the requirements contemplated by the said
provision and the Rules framed thereunder.  By no stretch of
imagination, it can be said that the moment application was
made the applicants were, as of right, entitled for grant of
mining lease in their favour.  Sub-section (5) of Section 11 of
the Principal Act on the contrary makes it further clear that
the State Government may, for any special reason to be
recorded, grant reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or
mining lease, as the case may be, to an applicant whose
application was received later in preference to an applicant
whose application was received earlier.  This itself shows that
no person, as of right, can claim grant of mining lease or
prospecting licence as claimed by the petitioners.  There are
several formalities or condition precedents laid down or
contemplated under Section 11 of the Principal Act and the
Rules, to be complied by the applicants and non-compliance
thereof also could be a ground for not recommending to the
Central Government for issue of reconnaissance permit or
prospecting licence or mining lease.
34.2            The right which the applicants claim on the basis of
Sections 10 and 11 of the Principal Act stood nullified on
substitution of Section 11 of the Principal Act by Section 11 of
the Amendment Act.  In the absence of any right as such, the
petitioners applications, made under the provisions of
Sections 10 and 11 of the Principal Act, cannot be considered
and disposed of after the Amendment Act came into effect, in
particular sub-section (1) of
Section 10A
thereof.
35.             It was contended on behalf of the petitioners that
sub-section (1) of Section 10A of the Amendment Act has the
effect of bringing the enactment into force with retrospective
effect and since it renders all applications made prior to the
commencement of the Amendment Act ineligible taking away   
the right of the petitioners, it is violative of
Article 14
of the
Constitution.  In support of this contention, our attention was
also invited to
Section 6
of the General Clauses Act, 1897, to
contend that when the repeal is followed by fresh legislation
on the same subject, one should have to look into the
provisions of the repeal Act if that has created any legal right
in favour of a person who claims such right. It was further
submitted that though the expression used in
Section 6
of the
General Clauses Act is repeal and enactment, the Section
applies to the Amendment Act with full force on account of the
fact that enactment is defined in
Section 3 (19)
of the said
Act itself as including a provision contained in any Act. In our
considered opinion, this argument deserves to be rejected
outright for more than one reason.  The law is well settled
insofar as the retrospective effect of a Statute is concerned.  It
is true that every statute is prima facie prospective unless it is
expressly or by necessary implication made to have a
retrospective in operation.  In other words, unless there are
words in the Statute sufficient to show the intention of the
Legislature to affect, existing rights deemed to be prospective.
35.1            In
Zile Singh v. State of Haryana and others
( )
the Supreme Court considered the retrospective effect of a
statute and in paragraphs, 13, 14 & 15 observed thus:
13.    It is a cardinal principle of construction that every statute is
prima facie prospective unless it is expressly or by necessary
implication made to have a retrospective operation. But the rule in
general is applicable where the object of the statute is to affect
vested rights or to impose new burdens or to impair existing
obligations. Unless there are words in the statute sufficient to
show the intention of the legislature to affect existing rights, it is
deemed to be prospective only  nova constitutio futuris formam
imponere debet non praeteritis  a new law ought to regulate
what is to follow, not the past. (See Principles of Statutory
Interpretation by Justice G.P. Singh, 9th Edn., 2004 at p. 438.) It
is not necessary that an express provision be made to make a
statute retrospective and the presumption against retrospectivity
may be rebutted by necessary implication especially in a case
where the new law is made to cure an acknowledged evil for the
benefit of the community as a whole (ibid., p. 440).
14.     The presumption against retrospective operation is not
applicable to declaratory statutes. In determining, therefore, the
nature of the Act, regard must be had to the substance rather than
to the form. If a new Act is to explain an earlier Act, it would be
without object unless construed retrospectively. An explanatory
Act is generally passed to supply an obvious omission or to clear
up doubts as to the meaning of the previous Act. It is well settled
that if a statute is curative or merely declaratory of the previous
law retrospective operation is generally intended. An amending
Act may be purely declaratory to clear a meaning of a provision of
the principal Act which was already implicit. A clarificatory
amendment of this nature will have retrospective effect (ibid., pp.
468-69).
15.     Though retrospectivity is not to be presumed and rather
there is presumption against retrospectivity, according to Craies
(Statute Law, 7th Edn.), it is open for the legislature to enact laws
having retrospective operation. This can be achieved by express
enactment or by necessary implication from the language
employed. If it is a necessary implication from the language
employed that the legislature intended a particular section to have
a retrospective operation, the courts will give it such an operation.
In the absence of a retrospective operation having been expressly
given, the courts may be called upon to construe the provisions
and answer the question whether the legislature had sufficiently
expressed that intention giving the statute retrospectivity. Four
factors are suggested as relevant: (i) general scope and purview of
the statute; (ii) the remedy sought to be applied; (iii) the former
state of the law; and (iv) what it was the legislature contemplated.
(p. 388) The rule against retrospectivity does not extend to protect
from the effect of a repeal, a privilege which did not amount to
accrued right. (p. 392)

35.2            In
Garikapati Veeraya v. N.Subbiah
Choudhry
( ) the Supreme Court observed that the golden
rule of construction is that, in the absence of anything in the
enactment to show that it is to have retrospective operation, it
cannot be so construed as to have the effect of altering the
law applicable to a claim in litigation at the time when the Act
was passed.
35.3            In
Seth Gulab Chand v. Seth Kudilal and
another
( )  the Supreme Court stated that rule is clear that
"provisions which touch a right in existence at the passing of
the statute are not to be applied respectively in the absence of
express enactment or necessary intendment. The Supreme   
Court has, however, made it clear where the language of a
statute plainly gives it a retrospective operation, the rule has
no application, for, "of course, it is obviously competent for
the Legislature, if it pleases, in its wisdom to make the
provisions of an Act of Parliament retrospective.
35.4            In
Anil Kumar Goel v. Kishan Chand Kaura
( )
the Supreme Court in paragraph 9 stated thus:-
All laws that affect substantive rights generally operate
prospectively and there is a presumption against their retrospectivity
if they affect vested rights and obligations, unless the legislative
intent is clear and compulsive. Such retrospective effect may be given
where there are express words giving retrospective effect or where
the language used necessarily implies that such retrospective
operation is intended. Hence the question whether a statutory
provision has retrospective effect or not depends primarily on the
language in which it is couched. If the language is clear and
unambiguous, effect will have to be given to the provision is question
in accordance with its tenor. If the language is not clear then the
court has to decide whether, in the light of the surrounding
circumstances, retrospective effect should be given to it or not. (See:
Punjab Tin Supply Co., Chandigarh etc. etc. v. Central Government
and Ors.[(1984) 1 SCC 206 paragraph 17).
35.5            In
Himachal Pradesh State Electricity
Regulatory Commission and Another v. Himachal  
Pradesh State Electricity Board
( ) the Supreme Court
while considering the effect of retrospectivity in the light of
Section 6
of the General Clauses Act, observed in paragraph
18 as under:-
.................... Whenever there is a repeal of an enactment, the
consequences
laid down in
Section 6
of the General Clauses Act will
follow unless, as the section itself says, a different intention appears.
In the case of a simple repeal, there is scarcely any room for
expression of a contrary opinion. But when the repeal is followed by a
fresh legislation on the same subject, we would undoubtedly have to
look to the provision of the new Act, but only for the purpose or
determining whether they indicate a different intention.
The line of enquiry would be, not whether the new Act
expressly keeps alive old rights and liabilities but whether it manifests
an intention to destroy them. We cannot therefore subscribe to the
broad proposition that
Section 6
, General Clauses Act is ruled out
when there is repeal of an enactment followed by a fresh legislation.
Section 6
would be applicable in such cases also unless the new
legislation manifests an intention incompatible with or contrary to the
provisions of the Section.
35.6            The Supreme Court while dealing with Section 6 of
the General Clauses Act in Gammon India Limited v.
Special Chief Secretary and Others( ), in paras 46 and 52,
stated thus:-
46.  The principle which has been
laid down in
this case is that
whenever there is a repeal of an enactment, the consequences
laid
down in
Section 6
of the General clauses Act will follow unless, as the
section itself says, a different intention appears. In the case of a
simple repeal there is scarcely any room for expression of a contrary
opinion. But when the repeal is followed by fresh legislation on the
same subject we would undoubtedly have to look to the provisions of
the new Act, but only for the purposes of determining whether they
indicate a different intention. The line of enquiry would be, not
whether the new Act expressly keeps alive old rights and liabilities but
whether it manifests an intention to destroy them. We cannot
therefore, subscribe to the broad proposition that
Section 6
of the
General clauses Act is ruled out when there is repeal of an enactment
followed by a fresh legislation.
Section 6
would be applicable in such
cases also unless the new legislation manifests an intention
incompatible with or contrary to the provisions of the section.
52.     In view of the interpretation what follows is absolutely clear
that unless a different intention appears in the repealing Act, any legal
proceeding can be instituted and continued in respect of any matter
pending under the repealed Act as if that Act was in force at the time
of repeal.
In other words, whenever there is a repeal of an enactment
the consequences
laid down in
Section 6
of the General clauses Act
will follow unless, as the section itself says, a different intention
appears in the repealing statute.
35.7            Similar were the observations in
State of Punjab
and Others v. Bhajan Kaur and others
( ).  In this case,
the Supreme Court reiterated the principle that a statute is
presumed to be prospective unless held to be retrospective,
either expressly or by necessary implication.  A substantive
law is presumed to be prospective. It is one of the facets of
the rule of law.
35.8            In
Suhas H.Pophale v. Oriental Insurance
Company Limited
( ) the Supreme Court while considering 
the retrospective effect of an enactment in paragraph 45
observed thus:-
45. It has been
laid down by
this Court time and again that if there
are rights created in favour of any person, whether they are property
rights or rights arising from a transaction in the nature of a contract,
and particularly if they are protected under a statute, and if they are
to be taken away by any legislation, that legislation will have to say so
specifically by giving it a retrospective effect.
This is because prima
facie every legislation is prospective (see para 7 of the Constitution
Bench judgment in Janardan Reddy Vs. The State, (1951 AIR(SC)
124)

35.9            It is true, in the present case, sub-section (1) of
Section 10A of the Amendment Act has the effect of bringing
the enactment into force with retrospective effect but that by
itself cannot be a ground for declaring the said provision or
any other provision under challenge as arbitrary, unreasonable
and unconstitutional as stated by the Supreme Court in the
aforementioned judgments. It is equally true that all laws
affecting substantive rights generally operate prospectively
and that there is a presumption against their retrospectivity if
they affect vested rights and obligations.  But, where the
legislative intent is clear in giving retrospective effect to any
provision, such provision cannot be stated to be
unconstitutional.  It is open for the legislature to indicate laws
having retrospective operation.  Even the principle which has
been
laid down in
Gammon India Limited
(supra) that
whenever there is a repeal of an enactment, the consequences
laid down in
Section 6
of the General Clauses Act will follow is
also of no avail to the petitioners since the provision contained
in sub-section (1) of Section 10A shows a different intention.
In other words, whenever there is a repeal of an enactment
the consequences
laid down in
Section 6
of the General
Clauses Act will follow unless, as the Section itself says, a
different intention appears in the repealing statute.  In the
present case, a different intention is clear whereby the
legislature provided that all applications received prior to the
date of commencement of the Amendment Act became     
ineligible.  Thus, the submission that sub-section (1) of
Section 10A of the Amendment Act has the effect of bringing
the enactment into force with retrospective effect is,
therefore, unreasonable and in violation of
Article 14
of the
Constitution also deserves to be rejected outright.
36.             That takes us to consider sub-section (2) of Section
10A of the Amendment Act. It protects reconnaissance permits 
or prospecting licences issued before commencement of the 
Amendment Act granted in respect of any land for any mineral
subject to satisfaction of the State Government in respect of
Clauses (i) to (iv) in Clause (b) of sub-
section 2
thereof.
Similarly, Clause (c) also saved mining leases where the
Central Government has communicated previous approval as  
required under sub-section (1) of
Section 5
or if letter of
intent has been issued by the State Government to grant a
mining lease before the commencement of the Amendment    
Act.  However, the mining lease shall be granted subject to
fulfillment of the conditions of the previous approval or/of
letter of intent within a period of two years from the date of
commencement of the Amendment Act. Such grant is    
obviously subject to the previous approval of the Central
Government.  Learned counsel for the parties, did not make
any submission insofar as sub-section (2) of Section 10A is
concerned.
37.             The petitioners have challenged Section 8 of the
Amendment Act whereby Section 8A has been inserted.   
Section 8 of the Principal Act still continues to be in operation.
In other words, original
Section 8
has not been either omitted
or substituted.  The challenge is only to Section 8 of the
Amendment Act.  Both the provisions read thus:-
Section 8 of the Principal Act:
Periods for which mining leases may be granted or renewed.
8.      (1)     The maximum period for which a mining lease 
                may be granted shall not exceed thirty years:
Provided that the minimum period for which any such mining
        lease may be granted shall not be less than twenty years.
(2)     A mining lease may be renewed for a period not
exceeding twenty years.
[(3)    Notwithstanding  anything  contained in sub-section (2), if the
        State Government is of opinion that in the interests of mineral
        development it is necessary so as to do, it may, for reasons to
        be recorded, authorize the renewal of a mining lease in
        respect of minerals not specified in Part A and Part B of the
        First Schedule for a further period or periods not exceeding
        twenty years in each case.
(4)    Notwithstanding, anything contained in sub-section (2) and
        sub-section (3), no mining lease granted in respect of mineral
        specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule shall be
        renewed except with the previous approval of the Central
        Government.] 

Section 8 of the Amendment Act:
8.  After
section 8
of the principal Act, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:
8A. (1) The provisions of this section shall apply to minerals other
than those specified in Part A and Part B of the First Schedule.
(2) On and from the date of the commencement of the Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015, all 
mining leases shall be granted for the period of fifty years.
(3) All mining leases granted before the commencement of the
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment    
Act, 2015 shall be deemed to have been granted for a period of
fifty years.
(4) On the expiry of the lease period, the lease shall be put up
for auction as per the procedure specified in this Act.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (2), (3) and
sub-section (4), the period of lease granted before the date of
commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and    
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015, where mineral is used for captive
purpose, shall be extended and be deemed to have been extended up  
to a period ending on the 31st March, 2030 with effect from the date of
expiry of the period of renewal last made or till the completion of
renewal period, if any, or a period of fifty years from the date of grant
of such lease, whichever is later, subject to the condition that all the
terms and conditions of the lease have been complied with.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (2), (3) and
sub-section (4), the period of lease granted before the date of
commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and    
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015, where mineral is used for other
than captive purpose, shall be extended and be deemed to have been 
extended up to a period ending on the 31st March, 2020 with effect
from the date of expiry of the period of renewal last made or till the
completion of renewal period, if any, or a period of fifty years from the
date of grant of such lease, whichever is later, subject to the condition
that all the terms and conditions of the lease have been complied with.
(7) Any holder of a lease granted, where mineral is used for captive
purpose, shall have the right of first refusal at the time of auction held
for such lease after the expiry of the lease period.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the period of
mining leases, including existing mining leases, of Government
companies or corporations shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(9) The provisions of this section, notwithstanding anything contained
therein, shall not apply to a mining lease granted before the date of
commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and    
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015, for which renewal has been  
rejected, or which has been determined, or lapsed. .
(emphasis supplied)

37.1            It is apparent from a bare look at Section 8 of the
Amendment Act that all mining leases, in respect of minerals
other than those specified in Part A and B of the first schedule,
shall be granted for a period of 50 years and the mining leases
granted before the Amendment Act came into effect shall be
deemed to have been granted for a period of 50 years.  In this
batch of writ petitions, we are concerned with the minerals
other than those specified in Part A and B of the first schedule
appended to the Principal Act.  Section 8A further provides
that on expiry of a lease period, the lease shall be put up for
an auction as per the procedure specified in the Amendment
Act.  This provision has been challenged contending that the
lease for a period of 50 years is provided without any
provision for renewal thereof.  It was submitted that absence
of renewal provision has the potential threat of the culture of
conservation of mineral wealth being transformed to profit
maximization on account of concession holders potential
intention to empty the mines from all the mineral within 50
years time.  It was further submitted, the absence of renewal
provision is contrary to the object set out in the Statement of
Object and Reasons of the Amendment Act and that it puts 
unreasonable restriction on the lessees.
37.2            If we look at Section 8 of the Principal Act, we find
that before the Amendment Act, the leases were granted or
renewed for a period not exceeding 30 years with the
provision for its renewal for another twenty years i.e. for total
fifty years.  Practically, the Legislature has not made any
difference between Section 8 of the Principal Act and of the
Amendment Act insofar as the period of licence/lease is
concerned.  By the Amendment Act, the Parliament has  
eliminated the hassle of renewal after thirty years.
37.3            The intent of the Parliament is apparent, which
introduced the Amendment Act after extensive consultations
preceded the finalization of the draft of the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011. It was thereafter
extensively scrutinized by the Standing Committee.  It has
also come on record that some provisions of the Principal Act
relating to renewals of mineral concessions had also been
found to be wanting in enabling quick decisions.
Consequently, there had been a slowdown in the grant of new
concessions and the renewal of existing licences/leases.  As a
result, the mining sector had started registering a decline in
production affecting the manufacturing sector which largely
depends on the raw material provided by mining sector.  The
Government, therefore, felt it necessary to address the
immediate requirements of the mining sector and also to
remedy the basic structural defects that underline the impasse
then prevalent.
37.4            In this backdrop, the tenure of mineral leases has
been increased, by introducing Section 8A of the Amendment 
Act, from the period of 30 plus 20 years to 50 years by
deleting the provision for renewal of leases.  The Legislature,
keeping in view the issue of renewal, as aforementioned, in its
wisdom, and in order to avoid the delay and hassles of
renewal procedure, extended the period of mining lease to
50 years and thereby addressed the immediate requirements  
of the mining sector and cured the basic structural defects.
Even the mining leases executed prior to this date were also
given the benefit by introducing the deeming provision under
sub-section (3) of Section 8A of the Amendment Act.  In this
view of the matter, we do not find any merit in the grounds of
challenge to this provision of the Amendment Act.  The period
of 50 years is quite a long period from the date of awarding
the prospecting licence-cum-mining lease.  In any case, the
law is well settled that the provision cannot be struck down
being unconstitutional unless it is in violation of any of the
fundamental rights guaranteed in Part.III of the Constitution
or of any other constitutional provisions.  It is not the case of
the petitioners that the Parliament while enacting this
provision lacked the legislative competence.
In view of the
law
laid down by
the Supreme Court in the judgments referred
to in the foregoing paragraphs in particular in
McDowell &
Company, United Yarn Tex (P) Limited, P.Laxmi Devi, 
K.T. Plantation Private Limited and A.K.Thakur
(supra),
this ground of challenge deserve to be rejected outright.
38.             This takes us to consider the provisions contained
in Section 10B and Section 11 of the Amendment Act.  It
would be relevant to reproduce the said provisions, which read
thus:-
10B. (1) The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to cases
covered by section 10A or section 17A or to minerals specified in Part A
or Part B of the First Schedule or to land in respect of which the
minerals do not vest in the Government.
(2) Where there is inadequate evidence to show the existence of
mineral contents of any notified mineral in respect of any area, a State
Government may, after obtaining the previous approval of the Central
Government, grant a prospecting licence-cum-mining lease for the said
notified mineral in such area in accordance with the procedure
laid
down in
section 11
.
(3) In areas where the existence of mineral contents of any notified
mineral is established in the manner prescribed by the Central
Government, the State Government shall notify such areas for grant of
mining leases for such notified mineral, the terms and conditions
subject to which such mining leases shall be granted, and any other
relevant conditions, in such manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(4) For the purpose of granting a mining lease in respect of any
notified mineral in such notified area, the State Government shall
select, through auction by a method of competitive bidding, including
e-auction, an applicant who fulfils the eligibility conditions as specified
in this Act.
(5) The Central Government shall prescribe the terms and conditions,
and procedure, subject to which the auction shall be conducted,
including the bidding parameters for the selection, which may include a
share in the production of the mineral, or any payment linked to the
royalty payable, or any other relevant parameter, or any combination
or modification of them.
(6) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (5), the Central
Government shall, if it is of the opinion that it is necessary and
expedient to do so, prescribe terms and conditions, procedure and
bidding parameters in respect of categories of minerals, size and area
of mineral deposits and a State or States, subject to which the auction
shall be conducted:
Provided that the terms and conditions may include the reservation of
any particular mine or mines for a particular end-use and subject to
such condition which allow only such eligible end users to participate in
the auction.
(7) The State Government shall grant a mining lease to an applicant
selected in accordance with the procedure
laid down in
this section in
respect of such notified mineral in any notified area.
11. For
section 11
of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:
11. (1) The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to cases
covered by section 10A or section 17A or to minerals specified in Part A
or Part B of the First Schedule or to land in respect of which minerals
do not vest in the Government.
(2) In areas where there is evidence to show the existence of mineral
contents as required by clause (a) of sub-section (2) of
section 5
, the
State Government shall grant a mining lease for minerals other than
notified minerals following the procedure
laid down in
section 10B.
(3) In areas where there is inadequate evidence to show the
existence of mineral contents as required under clause (a) of sub-
section (2) of
section 5
, the State Government shall grant a
prospecting licence-cum-mining lease for minerals other than notified
minerals in accordance with the procedure
laid down in
this section.
(4) The State Government shall notify the areas in which prospecting
licence-cum-mining leases shall be granted for any minerals other than
notified minerals, the terms and conditions subject to which such
prospecting licence-cum-mining leases shall be granted, and any other
relevant conditions, in such manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(5) For the purpose of granting prospecting licence-cum-mining
leases, the State Government shall select, through auction by method
of competitive bidding, including e-auction, an applicant who fulfils the
eligibility conditions as specified in this Act.
(6) The Central Government shall prescribe the terms and conditions,
and procedure, subject to which the auction shall be conducted,
including the bidding parameters for the selection, which may include a
share in the production of the mineral, or any payment linked to the
royalty payable, or any other relevant parameter, or any combination
or modification of them.
(7) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (6), the Central
Government shall, if it is of the opinion that it is necessary and
expedient to do so, prescribe terms and conditions, procedure and
bidding parameters in respect of categories of minerals, size and area
of mineral deposits and a State or States, subject to which the auction
shall be conducted.
(8) The State Government shall grant a prospecting licence-cum-
mining lease to an applicant selected in accordance with the procedure
laid down in
this section.
(9) The holder of a prospecting licence-cum-mining lease shall be
required to complete, within the period
laid down in
section 7
, the
prospecting operations satisfactorily as specified in the notice inviting
applications.
(10) A holder of a prospecting licence-cum-mining lease, who
completes the prospecting operation as
laid down in
sub-section (9)
and establishes the existence of mineral contents in the area in
conformity with such parameters as may be prescribed for this purpose
by the Central Government, shall be required to apply for a mining
lease for such area and shall have the right to get the mining lease and
thereafter undertake mining operations in accordance with the
provisions of this Act..
(emphasis supplied)


38.1            These provisions were challenged on the grounds
that they are vague and arbitrary.  It was submitted that the
language of sub-section(2) of Section 10B and sub-section (3)
of Section 11 of the Amendment Act is vague since there is no
empiric data that could be made available regarding available
quantity and in the absence thereof, the auction would be
speculative and based on chance.  It was further submitted
that such vagueness is not permissible in legislation and is in
violation of
Article 14
of the Constitution. It was then
submitted that there is no consideration or provision made for
mineral based industries in order to safeguard availability of
raw-materials to them and, on this ground also these
provisions deserve to be struck down being arbitrary and
violative of
Article 14.
It was also submitted that for not
providing protection or showing distinction for industries based
on mineral raw material and creating the possibility of larger
corporations and multinational companies to corner the
mineral amounts to placing unreasonable restriction and so
also discriminatory and hence in violation of
Articles 14
and
19(i)(g)
of the Constitution.  A reference was also made to
Article 39
to submit that mandate cast upon the State under
clause (b) and (c) thereof to protect the mineral and natural
resources and ensure equal distribution of the same has been
violated since auction has the direct effect of person having
(money) resources to control minerals.
39.             Insofar as Section 10B is concerned, the challenge
is to the provisions contained in sub-sections (2) and (4)
thereof, in particular, and sub-section (3) and (5) of
Section 11
.  The provisions contained in Section 10B and 11 of
the Amendment Act are similar. The difference between these
provisions is that Section 10B provides for grant of mining
lease in respect of the notified minerals through auction,
whereas
Section 11
provides for grant of prospecting licence-
cum-mineral licence through auction in respect of the minerals
other than notified minerals. Both the provisions are not
applicable to cases covered by Section 10A or Section 17A or
minerals not specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule
or to land in respect of which minerals do not vest in the
Government.
39.1            Having noticed the difference between these two
provisions, we would now deal with the grounds of
challenge raised by the petitioners.  Sub-section (2) of
Section 10B provides that where there is inadequate evidence
to show the existence of mineral contents of any notified
mineral in respect of any area, the State Government, may,
after obtaining the previous approval of the Central
Government, grant a prospecting licence-cum-mining lease for
the said notified mineral in such area in accordance with the
procedure
laid down in
Section 11
.
Section 11
lays down the
procedure for grant of a prospecting licence-cum-mining lease
for the notified mineral in the area where there is inadequate
evidence to show the existence of the mineral contents.
According to the petitioners, such vagueness in the
provisions contained in sub-section (2) of Section 10B and
sub-section (3) of
Section 11
is not permissible in Legislation
and is, therefore, in violation of
Article 14
of the Constitution.
39.2            The submissions that the provisions contained in
Sections 10B and
11
are unconstitutional being vague deserve
to be rejected outright.  This provision on the contrary keeps
the participants in the auction process informed about the
inadequate evidence to show the existence of mineral contents
which would help the participants to quote accordingly in the
auction process and that they would not be misled or
misguided.  It is for the applicant to decide whether he would
like to participate in the auction process if there is inadequate
evidence to show the existence of mineral contents.
39.3            The provision cannot, in any case, be challenged on
this ground. It is well settled that a law made by the
Legislature can be struck down on only two grounds viz., lack
of legislative competence and violation of any of the
fundamental rights guaranteed in Part.III of the Constitution
or of any other constitutional provision.  There is no third
ground. Further, if an enactment is challenged as violative of
Article 14
, it can be struck down only if it is found that it is
violative of the equality clause/equal protection clause
enshrined therein. None of the learned counsel appearing for
the parties could demonstrate as to how there is violation of
any of the fundamental rights or these provisions are violative
of
Article 14
or violative of equality clause/equal protection
clause enshrined in the Constitution. The Supreme Court in
United Yarn Tex (P) Limited
(supra) observed that in
considering the validity of a statute the presumption is always
in favour of constitutionality and the burden is upon the
person who attacks it to show that there has been
transgression of constitutional principles.  We do not find from
perusal of these provisions any transgression of constitutional
principles nor could learned counsel for the parties point out
such transgression.  The only submission advanced by the 
learned counsel for the parties was that this provision is vague
and vagueness is not permissible in the legislation.
The
Supreme Court in
P.Laxmi Devi
(supra) observed that the
Legislature must be given freedom to do experimentations in
exercising its powers, provided of course, it does not clearly
and flagrantly violate its constitutional limits.  Bearing this in
view we are satisfied that by no stretch of imagination it can
be stated that these provisions violate constitutional limits.
That apart, this provision cannot be treated as unreasonable
or arbitrary. The principle of reasonableness, undoubtedly, is
an essential element of equality or non-arbitrariness pervades
Article 14
and the procedure contemplated by
Article 21
must
answer the test of reasonableness in order to be in conformity
with
Article 14.
The Government cannot act arbitrarily at its
sweet will and like a private individual and it must act in
conformity with the standards or norms which are not
arbitrary, irrational or irrelevant.  In the present case, it is not
possible to state that the Government is dealing with the
public in giving licences/leases at its sweet will.  On the
contrary by way of amendment, the Government has made   
allotment of licences/leases more transparent way by adopting
rational method for disposal of natural resources.  Thus, the
challenge to the provisions of Section 8 of the Amendment Act
also deserves to be rejected.
40.             Though in the prayer clause challenge was made to 
Section 10 of the Amendment Act whereby three (3) 
sub-sections viz., Sections 10A, 10B and 10C were inserted,
learned counsel for the parties did not make any submission
whatsoever in respect of Section 10C.  Similarly, no
arguments were advanced by learned counsel for the parties
in respect of Section 13 of the Amendment Act.
41.             Many statutes, which may deprive a person of his
property, have the protection of
Article 30 (1A)
, 31A
, 31B
and
31C
and they are immune from challenge under
Article 19
or
Article 14
of the Constitution. On deletion of 19(1)(f), the
available ground of challenge is
Article 14
, the basic structure
and the rule of law, apart from the grounds of legislative
competence as held by the Supreme Court in
K.T.Plantation 
Private Limited
(supra).
The Supreme Court in
I.R.Coelho
v. State of Tamil Nadu
( ) stated that the basic structure
was defined in terms of fundamental rights as reflected under
Articles 14
, 15
, 19
, 20
, 21
and
32.
In that case the Supreme
Court held that Statutes mentioned in Ninth Schedule are
immune from challenge on the ground of violation of
fundamental rights, but if such laws violate the basic
structure, they no longer enjoy the immunity offered by Ninth
Schedule.
41.1            Insofar as the Principal Act is concerned, it is
mentioned in Ninth Schedule and, therefore, obviously
immune from challenge on the ground of violation of
fundamental rights. As a matter of fact, none of learned
counsel appearing for the petitioners could demonstrate as to
how any of the provisions, under challenge, are in violation of
fundamental rights. That apart, it is not the contention of the
petitioners that the provisions under challenge in these
petitions violate the basic structure of the Constitution.
Therefore, on this ground also the challenge to the provisions
fails and is liable to be rejected. Similarly, the provisions
under challenge cannot be described as arbitrary or
unreasonable. In other words, these provisions cannot be
stated to be not reasonable and are manifestly arbitrary. The
expression arbitrary as stated by the Supreme Court in
Sharma Transport
(supra) means: in an unreasonable 
manner, as fixed or done capriciously or at pleasure, without
adequate determining principle, not founded in the nature of
things, non-rational, not done or acting according to
reason or judgment, depending on the will alone.  Similarly,
these provisions cannot be described or treated as
discriminatory.  As a matter of fact, the Parliament by
introducing auction as the method for allocation of prospecting
licence-cum-mining lease has given equal opportunity to all
those who are interested in the minerals.  The question of
favoritism also does not arise. The provisions do not even
indirectly suggest to do any favour to any larger Corporations
or class of persons.  The question of giving any protection to
any particular mineral based industries also does not arise.
The apprehension expressed that the method of auction has 
the hazard of small industry being cornered by larger
industry-corporation is only an imaginary and in any case on
this ground the provisions providing for auction, which is
otherwise rational method for disposal of public property,
cannot be stated to be discriminatory.
In our opinion, duly
publicized auction conducted fairly and impartially is perhaps
the best method for discharging this burden and the methods
like first-come-first-served when used for alienation of natural
resources/public property are likely to be misused by
unscrupulous people who are only interested in garnering
maximum financial benefit and have no respect for the
constitutional ethos and values, as observed by the Supreme
Court in 2G Case (supra).  Though auction, as the method of
disposal of natural resources, cannot be declared as
constitutional mandate under
Article 14
of the Constitution, it
is always considered as best method giving equal opportunity
to all those who are interested and if the Legislature in its
wisdom has provided that as the method for issuing
prospecting licences-cum-mining leases under Sections 10 and 
11 of the Amendment Act, it cannot be declared arbitrary,
unreasonable and discriminatory being violative of
Articles 14
,
19(g)
, 39
, 30
, 300A
and
301
of the Constitution of India.
W.P.Nos.12236, 12437, 12476, 12975, 13205,   
13206, 13208, 13643 and 15132 of 2015
42.             The petitioners in these nine writ petitions apart
from the grounds of challenge, as raised in the other writ
petitions in the batch, have also raised challenge to the
provisions of the Amendment Act based on the Fifth Schedule 
of the Constitution dealing with Scheduled Areas and
Scheduled Tribes.  The petitioners claim that they belong to
Scheduled Tribes community.  The additional ground of
challenge is that no Prospecting licence or Mining lease can be
granted in the scheduled areas to any person who is not a
member of the Scheduled Tribe. These petitioners placed
heavy reliance upon sub-section (5) of Section 11 of the
Principal Act inserted vide G.O.Ms.No.264, I&C, dated
07.08.1991 w.e.f 14.08.1991 (for short the State
Amendment) to contend that this provision safeguards the
interest of Scheduled Tribes from the competitive field of
mining leases/licences in Scheduled Areas.  As a result of
insertion of this provision (sub-section (5) of the State
amendment) the vast extent of schedule areas in the States of
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana are preserved and protected  
for the benefit of the Scheduled Tribes living in scheduled
areas for their socio-economical and political empowerment to
reach the social justice, that being a part of the basic structure
of the Constitution.  It was submitted on behalf of the
petitioners that by virtue of deletion of Section 11 of the
Principal Act by Section 11 of the Amendment Act, sub-section
(5), inserted by the State Amendment, also stood omitted and
thereby the protection to the scheduled areas has been taken
away.  It was further submitted that in view of
deletion/omission of
Section 11
from the Principal Act, even
non-tribals will participate in the auction process to be
conducted by virtue of the provisions introduced/amended by
the Amendment Act of the minerals/mines in the Scheduled  
Areas and that would violate the very basic structure of the
Constitution.
43.             It is true that
Section 11
has been deleted and by
virtue thereof sub-section (5) inserted by the State
Amendment also stood omitted and as a result thereof even
non-tribals may compete with the tribals if the auction is
conducted in scheduled areas, if similar provision is not
introduced by the State Government.  In view thereof,
when we specifically asked the learned Advocate General for
the State of Andhra Pradesh and the learned Additional
Advocate General for the State of Telangana whether they
intend to introduce similar provisions [sub-section (5)] by way
of State Amendment in view of the substitution of Section 11
of the Principal Act, they both submitted that the State
Government may do so.  Though they so stated, they could 
not make any positive statement within how much time the 
State Amendment will be introduced protecting the rights and
interests of the members of Scheduled Tribes.  The learned
Advocate General for the State of Andhra Pradesh, however,
submitted that in any case, the question, as raised, based on
the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution of India, need not be
considered at this stage since the State Government has not
issued any notification inviting bids for minerals in the
scheduled areas.  He submitted that challenge based on these
provisions and on this ground can be kept open to be
considered if the State Government either do not
bring the amendment in terms of sub-section (5) of
Section 11 of the Principal Act (State amendment) and if steps
are taken to conduct auction of the mines/minerals in the
scheduled areas before such amendment.  In response to this 
submission, the learned counsel for the petitioners in these
nine writ petitions have fairly stated that this issue may be
kept open to be raised if the circumstances so demand leaving
it open to the petitioners to take appropriate remedy for
challenging any such notification for conducting auction
without carrying out necessary amendment.  In this view of
the matter, we refrain from entering into merits of the
question of law based on the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution
and keep it open to be considered in an appropriate
proceeding.  All contentions in respect thereof are kept open.
44.             In the result, the writ petitions are disposed of
answering both the questions, as framed in paragraph 6 of
this judgment, in the negative.  No order as to costs.
45.             Miscellaneous petitions pending in the writ
petitions, if any, also stand disposed of.
________________   
Dilip B.Bhosale, ACJ
__________  
S.V.Bhatt, J
11th September, 2015.