[Cites
12
, Cited by
104
]
Supreme Court of India
Nand Kumar Verma vs State Of Jharkhand & Ors on 1 February, 2012
Equivalent citations: 2012 AIR SCW 1791, 2012 (2) AIR JHAR R 491, 2012 LAB. I. C. 1546, AIR 2012 SC (SUPP) 66, (2012) 3 ALLMR 413 (SC), (2012) 1 CLR 549 (SC), (2012) 2 SERVLJ 6, (2012) 4 KCCR 266, (2012) 5 CAL HN 230, (2012) 4 JCR 129 (SC), (2012) 3 LAB LN 1, (2012) 1 ORISSA LR 747, (2012) 3 SERVLR 151, (2012) 5 MAD LJ 133, (2012) 2 SCALE 663, (2012) 2 ALL WC 2026, (2012) 133 FACLR 13
Bench:
Anil R. Dave
,
H.L. Dattu
REPORTABLE


                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.
                                               
                                                
                                                1458
                                                           
                                                          
                                                           OF 2012
                                                                     
         (SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 5921 OF 2007)



NAND KUMAR VERMA                                                     ... APPELLANT



                     VERSUS



STATE OF JHARKHAND & ORS.                                           ...RESPONDENTS 



                                      O R D E R
1.    Leave granted.
2.    This appeal is directed against the judgment and order passed by the 


        High   Court   of   Jharkhand   at   Ranchi   in   Writ   Petition   No.2856   of 


        2002 and Writ Petition No.1620 of 2003 dated 11.07.2006.  By the 


        impugned   judgment   and   order,   the   High   Court   has   sustained   the 


        order   of   reversion   and   the   order   of   compulsory   retirement   passed 


        against the appellant.
3.    At the outset, we intend to observe that the Judicial Officers are part 


        and   parcel   of   this   institution.   They   should   be   respected   and   their
1
career   should   be   carefully   protected.   But   in   the   present   case,   it 


      appears   to   us,   after   going   through   the   records   that   the   appellant, 


      who was serving as a Judicial Officer, has been treated with scant 


      respect by the High Court.  Be that as it may.
4.    The   appellant   was   initially   appointed   as   Munsif   (now   known   as 


      Civil   Judge,   Junior   Division)   in   the   Bihar   Subordinate   Judicial 


      Service in the year 1975 and his services were confirmed as Munsif 


      in the year 1980. Subsequently, in the year 1986, he was promoted 


      to   the   rank   of   Sub-Judge   (Civil   Judge,   Senior   Division)   and 


      confirmed on the same rank w.e.f. 19.01.1988.  In the year 1987, the 


      appellant   was   made   Sub-Judge-cum-Addl.   Chief   Judicial 


      Magistrate. Thereafter, in November 1989, he was posted as Chief 


      Judicial Magistrate by the Patna High Court vide Notification dated 


      5.11.1989. While he was working as a Chief Judicial Magistrate at 


      Gopalganj, an inspection was made  by the portfolio Judge and on 


      noticing   certain   omissions   and   commissions   in   granting   bail   in 


      certain  cases by the appellant,  certain adverse remarks were made 


      against him in the note made on 09.03.1994.  Further, the appellant 


      had   also   passed   an   Order   dated   10.2.1994   granting   bail   to   one 


      person   accused   of   offences   punishable   under   Section   302   of   the
2
I.P.C
.   in   Mohammadpur   Police   Station   case   no.   90/93.   This   was 


      taken as an exception by the  learned  District Judge and also by the 


      High   Court   while   deciding   the   Criminal   Miscellaneous   Petition 


      No.11327/1994.   The   High   Court   of   Patna   vide   Order   dated 


      12.09.1994   in   Cr.   Misc.   No.   11327   of   1994,   whilst   commenting 


      adversely against the appellant, had observed that the appellant had 


      granted   bail   in   the   said   matter   on   extraneous   consideration   and 


      further   directed   the   matter   to   be   placed   before   the   Hon'ble   Chief 


      Justice of the High Court for taking necessary action.
5.    In   view   of   the   abovementioned   adverse   comments   passed   against 


      the appellant, he was directed to offer his explanation if any, by the 


      High Court. In this regard, the appellant had offered his explanation, 


      firstly,   on   7.5.1994   for   strictures   passed   by   the   Inspecting   Judge 


      and; secondly on 21.12.1994 for adverse remarks made by the High 


      Court dated 12.09.1994 in Cr. Misc. No. 11327 of 1994.
6.    The   explanation   so   offered   on   7.5.1994   was   placed   before   the 


      Standing Committee of the High Court on 17.11.1994. In regard to 


      this explanation, the Standing Committee further sought explanation
3
from   the   appellant   for   using   objectionable   language   against   the 


      Inspecting   Judge   and   directed   him   to   appear   before   it   in   its   next 


      meeting.
7.    Accordingly,   the   appellant   appeared   on   1.12.1994   and   2.12.1994 


      and had promptly stated that he was apologetic for the impertinent 


      language   used   in   the   explanation.   The   Standing   Committee,   after 


      accepting   the   unconditional   apology   offered   by   the   appellant,   had 


      condoned   his   lapses   and   had   transferred   him   from   Gopalganj   to 


      Samastipur.
8.    The case of the appellant was also considered for promotion from 


      Sub-Judge to the Additional District Judge among 16 Sub-Judges by 


      the Standing Committee in its meeting dated 3.2.1995 and the same 


      came   to   be   deferred   because   of   the   pendency   of   the   inquiry 


      proceedings against him.
9.    In the second explanation offered by the appellant dated 21.12.1994 


      he  had,   specifically,  adverted  to  the  allegations   made  for  granting 


      bail   indiscriminately   even   in   cases   of   heinous   crimes.   The   said
4
explanation was placed before the Standing Committee of the High 


       Court   for   its   consideration   in   its   meeting   dated   5.1.1995   as   an 


       Additional   Agenda   which   was   duly   accepted   by   the   High   Court.
Thereafter,   the   same   was   communicated to the   appellant   by   the 


       Registrar General of the High Court vide his order dated 1.2.1995.
10.     After accepting the explanations offered, the High Court was still 


        under the impression that the Judicial Officer should not be left in 


        peace.  Therefore, it appears to us, that the Standing Committee of 


        the   High   Court   in   its   meeting   dated   11.08.1995   directed   the 


        initiation of the departmental proceedings against the appellant by 


        framing   the   Articles   of   Charges.   Accordingly,   the   appellant   was 


        served   Articles   of   Charges   dated   13.12.1995   containing   two 


        charges and was also asked to show cause within one month. Both 


        the   charges   relate   to   the   granting   of   bail   indiscriminately   in 


        Mohammadpur   Police   Station   Case   No.   90/93,   by the   appellant 


        while   he   was   discharging   his   functions   as   Chief   Judicial 


        Magistrate. Pursuant to the Show Cause, the appellant had replied 


        in detail on 16.01.1996 that his explanation on the said charges has 


        already been accepted by the High Court. However, the High Court 


        through   the  District   Judge,   Samastipur   had  served  a  notice  dated
5
03.04.1996 to the appellant for initiating departmental proceedings 


        against   him   on   the   basis   of   Articles   of   Charges.
The appellant had submitted his reply statement dated 11.06.1996 


        and 22.06.1996 wherein he had specifically contended that on the 


        same   set   of   charges,   he   had   already   offered   his   explanation   on 


        21.12.1994   and   the   same   was   placed   before   the   Standing 


        Committee consisting of Hon'ble the Chief Justice and also other 


        learned Judges of the High Court in its meeting dated 5.1.1995 and 


        wherein they have accepted his explanation.   But the explanation 


        so offered was not accepted by the Enquiry Officer, therefore, he 


        proceeded with the Enquiry proceedings.
11.    After   recording   the   evidence   of   the   witnesses   and   the   documents 


       produced by them, the Enquiry Officer had submitted a report to the 


       disciplinary authority, namely, the High Court on 19.07.1996.In the 


       Enquiry Report, the Enquiry Officer was of the view that both the 


       charges   alleged   against   the   appellant   are   proved   beyond   all 


       reasonable doubt.
12.    Based   on   the   report   of   the   Enquiry   Officer,   the   disciplinary 


       authority, viz. the High Court, took a decision to compulsorily retire
6
appellant   from  service  in  its  administrative  jurisdiction  and  acting 


       on   the   recommendation   made   by   the   High   Court,   a   formal 


       notification   dated   20.04.1998   came   to   be   issued   by   the   personnel 


       department, Government of Bihar, reverting the appellant from the 


       rank of Sub-Judge (Civil Judge, Senior Division) to the lower post 


       of Munsif (Civil Judge, Junior Division).
13.    Aggrieved   by   the   said   order,   the   appellant   had   approached   this 


       Court in Writ Petition (S) No.547 of 1999 under
Article 32
of the 


       Constitution of India.
14.    This Court, while admitting the petition, had issued notices to the 


       respondents therein.
15.    At this stage, one more factor which requires to be noticed by us is 


       that during pendency of the said Writ Petition, in the month of May, 


       2001,   due   to   bifurcation   of   the   State   of   Bihar,   the   appellant   was 


       allotted   to   the   State   of   Jharkhand   and   was   posted   as   Judicial 


       Magistrate   (First  Class)  at  Koderma vide  Order   dated 21.04.2001.
Accordingly,   the   appellant   had   joined   his   services   under   new 


       regime  on 5.5.2001. While working  as Judicial  Magistrate,  on the
7
recommendation made by the Full Court of Jharkhand High Court, 


       the   State   Government   has   issued   notification   dated   17.07.2001 


       compulsorily   retiring   appellant   from   service.   The   said   order   was 


       served  on  the appellant  on  26.7.2001. This  decision   was  taken  by 


       the   High   Court   on   the   basis   of   appellant's   Annual   Character 


       Roll/Annual   Confidential   Report   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   "the 


       A.C.R.") pertaining to past service which includes the A.C.R.'s of 


       the selective period of the service.
16.    Aggrieved   by   the   aforesaid   order   of   compulsory   retirement   from 


       service,   the   appellant   had   approached   this   Court   in   Writ   Petition 


       No.5   of   2002.   This   Court,   however,   dismissed   the   W.P.   No.   5   of 


       2002 vide Order dated 18.01.2002 with liberty to avail alternative 


       remedy under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. Accordingly, 


       the appellant  filed a Writ  Petition  no. 2856 of 2002 under
Article 


       226
before the Jharkhand High Court.
17.    The   respondents   herein   had  brought  to  the  notice  of  this  Court  in 


       Writ Petition (C) No.547 of 1999 that the appellant had retired from 


       service   and   therefore,   this   Court   transferred   the   pending
8
proceedings in W.P.(C) NO.547/1999 to the Jharkhand High Court 


             for   its   consideration   and   decision.   On   transfer,   the   same   was 


             registered as W.P. No. (S) 1620 of 2003 before the High Court.
18.    By   the   impugned   judgment,   the   High   Court   has   rejected   both   the 


             writ   petitions   filed   by   the   appellant.   That   is   how   the   appellant   is 


             before us in this Civil Appeal.
19.    Learned   counsel   for   the   appellant   submitted   that   the   order   of 


             reversion,   whereby   the   appellant   was   reverted   from   the   post   of 


             Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   to   that   of   Munsif   (Civil   Judge,   Junior 


             Division) is smacked with arbitrariness and contrary to the norms of 


             service   law   jurisprudence   and   therefore,   is   bad   in   law.   While 


             elaborating his submission, the learned counsel would contend that 


             the High Court, having accepted his explanation to the Show Cause 


             Notice issued to explain the notings made by the Inspecting Judge 


             in   Criminal   Miscellaneous   Petition   No.10327   of   1994,   could   not 


             have initiated departmental proceedings against the appellant.  This, 


             the   learned   counsel   would   contend,   would   amount   to   double 


             jeopardy.
[[
9
20.    Per contra,  learned counsel for the respondents would submit that 


       the explanation was accepted by the Standing Committee only with 


       regard   to   the   impertinent   language   used   by   the   appellant   and   not 


       with regard to the allegations of granting of bail/provisional bail to 


       the accused persons even in heinous crimes.  Therefore, he submits 


       that the High Court was justified in  initiating  departmental inquiry 


       proceedings   against   the   appellant   for   the   charges   alleged   in   the 


       charge memo.
21.    Learned   counsel   for   the   appellant,   insofar   as   his   compulsory 


       retirement   from   service   is   concerned,   submits   that   the   adverse 


       remarks that were taken into consideration by the High Court while 


       terminating the services of the appellant, were never communicated 


       to   him   and   secondly,   he   would   submit   that   the   High   Court   was 


       selective   in   taking   into   consideration   the   ACR's   of   the   appellant 


       from the date of his entry into service till the date of his retirement.
He further submits that the High Court, while recording the entries 


       made   in   the   ACR's   in   the   impugned   judgment,   has   not   made   the 


       correct reflection of the actual contents of the ACR's which are in 


       the records.   In support of that contention, the learned counsel has
10
invited our attention to the additional affidavit filed before the High 


       Court as well in these proceedings.
22.    In   reply   to   the   submissions   made   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the 


       appellant, the learned counsel for the High Court submits that in the 


       Writ   Petition,   filed   by   the   appellant,   he   had   not   specifically 


       contended   that   the   adverse   remarks   which   were   entered   in   the 


       ACR's   were   not   communicated   to   him.   Even   otherwise,   learned 


       counsel   would   contend   that   the   entire   service   profile   of   the 


       appellant   while   in   service   was   not   above   board and   therefore,   the 


       High Court was justified in recommending the case of the appellant 


       to the State Government for compulsory retirement from service.
23.    The issues that would fall for our consideration and decision in this 


       appeal   are:     Whether   the   High   Court   was   justified   in   passing   the 


       order   dated   21.4.1998   in   reverting   the   appellant   from   the   post   of 


       Chief Judicial Magistrate to the rank of Munsif (Civil Judge, Junior 


       Division); and Whether the High Court was justified in passing the 


       order of compulsorily retiring the appellant from service in public 


       interest.
11
24.    To answer the first issue, we may  have to notice the observations 


       made   by   the   learned   Inspecting   Judge   in   Criminal   Miscellaneous 


       Petition No.11327 of 1994.  The same is extracted :-
"In the present case, as stated above, the grant of bail by the Chief 


        Judicial   Magistrate   itself   was   against   the   statutory   provision 


        contained in
section 437
of the Code as the materials on the record 


        clearly   show   that   there   was   reasonable   ground   for   believing   that 


        the petitioner has been guilty of an offence punishable with death 


        or   imprisonment   for   life.   The   grant   of   bail   itself   was   not 


        permissible in law and virtually the Chief Judicial Magistrate has 


        surrendered his judicial discretion to some other consideration.
25.    In pursuance to certain directions  issued in the aforesaid Criminal 


       Miscellaneous   Petition,   the   High   Court   had   called   for   the 


       explanation from the appellant.  Pursuant to the direction so issued, 


       the appellant had offered his explanation.  The Standing Committee 


       of   the   High   Court   had   directed   the   appellant   to   appear   before   it.
Before   the   Standing   Committee,   the   appellant   had   expressed   his 


       unconditional apology and the same was accepted by the Standing 


       Committee and the Standing Committee had observed in its noting
12
that the case has been closed against the appellant and the same was 


       informed to the appellant also.
26.    By yet another explanation, the appellant had justified his action in 


       granting bail.  This explanation offered by him was also accepted by 


       the High Court and the same was communicated to the appellant by 


       the Registrar General of the High Court in which specific reference 


       is   made   to   the   explanation   offered   by   the   appellant   in   his   reply 


       dated 21.12.1994.
27.    After accepting his explanation, the High Court was still of the view 


       that   disciplinary   proceedings   requires   to   be   initiated   against   the 


       appellant for his alleged omission and commission of granting bail 


       indiscriminately   even   in   heinous   crimes.   The   Charge   Memo   was 


       replied by the appellant and in that he had, specifically, contended 


       that the Standing Committee of the High Court, after accepting the 


       explanation, had informed him that his explanation is accepted and 


       all the allegations made against him are closed.   This aspect of the 


       matter, though noticed by the Inquiry Officer, he does not give any 


       finding.  He, however, has observed that the charges alleged against 


       the appellant are proved.  Based on this, the High Court has passed
13
the order of reversion whereby the appellant was reverted from the 


post of Chief Judicial Magistrate to that of Munsif and the same was 


notified   by   the   State   Government   also.   In   our   opinion,   having 


accepted the explanations and having communicated the same to the 


appellant,   the   High   Court   could   not   have   proceeded   to   pass   the 


order   of   initiating   departmental   proceedings   and   reverting   the 


appellant from the post of Chief Judicial Magistrate to the post of 


Munsif.     On  General   Principles,   there   can  be  only  one  enquiry  in 


respect of a charge for a particular misconduct and that is also what 


the   rules   usually   provide.     If,   for   some   technical   or   other   good 


ground, procedural or otherwise, the first enquiry or punishment or 


exoneration is found bad in law, there is no principle that a second 


enquiry cannot be initiated.   Therefore, when a completed enquiry 


proceedings is set aside by a competent forum on a technical or on 


the ground of procedural  infirmity, fresh proceedings  on the same 


charges   is   permissible.     In   the   present   case,   a   charge   memo   was 


issued and served on the appellant.  A reading of the charge memo 


does not contain any reference to the proceedings of the Standing 


Committee   at   all.     It   is   also   not   found   as   to   whether   the   earlier 


proceedings   has   been   revived   in   accordance   with   the   procedure 


prescribed.  In fact, after receipt of the charge memo, the appellant,
14
in   his   reply   statement,   had   brought   to   the   notice   of   the   enquiry 


       officer   that   on   the   same   set   of   charges,   a   notice   had   been   issued 


       earlier   and   after   receipt   of   his   explanation   dated   21.12.1994,   the 


       Standing   Committee,   after   accepting   his   explanation   had   dropped 


       the entire proceedings and the same had been communicated to him 


       by   the   Registrar   General   of   the   High   Court   by   his   letter   dated 


       02.02.1995.  In spite of his explanation in the reply statement filed, 


       the enquiry officer has proceeded with the enquiry proceedings and 


       after   completion   of   the   same,   has   submitted   his   report   which   has 


       been   accepted   by   the   disciplinary   authority.     Therefore,   in   these 


       circumstances,   there   is   no   justification   for   conducting   a   second 


       enquiry   on   the   very   charges,   which   have   been   dropped   earlier.
Even through the principles of double jeopardy is not applicable, the 


       law   permits   only   disciplinary   proceedings   and   not   harassment.
Allowing such practice is not in the interest of public service.  In the 


       circumstance,   we   cannot   sustain   the   impugned   order   reverting   the 


       appellant to the lower post.
28.    We now proceed to consider the second order passed by the High 


       Court   for   recommending   the   case   of   the   appellant   to   the   State 


       Government   to   accept   and   issue   appropriate   notification   to
15
compulsorily  retire   the  appellant   from Judicial   Service.    It  is  now 


well settled that the object of compulsory retirement from service is 


to weed out the dead wood in order to maintain a high standard of 


efficiency and honesty and to keep the judicial service unpolluted.
Keeping this object in view, the contention of the appellant has to 


be   appreciated   on   the   basis   of   the   settled   law   on   the   subject   of 


Compulsory   retirement.
In
Baikuntha   Nath   Das   v.   Chief   District  


Medical Officer
, (1992) 2 SCC 299, three Judge Bench of this Court 


has   laid   down   the   principles   regarding   the   Order   of   Compulsory 


retirement in public interest :
34.  The   following   principles   emerge   from 
     the above discussion:
(i) An   order   of   compulsory   retirement 
     is not a punishment. It implies no stigma 
     nor any suggestion of misbehaviour.
(ii) The order has to be passed by the 
     government   on   forming   the   opinion   that   it 
     is   in   the   public   interest   to   retire   a 
     government servant compulsorily. The order 
     is   passed   on   the   subjective   satisfaction 
     of the government.
(iii)           Principles   of   natural   justice 
     have   no   place   in   the   context   of   an   order 
     of   compulsory   retirement.   This   does   not 
     mean   that   judicial   scrutiny   is   excluded 
     altogether.  While   the   High   Court   or   this 
     Court   would   not   examine   the   matter   as   an 
     appellate   court,   they   may   interfere   if 
     they   are   satisfied   that   the   order   is 
     passed
                   (
                     a
                       
                       )
                            mala   fide   or   (
                                                          b
                                                            
                                                            )
                                                                    that   it   is
16
based
                       on   no   evidence   or   (
                                                             c
                                                               
                                                               )
                                                                       that   it   is
                                                                                         
            arbitrary   --   in   the   sense   that   no 
            reasonable person would form the requisite 
            opinion   on   the   given   material;   in   short, 
            if it is found to be a perverse order.
(iv) The   government   (or   the   Review 
            Committee, as the case may be) shall have 
            to   consider   the   entire   record   of   service 
            before   taking   a   decision   in   the   matter   -- 
            of   course   attaching   more   importance   to 
            record of and performance during the later 
            years.   The   record   to   be   so   considered 
            would naturally include the entries in the 
            confidential   records/character   rolls,   both 
            favourable   and   adverse.  If   a   government 
            servant   is   promoted   to   a   higher   post 
            notwithstanding   the   adverse   remarks,   such 
            remarks lose their sting, more so, if the 
            promotion   is   based   upon   merit   (selection) 
            and not upon seniority.
(v) An   order   of   compulsory   retirement 
            is   not   liable   to   be   quashed   by   a   Court 
            merely   on   the   showing   that   while   passing 
            it   uncommunicated   adverse   remarks   were 
            also   taken   into   consideration.   That 
            circumstance   by   itself   cannot   be   a   basis 
            for interference.
Interference   is   permissible   only   on   the 
            grounds   mentioned   in   (iii)   above.   This 
            aspect   has   been   discussed   in   paras   30   to 
            32 above.
29.
In
Madan Mohan Choudhary  v.  State of Bihar
,  (1999) 3 SCC 396, 


       this   Court   was   considering   the   order   of   compulsory   retirement   of 


       the appellant, who was a Member of the Superior Judicial Service in 


       the State  of Bihar. On a writ petition filed by the appellant  in the
17
High Court, challenging his order of compulsory retirement by the 


Full  Court  of  the  High Court, the  High  Court  on the  judicial   side 


refused to interfere and dismissed the petition. The appellant came 


in appeal before this Court. This Court found that while on various 


earlier  occasions  remarks   were  given  by  the  High Court  but there 


were no entries  in the  character  roll  of the  appellant  for the years 


1991-92,   1992-93   and   1993-94.   The   entries   for   these   years   were 


recorded   at   one   time   simultaneously   and   the   appellant   was 


categorized   as   `C'   Grade   officer.  The   date   on   which  these   entries 


were made was not indicated either in the original record or in the 


counter-affidavit filed by the respondent. These were communicated 


to   the   appellant   on   29-11-1996   and   were   considered   by   the   Full 


Court on 30-11-1996. It was clear that these entries were recorded 


at   a   stage   when   the   Standing   Committee   had   already   made   up   its 


mind   to   compulsorily   retire   the   appellant   from   service   as   it   had 


directed   the   office   on   6-11-1996   to   put   up   a   note   for   compulsory 


retirement of the appellant. This Court held that it was a case where 


there was no material on the basis of which an opinion could have 


been   reasonably   formed   that   it   would   be   in   the   public   interest   to 


retire the appellant from service prematurely. This Court was of the 


opinion   that   the   entries   recorded   "at   one   go"   for   three   years,
18
namely,   1991-92,   1992-93   and   1993-94   could   hardly   have   been 


       taken   into   consideration.
The   Court   then   referred   to   its   earlier 


       decision in Registrar, High Court of
Madras v. R. Rajiah
, (1988) 3 


       SCC   211,  where   this   Court   said   that   the   High   Court   in   its 


       administrative jurisdiction has the power to recommend compulsory 


       retirement of the Member of the judicial service in accordance with 


       the rules framed in that regard but it cannot act arbitrarily and there 


       has to be material to come to a decision to compulsorily retire the 


       officer.  In   that   case   it   was   also   pointed   out   that   the   High   Court 


       while exercising its power of control over the subordinate judiciary 


       is   under   a   constitutional   obligation   to   guide   and   protect   judicial 


       officers   from   being   harassed   or   annoyed   by   trifling   complaints 


       relating   to   judicial   orders   so   that   the   officers   may   discharge   their 


       duties   honestly   and   independently;   unconcerned   by   the   ill-
conceived or motivated  complaints made by unscrupulous lawyers 


       and litigants.
30.    We   are   conscious   of   the   fact   that   there   is   very   limited   scope   of 


       judicial   review   of   an   order   of   premature   retirement   from   service.
As   observed   by   this   Court   in
Rajiah
's   case   (supra)   that   when   the 


       High Court takes the view that an order of compulsory retirement
19
should   be   made   against   a   member   of   the   Judicial   Service,   the 


       adequacy   or   sufficiency   of   such   materials   cannot   be   questioned, 


       unless   the   materials   are   absolutely   irrelevant   to   the   purpose   of 


       compulsory   retirement.     We   also   add   that   when   an   order   of 


       compulsory retirement is challenged in a court of law, the Court has 


       the right to examine whether some  ground or material germane to 


       the issue exists or not. Although, the Court is not interested in the 


       sufficiency   of   the   material   upon   which   the   order   of   compulsory 


       retirement rests.
31.    This Court in  High Court of
Punjab & Haryana v. Ishwar Chand  


       Jain
, (1999) 4 SCC 579, has discussed the purpose, importance and 


       effect   of   the   remarks   made   during   inspection   which   ultimately 


       become the part of the ACR of the concerned Judicial officer. This 


       Court has observed thus:
32.   Since   late   this   Court   is   watching  
            the   spectre   of   either   judicial   officers  
            or the High Courts coming to this Court  
            when   there   is   an   order   prematurely  
            retiring   a   judicial   officer.   Under
Article 235
of the Constitution the High  
            Court   exercises   complete   control   over  
            subordinate                courts            which           include  
            District   Courts.   Inspection   of   the  
            subordinate   courts   is   one   of   the   most
20
important functions which the High Court  
performs           for         control         over         the  
subordinate   courts.   The   object   of   such  
inspection   is   for   the   purpose   of  
assessment of the work performed by the  
Subordinate   Judge,   his   capability,  
integrity   and   competency.   Since   Judges  
are   human   beings   and   also   prone   to   all  
the   human   failings   inspection   provides  
an opportunity for pointing out mistakes  
so   that   they   are   avoided   in   future   and  
deficiencies, if any, in the working of  
the         subordinate             court,          remedied.
Inspection   should   act   as   a   catalyst   in  
inspiring Subordinate Judges to give the  
best   results.   They   should   feel   a   sense  
of achievement. They need encouragement.
They work under great stress and man the  
courts   while   working   under   great  
discomfort   and   hardship.   A   satisfactory  
judicial   system   depends   largely   on   the  
satisfactory   functioning   of   courts   at  
the   grass-roots   level.   Remarks   recorded  
by   the   Inspecting   Judge   are   normally  
endorsed   by   the   Full   Court   and   become  
part   of   the   annual   confidential   reports  
and are foundations on which the career  
of a judicial officer is made or marred.
Inspection   of   a   subordinate   court   is  
thus   of   vital   importance.   It   has   to   be  
both effective and productive. It can be  
so   only   if   it   is   well   regulated   and   is  
workman-like.   Inspection   of   subordinate  
courts is not a one-day or an hour or a  
few minutes' affair. It has to go on all  
the year round by monitoring the work of  
the   court   by   the   Inspecting   Judge.   A  
casual   inspection   can   hardly   be  
beneficial to a judicial system. It does  
more harm than good.
21
32.    It is also well settled that the formation of opinion for compulsory 


       retirement is based on the subjective  satisfaction of the concerned 


       authority but such satisfaction must be based on a valid material. It 


       is  permissible  for  the  Courts  to  ascertain  whether  a  valid  material 


       exists   or   otherwise,   on   which   the   subjective   satisfaction   of   the 


       administrative authority is based. In the present matter, what we see 


       is   that   the   High   Court,   while   holding   that   the   track   record   and 


       service   record   of   the   appellant   was   unsatisfactory,   has   selectively 


       taken   into   consideration   the   service   record   for   certain   years   only 


       while making extracts of those contents of the ACR's. There appears 


       to be some discrepancy.  We say so for the reason that the appellant 


       has produced the copies of the ACR's which were obtained by him 


       from the High Court under the
Right to Information Act, 2005
and a 


       comparison   of   these   two   would   positively   indicate   that   the   High 


       Court   has   not   faithfully   extracted   the   contents   of   the   ACRs.   The 


       High Court has taken the decision on the basis of selective service 


       record   which   includes   the   summarized   ACR's,   as   quoted   in   the 


       impugned judgment, for the selected years. The ACR for the initial 


       years:   1975-76   and   1976-77   remarks   him   as   capable   of 


       improvement   against   quality   of   work,   the   ACR's   for   the   years:
22
1982-83, 1983-84 points that his work is unsatisfactory, the ACR's 


for   the   year:   1984-85,   1987-88   remark   his   work   performance   as 


unsatisfactory with bad reputation and quarrelsome attitude, and the 


ACR for the later years: 1993-94 & 1994-95 refers to some private 


complaints and remark that his powers were divested by the High 


Court   and   the   ACR's   for   the   recent   years:   1997-98   &   1998-99 


points that no defect in judicial work but disposal of cases is poor. 


Whereas,   the   appellant   furnished   certain   Service   records   which 


includes:   the  ACR  recorded   by   inspecting  Judge   in  the  year  1985 


which   evaluate   the   appellant   as   `B'-Satisfactory   against   the   entry 


"Net result", further the ACR prepared by the District and Sessions 


Judge, Samastipur for the year 1997-98 assessed him as an officer 


of average merit, maintaining good relationship with bar, staffs and 


colleagues but poor disposal, and the ACR prepared by the District 


and Sessions Judge, Muzaffarpur for the year 1998-99 assessed him 


as   a   good   officer   but   poor   disposal.  However,   his   poor   disposal 


during this period is justified up to certain extent in the background 


of his involvement in the continuous and unnecessary disciplinary 


proceedings   which   was   based   on   the   charges   of   granting   of   bail 


indiscriminately, even after, the fact that he had been exonerated of 


these   charges   long   back   in   the   year   1995   by   the   High   Court   at
23
Patna.  The   material   on   which   the   decision   of   the   Compulsory 


retirement   was   based,   as   extracted   by   the   High   Court   in   the 


impugned judgment, and material furnished by the appellant would 


reflect   that   totality   of   relevant   materials   were   not   considered   or 


completely   ignored   by   the   High   Court.  This   leads   to   only   one 


conclusion that the subjective satisfaction of the High Court was not 


based   on   the   sufficient   or   relevant   material.  In   this   view   of   the 


matter,  we cannot say that the service record of the appellant was 


unsatisfactory   which   would   warrant   premature   retirement   from 


service.  Therefore, there was no justification to retire the appellant 


compulsorily   from   service.
In
Swami   Saran   Saksena   v.   State   of  


U.P.
,   (1980)   1   SCC   12,   this   Court   has   quashed   the   order   of 


Compulsory   retirement   of   the   appellant,   therein,   in   the   public 


interest,   which   was   found   to   be   in   sharp   contradiction   with   his 


recent service performance and record. This Court observed:
3.   Ordinarily,   the   Court   does   not  
     interfere   with   the   judgment   of   the  
     relevant authority on the point whether it  
     is   in  the   public  interest   to  compulsorily  
     retire   a   government   servant.   And   we   have  
     been   even   more   reluctant   to   reach   the  
     conclusion   we   have,   when   the   impugned  
     order of compulsory retirement was made on  
     the   recommendation   of   the   High   Court  
     itself.   But   on   the   material   before   us   we
24
are   unable   to   reconcile   the   apparent  
            contradiction   that   although   for   the  
            purpose   of   crossing   the   second   efficiency  
            bar   the   appellant   was   considered   to   have  
            worked   with   distinct   ability   and   with  
            integrity   beyond   question,   yet   within   a  
            few   months   thereafter   he   was   found   so  
            unfit as to deserve compulsory retirement.
The   entries   in   between   in   the   records  
            pertaining   to   the   appellant   need   to   be  
            examined   and   appraised   in   that   context.
There is no evidence to show that suddenly  
            there   was   such   deterioration   in   the  
            quality   of   the   appellant's   work   or  
            integrity   that   he   deserved   to   be  
            compulsorily   retired.   For   all   these  
            reasons, we are of opinion that the order  
            of   compulsory   retirement   should   be  
            quashed.   The   appellant   will   be   deemed   to  
            have   continued   in   service   on   the   date   of  
            the impugned order.
33.    Moreover,  the District and Sessions Judge have the opportunity to 


       watch   the   functioning   of   the   appellant   from   close   quarters,   who 


       have   reported   favourably   regarding   the   appellant's   overall 


       performance   except   about   his   disposal,   in   the   appellant's   recent 


       ACR for the year 1997-98 and 1998-99. In view of this, the greater 


       importance   is   to   be   given   to   the   opinion   or   remarks   made   by   the 


       immediate   superior   officer   as   to   the   functioning   of   the   concerned 


       judicial   officer   for   the   purpose   of   his   compulsory  retirement.  The 


       immediate  superior  is   better  placed   to  observe,  analyse,   scrutinize
25
from close quarters and then, to comment upon his working, overall 


        efficiency, and reputation.
In
Nawal Singh v. State of U.P.
, (2003) 8 


        SCC 117, this Court has observed thus:
12. ... In the present-day system, reliance is required to be  

             placed   on   the   opinion   of   the   higher   officer   who   had   the  

             opportunity   to   watch   the   performance   of   the   officer  

             concerned from close quarters and formation of his opinion  

             with regard to the overall reputation enjoyed by the officer  

             concerned would be the basis.
34.     In view of the above discussion, we are of the opinion that the High 


        Court was not justified in sustaining the orders passed by the Full 


        Court of the same High Court.   Accordingly, we allow this appeal, 


        set aside the orders passed by the High Court. Since the appellant 


        has retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation, he is 


        entitled   to   all   the   monetary   benefits   from  the   date   of   his   notional 


        posting   as   C.J.M.   till   his   notional   retirement   from   service   on 


        attaining the age of superannuation, as expeditiously as possible, at 


        any rate, within four months from the date of receipt of a copy of 


        this order.
Ordered accordingly.
......................................J.
                                                               (H.L. DATTU)
26
......................................J.
                                        (ANIL R. DAVE)
NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 01, 2012
27