[Cites
8
, Cited by
13
]
Supreme Court of India
Raja Mechanical Co.(P) Ltd vs Commnr. Of Central Excise, Delhi-I on 9 February, 2012
Bench:
Anil R. Dave
,
H.L. Dattu
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.5049 OF 2003


RAJA MECHANICAL CO.(P) LTD.           ...APPELLANT

                                   VERSUS

COMMNR. OF CENTRAL EXCISE,            ...RESPONDENT
DELHI-I


                                  O R D E R
1. This Civil Appeal is directed against the  judgment  and  order  dated
      21.12.2001 passed by High Court of  Delhi  at  New  Delhi  in  Central
      Excise Case No.41 of 2001, wherein the High Court  has  dismissed  the
      reference application filed by the appellant.
2. The facts in nutshell are that  the  assessee  is  a  manufacturer  of
      dutiable excisable goods.  For  its  manufacturing  activity,  it  had
      purchased  certain  capital  goods,  namely  Windsor  Model  Injection
      Moulding Machine and screw assembly along with tool kit falling  under
      Chapter sub heading 8477.10. The assessee has availed a MODVAT  Credit
      of Rs. 1,47,000/- by filing a declaration dated 30.6.1995  under  Rule
      57T(1), whereby it declared the receipt of the  said  goods  from  M/s
      D.G.P. Windsor India Ltd. vide invoice dated 18.6.1995, along with the
      application  for  condonation  of  delay,  before   the   adjudicating
      authority/assessing authority. However, the said declaration  was  not
      filed within the time prescribed under the ‘
Central Excise  Act,  1944
(for short ‘the Act’) and the rules  framed  thereunder.  Accordingly,
      the adjudicating authority  had  issued  a  show  cause  notice  dated
      11.10.1995 to the assessee, inter alia, directing it to show cause  as
      to why the MODVAT credit to the tune of Rs.1,47,000/-, availed by  it,
      should not be disallowed and recovered under Rule 57G of  the  central
      Excise Rules, 1944 (for short ‘the Rules’) read with
Section  11A
of
      the Act and, further directed it to show cause as to why penalty under
      Rule  173Q  of  the  Rules  should  not  be  imposed.  Thereafter,   a
      Corrigendum dated 23.4.1997 to the Show cause notice was issued to the
      assessee, inter alia, directing it to  show  cause  to  the  Assistant
      Commissioner instead of the Deputy Collector, as mentioned in the Show
      cause notice dated 11.10.1995. The assessee was  further  directed  to
      show cause as to why the penalty under  Section  11AC  should  not  be
      imposed and, further, interest should not be recovered  under
Section
      11AB
of the Act.
3. In its reply dated 16.11.1995 and 26.6.1997 to the Show cause  notice,
      the assessee had submitted that it had received the said goods in  the
      factory only on 30.9.1995, however, had wrongly mentioned the date  of
      receipt of said goods as 18.6.1995 in its declaration filed under Rule
      57T due to inadvertence, which was actually the date of invoice issued
      by the supplier. The assessee further submitted that it had also filed
      the application for condonation of delay in filing the declaration.
4. After receipt of the reply  that  was  filed  by  the  appellant,  the
      adjudicating authority, after taking cognizance of the cash voucher of
      the assessee dated 30.6.1997, observed that  the  cash  voucher  which
      shows the payment made by the party is the evidence of delivery of the
      goods to the party. Therefore, the actual delivery of the goods to the
      assessee was made on 30.6.1997 instead of 30.6.1995. It also  observed
      that the whole  machinery  was  transported  by  one  consignment,  as
      evident  from  the  invoice,  which  bear  vehicle  number  used   for
      transportation. In  view  of  this,  the  adjudicating  authority  has
      confirmed the show cause notice and  disallowed  the  benefit  of  the
      MODVAT credit vide  his  order  dated  17.10.1997  and,  thereby,  had
      directed the recovery of  MODVAT  credit  of  Rs.1,47,000/-.  He  also
      imposed a penalty of Rs.20,000/-.
5. The  assessee,  being  aggrieved  by  the  orders  so  passed  by  the
      adjudicating authority,  had  preferred  an  Appeal  before  the  same
      authority which had passed the orders  in  original.  Nearly  after  a
      year's time, the assessee realized that the appeal that was  filed  by
      him was not before the appropriate authority but before  an  authority
      which had passed the order in original. Thereafter, the  assessee  has
      filed an appeal before the  first  appellate  authority,  namely,  the
      Commissioner of Appeals, but by that time there was a delay in  filing
      the appeal. Along with the appeal, the  assessee  had  also  filed  an
      application under
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, 1963 explaining the
      delay in filing the appeal.
6. The first appellate authority, being of the opinion  that  it  has  no
      powers to condone the delay beyond the prescribed period, has rejected
      the appeal vide its Order dated 1.3.2000. Aggrieved by the  same,  the
      assessee had carried the matter by way of  Second  Appeal  before  the
      Tribunal. The Tribunal, by its judgment and  order  dated  17.10.2000,
      confirmed  the  orders  passed  by  the  first  appellate   authority.
      Thereafter, the assessee had filed an application for rectification of
      the judgment and orders passed by the Tribunal on the ground that  the
      Tribunal ought to have considered the assessee's appeal  not  only  on
      the ground of limitation but also on merits of the case. The  Tribunal
      vide its miscellaneous order  dated  9.3.2001,  in  our  opinion,  has
      rightly rejected the application filed for rectification of the  order
      passed.  Being aggrieved by the order  passed  by  the  Tribunal,  the
      assessee had  approached  the  High  Court  by  filing  the  reference
      application with a request to direct the Tribunal to  state  the  case
      and the question of law for its consideration and decision.  The  High
      Court, after noticing the question of  law  that  was  framed  by  the
      assessee, has answered the same in negative and against  the  assessee
      and in favour of  the  revenue  vide  its  judgment  and  order  dated
      21.12.2001. It is the correctness or otherwise of this  order  of  the
      High Court is the subject matter of this appeal.
7. We have heard  Mr.P.C.Jain,  learned  counsel  for  the  assessee  and
      Mr.Harish Chandra, learned senior counsel for the  revenue.   Firstly,
      Mr.Jain, would contend that the Tribunal ought to have considered  the
      assessee's appeal not only on the ground of  limitation  but  also  on
      merits of the case. Since that has not been  done,  according  to  the
      learned counsel, the Tribunal has  committed  a  serious  error.   The
      learned counsel would further submit that  the  “doctrine  of  merger”
      theory would apply in  the  sense  that  though  the  first  appellate
      authority has rejected the appeal filed by the assessee on the  ground
      of limitation, the orders passed by the original authority would merge
      with  the  orders  passed  by  the  first  appellate  authority   and,
      therefore, the Tribunal ought to have considered the appeal  filed  by
      the assessee not only on the ground of limitation but also  on  merits
      of the case.  To buttress his arguments, the learned counsel has drawn
      our attention to the observations made by this Court in  the  case  of
Collector of Customs, Calcutta, Vs. East India Commercial Co.Ltd.
,
AIR
      1963 1124, Shyam Sunder Sarma Vs. Panllalal Jaiswal
,  2005  (
181)  ELT
      163 (SC), Kunhayammed Vs. State of Kerala
, 2001 (129) ELT 11 (SC)  and
      the decision of the Tribunal in the case of
Mark Auto  Industries  Vs.
      CCE, New Delhi
, 2000 (41) RLT 756 (CEGAT).
8.
In reply to the submissions made by learned counsel for the appellant,
      Shri Harish Chandra, learned senior counsel appearing for the  revenue
      has invited our attention to the decision of this Court in the case of
Chandi Prasad & Ors., Vs. Jagdish Prasad &  Ors.
,  (2004)  8  SCC  724
      wherein this Court, after consideration of the earlier  decisions  has
      come to the conclusion that the doctrine of merger  would not apply to
      a case where an  appeal  is  dismissed  only  on  the  ground  of  the
      limitation. In
the said decision
, this Court has observed as under:
“.....when an appeal is dismissed on the ground that delay in filing
        the same is not condoned, the doctrine of merger shall not apply.”
9. The learned counsel has also invited our attention to the observations
      made by this Court  in  the  case  of
State  of  Kerala  &  Anr.  Vs.
      Kondottyparambanmoosa & Ors.
,(2008) 8 SCC 65. In
the  said  decision
,
      the Court has stated as under:
“Keeping these  principles  as  enunciated  by  this  Court  in  the
        aforesaid three decisions in mind and applying the  said  principles
        in the facts of this case, we have no  hesitation  in  our  mind  to
        conclude that the High Court in the impugned order did  not  at  all
        consider that in the earlier  revision  order  of  the  High  Court,
        revisional application was rejected not on merits but  only  on  the
        ground of delay.  Therefore, it must be held that since the  earlier
        revision application was not rejected  on  merits,  the  said  order
        rejecting the same on the ground of delay cannot be said to  be  the
        order of affirmance and that being the position, we must  hold  that
        since the earlier revision petition was not decided on  merits,  the
        doctrine of merger cannot be applied to the facts and  circumstances
        of the present case.”
10.
In this connection, the observations made by this Court in the case of
Chandi Prasad & Ors.
(supra), needs to be  reproduced,  which  are  as
      under:
“It is trite that when an  appellate  court  passes  a  decree,  the
        decree of the trial court merges with the decree  of  the  appellate
        court and even if and subject to any modification that may  be  made
        in  the  appellate  decree,  the  decree  of  the  appellate   court
        supersedes the decree of the trial court. In other words, the merger
        of a decree takes place irrespective of the fact as to  whether  the
        appellate court affirms, modifies or reverses the decree  passed  by
        the trial  court.   When  a  special  leave  petition  is  dismissed
        summarily, doctrine of merger does not apply but when an  appeal  is
        dismissed, it does.”
11. The facts are not in dispute and cannot be disputed that there  was  a
      delay in filing the prescribed forms before the  assessing  authority.
      Therefore, the assessing authority  had  rejected  the  claim  of  the
      assessee and accordingly, had directed him for payment of  the  excise
      duty credit availed by the assessee.  Aggrieved  by  that  order,  the
      assessee had belatedly filed an appeal  before  the  proper  appellate
      authority.  Since there was delay in filing the appeal and  since  the
      same was not within the time that the appellate authority  could  have
      condoned the delay, accordingly had dismissed the same.   It  is  that
      order which was questioned before the Tribunal.  Before the  Tribunal,
      as we have already noticed, the assessee had requested the Tribunal to
      first condone the delay and next to decide the appeal on merits,  i.e.
      to  decide  whether  the  adjudicating  authority  was  justified   in
      disallowing the benefit of the MODVAT credit that was availed  by  the
      assessee.  The Tribunal had not conceded to the second request made by
      the assessee and only accepted the findings and conclusions reached by
      the Commissioner of Appeals, who had rejected the appeal.
12. The question now that falls for  our  consideration  and  decision  is
      whether the Tribunal was justified in not considering the case of  the
      assessee on merits.  The assessee's  stand  before  the  Tribunal  and
      before this Court is  that  the  orders  passed  by  the  adjudicating
      authority would merge with the orders passed by  the  first  appellate
      authority and the Tribunal ought to have considered the  appeal  filed
      by the assessee on merits also.  In our opinion, the  same  cannot  be
      accepted. In view of the plethora of decisions of this Court,  wherein
      this Court has, categorically, observed that  if  for  any  reason  an
      appeal is dismissed on the ground of limitation  and  not  on  merits,
      that order would not  merge  with  the  orders  passed  by  the  first
      appellate authority.  In that view  of  the  matter,  we  are  of  the
      opinion, that the High Court was justified in  rejecting  the  request
      made by the assessee for directing the revenue to state the  case  and
      also the question of law for its consideration and decision.  In  view
      of the above discussion, we do not find any merit in this appeal.
13. Accordingly, the appeal stands rejected.  No costs.
Ordered accordingly.
...................J.
                                                                (H.L. DATTU)



                                                       ...................J.
                                                              (ANIL R. DAVE)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 19, 2012
-----------------------
12