[Cites
25
, Cited by
33
]
Supreme Court of India
T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad vs Union Of India & Ors on 13 February, 2012
Equivalent citations: AIR 2012 SUPREME COURT 1254, 2012 (3) SCC 277, 2012 AIR SCW 1644, 2012 (2) SCALE 534, (2012) 1 CLR 511 (SC), AIR 2012 SC (CIVIL) 1065, (2012) 4 MAD LW 911, (2012) 4 ANDHLD 47, (2012) 2 SCALE 534, (2012) 114 CUT LT 71, AIRONLINE 2012 SC 55, (2012) 4 MAD LJ 137, (2012) 2 ALL WC 2037, (2012) 4 MAD LW 777, (2012) 2 SCALE 551, 2012 (4) SCC 362, (2012) 116 ALL IND CAS 214 (SC), (2012) 116 ALLINDCAS 214
Author:
K.S. Radhakrishnan
Bench:
Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
,
K.S. Radhakrishnan
REPORTABLE

                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                        CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                     I. A. Nos. 1433 and 1477 of 2005

                                       IN 

                    WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 202 OF 1995

T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad                    .. Petitioner   (s)

                                     Versus

Union of India & Others                        .. Respondent(s)




                               J U D G M E N T
K.S. Radhakrishnan, J.
Asiatic   Wild   Buffalo   is   reported   to   be   the   most   impressive 

  and magnificent animal in the world.   Often it is found in the 

  Western and Eastern Ghats of the country.  Learned Amicus Curiae 

  has moved this Court seeking a direction to the Union of India 

  and the State of Chhattisgarh to prepare a rescue plan to save 

  Wild Buffalo,  an endangered specie from extinction and to make 

  available   necessary   funds   and   resources   required   for   the   said 

  purpose   and   also   for   a   direction   to   take   immediate   steps   to 

  ensure that interbreeding between the wild and domestic buffalo 

  does not take place and the genetic purity of the wild species 

  is maintained. Direction was also sought for to prepare a scheme 

  in  consultation   with  the   villagers  for   relocation  of   villagers 

  from   the   Udanti   Sanctuary   to   ensure   the   survival   of   the 

  endangered   wild   buffalo.       Direction   was   also   sought   for   that 

  all   research   and   monitoring   inputs   including   scientific
2
management of the wild buffalo and its habitat be made available 

on long term basis by involving institutes such as the Wildlife 

Institute of India, the Bombay Natural History Society etc.
2. The   State   of   Chhattisgarh   filed   its   reply   affidavit     on 

30.01.2006  explaining   the  steps   taken  to   conserve  and   preserve 

the   endangered   species   which   was   declared   as   a   State   Animal. 

Along with the affidavit, a comprehensive operational Management 

Plan   for   Udanti   Wildlife   Sanctuary   was   also   enclosed   stating 

that   the   execution   of   the   said   Management   Plan   had   suffered 

setbacks due to acute financial shortage for its implementation. 

Further,   it   was   stated   that   the   funds   allotted   under   Central 

Assistance from the Government of India, Ministry of Environment 

and   Forests   was   not   in   tune   with   the   budget   requirement   for 

development   of   the   sanctuary   and   the   conservation   of   the 

endangered species.   A chart showing shortfall in funds for the 

development   of   the   sanctuary   has   also   been   annexed   with   the 

affidavit,   so   also   a   table   showing   the   census   figures   of   wild 

buffalos.  The reasons for the decline of the wild buffalos have 

also been explained.  In order to overcome those hurdles, it was 

stated that an MoU was entered into with the Wildlife Trust of 

India   on   21.03.2005   which   included   special   efforts   for 

maintaining the genetic purity of those species and for breeding 

thereof.   Steps taken to relocate the villagers residing within 

the sanctuary area has also been highlighted.
3
3. This   Court   on   08.09.2006   passed   an   order   directing   the 

Central   Empowered   Committee   (CEC)   to   conduct   an   enquiry   and 

submit   a   report.   Affidavit   filed   by   the   State   was   also   placed 

before   the   CEC   and     it   had   detailed   discussions   with   the 

officials   of   the   State   of   Chhattisgarh   and   MoEF.     State   of 

Chhattisgarh   constituted   a   task   force   by   its   order   dated 

24.05.2007  for   suggesting  steps   and  formulating   an  action   plan 

for the conservation and increasing the number of wild buffalos 

in   the   State.     Proposal   made   by   the   Chief   Wildlife   Warden   to 

replace the domestic buffalos reared by the villagers with cows 

and bullocks it was stated, was also given active consideration. 

CEC after consultation with the MoEF as well as the officials of 

the State Government submitted its report on 10.09.2008.
4. Steps   taken   by   the   State   of   Chhattisgarh   to   preserve   and 

conserve the wild buffalo which was declared as a State Animal 

is   far   from   satisfactory.   When   the   matter   came   up   for   final 

hearing,   the   counsel   appearing   for   the   MoEF   made   available   a 

copy   of   the   Centrally   Sponsored   Scheme   of   2009   (CSS)   titled 

"Integrated  Development   of  Wildlife   Habitats".    The  Scheme   was 

formulated during the Eleventh Five Year Plan.   The Scheme has 

also   incorporated   additional   components   and   activities   for 

implementing   the   provisions   of   the   Wildlife   (Protection)   Act, 

1972 [for short the Act], National Wildlife Action Plan (2002-

2016),   recommendations   of   the   Tiger   Task   Force,   2005,   and   the 

National  Forest   Commission,  2006   and  the   necessities  felt   from
4
time to time for the conservation of wildlife and biodiversity 

in the country.
5. Before coming into force of the Act, the scheme which was in 

force was "Assistance for the Development of National Parks and 

Sanctuaries"   which   used   to   support   only   National   Parks   and 

Wildlife  Sanctuaries.     However,   following  the   amendment  to   the 

Act, in 2003, two more categories of Protected Areas (PAs) i.e. 

the  Conservation   Reserves  and  Community   Reserves  have   been 

recognized.   Conservation   Reserves,   which   are   government   land, 

but do not require acquisition of rights, nor the curtailment of 

activities   as   envisaged   in   National   Parks   and   Wildlife 

Sanctuaries are stated to be the most appropriate strategy for 

connecting   protected   areas,   by   providing   corridors.     Community 

Reserves   are   entirely   based   on   efforts   of   the   local   people   on 

privately   owned   lands   which   require   financial   and   technical 

assistance   for   their   future   management.   The   Central   Government 

before  the   Act  came   into  force   did  not   have  much   control  over 

the States and the Union Territories for implementation of its 

various schemes and the Parliament, in order to give effect to
Article   51A(g)
,   enacted   the   Act   for   the   protection   of   wild 

animals, birds and plants and   for matters connected therewith, 

with a view to ensure the ecological and environmental security 

of   the   country.
Article   48A
of   the   Constitution   of   India 

imposes   a   duty   on   the   State   to   protect   and   improve   the 

environment   and   to   safeguard   the   forest   and   wildlife   of   the 

country.
5
6.
Article 51A(g)
states that it is the duty of every citizen of 

India  to   protect  and   improve  the   natural  environment   including 

the   wildlife   and   to   have   compassion   for   the   living   creatures. 

By the 42nd Amendment Act 1976 of the Constitution "Forests" was 

added as Entry 17A in the Concurrent List and the "protection of 

wild animals and birds" was added as Entry 17B.   Consequently, 

both the Central and State Governments/UTs are mandated with the 

responsibility   of   protection   and   conservation   of   wildlife   and 

its habitat.     Chapter IV of the Act deals with the "protected 

areas."   Earlier  headings  `Sanctuaries', `National Parks' and 

`Closed  Areas',   was  substituted   by  the   words  "protected   areas"
by Act 16 of 2003.     Section 18 of the Act empowers the State 

Government to declare its intention to constitute any area other 

than   an   area   comprised   within   any   reserve   forest   or   the 

territorial waters as a sanctuary if it considers that such area 

is   of   adequate   ecological,   faunal,   floral,   geomorphological, 

natural   or   zoological   significance,   for   the   purpose   of 

protecting,   propagating   or   developing   wildlife   or   its 

environment.   Chapter IV also confers various other powers upon 

the State Government like acquisition, initiation of acquisition 

proceedings,   declaration   of   areas   as   sanctuary,   restriction   on 

entry   to   the   sanctuaries   etc.     It   is   unnecessary   to   refer   to 

those provisions for the purpose of the instant case.
7. Section   36A  of   the  Act   empowers  the   State  Government,   after 

consultations with the local communities, declare any area owned
6
by  the   Government,  particularly   the  areas   adjacent  to   National 

Parks and sanctuaries and those areas which link one protected 

area   with   another,   as   a  conservation   reserve  for   protecting 

landscapes, seascapes, flora and fauna and their habitat.    The 

Act also empowers the State Government, where the community or 

an   individual   has   volunteered   to   conserve   wildlife   and   its 

habitat,   declare   any   private   or   community   land   not   comprised 

within a National Park, Sanctuary or a Conservation Reserve, as 

a Community Reserve, for protecting fauna, flora and traditional 

or cultural conservation values and practice.     The management 

of   Community   Reserves   shall   primarily   be   done   by   the 

communities/individuals   themselves.   The   Centrally   Sponsored 

Scheme (CSS), therefore, intended to bring these two categories 

of   PAs   also   under   the   ambit   of   the   Scheme   along   with   the 

existing National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries.
8. The   State   of   Forest   Report   2005   states   that   the   forest   and 

tree   cover   in   the   country   is   around   23.39%,   of   which   forests 

constitute around  20.64%.   However, the PA network covers only 

4.8%  of   the  geographical   area  of   the  country   with  most   of  the 

PAs forming part of the forest area.     At present, India has a 

network   of   99   National   Parks,   515   Wildlife   Sanctuaries,   43 

Conservation Reserves and 4 Community Reserves in different bio-

geographic   zones.  Protected   Areas,   i.e.   Conservation   Reserves 

and   Community   Reserves   have   an   important   role   to   play   in 

maintaining geographical integrity of the Nation.   Fact is that 

many   important   habitats   still   exist   outside   those   areas   which
7
require   special   attention   from   the   point   of   view   of 

conservation.   Habitat of Sandalwood, red sanders, white cedar, 

rhododendrons,   Southern   Tropical   Montane   forests,   grasslands, 

alpine meadows of Himalayan region, corridors connecting PAs and 

crucial   wildlife   habitats,   deserts,   tropical   swamps,   rivers, 

estuaries,   bamboo   and   reed   breaks,   mangroves,   coral   reefs, 

deserts   etc.   are   examples   of   such   habitats   existing   outside 

conventional PAs.   The tenurial status of such habitats ranges 

from   government-controlled   Reserved   Forests   to   Protected 

Forests, revenue forests, interspersed vegetation in plantation 

sector,   revenue   lands,   village   forests,   private   forests, 

religious forests, territorial waters, Community Conserved Areas 

etc.   Such habitats also act as corridors for wildlife between 

PAs thus ensuring connectivity in the landscape.
Human-wildlife conflict
9. Human-wildlife conflict is fast becoming a critical threat to 

the   survival   of   many   endangered   species,   like   wild   buffalo, 

elephants, tiger, lion etc.  such conflicts affect not only its 

population   but   also   has   broadened   environmental   impacts   on 

ecosystem   equilibrium   and   biodiversity   conservation.     Laws   are 

man-made,   hence   there   is   likelihood   of   anthropocentric   bias 

towards   man,   and   rights   of   wild   animals   often   tend   to   be   of 

secondary   importance   but   in   the   universe   man   and   animal   are 

equally   placed,   but   human   rights   approach   to   environmental 

protection   in   case   of   conflict,   is   often   based   on 

anthropocentricity.
8
10.      Man-animal   conflict   often   results   not   because   animals 

encroach   human   territories   but   vice-versa.     Often,   man   thinks 

otherwise, because man's thinking is rooted in anthropocentrism. 

Remember,   we   are   talking   about   the   conflict   between   man   and 

endangered   species,   endangered   not   because   of   natural   causes 

alone but because man failed to preserve and protect them,  the 

attitude was destructive, for pleasure and gain.   Often, it is 

said   such   conflicts   is   due   human   population   growth,   land   use 

transformation,   species   habitat   loss,   degradation   and 

fragmentation,   increase   in   eco-tourism,   access   to   natural 

reserves,   increase   in   livestock   population,   etc.     Proper 

management   practices   have   to   be   accepted,   like   conservation 

education   for   local   population,   resettlement   of   villages, 

curbing   grazing   by   livestock   and   domestic   animals   in   forest, 

etc.,   including   prey-preservation   for   the   wild   animals. 

Provision   for   availability   of   natural   water,   less   or   no 

disturbance from the tourists has to be assured.  State also has 

to   take   steps   to   remove   encroachments   and,   if   necessary,   can 

also  cancel   the  patta  already   granted  and   initiate  acquisition 

proceedings to preserve and protect wildlife and its corridors. 

Areas outside PAs is reported to have the maximum number of man-

animal   conflict,   they   fall   prey   to   poachers   easily,   and   often 

invite   ire   of   the   cultivators   when   they   cause   damage   to   their 

crops.  These issues have to be scientifically managed so as to 

preserve  and   protect  the   endangered  species,   like  wild   buffalo
9
and other species included in Schedule 1 Part 1 of  the Wildlife 

Protection Act, as well as other species which face extinction.
11.     Management   plan   for   Udanti   Wildlife   Sanctuary   (2002-

2003,   2011-2012)   published   by   the   Forest   Department   of 

Government of Chattisgarh, paragraph 3.6.2 of the Report reveals 

much more than what meets the eyes which reads as follows:-
"Prior   to   declaration   as   sanctuary   this   area   was 
   part of East Raipur Division in which rules to regulate 
   illegal poaching and hunting existed.
Before   declaration   of   Govt.   forest   it   was   under
control of Bindrawagrah Zameendar.
In those days shooting was allowed after receiving a 
   fee   of  Rs.25/-   at  that   time.    Shooting  of   wild  buffalo 
   was   prohibited   after   Govt.   Notification   no.1905-1517-4 
   dt.   27.08.1935   but   in   this   zameendari   one   shooting 
   licence   holder   was   entitled   to   shoot   one   Bison,   one 
   Barasingha, Tow spotted deer and one Sambhar.  Game rules 
   of C.P. and Bear Game Act, 1935 and CP & Bear Bird game 
   1942 were existing in this are during past.
After   end   of   Zameendari   system   when   these   forest 
   became   Govt.   forest   rules   were   enforced   to   regulate 
   hunting vide notification no.788-2319 DT.19.8.53.
In   these   shooting   rules   of   1953   shooting   of   wild 
   Buffalo was allowed after formal permission of Govt. But 
   shooting of bison was prohibited.   In shooting rules of 
   1955 different fee was decided for hunting.  Shooting of 
   Bison, wild buffalo, Barasingha, Tiger, Sambhar, Leopard, 
   Sloth Bear and Cheetal were allowed.
These   hunting   rules   were   not   very   effective   for 
   regulation of shooting and hunting and therefore shooting 
   was stopped by Govt. of M.P. completely vide notification 
   no.   6036-10(2)-71   dt.   Govt.   of   India   in   this   regard 
   started 11.11.1971.  Effective steps after enforcement of 
   wildlife protection act 1972."
12. Paragraph 3.6.3.2 deals with encroachment   and other illegal 

activity, which reads as follows :-
10
Encroachment and other Illegal activity

            In UWLS encroachment for land hunger is not common 
    practice.   Sometime due to lack of clearcut demarcation 
    live   or   boundaries,   cases   of   encroachment   have   been 
    observed.     Therefore,   village   boundary   should   be 
    development   of   villages   and   for   the   betterment   of 
    villagers in the revenue villages inside and around the 
    sanctuary.         These   department   are   revenue,   ICDS, 
    Veterinary   Health   Services,   Medical   Department,   State 
    Electricity   Board   etc.,   semi   Govt.   village   institutions 
    like   village   and   Janpad   Panchayat   are   also   working   for 
    development activities.
More   development   activity   causes   more   interference 
    in forest and the privacy of wild life.  These ultimately 
    cause conflict with wildlife.
Conflict with wildlife to the abnormal behaviour of 
    wild   animals   like   aggressiveness   of   monkey,   cattle 
    lifting by carnivore, injury by bears during Mahua season 
    etc.

            Development of people is always welcome but not in 
    the cost of negative ecological in the ecosystem.
13. Report clearly states that development activities causes more 

interference in forest and also the privacy of wildlife and these 

ultimately   cause   conflict   with   wildlife.   Man-animal   conflict 

often takes place when wild animals cause damage to agricultural 

crop and property, killing of livestock and human beings.  Human 

population   growth,   land   use   transformation,   species   loss   of 

habitat,   eco-tourism,   too   much   access   to   reserves,   increase   in 

livestock population bordering the forest, depletion of natural 

prey   base   etc.,   often   stated   to   be   reasons   for   such   conflict. 

Central   Govt.   the   State   Governments,   and   the   Union   Territories 

should   evolve   better   preservation   strategies,   in   consultation
11
with Wildlife Boards so that such conflicts can be avoided to a 

large   extent.     Participation   of   people   who   are   staying   in   the 

Community Reserves is also of extreme importance.  The necessity 

of   implementing   proper   management   measures   for   preserving   the 

wild buffalo has also been elaborately stated in the Report.
14. Environmental justice could be achieved only if we drift away 

from the principle of anthropocentric to ecocentric.  Many of our 

principles like sustainable development, polluter-pays principle, 

inter-generational   equity   have   their   roots   in   anthropocentric 

principles.   Anthropocentrism is always human interest focussed 

and non-human has only instrumental value to humans.   In other 

words, humans take precedence and human responsibilities to non-

human   based   benefits   to   humans.     Ecocentrism   is   nature   centred 

where   humans   are   part   of   nature   and   non-human   has   intrinsic 

value.     In   other   words,   human   interest   do   not   take   automatic 

precedence   and   humans   have   obligations   to   non-humans 

independently of human interest.  Ecocentrism is therefore life-

centred, nature-centred where nature include both human and non-

humans.     National   Wildlife   Action   Plan   2002-2012   and   centrally 

sponsored scheme (Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats) is 

centred on the principle of ecocentrism.
15. The National Wildlife Action Plan (2002-2016) is intended to 

provide   adequate   protection   to   wildlife   in   multiple   use   areas 

such   as   Government   forests   outside   PAs,   various   Community 

Conserved   Areas   like   sacred   groves,   community   and   panchayat
12
forests, identified private forests such as interspersed forests 

in   tea,   coffee   and   cardamom   gardens   and   other   protection 

landscapes,   farm   lands,   wastelands,   wetlands,   coastal   habitats, 

heronries, wintering wetlands of birds, catchment forests, turtle 

nesting sites, pastures for livestock and wild herbivore, deserve 

ecosystems etc.    




Recovery Programmes
16. The   Centrally   Sponsored   Scheme   also   deals   with   Recovery 

programmes for saving critically endangered species and habitats. 

It was noticed that, due to variety of reasons, several species 

and   their   habitats   have   become   critically   endangered. 

Consequently,   the   scheme   intends   to   extend   support   to   such 

recovery programmes for saving critically endangered species and 

their habitat based on the requirement felt from time to time. 

The   objective   of   this   recovery   plan   of   saving   critically 

endangered   species/ecosystems   cannot   be   covered   under   the 

components   of   Conservation   of   PAs   and   protection   of   wildlife 

outside   PAs   as   disjunct   population   across   a   wider 

landscape/seascape.   Several   programmes   are   proposed   under   the 

recovery plan, of which one is to save the critically endangered 

species of Asian Wild Buffalo and grasslands and riverine forests 

of central and north India.   Several other components were also 

included in the recovery plan such as Dolphin and River Systems, 

Nilgiri Tahr, Asiatic Lion etc.   The scheme envisages that the 

Director,   Wildlife   Preservation,   Government   of   India,   in
13
consultation with the Wildlife Institute of India or the relevant 

scientific   institute/organization   and   with   the   approval   of   the 

Standing   Committee   of   the   National   Board   for   Wildlife   can 

initiate   other   recovery   programmes   or   wind   up   the   ongoing 

programme.       The   Director,   Wildlife   Preservation,   is   also 

authorised   to   undertake   assessment   of   the   effectiveness   of   any 

`recovery programme' already undertaken or being undertaken.  The 

Integrated   Development   of   Wildlife   Habitats   scheme   specifically 

highlighted the necessity to preserve and conserve the habitat of 

wild buffalo.  The scheme states as follows:
"Wild buffalo is one of the worst affected mammalian 
     species   in   the   recent   times.     Domestication   of   the 
     species   and   continuous   interbreeding   with   domestic 
     buffalo   has   led   to   inbreeding,   genetic   disorders, 
     competition   and   mortality   due   to   disease.     Apart   from 
     this,   habitat   fragmentation,   degradation,   and   poaching 
     are   the   main   threats   to   the   conservation   of   this 
     globally   threatened   species.     Urgent   and   concerted 
     efforts   are   needed   to   recover   this   species   from   the 
     brink of extinction."
17.  Conservation and Management of Wildlife, as per the Act, is 

primarily   vested   in   the   States   /   UTs   who   are   in   physical 

possession   of   the   area.     It   was   noticed   that   many   States/UTs 

have set up various regular wildlife wings within the States/UT 

Forest   Departments   and   implemented   a   scheme   as   to   be   done   in 

accordance with a work programme covering the 11th  Plan period. 

The   Centrally   Sponsored   Scheme,   therefore,   envisages   that   the 

State/UTs   are   required   to   submit   Annual   Plan   of   Operations 

(APOs)  to  the  Central  Government  detailing  the  proposed  course 

of   action,   which   consists   of   management   planning   and   capacity
14
building,   anti-poaching   and   infrastructure   development, 

restoration of habitats, eco-development and community oriented 

activities   etc.   so   as   to   qualify   for   the   financial   assistance 

under   the   scheme.       The   concerned   State/UTs   have   to   follow 

certain conditions which have been enumerated in the scheme.
18. The State of Chhattisgarh, in the instant case, has pointed 

out that they could not effectively give effect to some of the 

programmes for preservation and conservation of wild buffalo due 

to lack of funds.  The scheme envisages 100% assistance.   It is 

relevant to extract the Pattern of Funding and the same reads as 

follows:
Pattern of Funding

   7            Under   the   Scheme,   100%   assistance   is   provided 
                for   non-recurring   items   of   expenditure   for 
                National         Parks,         Wildlife          Sanctuaries, 
                Conservation Reserves and Community Reserves.
7            50%   cost   of   recurring   expenditure   is   provided 
                for   National   Parks,   Wildlife   Sanctuaries, 
                Conservation   Reserves   and   Community   Reserves 
                where   the   State   Government   provides   for   the 
                balance 50% as the matching share.
7            National         Parks,         Wildlife          Sanctuaries, 
                Conservation Reserves and community Reserves in 
                mountain   regions,   coastal   zones,   deserts,   or 
                those   areas   which   support   highly   endangered 
                species   i.e.   Snow   Leopard,   Red   Panda,   Rhino, 
                Sangai   Deer,   Phayre's   leaf   monkey,   Musk   Deer, 
                Hangul,   Great   Indian   Bustard,   Great   Indian 
                Hornbill, Siberian Crane, Chinkara, Chowsingha, 
                Black Buck, Marine Turtles, Nilgiri Tahr, Lion 
                Tailed  Macaque,  Bustards,  Floricans,  Pelicans, 
                Gyps   Vultures,   Wild   Ass,   Grizzled   Giant 
                Squirrel,   Clouded   Leopard,               Wild   Buffalo, 
                Hoolock  Gibbon  and  Lion  are  eligible  for  100%
15
central assistance for both recurring and non-
recurring items of expenditure.
7            In   the   case   National   Parks,   Wildlife 
                 Sanctuaries,   Conservation   Reservation   and 
                 Community   Reserves   falling   in   the   high 
                 mountainous,   snow   clad   regions   (where   working 
                 season   is   limited   to   a   few   months)   in   the 
                 States of Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, 
                 Uttarakhand and Sikkim, the central assistance 
                 shall   be   given   in   one   instalment.     For   other 
                 States,   the   approved   allocation   shall   be 
                 released in two instalments (80 per cent as 1st 
                 instalment and balance as 2nd instalment.)

    7            Similarly,           subject         to         site-specific 
                 adjustments,   as   a   guiding   principle,   a 
                 40:40:20: proportion of financial sharing shall 
                 be  ensured  between  Centre,  State  as  owners  of 
                 the   privately   held   land,   when   such   areas   are 
                 involved in the case of Community Reserves.
19. State   of   Chattisgarh   has   maintained   the   stand   that   they   do 

not   have   sufficient   funds   to   undertake   various   programmes   for 

protection   of   wild   buffalo   within   the   national   parks, 

sanctuaries   and   also   at   conservation   reserves   and   community 

reserves.     This   stand   cannot   be   countenanced   now,   especially 

after the introduction of the Scheme.
20. Wild   buffalo   has   been   included   as   Item   No.   41,   Part   I   of  

Schedule I of the Act.   Once it is included in Schedule I, the 

State Board for Wildlife has to advise the State Government in 

the   selection   and   management   of   the   areas   to   be   declared   as 

protected areas, in the formulation of policy for protection and 

conservation of the wildlife etc., as per Section 8 of the Act. 

Section 9 of the Act states that no person shall hunt any wild 

animal specified in Schedule I to IV, except as provided under 

Sections 11 and 12.
16
21. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has 

calculated   the   percentage   of   endangered   species   as   40%   of   all 

organisms.       IUCN   Red   List   refers   to   specific   categories   of 

endangered   species   and   includes   critically   endangered   species. 

IUCN   Red   List   of   Threatened   Species   uses   the   term   endangered 

species as a specific category of imperilment, rather than as a 

general   term.     Under   the   IUCN   Categories   and   Criteria, 

endangered   species   is   between   critically   endangered   and 

vulnerable.   Wild water buffalo is included in the category of 

endangered species.     Apart from the human-animal conflict, the 

most important threat to wild buffalo is inbreeding with feral 

and   domestic   buffalo,   habitat   loss/degradation   and   hunting. 

Diseases   and   parasites   (transmitted   by   domestic   livestock)   and 

competition for food and water between wild buffalo and domestic 

stock  are   also  serious   threats.    Habitat  loss   is  also   a  major 

concern   for   species   endangerment.       When   wild   buffalos'   eco-

system is not maintained, they lose their home and either forced 

to adopt new surroundings or human habitat.   Eminent ecologists 

have   proposed   biological   corridors,   biosphere   reserves, 

ecosystem management and eco-regional planning as approaches to 

integrate   biodiversity   conservation   and   socio-economic 

development at increasingly larger spatial scales.
22. We have seen the subjects `forest' and `protection of animals 

and birds' are in the concurrent list of the Constitution and it 

is the fundamental duty of every citizen of India under
Article
17
51A(g)
of   the   Constitution   to   protect   and   improve   the   natural 

environment  including   forests,  lakes,   rivers  and   wildlife.    It 

is to achieve the above objective and also to give effect to the 

purpose of the object of the Act that the Central Government has 

sponsored "the Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats".  As 

per the Scheme and the Act, the State Government is empowered to 

notify   conservation   reserves   and   community   reserves   for 

protecting  the   landscape,  seascapes,   flora  and   fauna  and   their 

habitat.   The Act also empowers the State Government to declare 

any private and community land not comprised within the national 

parks,   sanctuaries   or   conservation   reserves   or   community 

reserves for protecting fauna, flora and traditional or cultural 

conservation values and practice.
23. We   are,   therefore,   inclined   to   dispose   of   this   application 

with the direction to the State of Chhattisgarh to give effect 

fully   the   Centrally   Sponsored   Scheme   -   "the   Integrated 

Development   of   Wildlife   Habitats",   so   as   to   save   wild   buffalo 

from extinction.   The State also would take immediate steps to 

ensure   that   interbreeding   between   wild   and   domestic   buffalos 

does  not   take  place   and  genetic   purity  of   the  wild   species  is 

maintained.   The State is also directed to take immediate steps 

to   undertake   intensive   research   and   monitor   the   wild   buffalo 

population  in   Udanti  Wildlife   Sanctuary  and   other  areas,   where 

the   wild   buffalo   may   still   be   found,   including   preparing   them 

their genetic profile for future reference.   The State is also 

directed to take appropriate steps to initiate wildlife training
18
programmes   for   the   officials   of   the   State   Forest   Department, 

especially   for   managing   the   above   sanctuary   and   other   areas 

where the wild buffalos are found.   The State is also directed 

to   submit   Annual   Plan   of   Operations   to   the   Central   Government 

detailing the proposed course of action, if not already done, as 

per   the   "Integrated   Development   of   Wildlife   Habitats"   scheme, 

within a period of three months from today.  All effective steps 

should be taken by the State to protect the Asian wild buffalo 

(Bubalus   bubalis),   which   is   declared   as   a   State   animal   by   the 

State of Chattisgarh.
24. The applications are disposed of as above.
......................................J.
                                                (K.S. Radhakrishnan)




                                                         .......................................J.
                                                 (Chandramauli Kr. Prasad)
New Delhi,
February 13, 2012
19
REPORTABLE


                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                             CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION




                         I. A. Nos. 1287, 1570-1571, 1624-1625, 

                                    1978, 2395, 2795-2796 

                                                  IN

                          WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 202 OF 1995

                                                With

  I.A. Nos. 2470-2471, 2472-2473, 2474-2475, 2476-2477, 2966-2967, in I.A. 

                              No.1287 in W.P.(C) 202 OF 1995





T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad                                        .. Petitioner(s)


                                               Versus


Union of India & Others                                        .. Respondent(s)





                                        J U D G M E N T 


K.S. Radhakrishnan, J.
We   are   in   this   case   concerned   with   the   question   whether   sandalwood  


(Santalum album Linn)  stated to be  an endangered species, be declared as a  


"specified   plant"   within   the   meaning   of   Section   2(27),   and   be   included   in   the
Schedule   VI   of   The   Wild   Life   (Protection)   Act,   1972
(for   short   the   Act).     On 


going through the various international conventions, we thought it appropriate to 


examine   the   repeated   requests   made   by  the   State   of   Andhra   Pradesh   to   the 


Central   Govt.   to   notify   Red   Sanders   (Pterocarpus   santalinus)  as   a   `specified 


plant' and be included in the
Schedule VI of the Act
.
20
2.     A   non-governmental   organisation   moved   the   Central   Empowered 


Committee (CEC) to initiate steps for closure of all unlicensed sandalwood oil  


industries, particularly in the State of Kerala.   CEC after conducting a detailed  


enquiry   and   hearing   the   state   officials,   representatives   of   the   sandalwood 


industries and various other interested persons, submitted its report dated 24 th 


February   2005   before   this   Court   praying   that   all   unlicensed   sandalwood   oil 


industries   be   also   brought   within   the   purview   of   this   Court's   order   dated  


30.12.2002 by which this Court had ordered the closure of all unlicensed saw  


mills,   veneer   and   plywood   industries   in   the   country.     Various   other   directions 


were also sought for.   Report of the CEC was listed along with IA 1287 of 1995  


which   came up for hearing on 1.4.2005  and   this Court  issued  notices  to the  


States of Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, which are the major  


sandalwood growing states of the country.   This Court then passed an order on 


10.2.2006   directing   closure   of   all   the   unlicensed   sandalwood   oil   extracting 


factories,   operating   in   various   parts   of   the   country.     Consequently,   24 


unlicensed   sandalwood   oil   factories   functioning   in   the   State   of   Kerala   were 


closed down.
3.     The   State   of   Kerala   and   few   other   states   submitted   their   reply   to   the  


reports submitted by the CEC and pointed out that no private sandalwood  oil 


extracting units are now functioning in most of the sandalwood growing states  


but only the state owned public sector undertakings.  The Karnataka Soaps and
21
Detergent   Ltd.,   a   Karnataka   State   owned   undertaking   also   submitted   their 


views.    MoEF  also  filed  a detailed  affidavit  before  this  Court  stating  that  they 


have no objection in the closure of all unlicensed sandalwood oil manufacturing 


factories in the country.
4.     Indian   Sandalwood   Association   got   themselves   impleaded   and   filed 


objections  to   the   CEC   Report.   CEC   later   submitted  three   other   reports   dated  


8.1.2008,   2.9.2009,   15.11.2010.   CEC   in   the   reports   took   the   stand   that   the 


sandalwood   oil   industries   could   be   permitted   to   function   outside   the 


sandalwood growing states and that import of sandalwood as such should not 


be banned.     The Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Karnataka  


also   submitted   before   the   CEC   that   there   are   no   matured   sandalwood   trees 


available in the State of Karnataka and the State has not approved any felling  


of  sandalwood   trees  due  to  non-availability.     State  of  Tamil  Nadu  also  stated  


before the CEC that no felling of sandalwood tree was officially undertaken due  


to want of matured trees.  State of Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh have also 


filed affidavits stating that whatever little sandalwood growth was there in those 


states needs to be protected and that sandalwood  species is under imminent 


threat.  MoEF in its affidavit dated 24th October, 2010 has stated as follows:
"The Ministry supports the contention that all illegal sandalwood 

        oil units should be closed down.  As far as closing of sandalwood  

        units   in   non-sandalwood   growing   States   is   concerned   the 

        Ministry   has   "No   Objection"   in   allowing   the   legal   private 

        entrepreneur   from   setting   up   sandalwood   oil   units   in   non-

        sandalwood producing States provided that only legally sourced 

        sandalwood for which Certificate of Origin has been obtained, is
22
used and the regulatory enforcement mechanisms, set up by the 

          State   for   detection,   control   and   action   against   proceedings   of  

          illegal units are well in place."
The CEC, however, in its report dated 2.9.2009 maintained the following  


stand:
"In the light of the facts highlighted above the CEC is unable to 

          agree with  the contention of the Applicants that they should be  

          permitted to establish /continue the sandalwood oil units in non-

          sandalwood producing States under appropriate supervision and 

          regulations and that the imported sandalwood is a substitute for 

          Indian   sandalwood.     The   CEC   is   of   the   considered   view   that   if 

          the  present  state  of  affairs  is  allowed  to  continue,  sandalwood,  

          so   unique   and   a   special   gift   of   nature   to   India   would   become  

          extinct   in   the   not   too   distant   future.     The   protection   of 

          sandalwood   forest   is   simply   not   possible   without   first   ensuring 

          that  the  establishment  /  functioning of  sandalwood  oil  units  are  

          severely   restricted   /   regulated   in   the   country   particularly   when 

          the sandalwood has become an almost extinct commodity.  One 

          is duty bound to protect in public interest whatever sandalwood 

          forests   are   left.     This   is   one   instance   where   the   public   interest 

          necessarily   and   unhesitatingly   has   to   take   precedence   over 

          private   interest.     However,   sandalwood   oil   units,   based 

          exclusively   on   imported   sandalwood   may   be   permitted   in 

          identified   locations   subject   to   strict   supervision   and   regulations 

          by the Forest Department.
5.    MoEF however in its affidavit dated 24.3.2011 stated that in the light of  


the   non-availability   of   sandalwood,   it   would   review   its   policy   about   permitting  


the   export   of   sandalwood   chips   and   oil,   particularly,   with   reference   to   its  


adverse effect on the production of sandalwood in the country and also would  


examine   the   imposition   of     complete   ban   on   sale/auction   of   confiscated  


sandalwood in view of the alarming rate at which sandalwood is disappearing  


and may become extinct in not too distant future.
23
6.     MoEF   however   in   its   latest   affidavit   dated   6.9.2011   expressed   the 


apprehension   that   the   inclusion   of   the   sandalwood   species   in
Schedule   VI   in 


the   Wild   Life   Protection   Act,   1972
would   alienate   people   from   growing   the 


species   on   a   large   scale   and   hence   it   is   of   the   view   that   an   "All   India  


Sandalwood Legislation" would be an adequate solution, in the event of which it  


was  stated the species would  be fully protected within  the country and at the  


same time trade could also be regulated.  Ministry has also expressed the view  


that sandalwood may be allotted to public sector units and that would  ensure  


that the artisans dealing with sandalwood would get raw materials which would  


give them a greater impetus for taking up their traditional work/skills and also  


give them an economic boost as well as earn foreign revenue as sandalwood  


handicrafts have high demand for export.
7.     The   Sandalwood   Oil   Manufacturers   Association   expressed   the 


apprehension that the inclusion of the sandalwood  as a specified plant under  


the   Act   would   not   be   conducive   and   beneficial   for   the   cultivation   and 


preservation of the trees.   Reference was also made to the various provisions  


of
Chapter IIIA of the Act
and stated that the members of the Association who  


have cultivation of sandalwood in the State of Chhattisgarh, Madhya  Pradesh  


and involved in the business of manufacturing products using sandalwood oil if 


covered   by
Section   17A(b)
would   be   put   to   considerable   difficulties.     The  


Association   also   maintained   the   stand   that   if
Chapter   IIIA   of   the   Act
is   fully
24
implemented   by   declaring   the   sandalwood   as   a   specified   plant   then   it   would  


adversely affect the interest of the cultivators of sandalwood and would lead to  


further extinction of the species.
8.     We   have   heard   the   learned   amicus   curiae,   Mr.   P.S.   Narasimha,   Senior  


Counsel Mr. Rajiv Dutta, and other counsels at length.  Learned amicus curiae  


referred   to   the   affidavits   filed   by   the   MoEF   and   other   state   governments   and  


submitted that there is consensus among all major sandalwood growing states 


and the Union of India that the export of sandalwood would be of serious threat  


and   may   lead   to   the   extinction   of   the   species.     Few   of   the   states   have 


maintained the stand that no matured sandalwood trees are available for felling  


which, according to the amicus curiae leads to the inescapable conclusion that  


Indian sandalwood is in fact endangered.   Learned senior counsel highlighted  


the   necessity   of   the   inclusion   of   sandalwood   in
Schedule   VI   of   the   Act
and 


submitted   that   the   apprehension   expressed   by   the   MoEF   that   it   would  


discourage the cultivation of sandalwood has no basis.  Learned senior counsel  


extensively referred to the provisions of
Chapter IIIA of Act
and the provisions  


of   Bio   Diversity   Act,   and   submitted   that   when   we   deal   with   the   issue   of   an  


endangered species, the question to be examined is not whether the species is  


of   any   instrumental   value   to   human   beings,   but   its   intrinsic   worth.     Learned  


senior   counsel   extensively   referred   to   the   anthropocentric   and   ecocentric 


approach and submitted that anthropocentric approach would depend upon the  


instrumental   value   of   life   forms   to   human   beings   while   ecocentric   approach
25
stresses on the intrinsic value of all life forms.  Learned senior counsel stressed  


that the bio-diversity law departs from the traditional anthropocentric character  


of environmental law and that our Constitution recognises ecocentric approach  


by obliging every citizen to have compassion for all living creatures, so also the  


preamble   to   Act.     Learned   counsel   also   submitted   that   public   trust   doctrine  


developed in M.C. Mehta v. Kamalnath 1997 (1) SCC 388 is based largely on 


anthropocentric   principles   and   the   precautionary   and   polluter-pay   principle  


affirmed   by  this   Court   in
Vellore   Citizens   Welfare   Forum  v.  Union   of  India 


and   others
1996   (5)   SCC   647   are   also   rooted   in   anthropocentric   principle, 


since they too depend on harm to humans as a pre-requisite for invocation of  


those principles.
9.     Learned   senior   counsel   also   highlighted   the   principle   of   sustainable 


development and inter-generational equity and stated that they too pre-suppose 


the   higher   needs   of   human   beings   and   lays   down   that   exploitation   of   natural  


resources   must   be   equitably   distributed   between   the   present   and   future  


generation.     Learned   senior   counsel   also   highlighted   that   the   above   principle  


would be of no assistance when a Court is called upon to decide as to when a  


species   has   become   endangered,   or   the   need   to   protect   irrespective   of   its 


instrumental   value.     Learned   senior   counsel   pointed   out   the   CEC   and   the  


States of Tamil Nadu and Kerala have produced enough materials to show that  


the sandalwood trees are critically endangered and that illegal felling and trade  


go   on     unabated   and   regulation   on   cultivation   and   use   of   sandalwood   would
26
definitely be in public interest and therefore constitutional.   Further it was also 


pointed out that Chapter IIIA altogether does not prohibit or abolish either the 


cultivation, possession or dealing in specified plants, but it merely regulates the  


cultivation and use of specified plants though  a  licensing  system   of  the  Chief  


Wildlife Warden.  He therefore urged that this Court must interpret Chapter IIIA 


along with the constitutional provisions and international obligations in a holistic 


manner   to   ensure   that   the   Central   Government   is   duty   bound   to   protect 


sandalwood by including the same in
Schedule VI of the Act
.
10.    Learned   senior   counsel,   Shri   Rajiv   Dutta   also   offered   his 


suggestion/comments   on   the   question   of   notifying   sandalwood   as   a   specified  


plant under
Schedule VI of the Act
.  The apprehension voiced by learned senior  


counsel   was   that   on   such   inclusion   there   would   be   blanket   restrictions   and  


conditions   covering   big   and   small   private   cultivators,   to   farmers,   to   menial  


vendors and hawkers who possess sandalwood and/or any part of and/or any  


derivative   of   sandalwood   in   any   product   that   uses   a   part   of   or   derivative   of 


sandalwood.  Learned senior counsel  also pointed that they have no objection  


in the prohibition of picking and uprooting  sandalwood tree from forest area or  


any area specified by notification by the Central Government but they are more 


concerned with the applicability of
Section 17A(b)
.   Further it was pointed that  


once   it   is   notified   as   a   specified   plant,
Section   17B
would   be   attracted   that  


would   only   discourage   the   trade   leading   to   the   stoppage   of   many   of   the  


sandalwood oil industries in the country.   Learned senior counsel also referred
27
to
Sections 17C
,
17D
,
17E
,
17F
and other relevant provisions and highlighted  


the   difficulties   that   they   would   experience   if   sandalwood   is   declared   as   a  


specified   plant.     Learned   senior   counsel   also   pointed   out   that   they   have   no  


objection in imposing proper regulation in the trade of sandalwood and all India  


legislation is a better option.
11.      We have heard the arguments of learned senior counsel appearing on 


either   sides   and   perused   the   affidavits   filed   by   various   state   governments,  


MoEF and the reports of the CEC and other relevant materials.  Sandalwood is  


an   evergreen   tree   which  generally  grows   in   the   dry,   deciduous   forests   of   the 


Deccan Plateau.  Sandalwood is also mentioned in one of the oldest epics, the  


Ramayana.     Descriptions   are   also   made   by   Kalidasa   of   its   use   in   his   literary  


works as well.  In short, it is part of Indian culture and heritage and its fragrance  


has spread not only in India but also abroad and its rich oil content led to its  


large   scale   exploitation   as   well.   Exploitation   of   this   rare   endangered   species 


went   on   unabatedly,   especially   in   the   southern   states   of   India   and   on  


intervention of this Court, the State of Kerala has closed down  24 unlicensed  


sandalwood   oil   factories.     Similar   steps   were   being   taken   by   other   states   as  


well.  Before we refer to various contentions raised by counsel on either sides,  


we will refer to some of the legislative measures taken by some of the states,  


which are as under:
State of Kerala:
28
12.      In State of Kerala best quality sandalwood trees are grown in the forest  


of   Marayoor,   spread   over   93   Sq.Km   which   generate   the   best   quality 


sandalwood   oil   in   the   world.     Recently,   the   Kerala   Forest   (Amendment)   Act, 


2010   introduced   a   new   chapter,   Chapter   6A   entitled   "Provisions   relating   to  


sandalwood" which  regulates cutting and possession of sandalwood.   Section 


47A provides that no individual shall cut, uproot, remove or sell any sandalwood 


tree without previous permission in writing from the forest officer.  There is also  


absolute prohibition on transport and possession of sandalwood or sandalwood 


oil in excess of one Kilogram or 100 ml respectively without a license from the  


forest   officer   under
Section   47C
of   the   Act.     Under   Section   47C(3)   only   the  


government or the public sector undertakings (PSU) owned by the government 


shall manufacture or distil, refine or sell sandalwood oil.   Section 47F imposes  


restrictions   on   purchase   and   sale   of   sandalwood   from   any   person   other   than 


government   or   authorised   officer.     Provision   is   also   there   for   seizure   of  


sandalwood   and   its   oil   under   Section   47H   and   penalty   for   offences   can   be 


imposed.   Act also provides for imprisonment for three years, extendable upto 


seven years and fine not less than Rs.10,000/- extendable upto Rs.25,000/-.
State of Tamil Nadu
13.
Tamil   Nadu   Forest   Act,   1882
--
Section   40G
of   the   Act   provides  that  


teak,   blackwood,   ebony,   sandalwood   and   also   ivory   and   teeth   of   elephants,  


either grown or found on government land or private property are royalties  and
29
no trade shall be carried on in them unless they have been duly obtained from  


the government.   Section 40G(2) places restrictions on felling of trees by any  


person without the permission of the Chief Conservator of Forest or any other  


person authorised by him.  The state of Tamil Nadu has also enacted the Tamil  


Nadu Sandalwood Possession Rules, 1970 and also Tamil Nadu Sandalwood 


Transit   Rules,   1967,   and   the   Act   also   provides   for   imposing   penalties   and  


imprisonment.
State of Karnataka
14.
Karnataka   Forest   Act,   1963
and   the   Rules   made   thereunder   have 


removed the restrictions on growing sandalwood trees in private lands.
Section  


83
of  the  Act  provides  that  where   a person  is  an  owner  of  sandalwood   trees  


before   the   commencement   of   2001   Amendment   Act,   he   shall   not   fell   or   sell  


such sandalwood tree or convert or dress sandalwood obtained from such tree 


or possess or store or transport or sell the sandalwood except in accordance  


with the provisions of the Act.
The Act
also provides for imposition of penalty  


and imprisonment.
State of Andhra Pradesh
15.
A.P. Forest Act, 1967
, A.P. Sandalwood Possession Rules, 1969, A.P. 


Sandalwood and Red Sanderswood Transit Rules, 1969 generally deal with the  


possession, control and transit of sandalwood and Red Sanders etc., but there
30
is   no   restriction   as   such   on   the   felling   of   sandalwood   trees.
The   Act
also  


provides   for   punishment   for   contravention   of   the   provisions   of   the   Act   or   the  


rules made thereunder.
16.      State of Maharashtra has also enacted the
Felling of Trees (Regulation) 


Act,   1964
,   The   Bombay   Forest   Rules   1942,   which   deal   with   sandalwood   as  


well.     State  of   Madhya   Pradesh   has   also  enacted  Madhya   Pradesh   Revenue 


Code.    States  like  Gujarat,   Orissa   have  framed  special   provisions  for   dealing  


with   sandalwood.   It   is   unnecessary   to   refer   to   the   laws   made   by   the   various 


states in the country, suffice to say lack of uniform legislation, dealing with this  


endangered species, is clearly felt.
17.
Article   48A
of   the   Constitution   introduced   by   the   Constitution   (42nd 


Amendment)   Act   1976   states   that   the   State   shall   endeavour   to   protect   and 


improve the environment and safeguard the forest and wild life of the country.
Article 51A(g)
states that it shall be the duty of every citizen of India to protect  


and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife  


and   to   have   compassion   for   living   creatures.     By   the   same   constitutional 


amendment Entry 17A "forest" and 17B "protection of wild  animals and birds"
were included in List III - Concurrent List so that the Parliament as well as the  


States can enact laws to give effect to the Directive Principles of State Policy as 


well   as   various   international   obligations.     Earlier,   by   virtue   of   Entry   20   of   the 


State   List   VII   Schedule   to   the   Constitution,   namely   protection  of   wild   animals
31
and   birds,   only   the   State   had   the   power   to   legislate   and   Parliament   had   no  


power to make law in this regard applicable to the State unless the legislatures  


of   two   or   more   states   passed   a   resolution   in   pursuance   of
Article   252
of   the 


Constitution empowering the Parliament to pass necessary legislations on the  


subject.  However, by virtue of (42nd Amendment) Act 1976 of the Constitution, 


the   Parliament   has   got   the   power   to   legislate   for   the   whole   country.  


Consequently,   The   Wildlife   (Protection   Act)   1972   was   enacted   by   the  


Parliament to provide for the protection to wild animals, birds and plants and for  


matters   connected   therewith   or   ancillary   or   incidental   thereto   with   a   view   to 


ensure the ecological and environmental security of the country.
The Act
was  


later   amended   and   Chapter-IIIA   was   inserted   by   Act   44   of   1991   enacting  


provisions for the protection of "specified plants".
18.
Biological Diversity Act, 2002
was also enacted by the Parliament with the 


object of conserving biological diversity, sustainable use of its components and  


for fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of utilization of genetic  


resources.   Biological diversity includes all the organisms found on our planet  


viz.,  the  plants,  animals  and  micro  organisms.
Environmental  Protection  Act,  


1986
enacted   by   the   Parliament   empowers   the   Central   Government   under
Section 3
to take such measures for the purpose of protecting and improving  


the quality of environment.  When we examine all those legislations in the light  


of   the   constitutional   provisions   and   various   international   conventions   like 


Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and
32
Flora   1973   (CITES),   the   Convention   of   Biological   Diversity   1992   (CBD) 


evidently, there is a shift from environmental rights to ecological rights, though  


gradual but substantial.  Earlier, the Rio Declaration on Earth Summit asserted  


the   claim   "human   beings   are   the   centre   of   concern".     U.N.   Conference   on 


Environment   and   Development   (UNCED-1992),   was   also   based   on 


anthropocentric   ethics,   same   was   the   situation   in   respect   of   many   such  


international conventions, that followed.
19.    The public trust doctrine developed in M.C. Mehta vs.  Kamalnath (1997) 


1 SCC 388, is also meant to ensure that all humans have equitable access to  


natural resources treating all natural resources as property and not life.   That  


principle also has its roots in anthropocentric principle.
Precautionary principle  


and polluter-pays principles affirmed by our Court in
Vellore Citizens Welfare 


Forum   vs.   Union   of   India   and   Others
(supra)   are   also   based   on 


anthropocentric principle since they also depend on harm to humans as a pre-


requisite   for   invoking   those   principles.     The   principle   of   sustainable  


development and inter-generational equity too pre-supposes the higher needs  


of   humans   and   lays   down   that   exploitation   of   natural   resources   must   be  


equitably   distributed   between   the   present   and   future   generations. 


Environmental   ethics   behind   those   principles   were   human   need   and 


exploitation, but such principles have no role to play when we are called upon  


to decide the fate of an endangered species or the need to protect the same 


irrespective of its instrumental value.
33
20.    Anthropocentrism considers humans to be the most important factor and 


value in the universe and states that humans have greater intrinsic value than  


other species.  Resultantly, any species that are of potential use to humans can  


be a reserve to be exploited which leads to the point of extinction of biological  


reserves.     Further,   that   principle   highlights   human   obligations   towards 


environment   arising   out   of   instrumental,   educational,   scientific,   cultural, 


recreational   and   aesthetic   values   that  forests  has  to  offer   to   humans.    Under  


this approach, environment is only protected as a consequence of and to the  


extent   needed   to   protect   human   well   being.     On   the   other   hand   ecocentric  


approach to environment stress the moral imperatives to respect intrinsic value, 


inter   dependence   and   integrity   of   all   forms   of   life.   Ecocentrism   supports   the 


protection of all life forms, not just those which are of value to humans or their  


needs and underlines the fact that humans are just one among the various life  


forms   on   earth.     (See   Environmental   Ethics,   Stanford   Encyclopaedia   of  


Philosophy 2002; Revised 2008.) The same book also gives a clear distinction  


between instrumental value and intrinsic value which reads as follows:-
"In   the   literature   on   environmental   ethics   the   distinction 

       between   instrumental   value   and   intrinsic   value   (meaning   "non-

       instrumental   value")   has   been   of   considerable   importance.     The  

       former is the value of things as means to further some other ends;  

       they are also useful as means to other ends.   For instance, certain 

       fruits   have   instrumental   value   for   bats   who   feed   on   them,   since  

       feeding on the fruits is a means to survival for the bats.  However, it 

       is not widely agreed that fruits have value as ends in themselves.  

       We   can   likewise   think   of   a   person   who   teaches   others   as   having 

       instrumental value for those who want to acquire knowledge.  Yet, in 

       addition  to  any  such  value,  it   is  normally  said   that  a   person,  as  a
34
person,   has   intrinsic   value,   i.e.,   value   in   his   or   her   own   right  

       independently   for   his   or   her   prospects   for   serving   the   ends   of 

       others.     For   another   example,   a   certain   wild   plant   may   have 

       instrumental   value   because   it   provides   the   ingredients   for   some 

       medicine or as an aesthetic object for human observers.  But if the  

       plant also has some value in itself independently of its prospects for  

       furthering some other ends such as human health or the pleasure  

       from   aesthetic   experience,   then   the   plant   also   has   intrinsic   value. 

       Because the intrinsically valuable is that which is good as an end in  

       itself,   it   commonly   agreed   that   something's   possession   of   intrinsic 

       value generates a prima facie direct moral duty on the part of morel  

       agents to protect it or at least refrain from damaging it."
Above   principle   had   its   roots   in   India,   much   before   it   was   thought   of   in   the  


Western world.   Isha-Upanishads (as early as 1500 - 600 B.C) taught us the 


following truth:-
"The   universe   along   with   its   creatures   belongs   to   the   Lord.     No 

       creature   is   superior   to   any   other.     Human   beings   should   not   be  

       above   nature.     Let   no   one   species   encroach   over   the   rights   and 

       privileges of other species."
21.    Father   of   the   Nation   Mahatma   Gandhi   has   also   taught   us   the   same  


principle and all those concepts find their place in
Article 51A(g)
as well.   The  


intrinsic   value   of   the   environment   as   we   have   already   indicated   also   finds   a  


place in various international conventions like, Convention for Conservation of 


Antarctic   Living   Resources   1980,   The   Protocol   to   Antarctic   Treaty   on 


Environmental   Protection   1998,   The   Bern   Convention   on   Conservation   of  


European Wildlife and Natural Habitats 1982, CITES, and CBD etc.


       CBD in its preamble states as follows:-
"The Contracting Parties,
35
Conscious of the intrinsic value of biological and of the ecological,  

       genetic,   social,   economic,   scientific,   educational,   cultural, 

       recreational   and   aesthetic   values   of   biological   diversity   and   its 

       components.
Conscious   also   of   the   importance   of   biological   diversity   for 

       evolution   and   for   maintaining   life   sustaining   systems   of   the 

       biosphere.
Affirming that the conservation of biological diversity is a common 

       concern of humankind."
India   is   a   signatory   to   CBD,   which   also   mandates   the   contracting   parties   to  


develop   and   maintain   necessary   legislation   for   protection   and   regulation   of  


threatened species and also regulate trade therein.  CITES in its preamble also  


indicates that Fauna and Flora are irreplaceable part of the natural environment  


of   the   earth   and   international   cooperation   is   essential   for   the   protection   of 


certain species against over exploitation and international trade.
22.    CITES,   to   which   India   is   a   signatory,   classifies   species   into   different  


appendices in the order of their endangerment, and prescribes different modes 


of regulation in that regard.
23.    Parties   to   the   CITES   are   also   entitled   to   take   (a)   stricter   domestic 


measures   regarding   conditions   of   trade,   taking   possession   or   transport   of 


specimens   of   species   included   in   Appendix-I,   II   and   III,   or   the   complete 


prohibition   thereof   or;   (b)   domestic   measures   restricting   or   prohibiting   trade, 


taking possession or transport of species not included in Appendix I, II or III. As  


indicated earlier species listed in Appendix - II shall include all species which
36
although not necessarily now threatened with extinction may become so unless 


trade   in   specimens   of   such   species   is   subject   to   strict   regulation   in   order   to  


avoid utilization incompatible with  their survival and other species which must 


be   subject   to   regulation   in   order   that   trade   in   specimens   of   certain   species 


referred to earlier may be brought under effective control.
CITES and CBD highlight the following principles:-
7              The   State   is   bound   to   initiate   measures   to   identify 
                        threatened species.
7              The   State   is   obliged   to   initiate   measures   to   conserve 
                        and protect such threatened species.
7              The   State   is   also   required   to   formulate   policies, 
                        legislation and appropriate laws to curb those practices 

                        (including trade) that result in extinction of species.  


         7              The State is obliged to undertake in-situ conservation of 
                        biological diversity as it is not sufficient that a species is 

                        cultivated   elsewhere.     It,   ought   to   be   protected   in   its 

                        natural habitat.
Indian sandalwood (Santalum album Linn) is not seen included in the species 


listed   in   Appendix-II   of   CITES,   however   red   sandalwood   (Pterocarpus  


Santalinus)   is   seen   included   in   Appendix-II.     At   the   same   time   International 


Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) which is an international organization  


dedicated to finding pragmatic solutions of our most pressing environment and  


development   challenges   has   included  Santalum  album  Linn  in   its   Red   List   of 


threatened   species   as   "vulnerable"   and   red   sandalwood   (Pterocarpus  


Santalinus) in the Red List as "endangered".   Therefore both in CITES and in
37
the   IUCN   Red   List   of   threatened   species   red   sandalwood   is   described   as  


"threatened   with   extinction",   "endangered".     A   taxon   is  critically   endangered 


when the available evidence indicates that it meets with the criteria of extremely  


high risk of extinction.  It is Endangered when it meets with the criteria of facing 


a very high risk of extinction.  A taxon is vulnerable when it is considered to be 


facing  a   high   risk   of   extinction.    Near   threatened,   means   a   taxon   is   likely   to 


qualify for a threatened category in the near future.
24.    Red   sandalwood   is   a   species   of  Pterocarpus  native   of   India   seen   no 


where   in   the   world.   It   is   reported   that   the   same   is   found   only   in   South   India,  


especially in Cuddapah and Chittoor in the States of Tamil Nadu and Andhra  


Pradesh border which is also known as  Lal Chandan /Rakta Chandan  in Hindi 


which   is   an   endemic   and   endangered   species.   Red   sandalwood   possesses 


medicinal properties viz., an anticoagulant, improves local circulation and used  


on traumatic wounds,  aberrations and bruises.   Since the trading is  mostly in 


South   India,   especially   in   Andhra   Pradesh   (AP)   it   is   stated   that   A.P.   Forest 


Corporation has been appointed as an agent to Govt. of A.P. for disposal of red  


sandalwood available with Forest Department.
25.    Red   Sanders   is   an   endemic   and   endangered   species   as   already  


mentioned, found only in the State of A.P.   A.P. Government has banned the  


sale of Red Sanders even by private parties, the wood  is of huge demand in  


Japan,   China   and   Western   world   and   is   very   costly   and   it   is   included   in   the
38
negative   list   of   plant   species   for   export   purposes,   implemented   by   the  


Directorate   General   of   Foreign   Trade,   Ministry   of   Commerce,   placing 


restrictions   on   international   trade   of   Red   Sanders.     Large   scale   smuggling   of 


Red Sanders is however reported from various quarters.  In order to protect the 


species, a proposal was made by the State of A.P. to Government of India for  


its inclusion in
Schedule VI of the Act
which, in our view, is justified.
26.    CITES   as   well   as   IUCN   has   acknowledged   that   Red   Sandalwood   is   an  


endangered   species.              It   is   settled   law   that   the   provisions   of   the  


Treaties/Conventions which  are not contrary to Municipal laws,  be deemed to 


have   been   incorporated   in   the   domestic   law.     Ref.
Vellore   Citizens
(Supra),
Jolly   George  vs.    Bank   of   Cochin
(
1980)   2   SCC   360,  Gramaphone 


Company of India   vs.   Birendra Baldev Pandey
(1984) 2 SCC 534.  Under 


the above mentioned circumstances, following the ecocentric principle, we are  


inclined to give a direction to the Central Government to take appropriate steps  


under
Section 61
of the Act to include
Red Sanders in Schedule-VI of the Act
as requested by the State of A.P., within a period of six months from the date of  


this judgment.  We are giving this direction, since, it is reported that nowhere in  


the   world,   this   species   is   seen,   except   in   India   and   we   owe   an   obligation   to  


world,   to   safeguard   this   endangered   species,   for   posterity.     Power   is   also  


vested with the Central Government to delete from the Schedule if the situation 


improves, and a species is later found to be not endangered.
39
27.    Sandalwood as such we have already indicated finds no place in CITES  


but   it   is   included   in   the   Red   List   of   IUCN   as   "vulnerable"   and   hence   call   for  


serious   attention   by  the   Central   Government,   considering   the   fact   that   all   the  


sandalwood growing states have stated that it faces extinction.
Section 61
of  


the Act empowers the Central Government to add or delete any entry to or from  


any schedule if it is known that it is expedient so to do.
Section 5
deals with the  


constitution of National Board for Wildlife (NBWL) which is headed by the Prime  


Minister as Chairman.
Section 5C
deals with the functions of the NBWL which  


states that it shall be the duty of the National Board to promote the conservation  


and   development   of   wildlife   and   forests   by   such   measures   as   it   thinks   fit.
Section  5C(ii)(a)
states  that  the  measures  may provide  for  promoting  policies  


and   advising   Central   Government   and   State   Governments   on   the   ways   and 


means   of   promoting   wildlife   conservation   and   effectively   controlling   poaching 


and illegal trade of wildlife  and its products and also for reviving from time to  


time   the   progress   in   the   field   of   wildlife   conservation   in   the   country   and 


suggesting measures for improvement thereto.  Various other powers have also  


been conferred on the National Board which consists of experts in the field of  


environment.   In such circumstances rather than giving a positive direction to 


include   sandalwood   in   Schedule   VI   we   are   inclined   to   give   a   direction   to   the  


Central Government to examine the issue at length in consultation with NBWL  


and take a decision within a period of six months from today as to whether it is  


to be notified as a specific plant and be included in
Schedule VI of the Act
.
40
28.    We   are   also   inclined   to   give   a   direction   to   the   Central   Government   to  


formulate   a   policy   for   conservation   of   sandalwood   including   provision   for  


financial reserves for such conservation and scientific research for sustainable 


use   of   biological   diversity   in   sandalwood.     Central   Government   would   also 


formulate   rules   and   regulations   under
Section   3
and
5
of   Environmental  


Protection   Act   1986   for   effective   monitoring,   control   and   regulation   of 


sandalwood  industries and factories and that it should also formulate rules to  


ensure   that   no   imported   sandalwood   is   sold   under   the   name   of   Indian  


sandalwood   and   adequate   labelling   to   this   effect   be   mandated   for   products  


manufactured   from   or   of   import   of   sandalwood.     States   are   directed   to  


immediately close down all un-licensed sandalwood oil factories, if functioning 


and take effective measures for proper supervision and control of the existing  


licensed sandalwood oil factories in states.
29.    We are also of the view that time has also come to think of a legislation  


similar   to   the   Endangered   Species   Act,   enacted   in   the   United   States   which  


protects   both   endangered   species   defined   as   those   "in   danger   of   extinction  


throughout all or a significant portion of their range" and "threatened species", 


those   likely   to   become   endangered   "within   a   foreseeable   time".     The   term 


species includes species and sub-species of fish, wildlife and plants as well as  


geographically   distinct   populations   of   vertebrate   wildlife   even   though   the
41
species as a whole may not be endangered.     We hope the Parliament would  


bestow   serious   attention   in   this   regard.       With   the   above   directions,   all   the 


applications are disposed of.
.....................................J.

                                                            (K.S. Radhakrishnan)





                                                               .....................................J.

                                                                 (Chandramauli Kr. Prasad)

New Delhi

  February 13, 2012


***