[Cites
6
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Bonanzo Engg. &Chemical Pvt. Ltd vs Commnr. Of Central Excise on 14 February, 2012
Equivalent citations: 2012 AIR SCW 3553, 2012 (4) SCC 771, AIR 2012 SC (SUPP) 359, (2012) 3 SCALE 43
Bench:
Anil R. Dave
,
H.L. Dattu
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6433 OF 2003




M/S. BONANZO ENGINEERING & CHEMICAL

PRIVATE  LIMITED                                                       .... APPELLANT


                         VERSUS


COMMISSIONER OF CENTRAL EXCISE            ... RESPONDENT




                                            O R D E R
1.    This   appeal   is   directed   against   the   judgment   and   order   passed   by 


        the Customs,  Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate  Tribunal, New 


        Delhi (for short 'the Tribunal') in Appeal No.E/1352/2002-B dated 


        25.10.2002. By the impugned judgment and order, the Tribunal has 


        sustained the original order passed by the Adjudicating Authority.
2.    The undisputed facts are: the appellant is a manufacturer of goods 


        falling under Chapter Headings 32 and 84 of the first schedule to 


        the
Central   Excise   Tariff   Act,   1985
('the   Act'   for   short).     The 


        description   of   the   goods   under   those   chapters   for   the   purpose   of 


        disposal   of  this  appeal  may not  be necessary,  since  we  are called 


        upon in this appeal to give a purposive construction to the language 


        employed   in   the   Notification   No.175/86-CE   dated   1.3.1986   and 


        Notification No.111/88-CE dated 1.3.1988.
1
3.    The   Notification   No.175/86-CE   dated   1.3.1986   exempts   the 


      excisable   goods   of   the   description   specified   in   the   annexure 


      appended to the Notification as enumerated under various
Chapters 


      of the Schedule to the Act
. The assessee availing the benefit of the 


      exemption   notification   has   to   satisfy   two   specific   conditions   for 


      claiming exemption from payment of duty under the Act. We need 


      to  notice Sub-clauses   (a),  (a)(ii)  and  proviso  to  Clause   1, and  the 


      Explanation II to the Notification.  They read as under:
"(a)     in   the   case   of   the   first   clearance   of   the   specified  

        goods upto an aggregate value not exceeding rupees thirty  

        lakhs,-
xxx              xxx              xxx
(ii) in any other case from the whole of the duty of excise  

        leviable thereon:
Provided   that   the   aggregate   value   of   clearances   of   the  

        specified   goods   under   Sub-clause   (ii)   of   this   clause   in  

        respect of any one Chapter of the said Schedule, shall not  

        exceed rupees twenty lakhs [w.e.f. 1.4.1990]...."
"Explanation   II   For   the   purposes   of   Computing   the  

        aggregate value of clearances under this Notification, the  

        clearances of any excisable goods, which are chargeable to  

        nil rate of duty or which are exempted  from the whole of  

        the duty of excise leviable thereon by any other Notification  

        [not being a notification where exemption from the whole  

        of the duty of excise leviable thereon is granted based upon  

        the   value   or   quantity   of   clearances   made   in   a   financial  

        year]  issued under Sub-rule[1]  of Rule 8 of the said rules,  

        or   under   Sub-section   [1]   of
Section   5A
of   the   Central  

        Excises and Salt Act, 1944 [1 of 1944], shall not be taken  

        into account."
2
4.    A   bare   perusal   of   Sub-clause   (a)   of   Clause   1   of   the   said 


      Notification   demonstrates   that   the   goods   enumerated   in   the 


      Schedule   to   the   Notification   are   exempted   from   payment   of   the 


      central   excise   duty   for   the   first   clearances   of   the   specified   goods 


      upto  the  aggregate  value   not  exceeding  rupees   thirty   lacs.   Clause
(a)(ii)   provides   that   such   clearances   should   not   exceed   rupees 


      twenty lacs in any one of the chapter. The Notification also say that 


      for the purpose of computing the aggregate value of the clearances 


      under the said Notification, the value of clearances of any excisable 


      goods   which   are   exempted   from   the   whole   of   duty   by   any   other 


      Notification shall not be taken into account.
5.    Having   seen   the   first   Notification,   namely,   the  Notification   dated 


      1.3.1986, let us also refer to the Notification No.111/88-CE dated 


      1.3.1988.  This Notification is issued by the Central Government in 


      exercise of its powers under sub-rule (1) of Rule 8 of the Central 


      Excise   Rules,   1944.   By   the   said   Notification,   the   Central 


      Government   exempts   the   goods   of   the   description   specified   in 


      column 3 of the table appended to the Notification, from the whole 


      of the excise duty leviable on the said goods. It is an admitted fact 


      that the assessee is the manufacturer of specific goods falling under 


      Serial No. 12 of the table appended to the Notification.
3
6.    We once again make it clear that the assessee in the instant case is a 


      manufacturer of goods falling under both chapters 32 and 84 of the 


      Act.
7.    The   assessee   has   filed   its   declaration   before   the   adjudicating 


      authority,  inter   alia,  informing   him   that   the   assessee   would   be 


      claiming   exemption   from   payment   of   excise   duty   for   a   sum   of 


      Rs.20 lacs under Chapter heading 32 of the Act and upto Rs.10 lacs 


      under Chapter heading 84 of the Act.
8.    The adjudicating authority has issued two show cause notices dated 


      26.11.1992   and   20.01.1993,   respectively.   The   first   show   cause 


      notice   is   for   the   period   20.08.1992   to  31.10.1992   and  the   second 


      show   cause   pertains   to   the   period   01.11.1992   to   31.12.1992.   The 


      duty effect of both the notifications does not exceed beyond Rs.2.3 


      lacs.
9.      In   the   aforesaid   show   cause   notices,   the   assessing   authority   had 


      stated that the assessee has exceeded the aggregate value of Rs.30 


      lacs as specified in the Notification dated 1.3.1986 and, therefore, 


      other clearances made by him would attract the levy of duty.  It was 


      also   mentioned   in   the   notice   that   since   the   assessee   had   paid   the
4
duty on the excess clearances of more than the value of Rs.30 lacs, 


    the assessee is liable to pay duty with penalty.
10. In reply to the said show cause notice, the assessee had brought to 


    the notice of the adjudicating authority that it is a manufacturer of 


    items   which   would   fall   under   chapter   heading   84   of   the   Act   and, 


    therefore, the Notification dated 1.3.1988 requires to be applied and 


    if  it  is  applied the  goods  enumerated  in  the table  appended  to the 


    Notification are exempted from the levy of duty and, therefore, the 


    excise   duty   paid   by   the   assessee   under   the   aforesaid   notification 


    cannot be added for the purpose of computing the aggregate value, 


    while   granting   benefit   of   the   Notification   No.175/86-CE   dated 


    1.3.1986.
11. The stand of the assessee was, initially, accepted by the adjudicating 



    authority (Assistant Commissioner) vide his Order dated 12.3.1993.
However, the Collector  of Central  Excise (Judicial) in his Review 


    Order   dated   17.2.1994   found   that   the   Order-in-Original   dated 


    12.3.1993 is legally incorrect and is passed by the authority which is 


    incompetent on account of monetary limits. He further directed the 


    Assistant   Collector   to   file   an   appeal   before   the   Collector,   Central 


    Excise   (Appeals)   for   appropriate   remedy.   On   Review   Appeal,   the 


    Collector,   Central   Excise   (Appeals)   vide   its   order   dated   2.6.1994
5
had set aside the Order-in-Original and remanded the matter to the 


   Competent   adjudicating   authority   (Deputy   Commissioner)   for   de 


   novo proceedings. Thereafter, the adjudicating authority vide Order 


   dated 7.1.2000 while rejecting the assessee's claim had confirmed 


   the duty demanded and also imposed the penalty.
12. Aggrieved by the said order, the assessee had carried the matter in 


   appeal before the Tribunal. The Tribunal rejects the claim only on 


   the ground that the assessee has not claimed the refund of the duty 


   paid for the clearances of the goods falling under Chapter heading 


   84   of  the
Tariff   Act
,   and   therefore,   the   assessee   is   not   entitled   to 


   avail   the   benefit   of   the   exemption   Notification   dated   1.3.1986.   In 


   the words of the Tribunal:
"It   is   admitted   fact   that   the   Appellants   have   not   availed   of  

       the   exemption   provided   under   Notification   No.111/88   while  

       clearing the goods classifiable under Heading 84.37. It has  

       not been brought on record that the Appellants have claimed  

       any   refund   of   the   said   duty.     Accordingly,   it   cannot   be  

       claimed by them that the goods were exempted from payment  

       of   duty.   The   value   of   the   clearance   of   goods   falling   under  

       Heading 84.37 being  cleared on payment  of duty has to be  

       taken into account by computing the value of clearances for  

       the purpose of Notification No.175/86."
13. The sum and substance of the reasoning of the Tribunal appears to 



   be   that   merely   because   the   assessee   has   paid   the   excess   duty   on 


   those   items   which   he   was   not   supposed   to   pay   in   view   of   the
6
exemption   notification   dated   1.3.1988   and   merely   because   the 


    assessee   has   not   claimed   the   refund   of   the   excess   duty   paid,   that 


    amount paid by him under the Notification dated 1.3.1988 requires 


    to be taken for the purpose of computing the aggregate value of the 


    clearances   under   the   notification   No.175/86-CE.   In   our   view, 


    merely   because  the  assessee,   maybe,  by  mistake  pays  duty  on the 


    goods which are  exempted from such payment, does not mean that 


    the   goods   would   become   goods   liable   for   duty   under   the   Act.
Secondly, merely because the assessee has not claimed any refund 


    on   the   duty   paid   by   him   would   not   come   in   the   way   of   claiming 


    benefit of the Notification No.175/86-CE dated 1.3.86.
14.
In
Union   of   India   v.   Wood   Papers   Ltd.
,   (1990)   4   SCC   256,   this 


    Court has observed:
4.   Literally   exemption   is   freedom   from   liability,   tax   or   duty.
Fiscally it may assume varying shapes, specially, in a growing  

         economy. For instance tax holiday to new units, concessional  

         rate of tax to goods or persons for limited period or with the  

         specific   objective   etc.   That   is   why   its   construction,   unlike  

         charging provision, has to be tested on different touchstone. In  

         fact an exemption provision is like an exception and on normal  

         principle   of   construction   or   interpretation   of   statutes   it   is  

         construed strictly either because of legislative intention or on  

         economic   justification   of   inequitable   burden   or   progressive  

         approach   of   fiscal   provisions   intended   to   augment   State  

         revenue. But once exception or exemption becomes applicable  

         no rule or principle requires it to be construed strictly. Truly  

         speaking   liberal   and   strict   construction   of   an   exemption  

         provision are to be invoked at different stages of interpreting  

         it.   When   the   question   is   whether   a   subject   falls   in   the
7
notification or in the exemption clause then it being in nature  

         of exception is to be construed strictly and against the subject  

         but once ambiguity or doubt about applicability is lifted and  

         the   subject   falls   in   the   notification   then   full   play   should   be  

         given to it and it calls for a wider and liberal construction.
5. ... A construction which results in inequitable results and is  

         incongruous, has to be avoided.
15.
In
Associated Cement Companies  Ltd. v. State  of Bihar
, (2004) 7 


    SCC 642, this Court while explaining the nature of the exemption 


    notification  and  also  the  manner  in which  it should  be  interpreted 


    has held:
"12.  Literally "exemption" is freedom from liability, tax or  

         duty. Fiscally it may assume varying shapes, specially, in a  

         growing economy. In fact, an exemption provision is like an  

         exception   and   on   normal   principle   of   construction   or  

         interpretation   of   statutes   it   is   construed   strictly   either  

         because of legislative  intention or on economic justification  

         of   inequitable   burden   of   progressive   approach   of   fiscal  

         provisions   intended   to   augment   State   revenue.   But   once  

         exception   or   exemption   becomes   applicable   no   rule   or  

         principle requires it to be construed strictly. Truly speaking,  

         liberal and strict construction of an exemption provision is to  

         be   invoked   at   different   stages   of   interpreting   it.   When   the  

         question is whether a subject falls in the notification or in the  

         exemption clause then it being in the nature of exception is to  

         be   construed   strictly   and   against   the   subject   but   once  

         ambiguity   or   doubt   about   applicability   is   lifted   and   the  

         subject falls in the notification then full play should be given  

         to   it   and   it   calls   for   a   wider   and   liberal   construction.   (See
Union   of   India  v.  Wood   Papers   Ltd.1
and
Mangalore  

         Chemicals and Fertilisers Ltd. v. Dy. Commr. of Commercial  

         Taxes2
to which reference has been made earlier.)"
16.   In   view   of   the   above,   we   cannot   sustain   the   judgment   and   order
8
passed   by   the   Tribunal   in   Appeal   No.E/1352/2002-B,   dated 


    25.10.2002.
17. Accordingly,   we   allow   this   appeal,   set   aside   the   judgments   and 


    orders   passed   by   the   Tribunal   and   the   adjudicating   authority.   We 


    direct   the   adjudicating   authority   to   apply   the   Notification   dated 


    1.3.86   in   the   assessee's   case   without   taking   into   consideration   the 


    excess   duty   paid   by   the   assessee   under   the   Notification   dated 


    1.3.1988. No costs.
Ordered accordingly.
.....................................J.

                                                                        (H.L. DATTU)





                                                          .....................................J.

                                                                   (ANIL R. DAVE)


     NEW DELHI,

     FEBRUARY 14, 2012.
9