[Cites
9
, Cited by
13
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Dakshin Shelters P.Ltd vs Geeta S Johari on 21 February, 2012
Equivalent citations: AIR 2012 SUPREME COURT 1875, 2012 AIR SCW 2313, AIR 2012 SC (CIVIL) 1255, 2012 (5) SCC 152, (2012) 1 CLR 653 (SC), (2012) 91 ALL LR 477, (2012) 3 CIVLJ 816, (2012) 4 MAD LW 806, (2012) 1 ARBILR 274, (2012) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 387, (2012) 2 JCR 107 (SC), (2012) 3 KCCR 159, (2012) 2 ALL WC 2052, (2012) 6 MAD LJ 791, (2012) 3 SCALE 20, (2012) 112 ALLINDCAS 156 (SC), (2012) 113 CUT LT 1096, (2012) 108 CORLA 3.2 SN, 2012 (2) KLT SN 12 (SC)
Author:
R.M. Lodha
Bench:
H.L. Gokhale
,
R.M. Lodha
REPORTABLE
                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                  SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION NO. 33448 OF 2011   
             

                      
 M/S. DAKSHIN SHELTERS P. LTD.                                ...   PETITIONER(s)
 
                      Versus


 GEETA S. JOHARI                                              .      RESPONDENT(s)




                                     J U D G M E N T
R.M. LODHA, J.
We   have   heard   Mr.   Pallav   Shishodia,   learned   senior 

     counsel   for   the   petitioner   and   Mr.   Shyam   Divan,   learned 

     senior counsel for the respondent.
2.          A Development Agreement-cum-General Power of Attorney 

     (for short "Development Agreement") was executed between the 

     parties on February 7, 2006.   Certain disputes arose out of 

     that agreement.  On December 10, 2010, the respondent issued 

     a notice to the petitioner invoking arbitration clause in the 

     above   agreement   and   nominated   a   former   Judge   of   the     High 

     Court   of   Andhra   Pradesh   -   Justice   P.L.N.   Sharma   -on   her 

     behalf   and called   upon the present petitioner to nominate 

     its arbitrator.
3.          By   reply   dated   January   10,   2011,   the   petitioner 

     communicated  to   the     respondent   that   since   the   Development 

     Agreement   has been cancelled by her, there was no question 

     for   resolution   of   disputes   between   the   parties   by   the 

     Arbitrator.     The   reply   sent   by   the   petitioner   necessitated 


the   invocation   of
Section   11
of   the   Arbitration   and 

Conciliation   Act,   1996   (for   short   "the   Act")     by   the 

respondent and an application was made before the High Court 

of   Andhra   Pradesh   requesting   the   Chief   Justice   or   the 

Designate   Judge     to   appoint   the   arbitrator/arbitrators   to 

decide the disputes arising out of the above agreement.
4.       On   hearing   the   parties,   the   Designate   Judge   by   his 

order dated September 9, 2011 appointed Mr. D.V. Seetharama 

Murthy,   Sr.   Advocate   as   an   arbitrator   on   behalf   of   the 

petitioner (respondent therein).  It was further observed in 

the   order   that   the   arbitrator   nominated   by   the   applicant 

(present   respondent)   and   the   arbitrator   appointed   by   the 

Designate   Judge   on   behalf   of   the   petitioner   (respondent 

therein) are required to appoint the third arbitrator before 

entering into  reference.
5.       The order dated September 9, 2011 is under challenge 

in this Special Leave Petition.
6.       On December 16, 2011, a limited notice was issued by 

this Court to the respondent.  The order issuing notice reads 

as follows:
"Mr.   Pallav   Shishodia,   learned   senior   counsel   for 
      the   petitioner   submits   that   instead   of   senior 
      advocate, who has been appointed as   arbitrator by 
      the   designate   Judge,   a   retired   High   Court   Judge, 
      stationed   in   Hyderabad,   may   be   appointed.     He 
      further   submits   that   the   petitioner   is   willing   to 
      bear  the  expenses, if  limited notice  is  issued to 
      the respondent.
Issue   notice   limited   to   the   above,   returnable   in 
      five   weeks   subject   to   deposit   of   Rs.   one   lakh   by 
      the petitioner in the Registry  towards costs.
      In   the   meanwhile,   further   proceedings   before   the 


      arbitrators shall remain stayed. "
7.       In compliance of the above order, the petitioner has 

deposited Rs. 1 lakh in the Registry of this Court towards 

the costs of the respondent.
8.       After   service,   respondent   has   entered   appearance 

through   Mr.   Y.   Rajagopala   Rao,   advocate-on-record.     Mr. 

Shyam     Divan,   learned   senior   counsel   appearing   for   the 

respondent, at the outset, submitted that the respondent was 

not agreeable to the substitution of arbitrator appointed by 

the Designate Judge on behalf of the petitioner.
9.       Mr. Pallav Shishodia, learned senior counsel for the 

petitioner   vehemently   contended   that   the   Designate   Judge 

ought   to   have   given   an   opportunity   to   the   petitioner   to 

nominate its arbitrator.   He referred to the suit filed by 

the   petitioner   against   the   respondent   challenging   the 

cancellation of the Development Agreement.  He also submitted 

that the   respondent made an application under
Section 8
of 

the   Act   but   that   came   to   be     dismissed.     In     backdrop   of 

these  facts,    Mr.  Pallav  Shishodia  submitted  that  when  the 

petitioner received the notice dated December 10, 2012,   it 

was communicated by the petitioner to the respondent in its 

reply dated January 10, 2011  that there was no question for 

appointment   of   arbitrator   and   the   disputes   between   the 

parties   could   not   be   decided   by   the   arbitrator.     Learned 

senior counsel, thus, submitted that the petitioner had not 

failed   to   appoint   the   arbitrator   as   contemplated   under
Section 11(4)
of the Act.
10.             Mr.   Shyam     Divan,   learned   senior   counsel   for   the 

         respondent,   on   the   other   hand,   submitted   that   once   an 

         opportunity   was   given   to   the   petitioner   to   nominate   its 

         arbitrator by notice dated December 10, 2010 and it failed to 

         avail   of   the   opportunity,   it   ceased   to   have   any   right   to 

         appoint the arbitrator in terms of the arbitration clause in 

         the Development Agreement.
In   support   of   his   submission, 

         Mr.   Shyam   Divan   relied   upon   the   decision   of   this   Court   in
Union of India vs. Bharat Battery Manufacturing Co. (P) Ltd.1
.
11.             Mr. Pallav Shishodia, learned senior counsel for the 

         petitioner, in rejoinder, referred to the   decision of this 

         Court in
National Highways Authority of India and another vs. 

         Bumihiway   DDB   Ltd.   (JV
)   and   others2.       He   particularly 

         referred to  paragraphs 37 and 38 of
the above decision
.
12.             We must immediately observe that the judgment of this 

         Court   in  National   Highways   Authority2  relied   upon   by   Mr. 

         Pallav   Shishodia   has   no   application   to   the   controversy 

         involved   in   the   present   matter.     The     main   question   in 

         National   Highways   Authority2  related   to   the   process   of 

         appointment of arbitrator to be   followed on resignation or 

         termination   of   mandate   of   an   arbitrator   and   one   of   the 

         questions framed by this Court for determination was whether 

         on   resignation   of   one   of   the   arbitrators,   the   statutory 

         provision that comes into play was
Section 15(2)
or
Section 

         11(6)
of the Act.  The other  three questions noted in para 


1    (2007) 7 SCC 684

2    (2006) 10 SCC 763


20 of the Report have also no bearing on the question with 

which we are concerned in the present matter.
13.       The   arbitration   clause   in   the   Development   Agreement 

between the parties reads as follows:
"25:  Arbitration:
25.1         Tribunal: Disputes relating to this Agreement or 
  its interpretation shall be referred to the arbitration 
  of   an   arbitral   tribunal,   consisting   of   three 
  arbitrators (Tribunal), one each to be appointed by the 
  parties  hereto and the  third   to be appointed by the 
  two   arbitrators   so   appointed.     The   award   of   the 
  Tribunal   shall   be   final   and   binding   on   the   parties.
The   arbitration   proceedings   will   be   held   only   in 
  Secunderabad and the courts situated in the Ranga Reddy 
  District alone shall have the territorial jurisdiction 
  to   entertain   the   dispute.              The   provisions   of
Arbitration   and   Conciliation   Act
shall   comply   to   the 
  arbitration procedures.
25.2   Powers   of   Tribunal:     The   Tribunal   shall   be   at 
  liberty to (1) proceed summarily (2) avoid all rules, 
  procedures   and/or   evidences   that   can   be   lawfully 
  avoided by the mutual consent and/or directions by the 
  parties   and   (3)   award   damages   along   with   the   final 
  award against the party not complying with any interim 
  award   or   order   passed   by   the   Tribunal.     The   Tribunal 
  shall:
(a)       Make   the   award   in   English   and   within   four 
       months from the date of appointment with the right to 
       give extension of not more than one month at a time 
       on   emergent   grounds   but   the   total   extensions   shall 
       not be more than four months.
(b)       Conduct the proceedings from   day-to-day and 
       for about 5 hours per day save for initial sittings.
(c)       Not   grant   to   either   of   the   parties   any 
       extension   of   time   and/or   adjournment   except   on 
       grounds   beyond   their   control   and   only   for   such 
       periods as be of the abosute3 minimum.
(d)       The   Tribunal   shall   be   entitled   to   pass 
       interim award granting interim relief to the parties.
25.3      Mechanism and Procedure:  The procedure to be 
       followed   shall   be   decided   by   the   Tribunal.     The 
       directions/award of the Tribunal shall be final and 
       binding on the parties."
14.       On the disputes   having   arisen between the parties, 


the notice was sent by the respondent to the petitioner on 

December 10, 2010.   Paragraph 4 of the said notice reads as 

under:
"I   do   hereby   invoke   the   Arbitration   Clause   in   the 
       agreement bearing Doc. No. 2778 of 2006 and appoint 
       Hon'ble   Mr.   Justice   P.L.N.   Sharma,   a   retired   Judge 
       of  A.P.   High  Court,  r/o   Gandhi  Nagar,  Hyderabad  as 
       arbitrator within a week from the date of receipt of 
       this     notice   to   adjudicate   all   claims,   disputes, 
       differences,   restitutions,   restorations   whatsoever 
       in   law   and   in   equity,   in   terms   of   the   registered 
       Development Agreement cum GPA document registered as 
       Doc.   No.   2778   of   2006,   failing   which   I   shall   be 
       constrained   to   initiate   appropriate   legal   action 
       under
Section   11
of   the   Arbitration   Act   for 
       appointment of arbitrator on your behalf as well as 
       you   shall   be   solely   responsible   fro   all   costs   and 
       consequences."
15.       The petitioner did respond to the above notice within 

30 days of its receipt by sending its reply on January 10, 

2011.     Various   pleas   were   raised   in   that   reply   and 

ultimately,   the   petitioner   responded   by   stating     "it   is 

stated   that   the   question   of   appointment   of   Arbitrator   does 

not raise either from your side or from our side. There is no 

arbitral dispute to be decided by the arbitrator."
16.       From   the   above   response,   it   is   clear     that   the 

petitioner declined to appoint its arbitrator as according to 

it there was no question   of appointment of arbitrator   by 

either  of  the  parties  and  there  being  no  arbitral  dispute, 

there was no occasion for resolution of dispute as provided 

in the Development  Agreement.  The stance of the petitioner 

amounted to failure on its part to appoint  its arbitrator on 

receipt of the request to do so from the respondent.
17.       In   view   of   the   above,   it   cannot   be   said   that   the 

Designate Judge   committed any error in nominating Mr. D.V. 


Seetharama Murthy, Sr. Advocate as an arbitrator on behalf of 

the petitioner.  The order of the learned Single Judge is in 

conformity with the decision of this Court in Bharat Battery 

Manufacturing   Co.   (P)   Ltd.1  wherein   this   Court   stated   as 

follows:
"Once   a   party   files   an   application   under
section 
        11(6)
of the Act, the other party extinguishes its 
        right   to   appoint   an   arbitrator   in   terms   of   the 
        clause of the agreement thereafter.    The right to 
        appoint   arbitrator   under   the   clause   of   agreement 
        ceases after
Section 11(6)
petition has been filed 
        by   the   other   party   before   the   Court   seeking 
        appointment of an arbitrator."
18      The   petitioner's   right   to   appoint   its   arbitrator   in 

terms   of   clause   25   of   the   Development   Agreement   got 

extinguished   once   it   failed   to   appoint   the   arbitrator   on 

receipt of the notice dated December 10, 2010. There   is no 

merit in the submission of the learned senior counsel for the 

petitioner  that  the Designate  Judge ought  to  have  given  an 

opportunity to the petitioner to nominate its arbitrator.
19.     The   order   impugned   in   the   present   Special   Leave 

Petition  does not suffer from any infirmity.  Special Leave 

Petition is, accordingly, dismissed with costs. The amount of 

Rs. one lakh  deposited by the petitioner in the Registry of 

this Court shall be paid to the respondent.
.....................J.
                                         (R.M. LODHA)



                                                                        
                                                                       
                                         .....................J.
                                         (H.L. GOKHALE)


   NEW DELHI
   FEBRUARY 21, 2012.
ITEM NO.3               COURT NO.8             SECTION XIIA



            S U P R E M E   C O U R T   O F   I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No(s).33448/2011

(From the judgement and order   dated 09/09/2011 in AA No.41/2011 of 
The HIGH COURT OF A.P  AT HYDERABAD)



M/S DAKSHIN SHELTERS P.LTD.                       Petitioner(s)

                 VERSUS

GEETA S. JOHARI                                    Respondent(s)

( office report for direction )



Date: 21/02/2012  This Petition was called on for hearing today.



CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE R.M. LODHA
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE H.L. GOKHALE




For Petitioner(s)       Mr. Pallav Shishodia, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Annam D.N. Rao,Adv.
Ms. Neelam Jain,Adv.
For Respondent(s)       Mr. Shyam Divan, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Y. Raja Gopala Rao,Adv.
UPON hearing counsel the Court made the following
                               O R D E R 
             We   have   heard   Mr.   Pallav   Shishodia,   learned   senior 

     counsel   for   the   petitioner   and   Mr.   Shyam   Divan,   learned 

     senior counsel for the respondent.
2.      A Development Agreement-cum-General Power of Attorney 

     was   executed   between   the   parties   on   February   7,   2006.
Certain disputes arose out of the above agreement between the 

parties.  On December 10, 2010, the present respondent issued 

a notice to the petitioner invoking the arbitration clause in 

the above agreement and nominated a former Judge of the  High 

Court   of   Andhra   Pradesh   -   Justice   P.L.N.   Sharma   -on   her 

behalf   calling   upon   the   present   petitioner   to   nominate   its 

arbitrator.
3.      By   reply   dated   January   10,   2011,   the   petitioner 

communicated   to   the   present   respondent   that   since   the 

Development   Agreement   itself   has   been   cancelled   by   the 

present   respondent,   there   is   no   occasion   for   resolution   of 

disputes  between  the  parties  by  the  Arbitrator.    The  reply 

sent by the petitioner necessitated the invocation of
Section 

11
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short 

"the Act")  by the present respondent and an application was 

made before the High Court of Andhra Pradesh requesting the 

Chief   Justice   or   the   designate   Judge     to   appoint   the 

arbitrator-arbitrators to decide the disputes arising out of 

the above agreement.
4.      On   hearing   the   parties,   the   designate   Judge   by   his 

order dated September 9, 2011 appointed Mr. D.V. Seetharama 

Murthy,   Sr.   Advocate   as   an   arbitrator   on   behalf   of   the 

petitioner   (respondent   therein)   for   adjudication   of   the 

disputes between the parties.  It was further observed in the 

order   that   the   arbitrator   nominated   by   the   present 

respondent-cum-applicant therein and the arbitrator appointed 

by  the  designate  Judge  on  behalf  of the  present  petitioner 


are required to appoint the third arbitrator before entering 

into a reference.
5.       It   is   the   order   dated   September   9,   2011   which   is 

under challenge in this Special Leave Petition.
6.       On December 16, 2011, a limited notice was issued by 

this Court to the respondent.  The order issuing notice reads 

as follows:
"Mr.   Pallav   Shishodia,   learned   senior   counsel   for 
      the   petitioner   submits   that   instead   of   senior 
      advocate, who has been appointed as   arbitrator by 
      the   designate   Judge,   a   retired   High   Court   Judge, 
      stationed   in   Hyderabad,   may   be   appointed.     He 
      further   submits   that   the   petitioner   is   willing   to 
      bear  the  expenses, if  limited notice  is  issued to 
      the respondent.
Issue   notice   limited   to   the   above,   returnable   in 
      five   weeks   subject   to   deposit   of   Rs.   one   lakh   by 
      the petitioner in the Registry  towards costs.
      In   the   meanwhile,   further   proceedings   before 
      the  arbitrators shall remain stayed. "
7.       In compliance of the above order, the petitioner 

has deposited Rs. 1 lakh in the Registry of this Court 

towards the costs of the respondent.
8.       After service, respondent has entered appearance 

through Mr. Y. Rajagopala Rao, advocate-on-record   and 

he   is   represented   by   Mr.   Shyam   Divan,   learned   senior 

counsel.
9.       Mr. Pallav Shishodia, learned senior counsel for 

the petitioner refers to the suit filed by the present 

petitioner   against   the   respondent   cancelling   the 


Development   Agreement   between   the   parties.     He   also 

submits that the present respondent made an application 

under
Section   8
of   the   Act   but   that   came   to   be 

dismissed.
10.     In   the   backdrop   of   the   above   facts,   when   the 

petitioner received the notice dated December 10, 2012, 

by   its   reply   dated   January     10,   2011,   it   was 

communicated   by   the   petitioner   to   the   respondent   that 

there was no occasion for appointment of arbitrator and 

the   disputes   between   the   parties   could   not   be   decided 

by   the   arbitrator.     Learned   senior   counsel   further 

submits   that   the   petitioner   had   not   failed   to   appoint 

the   arbitrator   as   contemplated   under
Section   11(4)
of 

the   Act   and,   therefore,   the   Designate   Judge   ought   to 

have given an opportunity to the petitioner to nominate 

its arbitrator.
11.     Mr. Shyam  Divan, learned senior counsel for the 

respondent,   on   the   other   hand,   submitted   that   once   an 

opportunity was given to the petitioner to nominate its 

arbitrator which it failed to do, it ceases to have any 

right   to   appoint   the   arbitrator   in   terms   of   the 

arbitration clause in the Development Agreement.
12.
In support of his submissions,   Mr. Shyam Divan 

relied upon a decision of this Court in
Union of India  


         vs. Bharat Battery Manufacturing Co. (P) Ltd.1
.
13.             Mr. Pallav Shishodia, learned senior counsel for 

         the petitioner, in rejoinder, referred to a decision of 

         this Court in
National Highways Authority of India and  

         another vs.  Bumihiway DDB Ltd. (JV
) and others2.     He 

         particularly referred to the   paragraphs 37 and 38 of
the above decision
.
14.             We must immediately observe that the judgment of 

         this   Court   in  National   Highways   Authority   of   India2 

         relied upon by Mr. Pallav Shishodia has no application 

         to the controversy involved in the present matter.  The 

         controversy in National Highways2 related to the process 

         of   appointment   of   arbitrator   to   be     followed   on 

         resignation or termination of mandate of an arbitrator. 

         That   matter   related   to   the   appointment   of   substitute 

         arbitrator which is not the present case.
15.             Insofar   as   the   present   case   is   concerned,   the 

         arbitration clause reads as follows:
"25:  Arbitration:
25.1          Tribunal:   Disputes   relating   to   this 
             Agreement or its interpretation shall be referred 
             to   the   arbitration   of   an   arbitral   tribunal, 
             consisting   of   three   arbitrators   (Tribunal),   one 
             each to be appointed by the parties hereto and the 
             third   to be appointed by the two arbitrators so 
             appointed.     The   award   of   the   Tribunal   shall   be 
             final and binding on the parties.  The arbitration 

1    (2007) 7 SCC 684

2    (2006) 10 SCC 763


  proceedings will be held only in Secunderabad and 
  the   courts   situated   in   the   Ranga   Reddy   District 
  alone   shall   have   the   territorial   jurisdiction   to 
  entertain   the   dispute.             The   provisions   of
Arbitration   and   Conciliation   Act
shall   comply   to 
  the arbitration procedures.
25.2 Powers of Tribunal:  The Tribunal shall be at 
  liberty   to   (1)   proceed   summarily   (2)   avoid   all 
  rules,   procedures   and/or   evidences   that   can   be 
  lawfully   avoided   by   the   mutual   consent   and/or 
  directions   by   the   parties   and   (3)   award   damages 
  along  with  the final  award  against the  party  not 
  complying   with   any   interim   award   or   order   passed 
  by the Tribunal.  The Tribunal shall:
(a)     Make the award in English and within four 
       months   from   the   date   of   appointment   with   the 
       right   to   give   extension   of   not   more   than   one 
       month   at   a   time   on   emergent   grounds   but   the 
       total   extensions   shall   not   be   more   than   four 
       months.
(b)     Conduct the proceedings from   day-to-day 
       and for about 5 hours per day save for initial 
       sittings.
(c)     Not   grant   to   either   of   the   parties   any 
       extension   of   time   and/or   adjournment   except   on 
       grounds  beyond  their control  and  only for  such 
       periods as be of the abosute3 minimum.
(d)     The   Tribunal   shall   be   entitled   to   pass 
       interim   award   granting   interim   relief   to   the 
       parties.
25.3    Mechanism   and   Procedure:     The   procedure 
       to be followed shall be decided by the Tribunal. 
       The   directions/award   of   the   Tribunal   shall   be 
       final and binding on the parties."
16.      On   the   dispute-   as   having   been   arisen   between 

the parties, notice was sent by the respondent to the 

petitioner   on   December   10,   2010.     Paragraph   4   of   the 

said notice reads as under:
"I   do   hereby   invoke   the   Arbitration   Clause   in 
       the agreement bearing Doc. No. 2778 of 2006 and 
       appoint   Hon'ble   Mr.   Justice   P.L.N.   Sharma,   a 
       retired   Judge   of   A.P.   High   Court,   r/o   Gandhi 


       Nagar,   Hyderabad   as   arbitrator   within   a   week 
       from   the   date   of   receipt   of   this     notice   to 
       adjudicate   all   claims,   disputes,   differences, 
       restitutions, restorations whatsoever in law and 
       in   equity,   in   terms   of   the   registered 
       Development   Agreement   cum   GPA   document 
       registered   as   Doc.   No.   2778   of   2006,   failing 
       which   I   shall   be   constrained   to   initiate 
       appropriate legal action under
Section 11
of the 
       Arbitration Act for appointment of arbitrator on 
       your   behalf   as   well   as   you   shall   be   solely 
       responsible fro all costs and consequences."
17.      The   petitioner   did   respond   to   the   above   notice 

by sending its reply on January 10, 2011.
18.      Various   pleas   were   raised   in   that   reply   and 

ultimately,   the   petitioner   responded   by   stating   that 

"it   is   stated   that   the   question   of   appointment   of 

Arbitrator does not raise either from your side or from 

our side. There is no arbitral dispute to be decided by 

the arbitrator."
19.      From the above response, no   doubt is left that 

the   petitioner   failed   to   appoint     its   arbitrator   on 

receipt of the request to do so from the respondent.
20.      In   view   of   the   above,   the   designate   Judge   did 

not commit any error in nominating Mr. D.V. Seetharama 

Murthy, Sr. Advocate as an arbitrator on behalf of the 

petitioner.   The order of the learned Single Judge is 

in conformity with the decision of this Court in Bharat 

Battery Manufacturing Co. (P) Ltd.1  wherein this Court 

stated as follows:
"Once   a   party   files   an   application   under
section   11(6)
of   the   Act,   the   other   party 
         extinguishes   its   right   to   appoint   an 
         arbitrator   in   terms   of   the   clause   of   the 
         agreement   thereafter.       The   right   to   appoint 
         arbitrator   under   the   clause   of   agreement 
         ceases   after
Section   11(6)
petition   has   been 
         filed   by   the   other   party   before   the   Court 
         seeking appointment of an arbitrator."
21.      The order impugned in the present Special Leave 

Petition     does   not   suffer   from   any   infirmity   and   is 

dismissed. The amount of Rs. one lakh  deposited by the 

petitioner in the Registry of this Court shall be paid 

to the respondent.
(Pardeep Kumar)                          (Renu Diwan)
        Court Master                            Court Master