[Cites
3
, Cited by
44
]
Supreme Court of India
Bhubaneswar Development Authority & ... vs Adikanda Biswal & Ors on 1 February, 2012
Equivalent citations: 2012 AIR SCW 3083, 2012 (4) AIR JHAR R 162, 2012 (11) SCC 731, (2012) 2 SCALE 620, (2012) 1 CLR 571 (SC)
Bench:
K. S. Radhakrishnan
,
Deepak Verma
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA         Reportable
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                     CIVIL APPEAL NOS.4036-4040 OF 2007

      Bhubaneswar Development Authority & Anr.    Appellants

                                   Versus

      Adikanda Biswal & Ors.                            Respondents


                                  O R D E R
1.    The question that arises for reconsideration in these Appeals is
      whether the methodology adopted by  Bhubaneswar Development  Authority
      (hereinafter shall be referred to as 'BDA') in allotment of  45  plots
      situated within the city of Bhubaneswar to the citizens of  Orissa  on
      "First Come First Served" basis on out-right purchase, can be said  to
      be just, proper and legally tenable method.
2.    Advertisements were issued by the Appellants  on  07.01.2000  in
      daily local newspapers published in Orissa namely, 'The  Samay',  'The
      Samvad' and 'The Dharithri', having wide circulation, for allotment of
      plots, on the terms and conditions mentioned in  it,  which  we  shall
      deal with later.
3.    The  advertisement  shows  that  45  plots  were  available  for
      allotment on "First Come First Served" basis under the  Scheme  framed
      by  BDA,  having  a  plot  size  of  2400  sq.ft.  (60'  X   40')   in
      Chandrasekharpur residential area at a cost of Rs.2.40 lakhs only that
      is at the rate  of  Rs.100/-  per  sq.ft.  The  advertisement  further
      contemplates that the persons interested in out-right  purchase  would
      get priority in allotment of plot and they had to submit a bank  draft
      drawn on Oriental Bank of Commerce, BDA Branch, Akash  Sova  Building,
      Bhubaneswar. It further contemplates that the  Applications  could  be
      submitted on plain paper with the original Challan but  general  terms
      and conditions of allotment of  plots,  applicable  to  other  schemes
      would be applicable to the present Scheme launched by BDA.
4.    Pursuant to the aforesaid advertisement, having been  issued  in
      the three daily local newspapers of Orissa as  mentioned  hereinabove,
      on 07.01.2000, 58  applicants  deposited  full  amount  together  with
      application and other prescribed details on out-right purchase.  Three
      applicants submitted their applications on 08.01.2000 and one each  on
      10.01.2000 and 11.1.2000 along with a sum of Rs.2.40 lakhs each.
5.    The 'Prajatantra' newspaper had published a news-item under  the
      heading 'BDA's Millennium Deceit'. The said publication indicates that
      it has criticised the manner and methodology under which the 45  plots
      were sought to be allotted to the applicants. It alleged that  it  was
      with an intention to  benefit  the  pre-determinated  and  pre-decided
      close persons of BDA's officials. It further  suggests  that  such  an
      action of the BDA calls for high level inquiry into the matter.
6.    On account of the aforesaid news-item having been  published  in
      the 'Prajatantra' newspaper, a letter was addressed by  the  Secretary
      to  the  Lokpal  of  Orissa  on  15.01.2000  to  the  Vice   Chairman,
      Bhubaneswar Development Authority. He wanted to have  a  copy  of  the
      original advertisement in respect of the  plotted  development  scheme
      mentioned therein. He also wanted a copy of the earlier  advertisement
      in respect of the core housing scheme at Jayadev Vihar square for  the
      kind perusal of the Hon'ble Lokpal. This letter was issued  after  the
      initial discussions were held between  the  Secretary  and  Lokpal  on
      earlier occasion. But nothing happened thereafter for a long time.
7.    On 16.05.2000, Secretary of the Department of Urban Development,
      Government of Orissa, gave a proposal to BDA to cancel the process  of
      allotment of plots. The matter was placed before the BDA in  its  76th
      Authority Meeting  held  on  16.05.2000.  It  was  taken  up  as  Item
      No.23/76. Various pros and cons of the same were discussed by the  BDA
      on the said date. Thereafter, a conscious decision was  taken  by  the
      BDA on the same day which reads as under :
"Item No.23/76 : Allotment of left over plots in Niladri  Vihar,
           Chandrasekharpur.
The Committee decided that under the above circumstances  it  is
           better to cancel the total  process  and  return  the  deposited
           money  to  all  the  applicants  with  interest   @4.5%.   Fresh
           applications be called  for  by  re-advertising  these  plots  @
           Rs.100/- per sq.ft. The applicants shall deposit EMD  &  balance
           within 15 days of allotment. One month time shall be  given  for
           receipt of application after which on  lottery  basis  allotment
           shall made."
8.    This  was  also  published  in  the  newspaper  'The  Samad'  on
      25.06.2000 so as to bring it to the notice of those applicants who had
      deposited their amount between 07.01.2000 till 11.01.2000.
9.    Pursuant to the aforesaid Resolution, amounts  received  by  BDA
      were  returned  to  the  applicants  together  with  interest  accrued
      thereon. We have been given to  understand  that  some  of  them  have
      accepted the amounts under protest, some of them have not accepted  it
      and some of them have accepted it without any protest.
10.   On account of the cancellation of the total process of allotment
      of plots by BDA, it gave rise to filing of spate  of Writ Petitions by
      the Applicants, who had applied under the Advertisement issued by BDA,
      in the High Court of Orissa.
11.   The said Writ Petitions came up for hearing before the  Division
      Bench of the High Court. The same were disposed off by a common  order
      on 31.1.2005. The Division Bench has allowed the Writ Petitions  filed
      by the Respondents and directed the BDA to proceed further with regard
      to process of allotment of developed plots to those applicants who may
      fulfill other criteria as envisaged under the general conditions fixed
      by the BDA under its Scheme. It is against this judgment and order  of
      the Division Bench of the High Court, BDA is in appeal before us.
12.   We have accordingly heard Mr. R. S. Jena, learned counsel  along
      with other learned counsel  appearing  for  Appellants  and  Mr.  P.S.
      Narasimha, learned senior counsel and Mr. Arvind Verma, learned senior
      counsel with other learned counsel appearing for Respondents at length
      and perused the record.
13.   Shri R. S. Jena submitted that the High Court under
Article  226
of the Constitution of India was not justified in interfering with the
      decision taken by the BDA to call for fresh applications for allotment
      of plots on lottery basis rather than proceeding with the allotment on
      the basis  of  "First  Come  First  Served"  basis.   Learned  counsel
      submitted that  there  were  sufficient  reasons  for  taking  such  a
      decision which cannot be said to be arbitrary, illegal or vitiated  by
      extraneous reasons. Learned counsel pointed  out  that  the  newspaper
      Prajatantra was highlighting the public perception that there was some
      foul play and favouritism in the proposed allotment of plots by way of
      "First Come First Served" basis.  The Commissioner-cum-Secretary of  H
      & UD Department had also suggested that the whole process be cancelled
      and the housing plots be auctioned.   Learned counsel also pointed out
      that the Lokpal had also proposed to initiate proceedings against  BDA
      on the basis of news item appeared in  Prajatantra.   Learned  counsel
      submitted that  taking  into  consideration  all  those  aspects,  the
      authority took a conscious decision to cancel the process of allotment
      by way of "First Come First Served" basis and to follow the system  of
      allotment of plots by way of lots.   Learned  counsel  also  submitted
      that there is no indefeasible right on the applicants to get allotment
      of plots and that authority has the right to adopt a system  which  is
      transparent and complaint free.  Learned counsel also  made  reference
      to a judgment of this Court in
Shrijee Sales Corporation  and  Another
      v. Union  of  India
-  (1997)  3  SCC  398  and  submitted  that  the
      supervening public equity or public interest would override individual
      equity and in such a case a Court sitting under
Article  226
of  the
      Constitution of  India  is  not  justified  in  interfering  with  the
      decision of the authority, as if, it is sitting in appeal.
14.   Mr. P. S. Narasimha, learned senior counsel, submitted that  the
      High Court was  justified  in  quashing  the  decision  taken  by  the
      authority in the absence of any material to  show  that  the  decision
      taken for allotment of plots following the "First Come  First  Served"
basis was vitiated by any  extraneous  or  irrelevant  considerations.
      No material has been produced  before  the  Court  to  show  that  the
      applicants had come to know about the advertisement prior to  7.1.2000
      or that any of the BDA officials was  involved   in  not  keeping  the
      secrecy of such advertisement.  Learned senior counsel, on  the  other
      hand, submitted that there were sufficient reasons to adopt the "First
      Come First Served" basis since the allotment was for left over  plots.
       Learned senior counsel also submitted  that  the  "First  Come  First
      Served" basis for allotment of housing plots is not inherently bad and
      that BDA itself  had  adopted  such  a  method  in  previous  schemes.
      Learned senior counsel also submitted that the  Lokpal  had  also  not
      conducted any inquiry in respect of the news  items  appeared  in  the
      News Daily  and,  therefore,  the  decision  of  the  authority  dated
      16.5.2000 cancelling the entire process of allotment was  bad  in  law
      and the  High  Court  was  justified  in  setting  aside  that  order.
      Learned senior counsel also made reference to a judgment of this Court
      in
Omkar Lal Bajaj v Union of India
- (2003) 2 SCC 673, in support  of
      his contentions.
15.   We are of the view that the  process  of  allotment  of  housing
      plots on "First Come First Served" basis by a statutory authority  has
      inherent dangerous implications and unless properly guarded, may  lead
      to favouritism, partiality, arbitrariness etc.  So far as this case is
      concerned, the advertisement informing the  public  that  the  housing
      plots would be allotted on "First Come First Served" basis appeared in
      three news papers on 7.1.2000 and on the very same day  58  applicants
      had deposited the  entire  purchase  price  of  Rs.2,40,000/-  in  the
      Oriental  Bank  of  Commerce,  BDA,  Bhubaneswar  and  few  others  on
      subsequent days.   Later, a  News  Daily  "Prajatantra"  on  12.1.2000
      published a news item,   the relevant portion of  the  same  reads  as
      follows:
"BDA'S MILLENNIUM DECEIT




            .....Surprisingly this advertisement has not been  published  in
            other widely circulated newspapers and on the same 7th day after
            opening of the office for a while acceptance of application form
            was closed.    Is  this  millennium  scheme  not  made  to  make
            available residential plots to  pre-determined  and  pre-decided
            close persons of BDA officials?  There is a public demand for  a
            high level inquiry into this."
16.   The Secretary of the Office of the Lokpal, Orissa,  taking  note
      of the abovementioned news item as directed by the Lokpal  called  for
      the copy of the advertisement from  the  BDA,  evidently   to  examine
      whether such a course was adopted to make available the plots to  pre-
      determined and pre-decided close persons of the officials of BDA.
17.   BDA taking note of the various complaints raised by  the  public
      through the newspaper as well as the initiation of proceedings by  the
      Lokpal, placed the entire matter before the Authority as Item No.23/76
      in the 76th Meeting held on 16.5.2000 in the Conference Hall  of  BDA,
      Bhubaneswar. The Commissioner-cum-Secretary, H &  UD  Department,  had
      also suggested that the whole process  should  be  cancelled  and  the
      housing plots  be  auctioned   Taking  into  consideration  all  those
      aspects, the Committee on 16.5.2000  passed  a  resolution  to  invite
      fresh applications, and to follow the process of allotment,  by way of
      lots.  The Division Bench of the High Court, however, interfered  with
      the decision taken by  BDA  and  directed  BDA  to  proceed  with  the
      advertisement dated 7.1.2000 and to follow the method of  "First  Come
      First Served" basis.
18.   We are of the view that the High  Court  was  not  justified  in
      sitting in appeal over the decision taken by the  statutory  authority
      under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India.  It is trite law  that
      the power of judicial review under
Article 226
of the Constitution  of
      India is not directed against the decision  but  is  confined  to  the
      decision making process.   The judicial review is not an appeal from a
      decision, but a review of the manner in which the decision is made and
      the Court sits in judgment only on the  correctness  of  the  decision
      making process and not on the  correctness  of  the  decision  itself.
      The Court confines itself to the question of legality and is concerned
      only with, whether the decision making authority exceeded  its  power,
      committed an error of law, committed a breach of the rules of  natural
      justice, reached an unreasonable decision or abused its powers.
19.   We are of the view that there are  sufficient  materials  before
      the statutory authority in cancelling the allotment of  housing  plots
      adopting the process of "First Come First Served" basis and to  go  in
      for allotment by way  of  lots.   Naturally,  at  least  some  of  the
      officials of the BDA, were  aware  prior  to  7.1.2000  that  BDA  was
      intending to follow the method of "First  Come  First  Served"  basis.
      Further the advertisement dated 7.1.2000 indicated that BDA  had  only
      nominated  one  bank  i.e.  the  Oriental  Bank  of   Commerce,   BDA,
      Bhubaneswar for depositing the money, evidently, at least some of  the
      bank officials would also be aware prior to 7.1.2000, that  the  basis
      of  allotment  would  be  "First  Come  First  Served".  Further,  the
      advertisement was published in three newspapers on  7.1.2000  and  the
      publishers, the staff of those newspapers would also be aware that the
      BDA would be following the "First Come First  Served"  basis  for  the
      allotment of plots.  BDA, therefore had not maintained  secrecy  which
      they were expected to  maintain.  It  is  under  the  above  mentioned
      circumstances the BDA took a conscious decision on 16.5.2000 to cancel
      the earlier advertisement and to go in for allotment of housing  plots
      by way of lots, which cannot  be  said  to  be  arbitrary  or  illegal
      warranting interference by a court sitting under
Article  226
of  the
      Constitution.
20.   The method of "First  Come  First  Served"  basis,  as  we  have
      already indicated, has many inherent defects and if not properly taken
      care of, may lead to undesired results.
21.   In our considered opinion, there appears  to  be  a  fundamental
      flaw in adopting the principle of 'first come first  served'  inasmuch
      as it cannot be said to be free of arbitrariness and does not  reflect
      transparency. It may be proved beneficial to those, who may  be  aware
      of such a procedure to be followed by B.D.A. in allotment of plots and
      may cause loss to those who may genuinely be interested  in  having  a
      plot. We cannot put a seal of approval for such a method as  the  same
      is surrounded by many extraneous considerations. We have  to  keep  in
      mind the larger public interest and institutional integrity cannot  be
      allowed to be compromised.
22.   We are not taking the extreme stand that, in all situations  the
      method of "First Come First Served" be not followed,   but  sufficient
      safeguards  have  to  be  taken.   For  instance,  the  Haryana  Urban
      Development Authority (HUDA), in the matter of allotment of industrial
      plots stated that the allotment of plots would be  on  ongoing  "First
      Come First Served" basis with the following rider:
"As per provisions made in the Industrial Policy, the industrial
           plots are to be allotted on "first come first  served  basis  on
           the analogy that all applications received within a block of one
           month  shall  be  treated  at  par.   However,   submission   of
           application will not  entitle  an  applicant  for  allotment  of
           industrial  plot.  The  allotment  shall  be  made   after   due
           assessment of the project report and the financial viability and
           usefulness of the project and other merits of the  applicant  as
           decided by the Committee constituted for the purpose."
23.   The policy of allotment of plots on "First  Come  First  Served"
basis was, therefore, on the analogy that applications received within
      a block of one month shall be treated  at  par.   This  may  make  the
      process transparent and give little chance for favouritism.
24.   We are of the view  that  BDA  can  adopt  several  methods  for
      allotment of plots like, by way of lots, "First  Come  First  Served",
      auction etc., but the process should be transparent.
25.   We, are, however, of the view  that so far as the  instant  case
      is concerned, the decision  taken  by  the  authority  to  cancel  the
      process of allotment by way of "First Come First Served" basis  cannot
      be said to be illegal, arbitrary or  vitiated  by  extraneous  reasons
      warranting interference under
Article  226
of  the  Constitution  of
      India.
26.   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of BDA submitted that though
      they had taken a decision on 16.5.2000 to call for fresh  applications
      by re-advertising those plots at the rate of Rs.100  per  sqft.,  they
      are free to allot the housing plots at the rate  of  Rs.1,378  per  sq
      ft., as assessed by the  Cost  Assessment  Committee  considering  the
      bench mark value furnished by the Sub-Registrar, Bhubaneswar,  by  way
      of lots.  We express no opinion on this aspect and  leave  it  to  the
      authority of BDA to act in accordance with law.
27.   Appeals are allowed and the impugned judgment of the High  Court
      is set aside but there will be no orders as to costs.
................J
                                                              [Deepak Verma]




                                                       ....................J
                                                       [K. S. Radhakrishnan)
      New Delhi;
February 01, 2012.
ITEM NO.101               COURT NO.9             SECTION XIA
[Revised]
            S U P R E M E   C O U R T   O F   I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
                    CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 4036-4040 OF 2007

BHUBANESWAR DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY & ANR.          Appellant (s)

                 VERSUS

ADIKANDA BISWAL & ORS.                            Respondent(s)
(With appln(s) for vacating stay and Intervention/Impleadment)

Date: 01/02/2012  These Appeals were called on for hearing today.
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE DEEPAK VERMA
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE K.S. RADHAKRISHNAN

For Appellant(s)     Mr. Radha Shyam Jena,Adv.
Mr. Siddharth Panda, Adv.
For Respondent(s)       Mr. P. S. Narasimha, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Arvind Verma, Sr. Adv.
Mr. S. Ghosh, Adv.
Mr. Vishnu Shankar Jain, Adv.
Mr. Shriram Parakkar, Adv.
Mr. Suresh Tripathy, Adv.
Mr. Merusagar Samantaray, Adv.
Ms. Aditi Mohan, Adv.
Mr. Abhijit Sengupta,Adv.
Ms. Kumud Lata Das ,Adv
                     Mr. Dipak Kumar Jena ,Adv
                        Ms. Minakshi Ghosh Jena, Adv.
Mr. Sridhar Nayak, Adv.
Mr. Suvidutt Sundaram, Adv.
Mr. Rajesh Singh, Adv.
UPON hearing counsel the Court made the following
                               O R D E R

            Application for impleadment is allowed.
            These Appeals are allowed in  terms  of  the  signed  reportable
      order but there will be no orders as to costs.
|     (Sanjay Kumar-II)       Court    |      (Veena Khera)                   |
|Master                                |Court Master                          |
[Signed Reportable Order is placed on the file]