[Cites
21
, Cited by
18
]
Supreme Court of India
Commnr. Of Central Excise vs M/S. Wockhardt Life Science Ltd on 22 February, 2012
Equivalent citations: AIR 2012 SUPREME COURT 1681, 2012 (5) SCC 585, 2012 AIR SCW 2107, 2012 (3) AIR BOM R 704, (2012) 3 SCALE 334
Bench:
Anil R. Dave
,
H.L. Dattu
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


               CIVIL APPEAL NOS.783-803 OF 2004


COMMNR. OF CENTRAL EXCISE  ... APPELLANT


               VERSUS


M/S.WOCKHARDT LIFE SCIENCES LTD...RESPONDENT



                              O R D E R
1.    These   appeals   are   directed   against   the   judgment   and 


order   passed   by   the   Customs,   Excise   and   Gold   (Control) 


Appellate Tribunal, West Zonal Bench at Mumbai in Appeal 


Nos.E-1252-1271/02-MUM   and   E/3630-01-MUM   dated 


18.6.2003.     By   the   impugned   judgment   and   order,   the 


Tribunal has reversed the findings and conclusions reached 


both   by   the   Adjudicating   Authority   and   the   appellate 


authority.
2.    The   primary   issue   that   falls   for   our   consideration   in 


these appeals  is   the   classification   of   two   products   viz.
`Povidone   Iodine   Cleansing   Solution   USP   and   Wokadine 


Surgical Scrub for the purpose of levy of  duty   under   the 


provisions of
Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
(`
The Tariff Act
' 


for short).
1
3.    The   assessee   is   the   manufacturer   of   Povidone   Iodine 


Cleansing   Solution   USP   and   Wokadine   Surgical   Scrub.
These   two   products   have   identical   composition.     The   only 


difference between these two products is that Wokadine is a 


branded   product   whereas   Povidone   Iodine   Cleansing 


Solution is a generic name.  The assessees' claim before the 


authorities and also before the Tribunal is that the aforesaid 


products   are   medicaments   and,   therefore,   require   to   be 


classified under Chapter sub-heading 3003 of the
Tariff Act, 


1985
, whereas the revenue's stand was that the products in 


question   are   detergents   and,   therefore,   to   be   classified 


under chapter sub-heading 3402.90.
4.    The Adjudicating Authority had issued nearly 20 show 


cause   notices   to   the   assessee   for   the   period   commencing 


from   September,   1992   to   December,   1999.   In   the   show 


cause   notices,   it   is   alleged   that   the   assessee   has   mis-
classified   the   product   under   chapter   sub-heading 


3003.10/20, instead of chapter sub-heading 3402.90 of the 


Act   with   an   intent   to   evade   the   payment   of   the   duty   by 


suppressing   vital   facts  regarding   usage  of  the  product   and  


the   same   amounts   to   contravention   of   Rule   173B   of   the
2
Central Excise Rules, 1944 (for short "Rules").   It is further  


stated   in   the   show   cause   notices   that   the   products   in 


question   are   mainly   used   for   the   purpose   of   detergents 


rather   than   medicaments.     Accordingly,   the   assessee   was 


directed to show cause why the products in question should 


not   be   classified   under   chapter   sub-heading   3402.90   and 


why the duty should not be demanded under Rule 9(2) read 


with   proviso   to
section   11A   (1)
of   the   Central   Excise   Act, 


1944   (for   Short   "the   Act   of   1944")   along   with   interest 


thereon under
Section 11AB
of the Act of 1944 and penalty  


under
Section 11
AC of the Act of 1944 read with Rule 173 


Q of the Rules for short payment of excise duty.
5.    After   receipt   of   the   show   cause   notices,   the   assessee 


had filed its detailed reply,  inter alia,  bringing to the notice 


of the adjudicating authority the contents of the products in 


question,   their   labeling   on   the   commodity   and   the   user   to 


which the products are put.  The assessee had also relied on  


the   various   shades   of   meaning   that   is   attributed   to   the 


medicaments, in particular the expressions `therapeutic and 


prophylactic'   and   had   contended   that   those   medicines   are 


used for external treatment of a human-being.  The assessee
3
had also placed reliance on the Indian Pharmacopoeia, the 


United   States   Pharmacopoeia   and   the   International 


Pharmacopoeia.   The assessee had also contended that the 


`Neutronix   and   Superamide'   are   other   two   products   with 


which Povidone Iodine is mixed to contend that they are in 


the   nature   of   vehiculars   for   the   spreading   of   the 


medicament.
6.    After   receipt   of   the   reply   so   filed,   the   adjudicating 


authority   has   proceeded   to   conclude,   that,   since   the 


contents   of   Neutronix   and   Superamide   are   more   than   the 


medicament,   namely;     Povidone   Iodine,   the   product   in 


question requires to be classified as detergent and thereby, 


would   fall   under   chapter   sub-heading   3402.90   and   it   has 


also   observed   in   its   order   that   the   product   in   question   is 


primarily   used   as   a   cleansing   solution   and,   therefore, 


cannot   fall   in   the   description   of   the   medicament.
Accordingly,   had   confirmed   the   show   cause   notices   issued 


earlier   and,   thereby,   had   directed   the   assessee   to   pay   the 


difference in duty and also the penalty.
7.    Aggrieved   by   the   aforesaid   order   passed   by   the
4
adjudicating authority, the assessee had carried the matter 


in   appeal   before   the   First   Appellate   Authority,   who   by   his 


order dated 29.11.2001 had sustained the order passed by  


the   adjudicating   authority.     According   to   the   appellate 


authority, since the product in question is mainly used as a 


cleansing   solution,   the   proper   classification   would   be   as   a 


detergent and would fall under tariff entry 3402.90.
8.    The assessee, being aggrieved by the order so passed, 


had carried the matter in appeal before the Tribunal.  Even 


before   the   Tribunal,   the   assessee   had   produced   copious 


material   in   the   form   of   product   literature   and   also   the 


dictionary   meaning   of   the   expression   "medicaments".   The 


Tribunal,   while   appreciating   the   rival   contentions   of   the 


revenue and the assessee, has considered the wide range of 


literature on the above products, their composition and user 


and   accordingly   has   concluded   that   the   `Povidone   Iodine 


Cleansing   Solution   USP'   is   used   as   an   antiseptic   and 


disinfectant.   The   Tribunal   has   further   observed   that   the 


main   contention   of   the   revenue   is   that   the   addition   of 


surface active agent and other substances would result in a 


product in which `Prophylactic' qualities of Povidone Iodine
5
would   become   subsidiary   to   its   primary   use   as   a   washing 


solution.   The   Tribunal,   while   rejecting   the   revenue's 


contentions and accepting the assesse's stand, has observed 


that   the   presence   of   the   surface   active   agent   and   other 


substances is only to ensure appropriate dispersible to the 


product and not to render its use as a washing or cleansing 


preparation.   The   Tribunal,   while   relying   on   the   Affidavit 


dated  9.8.2002  filed by  the   Senior  President  (Marketing) of 


the assessee in order to show sale pattern of the goods, has  


observed that the product is not used as a general cleansing  


solution   similar   to   medicated   soaps   used   by   ordinary 


persons,   but   it   is   only   used   in   places   where   practice   of  


surgery and medicine is being carried out. The Tribunal has 


further   observed   that   the   products   are   packed   in   opaque 


brown   thick  plastic   bottles  with   plain   labels,   unlike,  soaps 


and   other   products   which   are   packed   in   bright   attractive 


colors   as   used   by   ordinary   household   consumers.   It   has 


also observed that the labeling of the product shows that it 


is   intended   for   preoperative   use   by   the   surgeon   and   his 


team   or   on   the   patient.   The   Tribunal   after   referring   to   the 


Explanatory Notes under heading 30.04 of the Harmonized 


System   of   Nomenclature   relating   to   medicament,   which
6
covers Povidone Iodine as Polyvinyl Povidone Iodine and, the 


test   laid   down   for   classification   of   the   product   as 


medicament:   has  concluded  that   the  product   is   purchased 


primarily   for   its   therapeutic   or   prophylactic   qualities   and 


not for its qualities as organic surface active preparation. In 


conclusion,   the   Tribunal,   while   allowing   the   appeal,   has 


held that the product in question is, primarily intended and 


also actually, used for its antiseptic properties, therefore, it  


is   classifiable   as   medicament   under   Chapter   30   of   the
Schedule to the Act
.  It is the correctness or otherwise of the 


findings   and   conclusions   reached   by   the   Tribunal   is   the  


subject matter of these appeals before us.
9.     We have heard Shri R.P. Bhatt, learned senior counsel 


appearing for the Revenue and Shri Ajay Aggarwal, learned 


counsel   appearing   for   the   Assessee.     Both   the   learned 


counsel have  dealt with  the  matter  in detail  and have  also 


relied upon some of the decisions of this Court to buttress 


their submissions.
10.      Shri   R.P.   Bhatt,   learned   senior   counsel   for   revenue 


would submit that the product in dispute, namely; Povidone
7
Iodine   Solution   or   its   patent   and   proprietary   equivalent 


Wokadine   surgical   scrub,   contains   only   80   kg   of   Povidone  


Iodine   and   250   kg   of   Neutronix   in   1000   litres   of 


demineralised water and is essentially used as a medicated 


detergent.   He   would   contend   that   the   said   product 


predominantly   contain   surface   active   agents   which   are 


primarily used as a medicated cleaning agent for removal of 


dirt,   bacteria,   fungi   etc.   In   this   regard,   he   would   further 


submit   that   the   said   product   is   admittedly   used   as   an 


antiseptic agent for washing hands of surgeons and is also 


applied   on   the   skin   of   the   patients   before   operation.   He 


would   further   contend   that   the   said   product   is   not   a 


medicament in terms of Chapter Note 2(i) of the
Tariff Act
as 


it   neither   has   "Prophylactic"   nor   "Therapeutic"   usage.   He 


would contend that in order to qualify as a medicament, the 


goods must be capable of curing or preventing some disease 


or ailment. Therefore the said products cannot be classified 


under Chapter Heading 3003 of
Tariff Act
.
11.    Shri Bhatt would further submit that Chapter Note 1(e) 


of   Chapter   30   clearly   excludes   soap   or   other   products   of 


Chapter   34,   containing   added   medicament,   from   their
8
classification   under   Chapter   30.   He   would,   therefore, 


submit   that   the   product   is   more   appropriately   classifiable 


under   the   Chapter   3402   as   an   organic   surface   active 


agent/preparation,   or  cleansing preparation,   irrespective  of 


the fact that it contains certain percentage of medicaments.
In other words, he would contend that even if said products 


have   added   prophylactic   effectiveness,   they   would   be 


considered as cleansing agent and not medicaments for the 


purpose   of   classification   in   view   of   their   primary   and 


essential   use   which   is   cleansing   and   their   prophylactic   or 


therapeutic   quality,   by   virtue   of   added   medicament,   is 


secondary   in   nature.   He   has   placed   reliance   on   some 


decisions of this Court in support of his submission that it 


is the primary functional properties and composition of the 


goods   that   would   decide   its   classification   under   particular 


Chapter. We will refer to the decisions on which reliance is  


placed by learned counsel at an appropriate time.
12.    Shri   Ajay   Aggarwal,   learned   counsel   for   the   assessee, 


has   meticulously   taken   us   through   the   judgment   of   the 


Tribunal   and   supported   its   reasoning.   He   contended   that 


the  revenue  in their   show  cause  notices has  admitted that
9
the products in issue are antiseptic. He further submits that  


the   products   are   medicament   in   which   some   carriers   are 


added and therefore, it will fall under Chapter Sub-heading 


3003 and not under Chapter 34.
13.    In order to resolve the controversy that is raised before 


us, we need to notice first the entries which the revenue and 


the   assessee  relies  upon   to   drive   home  their   point   of  view.
The   Tariff   Items   under   Chapter   sub-heading   3003   and 


chapter   sub-heading   3402.90,   at   the   relevant   time,   are 


extracted. The same reads as under:
Heading         Sub-                Description of goods                                                     Rate of 

   No.        heading                                                                                             duty

                 No.


                           Medicaments                                               (including 

  30.03                    veterinary medicaments)




                           Patent                   or                              proprietary 

                           medicaments,   other   than   those 

                           medicaments                               which                          are 

              3003.10      exclusively   Ayurvedic,   Unani,                                                      15%

                           Siddha,   Homeopathic   or   Bio-

                           chemic.



                           Medicaments   (other   than   patent 

                           or   proprietary)   other   than   those 

              3003.20      which          exclusively                               used             in           8%

                           Ayurvedic,                Unani,                              Siddha, 

                           Homeopathic                         or                   Bio-chemic
10
systems   Medicaments,   including 

                          those   in   Ayurvedic,   Unani, 

                          Siddha,   Homeopathic   or   Bio-

                          chemic systems.




                          Organic   Surface   active   agents 

                          (other   than   soap):   surface-active 

34.02                     preparations,                     washing 

                          preparations   (including   auxiliary 

                          washing           preparations          and 

                          cleaning preparations, whether or 

                          not containing soap.


              3402.90     Other

                                                                                18%
14.    The chapter note 2 (i) of Chapter 30 to the schedule of
Tariff Act
pertaining to pharmaceutical products, define the 


meaning of the expression "medicament".  It is as under :
Medicament"   means   goods   (other   than   foods   or 


beverages such  as dietetic,  diabetic  or  fortified foods,  tonic 


beverages)   not   falling   within   heading   No.   30.02   or   30.04 


which are either:
(a)   products   comprising   two   or   more   constituents 


which   have   been   mixed   or   compounded   together   for 


therapeutic or prophylactic uses; or
(b)unmixed products suitable for such uses put up in 


measured doses  or  in  packings  for  retail  sale   or  for  use  in 


hospitals.
11
15.    Chapter   note   makes   it   clear   that   the   products, 


comprising   two   or   more   constituents   which   have   been 


compounded together either for therapeutic or prophylactic 


uses,   would   fall   within   the   meaning   of   the   expression 


Medicaments. In the  present case, it is not  in dispute  that 


along   with   the   medicament,   namely;   Povidone   Iodine,   the 


assessee while manufacturing the products in question uses 


three   other   constituents,   namely;   Neutronix,   Superamide 


and   Sodium Hydroxide as a preservative.
16.    It  is   also   relevant   to   explore   the   meaning   of   the   word 


`prophylactic' in medical parlance as well, in order to resolve 


the   controversy   before   us.   The   word   `prophylactic'   derives 


from   Greek   word  `prophylaktikos'  which   means   "to   take 


precautions   against"   or   "to   keep   guard   before".  Dorland's 


Medical   Dictionary   1364   (28th   ed.   1994)   defines 


"prophylactic" as "an agent that tends to ward off disease".
Merriam-Webster's   Medical   Desk   Dictionary   579   (1993) 


defines   it   as   "guarding   from   or   preventing   the   spread   or 


occurrence of disease or infection"; Mosby's Dictionary 1284 


(4th   ed.   1994)   defines   it   as   a   biologic,   chemical,   or 


mechanical agent that prevents the spread of disease.
12
17. It is relevant to notice the composition, label and usage 


of the products whose classification is in dispute before us.
The   label   of   the   products   would   stipulate   its   formula   and 


describe its usage. However, the labels of both the products 


are identical. Therefore, we would consider `Povidone Iodine 


Cleansing   Solution   USP'   which   is   presented   in   a   maroon 


coloured bottle of 500ml capacity on which a label has been 


pasted which read as thus:
Povidone Iodine Cleansing Solution USP


  "Povidone Iodine Cleansing Solution USP to be used as a 

surgical scrub.
Broad   Spectrum   topical   microbicidal   effective   against 

bacteria, fungi, protozoa, yeasts and viruses.
Formula:
Povidone-Iodine I.P. 7.5. w/v

  (Available Iodine 0.75% w/v)

  Phosphate Free"
Store in a cool place

  For External use only 




  Usage:
1. For preoperative cleansing and degerming of surgeon's 


and operating team's hands
13
a)     Wet hands and forearms with water. Pour about 5 


       ml   of   surgical   scrub   with   the   help   of   the   `elbow  


       dispenser'   on   the   palm   and   spread   over   both   hands  


       and forearms scrubbing thoroughly over all areas for  


       about   5   minutes.   Add   little   water   to   develop   copious  


       suds. Rinse thoroughly under running water.
b)     Complete   the   cleansing   with   another   5   ml   of  


       surgical scrub in the same way.
2.     For preoperative uses on Patients.
After the skin area is shaved, wet it with water. Apply 


       Povidone Iodine surgical scrub on the skin and scrub, 


       thoroughly   for   about   5   minutes.   Rinse   off   by   aid   of  


       sterile gauze saturated with water. Now paint the skin 


       with Povidone-Iodine solution and allow to dry before  


       incision."
18.    The   composition   of   the   product   per   1000   litres   has 


been produced below:
S.No.       Ingredients                         Quantity

             1.       Povidone Iodine IP                     80.21 Kgs.


             2.       Neutronix               S-60(Anionic  250 Kgs.

                      Detergent)   (active   content 

                      58%)

             3.       Superamide   L-9   (foaming  12 Kgs.

                      agent)

             4.       Sodium                    Hydroxide  1.46 Kgs

                      (Preservative)

             5.       Demineralised water                    Balance 

                                                             quantity
14
19.    The said product contains- Povidone Iodine: The 7.5% 


w/v   of   Povidone   Iodine   provides   0.75%   w/v   of   available 


iodine   which   is   functions   as   disinfectant.   Neutronix:   The 


25%   of   composition   of   the   product   is   Neutronix   which   is 


Anionics   and   used   as   detergents,   wetting,   emulsifying   and 


dispersing agents. Further the content of Superamide is just 


1.2%   in   the   said   product   which   serves   as   an   excellent 


booster   and  stabilizer,   viscosity   builder   and   detergent   with 


wetting and soil suspending properties.
20.    The   assessee   has   relied   on   various   pharmacopeias   to 


throw light on the essential composition of Povidone Iodine 


Solution including surface active agents and their respective 


functions.   It  is   relevant   to   refer  to   these  pharmacopeias   in 


order   to   appreciate   and   analyze   the   functions   of   various 


ingredients contained in a Povidone Iodine Solution.
21.    According to the US Pharmacopeia, Povidone Iodine is 


a complex of Iodine with Povidone. It contains not less than 


9.0%   and   not   more   than   12.0%   of   available   iodine 


calculated   on   the   dried   basis.   Povidone   Iodine   cleansing 


solution   is   a   solution   of   Povidone   Iodine   with   one   or   more
15
suitable surface active agents. It contains not less than 85% 


and   not   more   than   120%   of   the   labelled   amount   of   the  


iodine. It may contain  a small amount  of alcohol. The only 


difference   between   the   two   is   that   while   the   first   product 


has a suitable surface active agent, the second product does 


not have surface active agent.
22.    The Japan Pharmaceutical Reference notes that Iodine 


Surgical Scrub is a disinfectant containing  povidone-iodine 


with   a   foaming   agent   and   a   surfactant   -   which   exerts 


disinfecting   action   by   releasing   iodine,   which   shows 


disinfecting   effect   against   broad   range   of   micro-organisms 


including bacteria, fungi and viruses.
23.    Goodman & Gilman's book titled `The Pharmacological 


Basis of Therapeutics' reads:
"The most widely used iodophor is povidone iodine, in which  


the   carrier   molecule   is   povidone......   A   standard   surgical  


scrub with  a 10% solution (1% available iodine) will decrease  


the   usual   cutaneous   bacterial   population   by   about   85%......
When   the   hands   are   contaminated   by   gram-negative
16
bacteria,         povidone-iodine   is   more   effective   scrubbing  


disinfectant."
24.    Remington's         Pharmaceutical   Sciences              records   that 


Povidone   Iodine   USP   is   a   virtually   non-stinging,   film 


forming,   water   soluble   iodine   compound   used   as   a   topical 


antiseptic   that   essentially   retains   the   non-selective   broad 


range   microbicidal   activity   of   iodine.   Povidone   Iodine   will 


rapidly kill bacteria (both Gram positive and Gram negative 


as   well   as   antibiotic   resistant   organisms),   fungi,   viruses, 


protozoa and yeasts, to cause a substantial reduction of the 


microorganisms   on   the   skin.   Preoperatively,   or   as   a   post 


surgical   antiseptic   scrub,   its   microbicidal   action   is   fast 


acting   and   is   effective   for   a   period   of   6   to   8   hours.   It   is  


further   stated   that   povidone-iodine   antiseptic   preparations 


are   clinically  indicated  for   the   prevention   and  treatment   of 


surface   infections   as   well   as   to   degerm   the   skin   prior   to 


injection   and   hyperalimentation   procedures,   for   pre   and 


post operative scrubbing and washing of hospital operating 


room   personnel   and   for   pre-operative   skin   preparation   of 


the patient of surgery.
17
25.    In   Martindale's  The   Extra   Pharmacopoeia,   states   that 


Povidone-Iodine   is   an   iodophore   which   is   used   as   a 


disinfectant   and   antiseptic   mainly   for   the   treatment   of 


contaminated  wounds  and  pre-operative  preparation  of  the 


skin and mucous membranes. It is stated that solutions of 


Povidone-Iodine   gradually   release   iodine   to   exert   an   effect 


against bacteria, fungi, viruses, protozoa, cysts and spores.
26.    In   Satoskar   and   Bhandarkar's          Pharmacology   &  


Pharmaco Therapeutics, it reads:
"Iodophors   are   developed   by   complexing   iodine   with  


 surfactants   like   non-ionic   detergents.   The   detergents   act  


 as  solubilizers and carriers, combining detergent property  


 with   anti-bacterial   activity.   They   owe   their   germicidal  


 activity to the slowly released elemental iodine."
27.    The   expression   "therapeutic"   or   "prophylactic"   is   not 


defined   under   the   tariff   entry.   Therefore,   useful   reference 


can be made to the dictionary meaning to these expressions.
In fact the assessee, in his reply to the show cause notices  


issued,   had   relied   upon   the   meaning   of   the   expression 


"therapeutic"   and   "prophylactic"   from   Webster's   New   20th
18
Century Dictionary, Chambers English Dictionary, Websters 


New   20th  Century   Dictionary.   In   our   view,   reference   to   all 


other dictionary meanings may not be necessary. We intend 


to confine ourselves only to the aforesaid three dictionaries.
In   that   the   meaning   of   the   expression   "therapeutic"   and 


"prophylactic" is stated as under:
"To   prevent,   to   guard   against   it,   before,   in   medicine,  


       preventive   protecting   against   disease.";   "Guarding  


       against   disease,   a   preventive   of   disease;   a   condom;
preventive treatment against diseases." and;  "Serving 


       to cure or heal, Curative concerned in discovering and 


       applying remedies for diseases."
28.    Before we discuss the issue posed before us, it would 


be   useful   to   make   reference   to   observation   made   by   this 


Court   in   the   case   of
ICPA   Health   Products   (P)   Ltd.   Vs.  


Commissioner   of   Central   Excise,   Vadodara
,   (2004)   4   SCC 


481,   wherein   this   Court,   after   referring   to   the   meaning   of 


the   expression   "prophylactic"   from   the   Concise   Oxford 


Dictionary,   9th      Edn.,   has   noted   that   the   expression 


"prophylactic"   means   a   medicament   intended   to   prevent 


diseases, a preventive medicine or course of action.
19
29.    It   is   the   specific   case   of   the   assessee   before   the 


adjudicating   authority   that   the   products   in   question   are 


primarily   used   for   external   treatment   of   the   human-beings 


for the purpose of the prevention of the disease.  This is not  


disputed by the revenue, but their stand appears to be since 


the   products   in   question   are   primarily   used   as 


detergents/cleansing   preparation,   they   cannot   be   brought 


under   the   definition   of   medicaments.     As   we   have   already 


noticed,   medicaments   are   products   which   can   be   used 


either   for   therapeutic   or   prophylactic   usage.   Since   the 


product in question  is basically and primarily used for  the  


prophylactic uses, in our view the Tribunal was justified in 


coming to a conclusion that the adjudicating authority and 


the first appellate authority were not right in classifying the 


products   under   chapter   sub-heading   3402.90   and, 


therefore, had classified those products under chapter sub-
heading 3003.
30.    There   is   no   fixed   test   for   classification   of   a   taxable 


commodity.   This   is   probably   the   reason   why   the   `common 


parlance   test'   or   the   `commercial   usage   test'   are   the   most 


common [see  A. Nagaraju  Bors. v. State  of A.P.,  1994 Supp
20
(3) SCC 122]. Whether a particular article will fall within a 


particular   Tariff   heading   or   not   has   to   be   decided   on   the 


basis of the tangible material or evidence to determine how 


such   an   article   is   understood   in   `common   parlance'   or   in 


`commercial world' or in `trade circle' or in its popular sense 


meaning. It is they who are concerned with it and it is the 


sense   in   which   they   understand   it   that   constitutes   the 


definitive index of the legislative intention, when the statute 


was enacted [see D.C.M. v. State of Rajasthan, (1980) 4 SCC 


71].
One  of the  essential factors for determining whether a 


product   falls   within   Chapter   30   or   not   is   whether   the 


product   is   understood   as   a   pharmaceutical   product   in 


common   parlance   [see  CCE   v.   Shree   Baidyanath   Ayurved, 


(2009) 12 SCC 413;
Commissioner of Central Excise, Delhi 


v. Ishaan Research Lab (P) Ltd.
(2008) 13 SCC 349]. Further, 


the quantity of medicament used in a particular product will 


also not be a relevant factor for, normally, the extent of use 


of   medicinal   ingredients   is   very   low   because   a   larger   use 


may   be   harmful   for   the   human   body.
[
Puma   Ayurvedic  


Herbal   (P)   Ltd.   v.   CEE,   Nagpur
(2006)   3   SCC   266;
State   of 


Goa   v.  Colfoax   Laboratories
(2004)   9   SCC   83   ;
B.P.L  


Pharmaceuticals v. CCE
, 1995 Supp (3) SCC1]
21
31.    However,   there   cannot   be   a   static   parameter   for   the 


correct classification of a commodity. This Court in the case 


of
Indian  Aluminium  Cables  Ltd.   v.  Union  of  India
,  (1985) 3 


SCC   284,   has   culled   out   this   principle   in   the   following 


words:
"13.   To   sum   up   the   true   position,   the   process   of  


       manufacture of a product and the end use to which it is 


       put,   cannot   necessarily   be   determinative   of   the           


       classification of that product under a fiscal schedule like  


       the   Central   Excise   Tariff.   What   is   more   important   is  


       whether the broad description of the article fits in with  


       the expression used in the Tariff..."
32.    Moreover,   the   functional   utility   and   predominant   or 


primary   usage   of   the   commodity   which   is   being   classified 


must be taken into account, apart from the understanding 


in   common   parlance   [see
O.K.   Play   (India)   Ltd.   v.   CCE
, 


(2005)   2   SCC   460;
Alpine   Industries   v.   CEE,   New   Delhi
(1995)  Supp.
(3)   SCC   1;  Sujanil  Chemo  Industries   v.  CEE   &  


Customs   (2005) 4 SCC 189;  ICPA Health Products (P) Ltd v.
CEE   (2004)   4   SCC   481;
Puma   Ayurvedic   Herbal
(Supra);
Ishaan   Research   Lab   (P)   Ltd.
(Supra)   ;
CCE   v.   Uni   Products  


India Ltd.
, (2009) 9 SCC 295].
22
33. A commodity cannot be classified in a residuary entry, 


in   the   presence   of   a   specific   entry,   even   if   such   specific  


entry requires the product to be understood in the technical 


sense [see
Akbar Badrudin v. Collector of Customs
, (1990) 2 


SCC 203;
Commissioner  of  Customs  v. G.C. Jain
,  (2011) 12 


SCC 713].
A residuary entry can be taken refuge of only in  


the absence of a specific entry; that is to say, the latter will 


always prevail over the former [see
CCE v. Jayant  Oil  Mills
, 


(1989)   3   SCC   343;  HPL   Chemicals   v.   CCE,   (2006)   5   SCC 


208;
Western India Plywoods v. Collector of Customs
,  (2005) 


12   SCC   731;
CCE   v.   Carrier   Aircon
,  (2006)   5   SCC   596].
In
CCE v. Carrier Aircon
, (2006) 5 SCC 596, this Court held:
"14... There are a number of factors which  have to  be taken  


into   consideration   for   determining   the   classification   of   a  


product.   For   the   purposes   of   classification,   the   relevant  


factors   inter   alia   are   statutory   fiscal   entry,   the   basic  


character, function and use of the goods. When a commodity  


falls within a tariff entry by virtue of the purpose for which it  


is put to  (sic. produced), the end use to which  the product is  


put to, cannot determine the classification of that product."
23
34.    In  our   view,  as   we   have   already  stated,  the   combined 


factor   that   requires   to   be   taken   note   of   for   the   purpose   of 


the   classification   of   the   goods   are   the   composition,   the 


product   literature,   the   label,   the   character   of   the   product 


and   the   user   to   which   the   product   is   put.   However,   the  


miniscule   quantity   of   the   prophylactic   ingredient   is   not   a 


relevant factor.  In the instant case, it is not in dispute that  


this is used by the surgeons for the purpose of cleaning or  


degerming   their   hands   and   scrubbing   the   surface   of   the 


skin of the patient before that portion is operated upon. The 


purpose is to prevent the infection or disease. Therefore, the 


product   in   question   can   be   safely   classified   as   a 


"medicament"  which   would  fall   under   chapter  sub-heading 


3003 which is a specific entry and not under chapter sub-
heading 3402.90 which is a residuary entry.
35.    The learned senior counsel for the revenue has placed 


reliance on several decisions of this Court in support of his  


argument   that   the   products   requires   to   be   classified   as 


medicament only when they are intended or meant to cure a 


disease   or   prevent   the   occurrence   of   disease.   He   further
24
submits that the disease can only be prevented when there 


are some symptoms of disease. We intend to refer to those  


decisions   relied   by   learned   senior   counsel   Shri   Bhatt   to 


sustain the submissions made before the Court.
36.    In  B.P.L.   Pharmaceuticals   Ltd.  v.  CCE,  (Supra),   the 


issue   before   this   Court   was   regarding   the   classification   of 


the   "Selenium   Sulfide   Lotion   USP"   manufactured   and   sold 


by   assessee   under   the   brand   name   "Selsun   shampoo".
According   to   the   manufacturers   this   shampoo   was   a 


medicated shampoo containing 2.5% Selenium Sulfide' w/v 


as   the   only   active   ingredient   which   was   meant   to   treat   a 


disease   of   the   hair,   namely;   dandruff,   and   the   rest   of   the 


ingredients   of   the   shampoo   merely   serve   the   purpose   of   a 


bare   medium.   The   revenue   contended   that   the   product 


contains   2.5%   w/v   of   Selenium   Sulfide   which   is   only   of   a  


subsidiary   curative   or   prophylactic   value   and   therefore, 


notwithstanding   the   product   having   a   medicinal   value   will 


fall under Chapter 33. This Court held that having regard to  


the   preparation,   label,   literature,   character,   common   and 


commercial parlance, the product was liable to be classified 


as a medicament under Chapter sub-heading 3003.19. This
25
decision   would   not   assist   the   revenue   because   this   Court 


held after considering various factors that selsun shampoo 


is   a   medicament   as   it   has   therapeutic   property   to   treat 


dandruff   unlike   ordinary   shampoo   which   could   be   of 


common use by common people.
37.
In
Alpine   Industries   v.   CCE,   New   Delhi  (Supra
),   the 


issue   which   arose   for   the   consideration   of   this   Court   was 


whether   the   product   `Lip   salve'   is   classifiable   as   a 


medicament   under   Chapter   Sub-   Heading   30.03   or   as 


`preparation   for   care   of   skin'   under   Chapter   Sub-heading 


33.04.     The  stand   of   the   assessee   was   that  the   product   in 


question   was   supplied   exclusively   to   the   military   for   use 


while   serving   at   high   altitude.   They   claimed,   by   relying   on 


various literatures based on the composition of the product 


that   it   was   used   as   "medicament"   and   therefore,   sought 


classification under Chapter Sub- Heading 30.03. The stand 


of   the   revenue   was   that   it   was   used   as   "a   preparation   for 


care of skin" to protect the skin on the lips against damage 


by natural factors. This Court after considering the various 


medical   and   pharmaceutical   literatures   held   that   the 


Entries   are   not   to   be   understood   in   their   scientific   or
26
technical   sense,   but   by   their   popular   meaning   for   the 


purpose of interpretation. This court had observed that  for 


the   purpose   of   classification,   the   commercial   parlance 


theory has to be applied and the chemical ingredients of the 


product   are   not   decisive.   This   Court   after   considering   the 


nature   of   the   product   and   the   use   to   which   it   is   put   had  


observed   that   the   `Lip   salve'   is   used   for   "care   of   skin"   and  


not   "cure   of   skin"   and   just   because   it   has   some   curative 


effect,   its   primary   use   is   not   curative,   therefore   it   is   not 


medicament   and   also  needs  no  prescription   from   a  doctor.
This   Court   also   held   that   it   is   neither   prescribed   by   any 


doctor   nor   obtainable   from   the   chemist   or   pharmaceutical 


shops in the market. This decision would not assist revenue 


as this Court had arrived at a conclusion that the product is 


not   medicament   but   cosmetic   after   considering   the 


commercial parlance test and primary user of the product.
38.
In
ICPA   Health   Products   (P)   Ltd.   v.   CCE  (Supra
),   this 


Court   has  considered  the   issue   of   classification  of  surgical  


scrubs,   namely'   Hexiprep,   Hexiscrub   (Surgiscrub)   and 


Hexiaque, manufactured by the assessee which was used as 


a skin disinfectant to paint the skin before surgery and as a
27
wound   disinfectant.   It  was   admitted   that   Hexiprep   is   used 


to   paint   the   skin   as   required   to   disinfect   the   skin   before 


surgery. Hexiaque is used as a skin disinfectant to paint the 


skin   before   surgery  and   as   a   wound,   abrasions   and   minor 


cuts disinfectant. Hexiscrub is used on hands and forearms 


of surgeons for rapid hand disinfection prior to surgery. The 


assessee   claimed   the   classification   of   these   products   as 


medicament under Chapter sub-heading 3003.10. Whereas, 


the   revenue   contended   that   these   products   should   be 


classified   as   disinfectants   under   Chapter   sub-heading 


38.08. This Court had considered the report of the Chemical 


examiner   who   opined   that   the   products   therein   contained 


`chlorhexidine gluconate solution BP' which had therapeutic 


properties. However, he also opined that they were used as 


disinfectant,   therefore   should   be   classified   under   Chapter 


sub-heading   38.08.   This   Court   after   considering   the   label 


and   usage   of   products   therein   and   dictionary   meaning   of 


the   word   `prophylactic'   had   observed   that   the   products 


therein   were  used  to  disinfect  the   skin  prior   to   surgery,  to 


clean  the   wound  and   minor  cuts,  and  therefore, they  have 


prophylactic   usage   and   classifiable   under   Chapter   sub-
heading 3003.10.
28
39.
In
State of Goa v. Colfax Laboratories (Supra
), the issue 


before   this   Court   was   that   whether   the   After   Shave   Lotion 


(ASL)   known   as   "Old   Spice"   and   "Blue   Stratos"   are 


classifiable   as   toilet   preparations   or   medical   preparations.
The   assessee   relying   on   various   pharmacopoeia   took   the 


stand   that  the  product  was  "medicinal   preparation"   due  to 


the   high   percentage   of   alcohol   content   (above   60%).   The 


revenue contended that the use of after shave lotion was in  


the   form   of   "toilet   preparations"   and   not   "medicinal 


preparation".   The   revenue   also   pointed   that   the   assessee 


had   obtained   the   license   for   manufacture   of   ASL   as   a 


cosmetic   product   and   not   as   a   medicinal   product.   This 


Court while rejecting the assessee's contention held that the 


high composition of alcohol in the product is not a relevant  


factor   for   ASL   to   be   considered   a   medicament.   This   Court 


further  observed that   in order  to  come  within  the   ambit  of  


"medicinal   preparations",   the   article   must   be   used   for   the 


purpose   of   either   curing   or   mitigating   the   disease   after   its 


symptoms   have   appeared   or   in   prevention   of   any   disease 


and   therefore,   on   a   plain   interpretation   ASL   cannot   be 


considered   to   be   within   the   ambit   of   "medicinal
29
preparation". Thus
,
in that case
, this Court did not rely on 


the   composition   of   the   product   but   relied   on   the   principal 


use   and   the   common   understanding   of   the   product   in   the 


market   as   the   test   for   classification,   in   other   words,   the 


classification   of   commodity   does   not   depend   on   the 


incidental   character   that   the   commodity   takes   but   on   its 


primary character.
40.
In
CCE, Nagpur v. Vicco Laboratories
, (2005) 4 SCC 17, 


the   point   in   consideration   before   this   Court   was   that 


whether   the   products,   namely;   Turmeric   skin   cream, 


vajradanti   toothpaste   and   tooth   powder   manufactured   by 


the   assessee   would   be   classifiable   as   Pharmaceutical 


products under Chapter 30 or cosmetics under Chapter 33 


of the
Tariff Act
. In that case, the assessee's products were 


classifiable as pharmaceutical products before and after the 


enactment   of   the
Tariff   Act
.   However,   the   revenue   issued 


show cause notices on the basis of the decision of this Court 


in   Shree   Baidyanath,   (1996)   9   SCC   402   alleging   that   the 


products are understood as cosmetics in common parlance.
The   revenue   further   contended   before   this   Court   that   the 


product was classifiable under Chapter 33 as a cosmetic as
30
there   was   no  need  for   a   medical   practitioner's   prescription 


and the same was sold in general/departmental store.   The 


assessee   took   the   stand   that   products   were   classifiable 


under   Chapter   30   as   being   pharmaceutical   product.   This 


Court held that mere decision of a court of law without more 


cannot   be   a   justification   enough   for   changing   the 


classification without a change in the nature of a product or  


a change in the use of the product, or a fresh interpretation 


of the tariff heading by such decision. This Court has held 


that   the   Show   cause   notices   having   issued   on   the 


misapprehension of the tests
laid down in
Shree Baidyanath 


cannot   be   sustained,   even   though,   the   adjudicating 


authority   had   found   from   the   market   survey   that   the 


products are understood as cosmetics in common parlance.
This Court also held that the product cannot be treated as 


cosmetic only because it was not sold by chemists or under 


doctor's   prescription.   We   are   afraid   that   decision   would 


assist   the   revenue   as   the   show   cause   notices
in   that   case
were issued on the misapprehension of the test
laid down in
the Shree Baidyanath and this Court further observed that 


the decision in Shree Baidyanath was based on its peculiar 


facts.
31
41.
In
Sujanil Chemo Industries v. CCE & Customs (Supra
), 


the   question   of   classification   of   the   product   "licel", 


manufactured by the assessee, was raised before this Court.
The   assessee   claimed,   on   the   basis   of   the   reports   of 


chemical   examiners   and   the   Department   of   Dermatology 


and   Venereology,   that   the   product   is   an   insecticide   and   is 


classifiable   under   Chapter   Sub-heading   3808.10   whereas 


the   Department   contended   that   the   product   is   classifiable 


as   medicament   under   Chapter   Sub-heading   3003.10.   This 


Court   after   referring   to   Chapter   Note   1(d)   of   Chapter   38 


which   excludes   "medicaments   under   Heading   30.03   or 


30.04"   from   its   ambit   and   considering   the   definition   of 


`medicament'   in   terms   of   Chapter   Heading   2(i)   of   Chapter 


30, had observed that in normal parlance, a product may be 


considered to be an insecticide but if that product has any 


therapeutic   and   prophylactic   use   then   for   purposes   of 


classification   that   product   would   fall   under   Chapter   30 


instead of Chapter 38. This Court observed that Licel cures 


the infection or infestation of lice in human hair which is a 


disease; therefore, it is thus therapeutic. This Court further 


observed   that   Licel   is   also   prophylactic   inasmuch   as   it
32
prevents   disease   which   will   follow   from   infestation   of   lice.
This   Court   referring   to   its   earlier   decision   in
ICPA   Health 


Products   (P)   Ltd.  v.  CCE   (Supra
)   has  concluded   that   this 


product   for   its   therapeutic   and   prophylactic   usages   would 


be   classified   as   medicament   under   Chapter   Sub-heading 


3003.10.   We   are   of   the   opinion   that   decision   would   not 


come to rescue of the revenue as this Court in that decision 


has clearly observed that the licel prevents as well as cures 


the infection or infestation of the lice.
42.
In
Puma   Ayurvedic   Herbal   (P)   Ltd.   v.   Commissioner   of  


Central   Excise,   Nagpur  (Supra
),   the   issue   before   this   Court 


was that  whether the ayurvedic goods manufactured by the 


assessee are classifiable under the
Central Excise Tariff Act, 


1985
as   cosmetics   under   Chapter   33   or   as   medicaments 


under   Chapter   30.   The   assessee   contended   that   their 


products   are   manufactured   as   per   the   Ayurveda 


pharmacopoeia   and   other   text   books   and   have   curative, 


therapeutic   or   prophylactic   value   which   are   meant   to   give 


relief in body ailments and they are not items of cosmetics.
The   assessee   further   relied   on   the   twin   test:   Whether   the 


product   is   used   as   medicament   in   common   parlance;   and 


whether the ingredients used in the product are mentioned
33
in   the   authoritative   ayurvedic   textbooks.   The   assessee 


further   contended   that   the   use   of   the   product   by   the 


customers should be taken into account for determining the 


classification   of   products  as   these  as   the   products   which 


have   special   and   distinct   use   for   treating   a   particular 


ailment  and   are  not   items   of   common   use.   The   revenue 


argued   that   even   if   a   product   had   some   curative   or 


prophylactic   value,   it   will   still   be   cosmetic   on   the   basis   of  


Note 2 of Chapter 33 of the
Central Excise Tariff Act
which 


excludes cosmetics and toilet preparation having subsidiary 


curative   and   prophylactic   value.                 This   Court   while 


appreciating   the   assessee's   contention   observed   that 


revenue   has   miserably   failed   to   prove   that   the   products   in 


dispute   are   not   medicament   and   not   understood   as 


medicament  by  the   common   man.   This  Court  had  upheld 


the   twin   test   for   classification   of   ayurvedic   products   relied 


by the assessee and observed that the primary role or use of 


the product has to be taken into account for the purpose of 


classification,   even   though,   it   may   happen   that   while 


treating   a   particular   medical   problem,  after   the   problem   is 


cured,   the   appearance   of   the   person   concerned   may 


improve. This
Court further held
that it is not necessary for
34
the medicament to be sold only under doctor's prescription 


and   its   availability   across   the   counter   in   shops   is   not 


relevant   for   its   classification   as   medicament.   This   Court 


held that, therefore, the fact that use of medicinal element 


in   a   product   was   minimal   does   not   detract   from   it   being 


classified  as   a   medicament.   This   Court  concluded  that   the 


products   in   dispute   are   medicinal   products   which   are 


intended   to   treat   certain   medical   conditions   of   the   human 


body   and   improvement   in   appearance   is   subsidiary, 


therefore, are  liable  to   be  classified as  medicaments  falling 


under   Chapter   30.   This   case   would   not   assist   revenue   as 


this Court had applied a primary user test of the products 


in question which has certain medicinal ingredient.
43.
In
Commissioner   of   Central   Excise,   Delhi   v.   Ishaan  


Research   Lab   (P)   Ltd.  (Supra
),   the   issue   before   this   Court 


was   whether   the   products   manufactured   by   the   assessee 


would   fall   under   Sub-Heading   3003.30   as   medicament   or 


under   Chapter   33   as   cosmetics.   The   assessee   contended 


that   each   of   the   products   was   having   ayurvedic   medicinal 


herbs   in   it   and   even   the   labels   on   these   products   claim 


specifically   the   medicinal   properties   of   the   product.   The 


assessee further urged that even if the user of product leads
35
to   improvement   in   appearance   of   a   person   that   by   itself  


cannot bring it into the category of "cosmetics" if otherwise 


the product is having a medicinal value and is marketed as 


such.   According   to   the   revenue,   all   these   products   were 


understood   to  be  the   "cosmetics"  in  common  parlance   and 


not   actually the  "ayurvedic medicines" for  various  reasons, 


the   said   products   should   have   been   held   to   be   covered 


under Chapter 33. This Court after inspecting the labels of  


the product has held that the assessee had claimed in each  


of   the   label   regarding   its   medicinal   properties   and,   the  


product is not a cosmetic.  This Court also observed that the 


common parlance test is not "be all and end all", and held 


that   the   miniscule   percentage   used   is   also   not   a   deciding 


factor. This Court concluded that  the  products in question 


are   medicinal   products   and,   therefore,   are   covered   by 


Chapter 30 and not under Chapter 33. That case would not 


assist   revenue   as   this   Court   after   taking   into   account   the  


labels   on   the   products   observed   that   these   products   have 


medicinal   ingredients   and   are   marketed   as   ayurvedic 


medicines not cosmetics, however it incidentally improve the 


appearance,   and   also   held   that   the   common   parlance   test 


by itself is not conclusive.
36
44.    In   view   of   the   above,   we   reject   the   Revenue's   appeals 


and confirm the order passed by the Tribunal with no order 


as to costs.
Ordered accordingly.
............................J.

                                                            (H.L. DATTU)





                                                  ............................J.

                                                         (ANIL R. DAVE)

NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 22, 2012
37